                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             MARKET CONDITIONS AND THE STRUCTURE OF SECURITIES

                                              Isil Erel
                                           Brandon Julio
                                            Woojin Kim
                                          Michael Weisbach

                                        Working Paper 14952
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14952


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2009




We would like to thank Murillo Campello, Naveen Daniel, Mike Faulkender, John Graham, Campbell
Harvey, Christopher Hennessy, Mark Huson, Mike Lemmon, Gordon Phillips, Per Stromberg, Rene
Stulz and Ralph Walkling, as well as seminar participants at The 2009 AFA Meetings, University
of Alberta, Carnegie Mellon University, University of Cincinnati, Drexel University, Harvard University,
KDI School of Public Policy and Management, Korea University, University of Illinois, NBER, Ohio
State University, Oxford University, Seoul National University, Southern Methodist University, Stockholm
School of Economics, University of Utah, and Yale University for very helpful suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Isil Erel, Brandon Julio, Woojin Kim, and Michael Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Market Conditions and the Structure of Securities
Isil Erel, Brandon Julio, Woojin Kim, and Michael Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 14952
May 2009
JEL No. E00,G01,G32

                                              ABSTRACT

Economic theory, as well as commonly-stated views of practitioners, suggests that market downturns
can affect both the ability and manner in which firms raise external financing. Theory suggests that
downturns should be associated with a shift toward less information-sensitive securities, as well as
a “flight to quality”, in which firms can issue high-rated securities but not low-rated ones. We evaluate
these hypotheses on a large sample of publicly-traded debt issues, seasoned equity offers, and bank
loans. We find that market downturns lead firms to use less information-sensitive securities. In addition,
poor market conditions affect the structure of securities offered, shifting them towards shorter maturities
and more security. Furthermore, market conditions affect the quality of securities offered, with worsening
conditions substantially lowering the number of low-rated debt issues. Overall, these findings suggest
that market-wide conditions are important factors in firms’ capital raising decisions.


Isil Erel                                            Woojin Kim
Department of Finance                                Korea University Business School
Ohio State University                                Anam-Dong, Seongbuk-Gu,
832 Fisher Hall                                      Seoul 136-701
2100 Neil Avenue                                     South Korea
Columbus, OH 43210                                   woojinkim@korea.ac.kr
and
erel@fisher.osu.edu                                  Michael Weisbach
                                                     Department of Finance
Brandon Julio                                        Fisher College of Business
London Business School                               Ohio State University
Regent's Park                                        2100 Neil Ave.
London NW1 4SA                                       Columbus, OH 43210
United Kingdom                                       and NBER
bjulio@london.edu                                    weisbach_2@fisher.osu.edu
        During 2008, a financial crisis made it increasingly difficult for firms to obtain credit. The crisis

worsened throughout the year, culminating in a massive bailout of US financial institutions. The reason

for the bailout was not to help investors in these institutions, but rather to facilitate lending throughout the

economy. The ability of even healthy firms to finance investments was dramatically affected by the

existence of unhealthy ones. While the 2008 financial crisis was somewhat unusual in that it was initiated

by a wave of mortgage defaults, it is illustrative of the manner in which economy-wide factors can affect

firms’ access to capital.

        The way in which economy-wide factors affect firms’ ability to raise capital shapes their

corporate financial policies. For example, Richard Passov, the longtime treasurer of Pfizer, argues that

the possibility of being shut out of the capital markets during market downturns is the primary reason why

Pfizer and other technology companies often place such importance on a high bond rating. [See Passov

2003]. The extent to which this concern is justified and macroeconomic factors can affect access to

capital is an important issue in finance and has clear policy implications.

        This paper estimates the manner in which overall market conditions affect firms’ issuances of

securities. We first consider the possibility that macroeconomic conditions can affect the choice of

securities that firms issue. Theory suggests that poor economic conditions will lead firms to issue less

information-sensitive securities, shifting from equity to convertibles, and from convertibles to debt. Poor

economic conditions should also increase the demand for monitoring of firms, causing them to shift from

public to private securities. In addition to affecting the type of securities offered, macroeconomic

conditions also can affect the structure of securities; in particular, poor financial conditions potentially

lead firms to shorten the maturity and to add security to the securities they issue. Finally, we examine the

idea that during poor financial times, issuing low-quality debt is particularly difficult, so that observed

debt issuances will be primarily high quality debt.

        To evaluate the extent to which these predictions hold in practice, we assemble a database

containing information on alternative ways in which firms can raise capital. Our sample contains detailed

information on 21,657 publicly-traded debt issuances and 7,746 seasoned equity offerings in the U.S.


                                                       1
between 1971 and 2007. The latter part of our sample (from 1988 to 2007) also includes data on 40,097

completed and mostly syndicated loan tranches.1 Analysis of this sample provides stylized facts on the

nature of public and private debt securities that have been issued recently in the US. As emphasized by

Bolton and Scharfstein (1996), the vast majority of external financing is supplied by debt rather than

equity. Consequently, understanding the choice between alternative types of debt is likely to be equally

important as, or even more important than, the choice between debt and equity.

        We first provide statistics documenting the average quantity of capital raised though issuance of

different kinds of securities during different market conditions. A complicating factor when interpreting

these numbers is the enormous increase in the total value of funds raised during our sample period.

Nonetheless, there are some noticeable differences in the average proceeds per month raised during weak

and strong economic conditions. For example, average proceeds raised per month through SEOs tend to

drop during poor market conditions.         However, short-term and highly-rated public debt increases

noticeably relative to longer-term and lower-rated issues during poor market conditions.

        Our multivariate analysis suggests that macroeconomic conditions affect both firms’ abilities to

raise capital and the manner in which they choose to raise it. We find that the conditional probability of

issuing less information sensitive securities, i.e., convertibles rather than equity, increases when credit

markets are tight. We do not observe an increase in the demand for bank loans during economic

downturns. However, we document that the borrowers of our sample of private loans tend to be of higher

quality during bad economic times, consistent with the view that capital available to intermediaries goes

down, leading them to tighten lending standards during these periods. In addition to the choice of

securities, we also find that market-wide factors affect the structure of debt contracts. In particular, market

downturns decrease the expected maturity of public bonds and private loans and increase the likelihood

that these bonds and loans are secured. These findings are consistent with the view that market downturns

lead firms to structure securities in ways that lessen their information sensitivity.


1
 The primary sources of capital omitted from this sample are regular bank loans, commercial paper, and private
placements of equity and debt.


                                                       2
        Finally, we consider the quality of the public securities, measured by their ratings. For our

sample of public bonds, our results suggest that market downturns do not reduce the issuances of high

quality bonds, but are associated with a substantial drop in the likelihood of a junk or unrated bond issue.

This pattern suggests that lower quality firms tend to be shut out of the credit markets during poor market

conditions.

        The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section I summarizes theoretical work

providing explanations on why economy-wide factors could affect the manner in which firms raise capital.

Section II describes the data employed in this paper and reports summary statistics. Section III presents

univariate comparisons of firms issuing securities in different market conditions.        It also provides

statistics on the characteristics of the firms issuing different kinds of securities.     Section IV uses

multivariate analysis to estimate the way in which economy-wide factors can affect security choice,

focusing on the broad question of what kind of security to issue; equity, public debt, or private debt.

Section V examines the impact of macroeconomic conditions on the design of debt contracts. Section VI

looks more closely at the firms issuing public debt, and considers how public debt issues of different

quality vary over the business cycle. Section VII provides a brief summary and conclusion.



I. Why economy-wide factors could conceivably affect corporate capital-raising.

A. Theoretical Background.

        There have been a number of attempts to link theoretically the state of the overall economy with

firms’ ability to borrow.     Of course, in a Modigliani-Miller world with perfect information, no

transactions costs, and managers whose interests are perfectly aligned with shareholders’, economy-wide

factors should have no effect on firms’ financial decisions. Therefore, attempts to model the linkage

between macroeconomic factors and firms’ financial decisions necessarily rely on a market imperfection

of one kind or another.

        Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) present a model in which managers can divert some of the firm’s

resources for their own private benefits, reducing the net worth of the firm and therefore make the firm


                                                     3
less attractive to lenders. In the Holmstrom and Tirole model, firms can either borrow directly from

lenders, or indirectly through an intermediary that provides monitoring. In this model, monitoring reduces

the private benefits the manager can extract from the firm and hence alleviates the moral hazard problem.

Monitoring is costly since it requires monitors to put up their own capital to avoid moral hazard on their

part. Firms prefer to borrow directly rather than through an intermediary, since borrowing directly avoids

paying the monitor for his services. In equilibrium, only the firms with sufficiently high net worth can

borrow directly. Lesser quality firms can borrow directly only if (or after) they borrow from a monitoring

intermediary. The worst quality firms cannot borrow at all.

        The effect of a market downturn is twofold in the context of this model. First, a downturn lowers

the value of all firms, leading to a collateral crunch that pushes firms that could previously borrow

directly into the region where they have to rely on intermediaries, and pushes some of the intermediary-

using firms out of the capital market altogether. Second, the capital available to intermediaries goes down,

creating a credit crunch that reduces the number of firms to which they can lend. Since intermediaries

prefer to lend to better firms, firms with the lowest net worth end up being shut out of the capital market.

This analysis implies that during market downturns, we should observe the lower quality firms being shut

out of the public debt market (the direct borrowing channel), some of whom can alternatively borrow

from monitoring intermediaries and some of whom cannot borrow at all.

        An alternative approach is to assume the market imperfections come from information

asymmetries between firms and investors. Bernanke and Gertler (1989) take this approach; in particular,

they assume that the degree of asymmetric information is a decreasing function of the firm’s net worth.

As the economy slows down, firms’ net worth declines, which increases the information asymmetry

problem. In market downturns, firms, especially ones that have a lower net worth to begin with, are

unable to receive financing. These financial frictions serve to magnify the underlying economic problems

and worsen business cycles.

        The first-order prediction of this model for financing behavior is, similar to Holmstrom and

Tirole, that poorer quality firms are shut out of the financial markets during overall market downturns. In


                                                     4
addition, this analysis has an additional implication not emphasized by Bernanke and Gertler (1989):

Firms will have an incentive to shift the securities they use toward less information-sensitive ones during

market downturns. To illustrate, suppose that a firm is indifferent between issuing equity or a convertible

bond during a boom. If market conditions deteriorate and information asymmetry problems worsen, then

at the margin, the same firm will be pushed towards the convertible bond issue, since it is less

information-sensitive than equity. Similarly, firms will have incentives to shorten maturities of the bonds

they issue, and to issue bonds that offer more security to the lender.2

        Similar to Holmstrom and Tirole (1997), Diamond (1991a) presents a moral hazard model

focusing on the borrower’s choice between direct financing (public debt) without monitoring and a bank

loan with monitoring. The Diamond model explicitly examines this choice as a function of a borrower’s

reputation (track record), which is built over time through repeated borrowing and monitoring.

Monitoring, which lowers moral hazard by the borrower, is costly and delegated to a financial

intermediary. As in the papers discussed above, the key determinant of debt structure is credit quality.

However, in Diamond (1991a), credit quality is determined over time through a rating, which is a

function of a firm’s reputation. Firms with sufficiently high credit quality borrow directly through public

debt market since they do not need to incur monitoring costs. Also firms with low ratings do not benefit

from bank monitoring since they do not have incentives to build a reputation.

        The Diamond model predicts that the firms that borrow from a financial intermediary are the ones

with credit ratings toward the middle of the spectrum. An important implication of the model is that

during economic downturns, only some borrowers with the highest ratings can continue borrowing

directly and the rest will need monitoring. In other words, during the down cycles, average bank

borrowers will be higher-rated and the ratio of bank loans to lower-rated public debt will increase.



2
 Choe, Masulis, and Nanda (1993) make similar arguments and present a model in which the increased investment
opportunities in expansions lower asymmetric information and lead to more equity offerings. Levy and Hennessy
(2007) analyze a computable general equilibrium model in which financing behavior varies over the business cycle.
Underlying the model is a moral hazard problem solved by managerial ownership, the optimal level of which varies
with business conditions.


                                                        5
        Bolton and Freixas (2000) also study the choice between different types of financing for the firm

in a setting in which the underlying frictions are based on asymmetric information. This paper considers

equity issues in addition to private and public debt as potential financing sources for the firm.3 Similar to

Myers and Majluf (1984), equity issuance is associated with information dilution costs. Furthermore, for

some borrowers, public debt can also be costly because it can lead to inefficient liquidation. While bank

loans are more flexible, borrowing from banks is relatively expensive because of monitoring costs. In

equilibrium, variation in the credit quality of the borrowing firms determines the choice between these

financing options. In this model, the riskiest firms cannot borrow, while the safest firms choose to borrow

directly through capital markets, either by issuing public debt or equity. The borrowers with moderate risk

borrow from the banks because of the flexibility provided during financial distress.

        These models analyze the effect of market-wide conditions on the supply of capital. However, it

is likely that macroeconomic conditions could affect the demand for capital as well. Unfortunately, it is

not clear theoretically the direction in which demand for capital will change over the business cycle. It is

possible that demand for capital could be pro-cyclical since the value of firms’ investment opportunities is

likely to increase during booming economies, as in the Shleifer (1986) model. However, during poor

economic times, firms are also likely to use up their cash reserves and have to raise capital to finance

operations, as occurred in the auto industry during 2008. The net effect of market-wide conditions on the

demand for capital is unclear. Nonetheless, the observed effect of macroeconomic conditions on security

choice is the equilibrium of both supply and demand effects, and the empirical results presented below

should be interpreted as such.

        Despite the differences in the underlying assumptions, these models all suggest that firms’

abilities to issue and choice of securities will be affected by overall market conditions. During market

downturns, poor quality firms will tend to be credit rationed, so that the only firms observed issuing

securities will be of relatively higher quality than during expansions. In addition, all other things equal,

3
 In addition to the papers discussed here, the literature on the firm’s choice between bank and public debt include
Besanko and Kanatas (1993), Hoshi, Kashyap, and Scharfstein (1993), Chemmanur and Fulghieri (1994), Boot and
Thakor (1997a, 1997b), and Repullo and Suarez (2000).


                                                        6
firms will be more likely to use less information-sensitive securities during recessions than during

expansions. In particular, during recessions, firms will be less likely to issue equity and more likely to

issue debt, and conditional on a debt issue, firms will tend to structure it with less information-sensitive

characteristics (i.e., shorter-term or secured). Finally, during market downturns, firms will substitute

away from publicly traded debt to private debt that is associated with greater monitoring.

B. Related Empirical Work

        There have been a number of papers documenting the manner in which equity offerings vary over

the business cycle. These papers have all found that equity offerings are much more likely to occur

during boom periods than during market downturns. This pattern appears to persist over a number of

different time periods. [See Hickman (1953), Moore (1980), Choe et al. (1993), Dittmar and Dittmar

(2007) and Dittmar and Thakor (2007].4

        Gomes and Phillips (2007) provide a fairly comprehensive analysis of the security choice

decision, focusing on the way in which asymmetric information affects the choice among public and

private equity and debt securities. These authors do not focus on the role of macroeconomic factors.

However, to the extent that a number of models discussed above argue that market-wide factors affect

security choice through their effect on asymmetric information, Gomes and Phillips’ results are related to

ours.

        Perhaps the most related paper to ours is Korajczyk and Levy (2003). Korazczyk and Levy

examine the way in which firms’ capital structures vary over the business cycle, and they focus their

analysis on the differences between constrained and unconstrained firms. Their main finding is that

leverage ratios tend to be countercyclical for unconstrained firms and cyclical for constrained firms.

Korazczyk and Levy’s focus is nonetheless quite different from ours; while they concentrate on the debt-




4
 There have also been several papers documenting the cross-sectional properties of debt maturity. [See Barclay and
Smith (1995), Guedes and Opler (1996), and Scherr and Hulburt (2001)]. In addition, Rauh and Sufi (2009) provide
detailed data on debt structure that goes well beyond the summary statistics found on Computstat.



                                                        7
equity ratio, our goal is to study how the business cycle affects the manner in which firms raise capital

and the way they structure the securities they issue.



II. Data Sources and Sample Description

A. Data Sources

        We obtain data on security issues from three different sources: SDC Global New Issues Database

for SEOs, Mergent Fixed Income Securities Database (FISD) for convertible bonds and other public debt,

and Loan Pricing Corporation’s Dealscan for private loans. The SDC database provides information on

total proceeds and the number of primary and secondary shares offered for each SEO. In our sample of

SEOs, we exclude all private placements. In addition, we drop SEOs that only offer secondary shares

since these offerings do not lead to a capital inflow to the firm. This process leads to a sample of 7,746

SEOs by 4,885 U.S. firms that have Compustat identifiers from 1971 to 2007.

        Mergent FISD provides comprehensive information for US corporate debt, including total

proceeds raised as well as other characteristics such as maturity, security, convertibility, and credit quality.

We utilize all public debt issues made by industrial firms reported in FISD from 1971 and 2007. Our

initial public bond sample consists of 21,657 issues from 3,072 firms with Compustat identifiers. The

average initial maturity is 12 years and the median is 10 years. Most of the bonds are unsecured (96.3%)

while slightly more than half (55%) are investment grade.

        Our data on private debt are from Loan Pricing Corporation’s Dealscan, which contains detailed

issuance-level information on the characteristics of syndicated and sole-lender bank loans. These

characteristics include size and maturity of the loan, credit quality of the borrower, as well as information

on whether the loan is secured by some type of collateral or not. Each loan can have multiple tranches,

each of which contains different characteristics. Our sample comprises 40,097 completed loan tranches to

7,465 firms with Compustat identifiers between 1988 and 2007, including 364-day facilities (9.58%),




                                                        8
bridge loans (1.6%), term loans (29.84%), and revolving loans and credit lines (58.98%).5 The mean loan

maturity is about 3.7 years with a slightly shorter median of 3.4 years. Contrary to the sample of public

bonds, most of the loans are secured, with 79% of sample loans being secured by some type of collateral.

        Using these issue-level data, we collapse each firm’s issues at the month level. We focus on

monthly issue-level data because our macroeconomic data is available monthly and we explore the

manner in which macroeconomic conditions affect firms’ capital raising decisions. We then match the

firm-month observations with accounting information from Compustat and eliminate all financial firms

(one-digit SIC equal to 6) and utilities (two-digit SIC equal to 49). After all these procedures, we end up

with a sample containing 7,170 firm-months with SEO issues, 2,546 firm-months with convertible bond

issues, and 10,400 firm months with straight public bond issues from 1971 to 2007, and also 20,322 firm-

months with private loan contracts from 1988 to 2007.

        We obtain macroeconomic data from three sources. Recession/expansion dates come from the

National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), while GDP growth rates are obtained from the US

Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). Finally, we also utilize a survey-based measure of overall credit

standards provided by the Federal Reserve, called the “Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank

Lending Practices”. This survey is a quarterly survey of approximately sixty large domestic banks and

twenty-four U.S. branches of foreign banks, asking the managers of these banks how their bank is

changing their credit standards. The particular variable we focus on is the net percentage of domestic

respondents who claim that they are tightening standards for commercial and industrial loans. 6 One

limitation of this survey is that it is available only after the second quarter of 1990, so when we use the

survey data, we restrict our sample to this subperiod.

B. The Pattern of Security Issues over Different Market Conditions


5
  We thank Amir Sufi and Michael Roberts for sharing Compustat identifiers that allow us to match Dealscan Loan
data with accounting data from Compustat. See Chava and Roberts (2008) for a discussion of the process of
gathering these identifiers.
6
  See Lown, Morgan, and Rohatgi (2000) for more information about the survey. These authors document that the
survey results are strongly related to loan growth, with tightening standards being associated with slower loan
growth.


                                                      9
           Table I presents descriptive statistics of our security issuance sample. To provide a rough idea of

the time-series variation in the use of securities, we divide the sample into sub-periods based on the

NBER’s expansion/recession classification. For each sub-period, we report the proceeds raised for four

types of securities in that period: SEOs, convertibles, straight public bonds, and private loans.7 Since

recessions are substantially shorter than expansions during our sample period, we report the monthly

average proceeds rather than total proceeds during each sub-period.

           A complicating factor in our analysis is that the quantity of capital raised increased substantially

over the sample period as the economy expanded, in part due to the development of the syndicated loan

market. Given the rapid growth in the quantity of issuances, it is difficult to infer patterns about the

relative effects of market conditions. Nonetheless, a few patterns relating macroeconomic conditions and

security offerings are evident from Table I. In particular, equity offerings decline during recessions, but

public debt offerings appear to rise. The rise of the syndicated loan market is also evident, coming into

existence in the late 1980s and becoming the predominant form of capital raising by the 2000s.

           Table II normalizes the amount of capital raised through each method in each calendar month by

the total capital raised in that particular month and considers how the percentage of capital raised by

different methods varies by market conditions. To consider the effect of market downturns on security

issuances, we rely on three alternative measures of market-wide conditions. In addition to an NBER-

defined recession, we characterize months by GDP growth, and call a month “Low Growth” if GDP

growth in that particular quarter is below the 25th percentile of economic growth over the entire sample

period. Finally we define “Weak Credit Supply” months as those for which the net percentage of senior

loan officers tightening standards for loans to large and medium firms is positive for that particular

quarter.

           Panel A of Table II presents the relative proceeds raised by different forms of financing for the

1971-1987 sub-period, for which there are no syndicated loans, while Panel B reports the results


7
  Our data on SEOs only include proceeds raised from the primary shares. Private loans include both syndicated
loans and sole-lender loans, and are only available after 1988.


                                                       10
subsequent to 1988, the first year for which we have data for syndicated loans. For both sub-periods, the

fraction of capital raised by public debt is larger during market downturns than in expansions. In contrast,

equity issues appear to be pro-cyclical, with larger fractions being raised during expansions than

contractions. This pattern is consistent with the idea that less information-sensitive securities such as debt

are more attractive during poor economic times. Market conditions have a somewhat ambiguous effect

on convertibles; in the earlier sub-period convertibles account for a larger fraction of capital raised during

expansions while in the latter sub-period they account for a larger fraction during recessions. Contrary to

the theories presented above, private debt appears to account for a higher fraction of capital raised during

expansions than recessions.

        These numbers suggest that there are differences in methods of capital raising across different

market conditions. Consistent with theory, Table II suggests that SEOs, the most information-sensitive

security we consider, decline noticeably during market downturns.             The issuance of public debt is

insensitive to market conditions and is even larger during downturns, consistent with the models of

Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) and Bernanke and Gertler (1989). In addition to the type of securities

offered, these theories have predictions about the quality and structure of the securities offered during

market downturns. These models predict that there will be a ‘flight to quality’, in which higher quality

debt is relatively insulated from market downturns while lower quality debt issuances decline in quantity.

In terms of the structure of securities, the Bernanke and Gertler model predicts that firms will prefer less

information-sensitive securities during market downturns, leading them to shorten the maturities of their

bonds and loans, and to be more likely to issue secured rather than unsecured bonds and loans.

        To evaluate these predictions, Table III breaks down the public debt issues more finely,

documenting the extent to which the use of bonds of different maturity, security, and quality vary by

market conditions.8 In the first two columns we report the relative proportion of short-term public debt,




8
 We focus on the features of public debt rather than private loans because ratings data are available for the vast
majority of the observations.


                                                       11
as well as secured public debt.9 We define a bond to be short-term if the time to maturity of the issue is

less than five years.10 Our measure of security level is a dummy variable set to one if the bond is secured

and set to zero otherwise. If the firm issues more than one bond in a month, we call it secured if the

proceeds raised from the secured bond is at least half of total proceeds raised. Consistent with the

predictions of the theories, the relative proceeds raised through short-term debt, which is less information

sensitive, increases significantly during recessions and weak credit supply. However, the results for

secured debt are more ambiguous, with the proportion of debt that is secured being somewhat higher in

good economic times than in downturns.

         The remaining columns of Table III present the fraction of capital raised by public debt with

different credit quality across varying macroeconomic conditions. The pattern is clear: Lower quality

and unrated debt issues decline substantially during poor market conditions. During recessions, the

quantity of low-quality issues declines to one third to one half of the expansion levels, depending on the

sample period used. In contrast, the level of investable B-rated issues is about the same, leading the

fraction of A-rated issues to increase by about twenty percentage points during recessions. Findings stay

similar if we measure market conditions using GDP growth or the survey of credit supply, although the

differences are somewhat smaller.



III. Firm Characteristics

         Different kinds of firms tend to issue different types of securities. The first two columns of Table

IV compare characteristics of firms in months in which some type of security was offered to months in

which no security was issued. As in Table II, we report the results separately for 1971-1987 sub-period

(in panel A) and post-1988 sub-period (in panel B) during which we have the data for private loans. The

accounting variables reported are taken from the fiscal year-end immediately prior to the issue.


9
  Mergent does not contain any short-term debt issues prior to 1985. Hence, we consider short-term debt to be
missing before 1985 when computing the numbers presented in Table III.
10
   If the firm issued more than one bond, then the issue activity is classified as short-term if the proceeds-weighted
maturity of the bonds is less than five years.


                                                         12
        Relative to firm-months with no issues, firms in issuing months tend to be larger, older, and have

higher growth and better prior stock performance. For the issuing months, the average sales growth for

the year just prior to the security issuance is 0.31 in panel A and 0.27 in panel B, compared to 0.19 in

panel A and 0.18 in panel B for nonissuing months. The stock return over the previous twelve months is

0.62 and 0.34 for issuing months, compared to 0.19 and 0.17 for nonissuing months in panels A and B

respectively. In addition, issues are less likely during market downturns, regardless of which measure of

financial conditions one uses in both panels A and B.

        The remaining columns of Table IV summarize differences in firm characteristics across issuers

of alternative securities. SEO issuers tend to be the smallest, youngest, and they have the highest market

to book ratios in both panels. Public debt issuers are substantially larger, and they have higher fixed asset

ratios than issuers of other types of securities. In contrast, issuers of private loans are noticeably smaller

than public debt issuers, with lower cash flows and fixed assets. This pattern suggests that public debt

issuers are noticeably different from other kinds of issuers, consistent with the view that publicly-traded

debt is the most attractive form of financing, and that firms using other forms are unable to issue publicly-

traded debt.



IV. Multivariate Analysis of Security Choice

        The aggregate statistics and the univariate comparisons are both suggestive of the hypothesis that

firm characteristics and macroeconomic conditions affect the way firms raise capital. However, to

identify the effect of macroeconomic conditions on the issuance of the firms’ funding choices, it is

important to estimate this effect in a multivariate setting, controlling for firm-level factors and time

trends. An important consideration is that the effect of changing market conditions on the demand for

capital is ambiguous. Worsening market conditions could either increase demand for capital, because of a

decline in cash flows, or decrease the demand for capital, because of fewer investment opportunities.

Since demand for capital will clearly be an important consideration in the decision to issue securities, it is

important to control econometrically for factors likely to be related to demand for capital.


                                                     13
        To evaluate formally the extent to which financing choices are affected by macroeconomic as

well as firm-specific factors, we employ discrete-choice models that estimate the likelihood of a firm

issuing a specified type of security in a particular time period. At any point in time, a firm can choose not

to obtain financing, to obtain a private loan, or to access the public security markets by issuing a straight

bond, convertible bond, or seasoned equity. Given the number of potential alternative outcomes, we

utilize econometric approaches that allow for multiple discrete choices.

A. An Ordered Logit Approach

        Theoretically, we expect that during poor financial conditions, firms will, at the margin, be more

likely to issue less information-sensitive securities than during good financial conditions. This hypothesis

suggests a natural ordering of the possible issuances arising from their information sensitivity.            In

particular, internally generated funds are least sensitive to information, followed by private debt, public

debt, convertible debt, and finally, seasoned equity. We assign a ‘4’ to equity, a ‘3’ to convertibles, and a

‘2’ to public bonds. Since for monitoring reasons, private debt is likely to be more attractive during poor

times, we assign private debt a ‘1’, and if a firm does not issue a security, a ‘0’. Our prediction is that this

ordering will be positively related with market-wide conditions, so that a recession, a period of low

growth, or tight capital markets should be negatively related to this variable.

        We estimate a model predicting which of these securities will be issued as a function of firm-

specific factors as well as market-wide factors. Since our dependent variable is ordered, we utilize an

‘ordered logit’ specification that takes advantage of the ordering of the dependent variable to improve the

efficiency of the estimator.

        Table V contains estimates of this ordered logit model. Each of the three columns uses a different

measure of market-wide conditions: Column (1) uses the NBER-defined recession, Column (2) uses the

level of GDP growth, and Column (3) uses the Senior Loan Officer Opinion survey. Each equation also

includes a number of variables designed to capture the firm’s financial condition and demand for capital

(e.g., market to book, cash flow, and sales growth). Other firm-level controls are firm’s age, natural




                                                      14
logarithm of the total assets, leverage, cash, natural logarithm of the inverse of interest coverage,11 and a

debt-rating dummy. We also include the firm’s stock return for the prior twelve months, which restricts

our sample to listed firms. Furthermore, all regressions include industry fixed effects. The equation is

estimated using a panel of monthly observations of all firms that had at least one type of security issue

during the sample period, leading to 737,433 observations in each equation.12 We also include the term

spread, defined as the difference between the yields on ten-year treasuries and one-year treasuries, as a

macro-level control. We calculate the standard errors in these equations allowing for clustering of

observations at the firm level.

           In each column, the coefficient on each measure of market conditions is negative and is

statistically significantly different from zero in two of the three columns. The implication of these

negative coefficients is that when conditions worsen, then it is more likely that there is a low value of the

dependent variable. For example, if there is a low growth, it becomes less likely that there is any security

issue at all, and if there is an issue, it is likely to be a less information-sensitive one.13

           A potential concern in interpreting the ordered logit results is that it is impossible to tell from the

fact that the estimated coefficient is negative exactly which of the choices is driving the negative

coefficient. For example, estimated coefficient in the ordered logit would be negative if all issuances

were less likely during market downturns, or if SEOs declined but there was no changes in other

issuances. To evaluate the extent to which each type of issuance is affected by market conditions, we

estimate the probability of an issue of a particular type, conditional on firm-specific and market-wide

factors.




11
   The transformation used is a negative function of conventional interest coverage, so that the negative coefficient
on this variable means that better interest coverage increases the likelihood of a more information sensitive issue.
We use this transformation because the usual measure of interest coverage becomes infinite for all-equity firms.
12
   We obtain similar results when we include all other firms in Compustat that did not have any security issue during
the sample period.
13
   We reestimate all equations throughout the paper excluding refinancing firm-months, which account for 8.7% of
all issuing firm-months. An issuing month is defined as refinancing if the total value raised in that specific month is
within plus or minus 15% of the size of the reduction in long-term debt as of the fiscal year end immediately
following the issue. The results are similar to the full sample results.


                                                         15
B. A Nested Logit Approach

         Given the natural nesting or sequential structure of external financing choices, we employ a

nested logit model (McFadden (1978, 1981)) to estimate the effect of market downturns on the choice

between the various types of external finance. This approach allows us to estimate the probability of

observing a particular security conditional on the decision to raise capital at all. In addition, this approach

does not impose the “Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives” assumption required for consistent

estimation in the multinomial logit model.14 The nesting structure is set up as follows: the top level of the

nesting structure represents the broad choice of financing through internal funds or by accessing external

finance. The lower level of the nesting structure represents the choice between loans, straight public

bonds, convertible bonds, and seasoned equity offerings. Thus, the first step in estimating the conditional

probabilities is to model the probability of obtaining any kind of external finance in the full sample.

Conditional on choosing to finance externally, the model estimates the probability of obtaining any one of

the specific types of securities.

         Table VI contains estimates of the nested logit specification predicting the type of security issued

conditional on obtaining any one of the four types of external finance in a given month. The model

allows for four possible outcomes conditional on obtaining external finance: The firm can choose to

receive a loan, to issue a straight bond, to issue a convertible bond, or to do a seasoned equity offering. In

each equation, ‘receive a loan’ is the baseline choice, so the coefficients in each column can be

interpreted as the impact on the conditional probability of issuing a particular type of security relative to

obtaining a loan. Each of the three panels utilizes a different measure of market conditions.

         The results are consistent across the three different measures of market conditions.                    The

coefficient on the variable indicating poor market conditions for bonds is positive but statistically

insignificant across the three panels, suggesting that conditional probability of issuing a bond relative to

14
   One potential drawback to the multinomial logit is the underlying independence of irrelevant alternatives
assumption, which requires that the choice between any two financing choices be independent of the existence of a
third choice. For example, the multinomial logit specification implicitly assumes that the choice between public debt
and private debt is independent of the choice of whether or not to issue seasoned equity. Nonetheless, for robustness,
we also estimated several multinomial logit specifications and obtained similar results.


                                                         16
that of obtaining a loan does not change during a downturn.        However, the shift in the probability of

issuing convertibles or seasoned equity across market conditions is statistically significant.

        The magnitudes implied by these changes in macroeconomic conditions are substantial. For

example, the coefficient of 0.363 on the recession dummy in Panel A of Table VI implies that the

estimated marginal effect of a recession on a convertible bond for the average firm is 0.021. In terms of

magnitude, this implies that a recession increases the conditional probability of issuing a convertible bond

to .082 compared to .061 for an average firm during non-recession years. This difference represents a

33.5% increase in the predicted probability of issuing a convertible bond, conditional on choosing some

type of external finance. The economic effect on convertibles is similar across the other two measures of

market conditions, with the estimated marginal effects being 0.022 for the low GDP growth dummy and

0.019 for the weak credit market dummy.

        The coefficients on the market condition variables for SEOs are significantly negative, regardless

of which measure of financial conditions we use. Additionally, the coefficients are statistically

significantly different from the coefficients on the other securities. This result indicates that a recession

lowers the likelihood of issuing an SEO, relative to not issuing any security or issuing any other type of

security. This result is consistent with the notion that as market conditions worsen, firms are less likely to

issue equity than in better market conditions. As such, it confirms the findings of Hickman (1953), Moore

(1980) and Choe, Masulis and Nanda (1993), who find similar patterns of security issuances over earlier

periods (1900-1938, 1946-1970, and 1971-1991 respectively). The marginal effect of a recession on the

conditional probability of issuing equity is -0.020, suggesting that for an average firm, the conditional

probability of issuing equity drops from 0.176 in non-recession years to 0.155 during recessions. This

represents an 11.6% reduction in the predicted probability of issuing seasoned equity. The marginal

effects for the low GDP growth dummy and the weak credit dummy are -0.023 and -0.011, respectively.

        The positive effect of downturns on convertible bonds together with the negative effect on

seasoned equity is consistent with the hypothesis that the distribution of security issues shifts towards less

information sensitive securities. The opposite signs of these coefficients may reflect the idea that firms


                                                     17
that otherwise would be issuing equity during these periods are instead choosing to issue a convertible

during market downturns. If asymmetric information increases during these downturns, this pattern is

consistent with the logic of the Stein (1992) model, in which convertible bonds are issued as an

alternative to equity when asymmetric information is high.

          The other coefficients in the equations in Table VI are consistent with the view, implicit in the

Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) model among others, that the firms issuing public debt are the lowest

quality risks to a lender. Relative to firms that issue other types of securities, public debt issuers are

oldest, largest, have the highest fixed asset ratio and sales growth, and are most likely to have a debt

rating.



C. The Credit Quality of Bank Borrowers

          Table VI suggests that the probability of initiating a loan does not increase relative to that of

issuing public bonds. Indeed, the probability of issuing a convertible bond actually increases relative to

obtaining a loan in a downturn. To the extent that syndicated loans are intermediated and are associated

with increased monitoring relative to public bonds, this pattern does not appear to be consistent with the

Diamond (1991a) and Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) models. In these models, poor market conditions

induce firms to substitute toward intermediated rather than public debt, while these equations indicate that

poor market conditions actually decrease the equilibrium quantity of loans.

          There are several potential explanations for this pattern of results. First of all, the models

discussed above predict that some firms will substitute from directly-placed debt toward intermediated

debt, while other firms that could have received intermediated debt during good times are shut out of the

capital market altogether. The impact on overall quantity of loans initiated could be unclear. Second,

Dealscan sample reflects large, mostly syndicated loans that are more ‘bond-like’ and not associated with

monitoring like smaller sole-lender bank loans. Finally, it could be that this substitution from direct to

intermediated debt could simply be inconsistent with empirical realities.




                                                     18
        A complicating factor in empirical analysis of loan initiations is that instead of taking out new

loans, firms have the option of drawing down existing lines of credit. It seems likely that firms will

choose to draw down lines of credit more quickly during recessions; Ivashina and Scharfstein (2008)

document that during the Financial Crisis of 2008, which occurred after our sample period, firms in fact

did draw down lines of credit substantially faster than they typically do during good economic times. If

the recent financial crisis is typical of other recessions in the respect that firms draw down lines of credit

more than usual, bank lending increases during poor market-wide conditions are likely to be larger than

one would infer by examining only the loans covered by DealScan as we do in Table VI.

        Consequently, we consider another implication of the Diamond (1991a) and Holmstrom and

Tirole (1997) models. In particular, these models predict that as a credit crunch begins to bind, banks will

become more selective and lend to higher quality borrowers. In equilibrium, loans initiated during market

downturns should be to higher quality firms than those that received them in good economic times.

        We test this prediction using the ratings of borrowers in our sample of loans. We order the

ratings of borrowers from 0 to 4, with 0 representing borrowers with bonds that are not rated, 1

representing C to Caa1 rated, 2 representing B3 to Ba1 rated, 3 representing Baa3 to Baa1 rated, and 4

representing A3 to Aaa rated.      We estimate equations predicting this rating as a function of firm

characteristics and the three measures of financial conditions.     We use ordered logit to estimate these

equations because of the natural ordering of the dependent variable.

        Table VII contains estimates of this equation, with each column using a different measure of

market conditions. In each equation, the coefficient on the market conditions variable is positive and

statistically significant. These positive coefficients strongly suggest that controlling for other factors,

poor overall market conditions lead banks to provide loans to higher quality borrowers being provided

with bank loans in equilibrium. This finding is consistent with the argument that poor market conditions

lower the amount of credit available for banks to lend, leading them to drop the worse-quality borrowers

and lend only to higher quality ones.




                                                     19
V. Market Conditions and the Design of Debt Contracts

        We have provided evidence that the distribution of financing choices changes over the business

cycle. In particular, firms are less likely to issue types of securities that are relatively more sensitive to

information during economic downturns. An additional testable implication of the idea that information-

sensitive securities are relatively less attractive during market downturns is that, conditional on the type of

security used, firms will alter the structure of those securities depending on macroeconomic conditions.

Regardless of the type of security used, we expect to observe that as market-wide conditions weaken,

firms will adjust the design of their securities to minimize their sensitivity to information.15

A. Publicly-traded Bonds

        We first examine how the characteristics of public bonds vary over the business cycle. The

information-sensitivity of a bond increases in the bond’s maturity and decreases when a bond is secured

with real assets. Therefore, we expect to observe that, all other things equal, firms are more likely to use

shorter maturity bonds or secured bonds when market conditions are relatively poor.

        As in Table III, we define short-term firm-months as those with proceeds-weighted initial

maturity of less than or equal to five years. Similarly, secured firm-months are defined as those with

proceeds-weighted secured dummy greater than or equal to 0.5. We estimate equations predicting the

maturity of the bond and the security of the bond, conditional on an issuance of public debt.

        We employ a nested logit model to estimate the effect of market downturns on the design of debt

securities. The nesting structure is set up as follows: the top level of the nesting structure represents the

broad choice of financing, including using internal funds, bank loans, straight public bonds, convertible

bonds, and seasoned equity offerings. The lower level of the nesting structure represents the choice

among various debt structure choices, particularly the choice between short-term and long-term debt and

the choice of whether or not the debt will be secured. Thus, the first step in estimating the conditional


15
    A related implication of this argument is that lenders should impose tighter covenants on borrowers during
recessions. Zhang (2008) examines this hypothesis on a sample of large US firms and finds that covenants are
stricter when set during downturns and they lead to higher recovery rates later.



                                                      20
probabilities is to model the probability of issuing a bond using the full sample. Then, conditional on

issuing a bond, the model estimates the probability of issuing short-term or secured bonds.16

         Table VIII contains estimates of these equations. The first three columns of this table report the

estimates for the choice between short-term and long-term debt issues. The results suggest that market

conditions and the maturity of publicly-traded bonds are negatively related. The coefficients on the

variables representing poor conditions are all positive and two of the three are statistically significantly

different from zero. This finding is consistent with the notion that weak macroeconomic conditions

exacerbate asymmetric information problems, since shorter maturity securities’ value fluctuates less with

changes in information about firm value than does longer maturity securities’ value.

         Additionally, consistent with the Diamond (1991b) liquidity risk arguments, we find that short-

term debt issuers tend to be larger, have higher market-to-book ratios and less cash on their balance sheets

than do firms that issue long-term debt. The large effect of growth opportunities, as measured by the

market-to-book ratio, is also consistent with Myers (1977) and Barnea, Haugen and Senbet (1980), in

which firms with better growth opportunities issue on shorter term maturities to help minimize potential

agency conflicts.     The results are also largely consistent with Flannery (1986) in that short-term debt

issuers seem to be of better quality in terms of firm maturity, size and growth options compared to long-

term debt issuers.

         Columns 4, 5, and 6 of Table VIII report estimates of the nested logit models predicting whether

the firm will issue secured or unsecured debt. In each of these equations, the coefficient on the financial

downturn variable is positive and statistically significantly different from zero. Even though only about

4% of the public bonds in our sample are secured, it appears that a financial downturn increases the

likelihood that a firm issues a secured rather than an unsecured bond.



16
  We have estimated a number of alternative specifications that we have reported in previous drafts. In particular,
we have estimated two-stage models in which we first estimate the likelihood of a bond issue, and then estimate,
conditional on the issue, the factors that affect the structure of the issue. We have also estimated multinomial logit
models in which firms face a choice of not to issue, to issue short-term, or to issue long-term (and similarly with
security). The results are similar regardless of the choice of specification.


                                                         21
        In addition, the results from Table VIII document other factors that affect the decision to use

secured debt. These results suggest that firms issuing secured debt tend to be smaller and much more

highly levered than unsecured issuers. Firms also tend to issue secured debt when they have high fixed

asset ratios and after periods of poor stock returns. They tend to hold more cash, which tends to indicate

that they are concerned about liquidity constraints in the future. These findings are consistent with the

‘banking’ view of secured debt (Berger and Udell (1990)), in which poor quality firms have little choice

but to issue secured debt as investors are more likely to require direct collateral when the firm is nearing

bankruptcy. They do not support the ‘corporate finance’ view, in which high quality firms issue secured

debt to avoid underinvestment problems associated with the priority of existing debt claims (Stulz and

Johnson (1985), Smith and Warner (1979), and Berkovitch and Kim (1990)).

B. Private Loans

        We now examine the way in which macroeconomic conditions and firm-specific factors affect the

structure of private loans. As with our analysis of public debt offerings, we classify private loans by

maturity and security level. As before, we consider a loan or collection of loans to be short-term if the

weighted maturity is less than five years, and classify the loans as to whether or not they are secured. We

then estimate nested logit models predicting the factors that affect whether a loan is short or long-term,

and whether or not it is secured, conditional on the firm’s obtaining a loan.

        Table IX presents estimates of the nested logit models for loans. The first three columns report

estimates of the factors that affect the choice between short-term and long-term loans. Similar to public

bonds, the conditional probability of obtaining a short-term loan increases during economic downturns

and tightening credit markets, consistent with the hypothesis that firms prefer less information-sensitive

debt during downturns. In addition, firms that receive short-term private loans tend to have lower debt

levels, higher market-to-book ratios, and are less likely to have obtained a credit rating than firms that

obtain long-term loans.

        The last three columns of Table IX report estimates of equations predicting whether a given loan

will be secured or unsecured. The coefficients on the three indicators of market conditions are positive


                                                     22
and statistically significant. These results suggest, consistent with the information-sensitivity arguments,

that weak credit conditions are associated with a higher use of secured relative to unsecured debt.

Security lessens the importance of information asymmetries, which tend to increase in worse market

conditions.

        In addition, the same firm-level factors that lead firms to issue bonds with secured public debt are

also associated with the use of secured private loans. In particular, firms obtaining secured loans tend to

be younger, smaller, highly levered with low interest coverage and weak cash flows.            This pattern

strongly supports the “banking view” of secured debt, in which firms tend to use secured debt in

situations in which lenders are unwilling to lend absent security. It is counter to the “corporate finance”

view, in which firms use secured debt as a way of finessing future agency problems.

C. Combinations of Issue Features

        The previous analysis considered each provision separately and estimated the factors that lead

firms to choose each one. However, in practice, the features are agreed to at the same time, and

undoubtedly they are negotiated as a group rather than individually. To mirror the joint decision process,

we estimate a model in which the features of the debt are estimated simultaneously.

        We first consider combinations of securities that are observed, and rank them according to their

expected sensitivity to market conditions. In addition to public bonds, we include loans and equity

offerings in this analysis.   We rank the possibilities from least to most sensitive to market-wide

conditions: no issue, short-term secured loan, short-term unsecured loan, long-term secured loan, long-

term unsecured loan, short-term bond, long-term bond, secured bond, convertible bond, and seasoned

equity issue.

        We estimate these combinations of features using an ordered logit model and present the results

in Table X. These results indicate that market conditions appear to have a large impact on the likelihood

that a firm uses a more information-sensitive security. Each of the three measures of market conditions,

the recession dummy variable, the low-growth dummy, and the survey-based measure of market

conditions, has a negative coefficient and is highly statistically significantly different from zero. This


                                                    23
finding confirms the results discussed above, in which the most information-sensitive securities are used

in expansions while the least-information sensitive securities are used during market downturns.



VI. The Determinants of Credit Quality of Public Debt

        In addition to the features of the debt contracts, we are also interested in the factors that affect the

credit quality of the bond. Consequently, we estimate equations predicting the bond’s quality, measured

by its rating. We estimate these equations using a multinomial logit setup, in which the dependent

variable encompasses five possible levels of credit quality: non-rated, C-rated, speculative B-rated,

investment grade B-rated, and A-rated bonds. The baseline corresponds to the firm choosing not to issue

any kind of debt.

        Table XI reports coefficient estimates from equations predicting the credit quality of a firm’s

bond issue. This table contains three panels, each of which utilizes an alternative measure of market

conditions.   Some of the results are not particularly surprising as they correspond to the firm

characteristics associated with bond ratings of different types. For example, larger firms, and firms with

higher market to book, higher cash flows and better coverage ratios are more likely to issue high-rated

debt than low-rated debt, while more levered firms are more likely to issue low-rated debt.

        A clear finding from Table XI concerns the impact of market downturns on bond ratings.

Regardless of which measure of market conditions is used, the estimates indicate that weaker market

conditions correspond to a shift in the distribution of issued bonds towards higher credit ratings.

Consistent with the commonly discussed arguments of practitioners, during bad economic times, poor

quality borrowers appear to be shut out of the bond market, so that the only bonds that are issued during

poor economic times are highly rated. In other words, the fact that the quality of bonds issued is strongly

countercyclical is evidence consistent with the view that financial constraints are exacerbated during

recessions.

        A somewhat counterintuitive finding is the strong negative relation between cash holdings and

the probability of issuing investment grade debt. This finding is consistent with the logic of Almeida,


                                                      24
Campello and Weisbach (2004, 2009), who argue that more financially constrained firms are likely to

save a higher percentage of cash from their cash flows. Since firms with low bond ratings are more likely

to face financial constraints, they will tend to save more cash, leading to a negative relation between

firms’ cash holdings and the ratings of the bonds they issue. This finding complements the results from

Tables VIII and IX showing that high cash levels also predict the use of secured debt, which also is

consistent with constrained firms holding more cash and using security as a way of enabling access to

credit.



VII. Conclusion

           As illustrated so dramatically by the Financial Crisis of 2008, overall market conditions can affect

firms’ ability to raise capital, as well as the manner in which they do so. Theories based on asymmetric

information suggest that the highest quality firms will be relatively unaffected by a market downturn.

However, some lesser quality firms will be forced to shift from direct issuances of debt to intermediated

debt, while other lesser quality firms will be shut out of the capital markets altogether (Holmstrom and

Tirole (1997)). In addition, market downturns can force riskier firms to rely on intermediated debt rather

than direct issuances (Diamond (1991a)) or shut these firms out of the capital market completely

(Bernanke and Gertler (1989)).         To the extent that a worsening of overall market conditions can

exacerbate information problems, information-based theories also imply we should observe such a

worsening of market conditions leading to firms’ using less information sensitive securities to raise

capital.

           We evaluate these predictions empirically using a sample of security issuances by US

corporations, including 7,746 seasoned equity offerings, 21,657 public debt offerings, and 40,097

completed loan tranches. Our results suggest that the likelihood that a firm raises capital decreases when

overall market conditions worsen, regardless of whether we measure this worsening by an NBER-defined

recession, the growth rate of GDP, or a Federal Reserve Survey of bankers.             When we consider the

likelihood that a particular firm issues the type of security it uses in a specification that controls for the


                                                       25
identity of the issuing firm, it appears that a market downturn increases the likelihood that the firm issues

a less information sensitive security, i.e., convertibles or nonconvertible debt rather than equity. We also

find that market downturns lead lenders to prefer higher quality borrowers, although the results on the

quantity of loans over the business cycle are more ambiguous.

        In addition to the choice of securities, we also consider the possibility that market-wide factors can

affect the structure of securities. In other words, how do overall market conditions affect the maturity and

security of the samples of public and private debt issuances? In general, the results are consistent with

view that market downturns lead firms to structure securities in ways that lessens their information

sensitivity. In particular, holding other factors fixed, a market downturn tends to decrease the expected

maturity of both public bonds and private loans and to increase the likelihood that these bonds and loans

are secured.

        Finally, we consider the quality of the security, measured by its rating. For our sample of public

bonds, our results suggest that market downturns do not affect or even increase the issuances of high

quality bonds, but are associated with a significant drop in the likelihood of a junk or unrated bond issue.

        Overall, our results are consistent with the view that market conditions are important determinants

of the structure of securities issued, and, equally importantly, of the ability of firms to raise capital at all.

Consistent with commonly-stated arguments of practitioners as well as Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) and

Bernanke and Gertler (1989), higher quality bonds are relatively unaffected by market-wide factors, but

lower-quality bonds appear to be noticeably more difficult to issue during market downturns. In addition,

firms appear to substitute away from information-sensitive securities toward less information-sensitive

securities.

        These findings appear to justify the concerns of Passov (2003) that firms with less than stellar

bond ratings could conceivably be shut out of the capital markets during market times. Indeed, in the well-

known Graham and Harvey (2001) survey of Chief Financial Officers, the two most common concerns in

debt policy were maintaining financial flexibility and bond ratings (p. 210). Consistent with this survey

evidence are Kisgen (2008) and Hovakimian et al. (2009), who document that firms do appear to target


                                                      26
bond ratings rather than debt levels. Our findings suggest that the concern about bond ratings is potentially

warranted, since firms with poor bond ratings potentially are shut out of the capital markets during

downturns.

        While this paper documents substantial relations between security issuances and market conditions,

it raises as many questions as it answers. The results are consistent with a number of alternative models,

yet it does not distinguish between these models. In particular, are the results driven primarily by moral

hazard or ex-ante asymmetric information considerations? To what extent do these market imperfections

justify government intervention to stabilize capital markets, as in the response to the Financial Crisis of

2008? What covenants potentially mitigate the asymmetric information problems affecting debt issuances

during market downturns, and can we predict when such covenants should or should not be adopted? The

answers to these and other questions are likely to be fruitful topics of future research.




                                                      27
REFERENCES

Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello and Michael S. Weisbach, 2004, The Cash Flow Sensitivity of Cash,
Journal of Finance, 59, 1777-1804.

Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello and Michael S. Weisbach, 2009, Corporate Financial and Investment
Policies when Future Financing is not Frictionless, Journal of Corporate Finance, forthcoming.

Barclay, Michael, J and Clifford W. Smith, 1995, The Maturity Structure of Corporate Debt, Journal of
Finance.

Barnea, Amir, Robert A. Haugen and Lemma W. Senbet, 1980, A Rationale for Debt Maturity Structure
and Call Provisions in the Agency Theoretic Framework, Journal of Finance, 35, 1223-1234.

Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler, 1989, Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations, American
Economic Review, 79, 14-31.

Berger, A. N., and G. F. Udell, 1990, Collateral, Loan Quality and Bank Risk, Journal of Monetary
Economics 25, 21-42.

Berkovitch, Elazar and E. Han Kim, 1990, Financial Contracting and Leverage Induced Over- and Under-
Investment Incentives, Journal of Finance, 45, 765-794.

Besanko, D, and G. Kanatas, 1993, Credit market equilibrium with bank monitoring and moral hazard,
Review of Financial Studies 6, 213-232.

Bolton, Patrick and Freixas, Xavier, 2000, Equity, bonds and bank debt: capital structure and financial
market equilibrium under asymmetric information. Journal of Political Economy 108, 324-351.

Bolton, Patrick and David S. Scharfstein, 1996, Optimal Debt Structure and the Number of Creditors, The
Journal of Political Economy, 104, 1-25.

Boot, A.W.A, and A.V. Thakor, 1997a, Banking Scope and Financial Innovation, Review of Financial
Studies 10, 1099-1131.

Boot, A.W.A, and A.V. Thakor, 1997b, Financial System Architecture, Review of Financial Studies 10,
693-733.

Chava, Sudheer and Michael R. Roberts, 2008, How does financing impact investment? The role of debt
covenants.” Journal of Finance, 63, 2085-2121.

Chemmanur, Thomas J., and Paolo Fulghieri, 1994, Reputation, renegotiation, and the choice between
bank loans and publicly traded debt, Review of Financial Studies 7, 475-506.

Choe, H., R. Masulis, and V. Nanda, 1993, Common Stock Offerings Across the Business Cycle: Theory
and Evidence,” Journal of Empirical Finance, 1, 3-31.

Diamond, Douglas W., 1991a, Monitoring and Reputation: The Choice between Bank Loans and Directly
Placed Debt, Journal of Political Economy 99, 689-721.




                                                  28
Diamond, Douglas W., 1991b, Debt Maturity Structure and Liquidity Risk, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 106, 709-737.

Dittmar, Amy and Robert Dittmar, 2007, The Timing of Financing Decisions: An Examination of the
Correlation in Financing Waves, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Dittmar, Amy and Anjan Thakor, 2007, Why do Firms Issue Equity? Journal of Finance, 42, 1-54.

Flannery, Mark J., 1986, Asymmetric Information and Risky Debt Maturity Choice, Journal of Finance,
41, 19-37.

Gomes, Armando and Gordon Phillips, 2007, Private and Public Security Issuance by Public Firms: The
Role of Asymmetric Information, Working Paper, University of Maryland.

Graham, John R. and Campbell R. Harvey, 2001, The theory and practice of corporate finance: evidence
from the field, Journal of Financial Economics, 187-244.

Guedes, Jose and Tim Opler, 1996, The Determinants of the Maturity of Corporate Debt Issues, Journal
of Finance, 51, 1809-1833.

Hickman, W. Braddock, 1953, The Volume of Corporate Bond Financing, National Bureau of Economic
Research, New York.

Holmstrom, Bengt and Jean Tirole, 1997, Financial Intermediation, loanable funds, and the real sector,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 663-691.

Hoshi, Takeo, Anil Kashyap, and David Scharfstein, 1993, The Choice between Public and Private Debt:
An Analysis of Post Deregulation Corporate Financing in Japan, NBER Working Paper 4421.

Hovakimian, Armen, Ayla Kayhan, and Sheridan Titman, 2009, Crediting Rating Targets, Working Paper,
University of Texas.

Ivashina, Victoria and David Scharfstein, 2008, Bank Lending During the Financial Crisis of 2008,
Working Paper, Harvard Business School.

Kisgen, Darren J., 2008, Do firms target credit ratings or leverage levels?, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis.

Korajczyk, Robert A. and Amnon Levy, 2003, Capital structure choice: Macroeconomic conditions and
financial constraints, Journal of Financial Economics, 68, 75-109.

Levy, Amnon and Christopher Hennessy, 2007, Why does Capital Structure Choice Vary with
Macroeconomic Conditions?, Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 1545-1564.

Lown, Cara S., Donald P. Morgan, and Sonali Rohatgi, 2000. Listening to loan officers: the impact of
commercial credit standards on lending and output, Economic Policy Review, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York Jul, 1-16.

McFadden, Daniel, 1978, Modeling the Choice of Residential Location, In: Karlqvist, A. Lundqvist, L.,
Snickars, F., Weibull, J. (Eds.), Structural Interaction Theory and Planning Models. North-Holland,
Amsterdam, pp. 75-96.


                                                 29
McFadden, Daniel, 1981, Econometric Models of Probabilistic Choice, In: McFadden, D., Manski, C.
(Eds.), Structural Analysis of Discrete Data with Econometric Applications. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
pp. 198-272.

Moore, Goeffrey H., 1980, Business Cycles, Inflation and Forecasting, National Bureau of Economic
Research Studies in Business Cycles, No. 24, Ballinger Publishing Company.

Myers, Stewart C., 1977, Determinants of Corporate Borrowing, Journal of Financial Economics, 5, 147-
176.

Myers Stewart C.and Nicholas S. Majluf, 1984, Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms
have information that investors do not have, Journal of Financial Economics 13, 187–221.

Passov, Richard, 2003, How Much Cash Does your Company Need?, Harvard Business Review,
November, 1-8.

Rauh, Joshua and Amir Sufi, 2009, Capital Structure and Debt Structure, Working Paper, University of
Chicago.

Repullo, Rafael, and Javier Suarez, 2000, Entrepreneurial moral hazard and bank monitoring: A model of
the credit channel, European Economic Review 44, 1931-1950.

Scherr, Frederick C. and Heather M. Hulburt, 2001, The Debt Maturity of Small Firms, Financial
Management 30, 84-111.

Shleifer, Andrei, 1986, Implementation Cycles, Journal of Political Economy, 94, 1163-1190.

Smith, Clifford and Jerold Warner, 1979, On Financial Contracting: An Analysis of Bond Covenants,
Journal of Financial Economics, 7, 117-161.

Stein, Jeremy, 1992, Convertible Bonds as Backdoor Equity Financing, Journal of Financial Economics,
32, 3-21.

Stulz, Rene M. and Herb Johnson, 1985, An Analysis of Secured Debt, Journal of Financial Economics,
14, 501-521.

Zhang, Zhipeng, 2008, Recovery Rates and Macroeconomic Conditions: The Role of Loan Covenants,
Working Paper.




                                                  30
                                                Table I
                                       Sample Descriptive Statistics

The sample includes all SEOs, convertible bonds, other public debt, and private loans issued by US industrial
firms that have corresponding accounting information in Compustat immediately prior to the issue. Sample
period is between 1971 and 2007 except for private loans where the data is only available after 1988. We
divide the sample into six expansion periods and five recession periods based on NBER classification. For each
sub-period, we report the averages of proceeds raised per month for each of the four security types.

                                                      Average Prodeeds per Month ($US mil)
                                                  SEOs      Convertibles Public Bonds Private Loans
   January 1971-October 1973                         117.1           8.7         278.0       -
   November 1973-March 1975 (recession)               46.0           5.9         577.7       -
   April 1975-December 1979                          127.7          14.5         468.5       -
   January 1980-July 1980 (recession)                212.5          22.7       1,587.6       -
   August 1980-June 1981                             618.4          80.5         934.7       -
   July 1981-November 1982 (recession)               255.7          46.0         920.9       -
   December 1982-June 1990                           497.6         355.9       2,902.6      9,265.5
   July 1990-March 1991(recession)                   326.3         793.9       3,317.7      6,157.7
   April 1991-February 2001                        1,968.1       1,903.3      15,778.4     26,593.7
   March 2001-November 2001(recession)             1,718.2       8,462.7      36,452.9     50,003.7
   December 2001-December 2007                     1,860.9       5,504.6      21,884.5     43,540.9
   All                                               704.4       1,563.5       7,736.7     12,323.8




                                                     31
                                               Table II
                              Macro Economic Conditions and Security Issues

This table presents the averages of relative proportions of proceeds raised through four types of securities
within each calendar month. The sample includes all SEOs, convertible bonds, other public debt, and private
loans issued by US industrial firms that have corresponding accounting information in Compustat immediately
prior to the issue. Sample period is between 1971 and 2007 except for private loans where the data is only
available after 1988. Expansions and recessions are based on NBER classification. A month is defined as low
growth if gdp growth in that particular quarter is below the 25th percentile of economic growth over the entire
sample period. A month is defined as in weak credit supply condition if the net percentage of senior loan
officers tightening standards for loans to large and medium firms is positive for that particular quarter, and is
based on Federal Reserve survey available since the 2nd quarter of 1990. For each calendar month, we first
calculate the relative proportions of each of the four security types within that month. Panel A reports the
results for the first half of sample period, till 1987, while panel B reports the results since 1988 when private
loan data became available.

   Panel A: 1971 to 1987
                                   Numbef of             Averages of Relative Proceeds within Month (%)
                                    months                SEOs            Convertibles       Public Bonds
   Expanson                                    162              25.7%                4.0%             70.3%
   Recession                                    41              18.6%                2.9%             78.5%
      t-stat(difference)                                         -1.78              -0.97              1.95

   High GDP growth                             144              25.6%               4.2%              70.2%
   Low GDP growth                               59              21.2%               2.7%              76.1%
      t-stat(difference)                                         -1.24             -1.56               1.59

   Panel B: 1988 to 2007
                                Numbef of             Averages of Relative Proceeds within Month (%)
                                 months              SEOs      Convertibles Public Bonds Private Loans
   Expanson                           222                4.0%           5.3%         29.9%         60.7%
   Recession                           18                2.5%           8.3%         34.8%         54.4%
      t-stat(difference)                                -1.75           2.57           1.44         -1.65

   High GDP growth                      180              4.1%            5.3%         30.0%           60.6%
   Low GDP growth                        60              3.2%            6.3%         31.2%           59.3%
      t-stat(difference)                                -1.70            1.44          0.58            -0.56

   Strong Credit Supply                 108              3.9%            4.1%         26.6%           65.4%
   Weak Credit Supply                   105              4.3%            7.3%         34.8%           53.5%
       t-stat(difference)                                0.88            5.26          4.52            -5.96




                                                         32
                                                                 Table III
                                          Macro Economic Conditions and Types of Public Debt Issues

This table presents the averages of relative proportions of proceeds raised through public debt issues with various characteristics. Short-term
months are those firm-months with proceeds-weighted initial maturities shorter than or equal to 5 years. Short term debts are only available since
1985. Secured months are those firm-months with proceeds-weighted issue level secured dummy greater than or equal to 0.5. We group all public
debt into five categories based on credit ratings from Moody’s; not rated, C's(C to Caa1), speculative B's (B3 to Ba1), investable B's (Baa3 to
Baa1), and A's (A3 to Aaa). Expansions and recessions are based on NBER classification. A month is defined as low growth if GDP growth in
that particular quarter is below the 25th percentile of economic growth over the entire sample period. A month is defined as in weak credit supply
condition if the net percentage of senior loan officers tightening standards for loans to large and medium firms is positive for that particular quarter,
and is based on Federal Reserve survey. For each calendar month, we first calculate the relative proportions of each of the bond types out of total
proceeds raised from public debt within that month. Panel A reports the results for the full sample period, while panel B reports the results since
the 2nd quarter of 1990, when the Federal Reserve survey became available.

Panel A: Full Sample Period
                      Numbef of                                                     Averages of Relative Proceeds within Month (%)
                        months    Short term         Secured       Non Rated        C's(C to Caa1) Speculative B's Investable B's A's (A3 to Aaa)
Expanson                     381       13.2%              5.3%               6.2%             3.7%            25.8%            18.7%             45.6%
Recession                      58      22.9%              4.8%               2.7%             1.2%            14.4%            15.7%             66.0%
 t-stat(difference)                      2.80            -0.24              -2.12            -2.57             -3.97            -1.35             5.70
High GDP growth                 321        13.1%           4.6%              6.5%             3.8%            26.2%            18.6%             45.0%
Low GDP growth                  118        16.3%           6.8%              3.8%             2.4%            19.0%            17.7%             57.2%
 t-stat(difference)                         1.53           1.65             -2.09            -1.88             -3.31            -0.52             4.40

Panel B: 1990 2nd Quarter to Dec. 2007
                     Numbef of                                                      Averages of Relative Proceeds within Month (%)
                       months       Short term       Secured       Non Rated        C's(C to Caa1) Speculative B's Investable B's A's (A3 to Aaa)
Expanson                      195        14.3%            3.9%               3.1%             2.8%            32.8%            23.2%             38.0%
Recession                      18        22.9%            0.7%               1.2%             0.5%            14.5%            26.8%             56.9%
 t-stat(difference)                        2.45          -3.01              -1.87            -2.60             -4.76            1.12              3.96
High GDP growth                 156        14.2%           4.0%              3.2%             2.8%            34.2%            22.6%             37.2%
Low GDP growth                   57        17.1%           2.7%              2.3%             2.1%            23.2%            26.1%             46.3%
 t-stat(difference)                         1.28          -1.85             -1.51            -1.35             -4.51            1.74              3.02
Strong Credit Supply            108        11.2%           3.8%              3.6%             3.4%            36.4%            22.8%             33.7%
Weak Credit Supply              105        18.9%           3.5%              2.3%             1.8%            25.9%            24.3%             45.7%
 t-stat(difference)                         3.98          -0.61             -2.35            -3.41             -4.94            0.87              4.54


                                                                          33
                                                Table IV
                       Firm Characteristics by Security Issues: Univariate Analysis

This table presents the averages of firm characteristics for the four security types over the sample period.
These characteristics are natural logarithm of the total assets, leverage, market to book, cash flow, cash, the
inverse of interest coverage, a debt-rating dummy, sales growth, and the stock return. Inverse interest
coverage is defined as the natural logarithm of (1+interest/EBIT) and stock return is calculated over the
previous twelve months. Panel A reports the results for the first half of the sample period, from 1971 until
1987, while panel B reports the results since 1988, when private loan data became available.

 Panel A: 1971 to 1987
                                                  Averages per Firm-M onths Observations
                                 No Issue           Issue         SEOs           CBs              Bonds
 Firm Age                            11.533            12.891        9.494         14.366           17.707
 Log(Total Assets)                    4.697             5.555        4.242          5.334            7.544
 Leverage                             0.276             0.306        0.296          0.299            0.324
 M arket to Book                      1.231             1.525        1.936          1.459            0.925
 Fixed Asset Ratio                    0.353             0.417        0.363          0.366            0.506
 Cash Flow                            0.062             0.078        0.070          0.088            0.088
 Cash                                 0.106             0.087        0.106          0.114            0.054
 Inverse Interest Coverage            0.205             0.235        0.206          0.263            0.273
 Rated Firm Dummy                     0.052             0.181        0.045          0.405            0.347
 Sales Growth                         0.188             0.311        0.412          0.351            0.155
 Stock Return                         0.193             0.622        0.893          0.579            0.221
 Term Spread                          0.784             0.973        0.875          1.183            1.086
 Recession Dummy                       0.188             0.141           0.130        0.070           0.169
 Low Growth Dummy                      0.269             0.207           0.209        0.086           0.223
 N                                  461,020              4,244           2,384          257           1,603
 Panel B: 1988 to 2007
                                                  Averages per Firm-Months Observations
                             No Issue          Issue        SEOs        CBs         Bonds          Loans
 Firm Age                      14.479            16.966        9.746     15.907       22.781        16.297
 Log(Total Assets)               4.561            5.849        4.271      6.101         7.522        5.485
 Leverage                        0.281            0.332        0.260      0.299         0.409        0.320
 Market to Book                  1.765            1.646        2.808      2.323         1.325        1.445
 Fixed Asset Ratio               0.287            0.335        0.285      0.261         0.417        0.321
 Cash Flow                      -0.029            0.029       -0.057      0.004         0.067        0.036
 Cash                            0.167            0.112        0.236      0.228         0.060        0.094
 Inverse Interest Coverage       0.184            0.243        0.161      0.134         0.312        0.243
 Rated Firm Dummy                0.234            0.507        0.192      0.543         0.922        0.403
 Sales Growth                    0.179            0.270        0.543      0.364         0.194        0.231
 Stock Return                    0.171            0.341        1.022      0.593         0.216        0.191
 Term Spread                     1.200            1.229        1.299      1.354         1.269        1.183
 Recession Dummy                  0.073          0.066           0.046       0.078       0.071         0.068
 Low Growth Dummy                 0.236          0.212           0.190       0.236       0.214         0.214
 Weak Credit Dummy                0.489          0.469           0.435       0.529       0.482         0.465
 N                             936,776          34,846           4,492      2,140        8,280       19,975



                                                         34
                                                       Table V
                                   An Ordered Logit Model of Security Choice
This table reports coefficient estimates for an ordered logit model. The dependent variable takes the following
values: 0 (not issuing any type of security), 1 (bank loan), 2 (straight public bond), 3 (convertible debt), and 4
(SEO). The sample period is from 1988 to 2007 in Columns 1 and 2 and from second quarter of 1990 to 2007
in Column 3. Firm-level controls are natural logarithm of the total assets, leverage, market to book, cash flow,
cash, the inverse of interest coverage, a debt-rating dummy, sales growth, and the stock return. Inverse
interest coverage is defined as the natural logarithm of (1+interest/EBIT) and stock return is calculated over
the previous twelve months. Our macro-level control is the term spread, defined as the difference between the
yields on ten-year treasuries and one-year treasuries. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of
observations at the firm level. Robust z statistics are in parentheses. The symbols ***, ** and * indicate
statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                                      Ordered Issue Choice
                                                                  (1)           (2)         (3)
                Firm Age                                       -0.005        -0.005      -0.005
                                                             (5.31)*** (5.25)*** (5.62)***
                ln(Total Assets)                                0.223         0.224       0.220
                                                            (24.48)*** (24.59)*** (23.89)***
                Leverage                                        0.475         0.476       0.471
                                                             (9.12)*** (9.15)*** (8.93)***
                Market-to-Book                                  0.032         0.033       0.028
                                                             (6.15)*** (6.22)*** (5.16)***
                Fixed-Assets Ratio                             -0.083        -0.088      -0.039
                                                               (1.29)        (1.35)      (0.60)
                Cash Flow                                      -0.020        -0.022       0.003
                                                               (0.50)        (0.55)      (0.07)
                Cash                                           -0.866        -0.862      -0.840
                                                            (12.82)*** (12.77)*** (12.44)***
                Inverse Interest Coverage                      -0.041        -0.041      -0.034
                                                             (2.68)*** (2.65)*** (2.09)**
                Debt Rating Dummy                               0.563         0.562       0.569
                                                            (21.95)*** (21.91)*** (22.07)***
                Sales Growth                                    0.362         0.360       0.361
                                                            (29.75)*** (29.65)*** (29.31)***
                Stock Return                                    0.163         0.162       0.157
                                                            (18.52)*** (18.56)*** (18.21)***
                Term Spread                                     5.412         4.603       2.591
                                                             (8.66)*** (7.15)*** (3.93)***
                Recession Dummy                                -0.020
                                                               (0.78)
                Low Growth Dummy                                             -0.116
                                                                           (7.25)***
                Weak Credit Dummy                                                        -0.083
                                                                                       (5.83)***
                Industry FEs                                     yes           yes         yes
                Observations                                  737,433       737,433     666,424
                Pseudo R2                                        0.05          0.05        0.05


                                                       35
                                                                         Table VI
                                                        A Nested Logit Model of Security Choice
This table reports coefficient estimates for a nested logit model. The nesting structure is designed such that the top level represents the choice
between internal finance and external finance. The bottom level of the nesting structure represents the choice of external finance: loan, straight
bond, convertible bond, or public equity. The model then estimates the probability of observing a particular type of external finance conditional
on obtaining any type of external finance in a given month. The sample period is from 1988 to 2007 in Panels A and B. In Panel C, where we
include weak credit dummy, the sample period is from the second quarter of 1990 to 2007. Robust t statistics are in parentheses. The symbols ***,
** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                          Panel A                                   Panel B                                 Panel C
                             Bond vs.    Convert vs.    SEO vs.       Bond vs.    Convert vs.    SEO vs.       Bond vs.    Convert vs.    SEO vs.
                                Loan        Loan           Loan          Loan         Loan          Loan          Loan         Loan           Loan
Firm Age                       0.006       -0.019         -0.030         0.004       -0.020        -0.030         0.003       -0.019        -0.029
                             (3.98)***    (8.66)***    (13.79)***     (3.64)***     (8.51)***   (13.67)***     (3.10)***    (8.21)***    (12.78)***
ln(Total Assets)               0.221       0.167          -0.331         0.211        0.172        -0.326         0.249        0.170        -0.334
                            (13.36)***   (10.75)***    (18.16)***    (12.02)***    (10.06)***   (17.46)***    (15.33)***   (18.38)***    (16.05)***
Leverage                       1.082       0.932           0.250         1.052        0.924         0.249         0.847        0.793         0.187
                             (8.45)***    (8.31)***     (2.94)***     (8.07)***     (8.25)***    (2.93)***     (8.19)***    (6.84)***      (2.06)**
Market-to-Book                 0.265        0.165          0.378         0.259        0.162         0.400         0.199        0.185         0.427
                             (4.51)***    (4.43)***     (5.66)***     (4.18)***     (4.26)***    (3.89)***     (3.81)***    (3.38)***     (3.92)***
Fixed-Assets Ratio             0.257       -0.637          0.157         0.249       -0.637         0.162         0.322       -0.688         0.157
                             (4.04)***    (5.41)***      (2.62)**     (3.91)***     (5.12)***     (2.67)**     (3.83)***    (5.14)***      (2.07)**
Cash Flow                     -0.074       -0.535         -0.671        -0.071       -0.540        -0.666        -0.091       -0.586        -0.758
                             (2.82)***    (4.45)***     (7.20)***     (2.78)***     (4.49)***    (7.16)***     (2.78)***    (4.65)***     (7.63)***
Cash                           0.037       1.516           1.400         0.053        1.520         1.507         0.029        1.504         1.577
                               (1.34)     (7.20)***     (6.21)***      (2.93)**     (7.22)***    (7.27)***      (1.79)*     (7.74)***     (6.18)***
Inverse Interest Coverage     -0.180       -0.345          0.060        -0.166       -0.327         0.056        -0.204       -0.337         0.031
                             (5.00)***    (6.54)***       (1.46)      (4.93)***     (6.22)***      (1.36)      (5.41)***    (6.13)***        (0.71)
Debt Rating Dummy              2.370       1.672          -0.213         2.357        1.656        -0.202         2.491        1.548        -0.248
                            (24.94)***   (16.30)***     (3.98)***    (24.54)***   (16.05)***     (3.78)***    (18.60)***   (13.30)***     (4.30)***
Sales Growth                   0.239       0.175           0.189         0.238        0.164         0.113         0.268        0.186         0.109
                             (5.86)***    (4.20)***     (4.77)***     (5.85)***     (3.94)***    (3.98)***     (6.25)***    (4.29)***     (3.66)***
Stock Return                   0.109        0.144          0.606         0.095        0.137         0.603         0.075        0.140         0.575
                             (3.88)***    (6.37)***    (16.81)***     (3.31)***     (6.14)***   (16.75)***      (2.54)**    (4.81)***    (15.20)***
Term Spread                    0.139       0.024           0.143         0.167        0.032         0.131         0.167        0.055         0.107
                              (1.76)*       (1.13)       (1.96)**       (1.61)       (1.52)       (2.38)**       (1.35)      (2.51)**       (1.74)*
Recession Dummy                0.043       0.363          -0.257
                               (0.85)     (4.39)***     (3.93)***
Low Growth Dummy                                                       0.051        0.165        -0.183
                                                                       (1.12)      (2.82)***    (3.62)***
Weak Credit Dummy                                                                                               0.027         0.193       -0.186
                                                                                                                (1.61)      (2.95)***    (4.49)***

Observations                737,433                                  737,433                                   666,424



                                                                        36
                                              Table VII
                      An Ordered Logit Model of Credit Quality of Bank Borrowers

This table reports coefficient estimates for an ordered logit model only for private loans in our sample. The
dependent variable takes the following values: 0 (not rated), 1 (C to Caa1 rated), 2 (B3 to Ba1 rated), 3 (Baa3
to Baa1 rated), and 4 (A3 to Aaa rated). The sample period is from 1988 to 2007 in Columns 1 and 2 and
from second quarter of 1990 to 2007 in Column 3. Firm-level controls are natural logarithm of the total assets,
leverage, market to book, cash flow, cash, the inverse of interest coverage, a debt-rating dummy, sales growth,
and the stock return. Inverse interest coverage is defined as the natural logarithm of (1+interest/EBIT) and
stock return is calculated over the previous twelve months. Our macro-level control is the term spread,
defined as the difference between the yields on ten-year treasuries and one-year treasuries. Standard errors are
corrected for clustering of observations at the firm level. Robust z statistics are in parentheses. The symbols
***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                                 Credit Quality
                                                    (1)                  (2)                 (3)
       Firm Age                                   0.025                0.024               0.024
                                                (7.97)***           (7.92)***            (7.73)***
       ln(Total Assets)                           0.925                0.923               0.959
                                               (29.04)***          (28.99)***           (30.24)***
       Leverage                                   1.457                1.447               1.493
                                                (8.68)***           (8.63)***            (8.96)***
       Market-to-Book                             0.167                0.169               0.128
                                                (5.08)***           (5.14)***            (3.76)***
       Fixed-Assets Ratio                         -0.989              -0.983               -0.909
                                                (4.20)***           (4.16)***            (3.88)***
       Cash Flow                                  1.870                1.854               2.218
                                                (4.71)***           (4.69)***            (5.29)***
       Cash                                       -0.879              -0.943               -0.587
                                                 (2.24)**            (2.39)**              (1.51)
       ln(1+Coverage^-1)                          -0.252              -0.250               -0.239
                                                (4.19)***           (4.12)***            (3.98)***
       Sales Growth                               -0.013              -0.026               -0.011
                                                  (0.18)               (0.37)              (0.16)
       Stock Return                               0.024                0.028               0.082
                                                  (0.74)               (0.84)            (2.84)***
       Term Spread                                -6.812              -4.029              -10.552
                                                (3.11)***             (1.80)*            (4.78)***
       Recession Dummy                            0.469
                                                (6.75)***
       Low Growth Dummy                                               0.199
                                                                    (3.87)***
       Weak Credit Dummy                                                                  0.626
                                                                                        (13.79)***
       Industry FEs                              yes                   yes                 yes
       Observations                             15997                15997                15236
       Pseudo R2                                 0.27                 0.27                 0.28




                                                      37
                                                  Table VIII
                      Factors affecting the Maturity and Security of Bonds: Nested Logit

This table reports coefficient estimates for a nested logit model. The nesting structure is designed such that
the top level represents the choice across internal finance, loans, bonds, convertibles and SEOs. The bottom
level of the nesting structure represents the choice of bond structure conditional on choosing to issue a bond.
The model then estimates the probability of observing a particular bond characteristic conditional on issuing a
bond. The dependent variable is equal to one if the public debt is short-term in columns (1) through (3), or
secured in columns (4) through (6). The sample period is from 1988 to 2007 except for in Columns 3 and 6.
In columns 3 and 6, where we include weak credit dummy, the sample period is from the second quarter of
1990 to 2007. Robust t statistics are in parentheses. The symbols ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance
at the 1, 5, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                       Short-term vs. Long-term Bond          Secured vs. Unsecured Bond
                                          (1)         (2)        (3)            (4)        (5)        (6)
     Firm Age                            0.014       0.013      0.016         -.012      -0.012     -0.007
                                      (4.25)*** (4.10)*** (4.57)***         (1.69)*      (1.59)     (0.92)
     ln(Total Assets)                    0.035      0.034       0.040        -0.496      -0.524     -0.583
                                       (1.71)*     (1.70)*    (1.80)*    (10.22)*** (10.65)*** (10.64)***
     Leverage                           -1.002     -1.004      -0.997         1.405       1.425      1.468
                                      (4.78)*** (4.80)*** (4.54)***       (4.37)*** (4.41)*** (4.45)***
     Market-to-Book                      0.144       0.150      0.120        -0.961      -0.965     -0.872
                                      (4.09)*** (4.28)*** (3.24)***       (5.97)*** (6.01)*** (5.32)***
     Fixed-Assets Ratio                 -1.610     -1.622      -1.596         1.398       1.468      1.173
                                     (10.10)*** (10.18)*** (9.47)***      (4.72)*** (4.95)*** (3.80)***
     Cash Flow                          -0.278     -0.270       0.022        -1.251      -1.231     -0.807
                                        (0.54)      (0.53)     (0.04)      (2.05)** (2.04)**        (1.27)
     Cash                               -3.724     -3.828      -3.434         1.481       1.629      2.021
                                      (6.67)*** (6.85)*** (5.92)***        (2.06)** (2.25)** (2.68)***
     Inverse Interest Coverage          -0.044     -0.040       0.006         0.101       0.087      0.155
                                        (0.39)      (0.34)     (0.05)        (0.70)      (0.60)     (1.04)
     Debt Rating Dummy                  -1.029      -1.017     -1.352         0.019      -0.007      0.094
                                      (7.88)*** (7.79)*** (9.01)***          (0.08)      (0.03)     (0.34)
     Sales Growth                       -1.031     -1.055     -1.0180        -0.281      -0.267     -0.167
                                      (6.97)*** (7.12)*** (7.28)***         (1.77)*     (1.71)*     (1.09)
     Stock Return                       -0.346     -0.350      -0.218        -0.418      -0.385     -0.460
                                      (3.85)*** (3.86)*** (2.45)**        (2.77)*** (2.64)*** (2.95)***
     Term Spread                        -0.238     -0.222      -0.196         0.127       0.141      0.193
                                      (6.90)*** (6.50)*** (5.54)***         (1.75)*     (1.91)*   (2.51)**
     Recession Dummy                     0.352                                0.330
                                      (2.94)***                            (2.26)**
     Low Growth Dummy                               0.082                                0.432
                                                    (1.00)                             (2.24)**
     Weak Credit Dummy                                          0.353                               0.293
                                                             (4.69)***                             (1.77)*
     Observations                       24,066     24,066      21,932       24,066      24,066     21,932
     Log likelihood                    -19,466    -19,470     -17,659       -17,431     -17,433    -15,857




                                                       38
                                                   Table IX
                   Factors affecting the Maturity and Security of Bank Loans: Nested Logit

This table reports coefficient estimates for a nested logit model. The nesting structure is designed such that
the top level represents the choice across internal finance, loans, bonds, convertibles and SEOs. The bottom
level of the nesting structure represents the choice of loan structure conditional on choosing to obtain a bank
loan. The model then estimates the probability of observing a particular loan characteristic conditional on
obtaining a loan. The dependent variable is equal to one if the private loan is short-term in columns (1)
through (3), or secured in columns (4) through (6). The sample period is from 1988 to 2007 except for in
Columns 3 and 6. In columns 3 and 6, where we include weak credit dummy, the sample period is from the
second quarter of 1990 to 2007. Robust t statistics are in parentheses. The symbols ***, ** and * indicate
statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                    Short-term vs. Long-term Loan              Secured vs. Unsecured Loan
                                   (1)             (2)           (3)          (4)             (5)         (6)
Firm Age                          0.003           0.002         0.002       -0.011          -0.011      -0.011
                                 (1.31)          (1.14)        (1.22)     (5.07)***       (5.37)*** (5.18)***
ln(Total Assets)                  0.070           0.065         0.035       -0.137          -0.157      -0.171
                               (5.43)***       (4.97)***     (2.61)***    (9.44)***      (10.62)*** (11.34)***
Leverage                         -0.099          -0.109        -0.333        4.342           4.315       4.171
                                 (0.94)          (1.04)      (3.04)***   (27.33)***      (27.10)*** (25.65)***
Market-to-Book                    0.124           0.121         0.105        0.003          -0.003      -0.001
                               (5.79)***       (5.70)***     (4.79)***      (0.14)          (0.14)      (0.03)
Fixed-Assets Ratio                0.067           0.064         0.027        0.984           0.980       0.961
                                 (0.72)          (0.69)        (0.28)     (8.90)***       (8.83)*** (8.51)***
Cash Flow                        -1.147          -1.153        -1.260       -2.545          -2.533      -2.988
                               (6.25)***       (6.30)***     (6.34)***    (9.50)***       (9.38)*** (8.51)***
Cash                              1.135           1.095         0.978        4.007           3.945       3.934
                               (5.53)***       (5.37)***     (4.62)***   (15.86)***      (15.63)*** (15.13)***
Inverse Interest Coverage        -0.028          -0.027        -0.024        0.274           0.279       0.304
                                 (0.62)          (0.61)        (0.52)     (4.61)***       (4.69)*** (4.86)***
Debt Rating Dummy                -0.891          -0.880        -0.842       -0.818          -0.788      -0.750
                              (15.74)***      (15.56)***    (14.42)***   (13.02)***      (12.49)*** (11.68)***
Sales Growth                     -0.040          -0.055        -0.052        0.547           0.558       0.613
                                 (0.91)          (1.25)        (1.13)     (7.86)***       (8.01)*** (8.44)***
Stock Return                     -0.093          -0.094        -0.077        0.035           0.048       0.049
                               (3.29)***       (3.30)***     (2.65)***      (0.96)          (1.29)      (1.29)
Term Spread                       0.365           0.399         0.397        0.228           0.262       0.245
                              (17.02)***      (18.34)***    (17.81)***    (9.88)***      (11.22)*** (10.44)***
Recession Dummy                   0.931                                      0.270
                               (8.25)***                                  (2.64)***
Low Growth Dummy                                  0.272                                      0.524
                                                (4.96)**                                  (8.54)***
Weak Credit Dummy                                              0.772                                     0.521
                                                            (16.86)***                               (10.55)***
Observations                     24,066          24,066       21,932       24,066          24,066      21,932
Log likelihood                  -22,815         -22,843       -20,981      -21,899         -21,865     -20,191




                                                       39
                                                       Table X
                             Ordered Logit Model of Security Choice and Structure
This table reports coefficient estimates for an ordered logit model. The dependent variable takes the following
values: 0 (not issuing any type of security), 1 (short-term secured loan), 2 (short-term unsecured loan), 3
(long-term secured loan), 4 (long-term unsecured loan), 5 (short-term bond), 6 (long-term bond), 7 (secured
bond), 8 (convertible bond), and 9 (SEO). The sample period is from 1988 to 2007 in Columns 1 and 2 and
from second quarter of 1990 to 2007 in Column 3. Firm-level controls are natural logarithm of the total assets,
leverage, market to book, cash flow, cash, the inverse of interest coverage, a debt-rating dummy, sales growth,
and the stock return. Our macro-level control is the term spread. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of
observations at the firm level. Robust z statistics are in parentheses. The symbols ***, ** and * indicate
statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% levels, respectively.
                                                 Ordered Issue Choice Incorporating Characteristics
                                                  (1)                     (2)                   (3)
       Firm Age                                -0.007                  -0.007                -0.007
                                             (6.37)***               (6.29)***             (6.62)***
       ln(Total Assets)                         0.196                   0.197                 0.190
                                            (19.16)***              (19.27)***            (18.48)***
       Leverage                                 0.525                   0.525                 0.528
                                             (9.41)***               (9.43)***             (9.37)***
       Market-to-Book                           0.030                   0.030                 0.025
                                             (5.49)***               (5.55)***             (4.47)***
       Fixed-Assets Ratio                      -0.082                  -0.086                -0.037
                                               (1.13)                  (1.19)                (0.52)
       Cash Flow                               -0.099                  -0.101                -0.069
                                              (2.44)**                (2.48)**              (1.69)*
       Cash                                    -0.632                  -0.628                -0.602
                                             (8.92)***               (8.86)***             (8.51)***
       Inverse Interest Coverage               -0.037                  -0.037                -0.029
                                              (2.16)**                (2.14)**               (1.64)
       Debt Rating Dummy                        0.672                   0.670                 0.678
                                            (23.37)***              (23.34)***            (23.51)***
       Sales Growth                             0.365                   0.363                 0.363
                                            (29.03)***              (28.96)***            (28.68)***
       Stock Return                             0.174                   0.174                 0.168
                                            (18.18)***              (18.23)***            (17.90)***
       Term Spread                              6.327                   5.385                 3.050
                                             (8.89)***               (7.32)***             (4.06)***
       Recession Dummy                         -0.059
                                              (2.03)**
       Low Growth Dummy                                                -0.129
                                                                     (7.07)***
       Weak Credit Dummy                                                                     -0.094
                                                                                           (5.83)***
       Industry FEs                              Yes                     Yes                   Yes
       Observations                           731,652                 731,652               661,038
       Pseudo R2                                 0.04                    0.04                  0.04


                                                      40
                                                    Table XI
                                         Determinants of Debt Quality
This table reports coefficient estimates for a multinomial logit model. The dependent variable includes five
different types of bond ratings: not rated, C to Caa1 rated, B3 to Ba1 rated, Baa3 to Baa1 rated, and A3 to Aaa
rated. The base outcome is not issuing any type of security. Each panel uses different measures of financial
conditions employed: Panel A uses the NBER-defined recession, panel B uses the level of GDP growth, and
panel C uses the Senior Loan Officer Opinion survey. The sample period is from 1971 to 2007. Firm-level
controls are natural logarithm of the total assets, leverage, market to book, cash flow, cash, the inverse of
interest coverage, a debt-rating dummy, sales growth, and the stock return. Our macro-level control is the
term spread, the difference between the yields on ten-year treasuries and one-year treasuries. Standard errors
are corrected for clustering of observations at the firm level. Robust z statistics are in parentheses. The
symbols ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% levels, respectively.

Panel A
                                 Not Rated         C to Caa1        B3 to Ba1       Baa3 to Baa1      A3 to Aaa
Firm Age                            -0.006           0.001            -0.014              0.015           0.017
                                    (0.92)           (0.12)         (3.62)***         (3.10)***        (3.00)***
ln(Total Assets)                    0.202            0.115            0.136              0.581            0.974
                                 (4.66)***           (1.56)         (4.37)***        (12.99)***       (21.05)***
Leverage                             1.732           2.517             1.695              0.189           0.023
                                 (6.84)***         (7.08)***        (8.43)***            (0.45)           (0.05)
Market-to-Book                      -0.091           -0.074           -0.272             -0.065           0.093
                                   (1.72)*           (0.84)         (5.23)***            (0.92)         (2.04)**
Fixed-Assets Ratio                   0.286           0.223            -0.206             0.733            1.186
                                    (0.85)           (0.48)           (1.19)           (2.01)**         (2.56)**
Cash Flow                           -0.252           -0.092            0.269              1.649           6.108
                                    (1.51)           (0.31)           (1.04)           (2.34)**        (6.22)***
Cash                                 1.532            1.273           -1.183             -6.443           -7.419
                                 (3.46)***          (1.68)*         (2.77)***         (6.77)***        (6.94)***
Inverse Interest Coverage           -0.078           0.213            -0.036             -0.045           -0.386
                                    (0.69)           (1.61)           (0.82)             (0.46)        (4.97)***
Debt Rating Dummy                    0.495           1.466             3.002              2.153           1.073
                                 (2.71)***         (4.90)***       (22.90)***        (12.52)***        (5.33)***
Sales Growth                         0.450           0.484             0.547              0.621            0.220
                                 (7.88)***         (5.38)***       (13.60)***         (8.46)***           (1.59)
Stock Return                         0.137           0.209             0.174             -0.004           0.098
                                 (5.31)***         (9.23)***       (11.03)***            (0.05)           (1.45)
Term Spread                         -5.365          -10.061           10.334              8.564           9.701
                                    (1.29)           (1.29)         (4.24)***         (2.84)***        (3.90)***
Recession Dummy                     -0.497           -0.505            0.021              0.181           0.410
                                  (2.29)**           (1.29)           (0.25)            (1.90)*        (5.78)***
Constant                            -9.465          -36.579           -8.052            -11.313          -39.712
                                (13.23)***        (34.11)***       (11.81)***        (20.93)***       (35.95)***
Industry FEs                                                            yes
Observations                                                        1,073,557
Pseudo R2                                                               0.26


                                                      41
Table XI – continuted


Panel B
                             Not Rated    C to Caa1    B3 to Ba1   Baa3 to Baa1    A3 to Aaa
Firm Age                        -0.005        0.001      -0.014         0.014         0.016
                                (0.84)       (0.15)    (3.59)***     (3.06)***     (2.88)***
ln(Total Assets)                 0.202       0.118        0.140         0.581         0.976
                             (4.64)***       (1.60)    (4.51)***    (13.01)***    (21.12)***
Leverage                         1.733       2.521        1.702         0.194         0.045
                             (6.82)***    (7.04)***    (8.46)***        (0.46)        (0.11)
Market-to-Book                  -0.089       -0.071      -0.272         -0.066        0.095
                               (1.70)*       (0.82)    (5.19)***        (0.92)      (2.10)**
Fixed-Assets Ratio              0.269        0.208       -0.220         0.734         1.188
                                (0.80)       (0.45)      (1.27)       (2.01)**      (2.57)**
Cash Flow                       -0.254       -0.081       0.283         1.671         6.175
                                (1.52)       (0.28)      (1.09)       (2.37)**     (6.30)***
Cash                             1.546       1.285       -1.189         -6.473        -7.533
                             (3.49)***      (1.71)*    (2.79)***     (6.81)***     (7.03)***
Inverse Interest Coverage       -0.078       0.211       -0.036         -0.044        -0.387
                                (0.70)       (1.60)      (0.80)         (0.45)     (4.89)***
Debt Rating Dummy                0.515       1.478       2.986          2.136         1.024
                             (2.82)***    (4.90)***   (23.09)***    (12.49)***     (5.15)***
Sales Growth                     0.447        0.480       0.543          0.617        0.199
                             (7.89)***    (5.37)***   (13.59)***     (8.36)***        (1.43)
Stock Return                     0.140       0.212        0.171         -0.006        0.080
                             (5.48)***    (9.23)***   (10.64)***        (0.09)        (1.16)
Term Spread                     -7.307      -13.825       8.361          9.149       10.705
                               (1.68)*      (1.73)*    (3.31)***     (2.92)***     (3.90)***
Low Growth Dummy                -0.328       -0.492      -0.277         0.066         0.133
                              (2.44)**     (2.39)**    (5.05)***        (1.11)      (2.40)**
Constant                        -9.428      -37.745      -7.976        -11.308       -39.545
                            (13.19)***   (35.23)***   (11.74)***    (20.98)***    (35.85)***
Industry FEs                                               yes
Observations                                           1,073,557
Pseudo R2                                                  0.26




                                               42
Table XI – continuted


Panel C
                             Not Rated    C to Caa1     B3 to Ba1   Baa3 to Baa1    A3 to Aaa
Firm Age                        -0.002        0.003       -0.013         0.014         0.016
                                (0.25)       (0.31)     (3.55)***     (2.96)***     (2.82)***
ln(Total Assets)                 0.138       -0.073        0.051         0.523         0.953
                              (2.26)**       (0.72)       (1.45)     (10.52)***    (16.63)***
Leverage                         1.525       2.245         1.619         -0.086        -0.308
                             (4.77)***    (5.35)***     (7.52)***        (0.17)        (0.77)
Market-to-Book                  -0.020       -0.055       -0.352         -0.088        0.106
                                (0.43)       (0.64)     (6.06)***        (1.15)      (1.97)**
Fixed-Assets Ratio              0.301        0.212        -0.091         0.672         0.986
                                (0.63)       (0.38)       (0.50)        (1.78)*      (2.06)**
Cash Flow                       -0.342       -0.363        0.342         1.407         7.458
                              (2.11)**       (1.32)       (1.15)       (1.98)**     (6.64)***
Cash                             1.577       1.359        -0.717         -6.419        -8.005
                             (3.05)***       (1.57)       (1.58)      (6.52)***     (5.84)***
Inverse Interest Coverage       -0.207       0.244        -0.020         -0.012        -0.369
                                (1.50)       (1.29)       (0.40)         (0.11)     (3.72)***
Debt Rating Dummy                0.570       2.539        3.455          2.812         3.071
                               (1.87)*    (5.49)***    (20.20)***     (7.71)***     (9.72)***
Sales Growth                     0.348        0.378        0.569          0.613        0.048
                             (4.60)***    (3.12)***    (12.08)***     (7.21)***        (0.27)
Stock Return                     0.111       0.210         0.168         0.022         0.071
                              (2.50)**    (8.78)***     (9.38)***        (0.31)        (0.72)
Term Spread                    -12.005      -22.794        6.188         5.925        12.519
                               (1.74)*     (1.96)**      (2.35)**       (1.82)*     (4.03)***
Weak Credit Dummy               -0.610       -0.637       -0.142         -0.012        0.097
                             (4.23)***    (2.91)***      (2.57)**        (0.17)        (1.37)
Constant                       -32.581     -144.163       -7.820        -11.230       -46.190
                            (29.91)***   (108.35)***   (11.50)***    (18.35)***    (37.07)***
Industry FEs                                                yes
Observations                                             645,949
Pseudo R2                                                   0.27




                                               43
