                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          LETTING DIFFERENT VIEWS ABOUT BUSINESS CYCLES COMPETE

                                            Paul Beaudry
                                            Bernd Lucke

                                        Working Paper 14950
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14950


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2009




We thank Daron Acemoglu, Jonas Fisher, Ulrich Fritsche, Thomas Haertel, Helmut Lütkepohl, Andreas
Schabert for comments. All remaining errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Paul Beaudry and Bernd Lucke. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Letting Different Views about Business Cycles Compete
Paul Beaudry and Bernd Lucke
NBER Working Paper No. 14950
May 2009
JEL No. E32

                                              ABSTRACT

There are several candidate explanations for macro-fluctuations. Two of the most common discussed
sources are surprise changes in disembodied technology and monetary innovations. Another popular
explanation is found under the heading of a preference or more generally a demand shock. More recently
two other explanations have been advocated: surprise changes in investment specific technology and
news about future technology growth. The aim of this paper is to provide a quantitative assessment
of the relative merits of all these explanations by adopting a framework which allows them to compete.
In particular, we propose a co-integrated SVAR approach that encompasses all 5 shocks and thereby
offers a coherent evaluation of the dynamics they induce as well as their contribution to macro volatility.
Our main finding is that surprise changes in technology, whether it be of the disembodied or embodied
nature, account for very little of fluctuations. In contrast, expected changes in technology appear to
be an important force, with preference/demand shocks and monetary shocks also playing non-negligible
roles.


Paul Beaudry
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
Room 997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, B.C. Canada V6T 1Z1
and NBER
paulbe@interchange.ubc.ca

Bernd Lucke
Department of Economics
University of Hamburg
von-Melle-Park 5
D-20146 Hamburg
Germany
lucke@econ.uni-hamburg.de
1. Introduction

The rise of real business cycle (RBC) models in the 1980s initiated much controversy about
the main driving forces of macroeconomic fluctuations. Some 25 years later, the profession
has still not reached a consensus on this issue. Shocks to disembodied technology had been
singled out by the RBC literature as a central element in business cycle fluctuations. In
contrast, a large literature based on new Keynesian models tends to emphasize instead the
importance of monetary and other non-technology shocks in fluctuations. For example, an
influential paper by Galí (1999) has suggested that surprise technology shocks may not be an
important contributor to business cycle fluctuations. More recently, Fisher (2006) reframed
the debate by distinguishing between shocks to disembodied and embodied technology. While
he found the former to be unimportant indeed, he claimed that shocks to investment specific
technology (IST) are the major source of hours variance. Simultaneously, Beaudry and Portier
(2006) suggested expectational shocks reflecting news about future technological
developments (referred to as news shocks) as an important force behind macro fluctuations.

In this paper, we aim to assess the relative importance of several candidate explanations of
macroeconomic fluctuations by adopting a framework which allows them to compete.
Following, among others, Galí (1999) and Fisher (2003, 2006), we use a structural vector
autoregressive approach (SVAR) to explore this issue. We depart slightly from these authors
by explicitly allowing for cointegration. Within this framework, we explore several alternative
identification schemes that allow us to isolate five shocks commonly discussed in the
literature. These are: surprise changes to disembodied and to embodied technology, news
shocks, monetary policy shocks and preference shocks.

Our benchmark identification scheme imposes only a few long-run restrictions since at least
three of the shocks we consider (two surprise technology shocks and the news shocks) may
well cause permanent effects. The first identification scheme we propose therefore relies
mostly on impact restrictions. For example, the news shock is identified to be orthogonal to
measures of total factor productivity (TFP) and the relative price of investment on impact, but
unrestricted in the long run. However, to illustrate the robustness of our results, we also work
with an alternative identification scheme which imposes fewer short run restrictions and relies
more on long-run restrictions.

Our baseline VECM model is composed of five variables: measured total factor productivity,
the relative price of investment goods, an index of stock prices, hours worked, and the Fed
funds rate. In accordance with much of the literature, we choose hours of work as our primary
measure of aggregate economic activity. We also document the robustness of our results by
considering alternative measures of economic activity such as consumption, investment and
output. Following Fisher (2006), we use the relative price of investment to help identify
investment specific technology (IST) shocks. Since standard deflators from the National
Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) have been criticized for insufficient quality adjustment,
e. g. Gordon (1989), we also work with a measure of the real price of investment based on the
work of Cummins and Violante (2002) and adjust investment, output, TFP and capital stock
data accordingly. We do not find that the issue of quality adjustment matters much.

Our main findings are as follows. Our two main identification schemes give very similar
results. In both cases we find that neither type of surprise technology shock explains more
than a small share of activity variance. The dominant force appears to be the news shock,
which preceeds growth in measured TFP by about 2 years. Monetary shocks, preference
shocks and in some cases surprise TFP shocks play more minor roles but are not negligible.

                                               2
IST shocks, on the other hand, appear to play a negligible role in fluctuations, provided the
analysis allows for the possibility of news shocks reflected in stock prices. These results are
shown to be robust across various modifications of the underlying dependent variables and the
identifying assumptions.

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents our structural vector error correction
framework (VECMs) and discusses the identifying assumptions for our two basic
identification schemes. Section 3 describes the data base and Section 4 contains the analysis
of the benchmark system under both identification strategies. In Section 5 we modify the
system to allow for improved investment good quality adjustment. Further robustness checks
are in Section 6. Here we also explore why our results differ from previous studies. Section 7
concludes.



2. Framework of the analysis

Our objective is to identify and quantify the relative importance of five shocks which we
consider as important contenders for explaining business cycle fluctuations. These shocks are:
surprise shocks to total factor productivity, surprise shocks to investment specific technology
(IST), news about future technology, preference shocks and monetary shocks. To achieve this
goal, we will work mainly with a five-variable structural vector error correction model
(SVECM). Specifically, we consider an environment where a K-dimensional vector of
observable variables yt is integrated of order one and can be represented as a vector
autoregressive (VAR) process of order p < ∞ . Allowing for r > 0 co-integrating vectors,
then the error-correction representation of the process is given by
                                                      p −1
                                 Δyt = αβ ' yt −1 + ∑ Γ j Δyt − j + ut                         (1)
                                                      j =1



where α and β are K × r matrices of loading coefficients and co-integrating vectors,
respectively, the Γ j 's , j = 1,..., p − 1 , are K × K coefficient matrices and ut are the reduced
form error terms. These can be thought to be linear combinations of the structural shocks ε t
we are interested in. As is common in the literature, we assume that the covariance matrix of
ε t is the identity matrix I K . Since the covariance matrix of ut is nonsingular, there exists a
nonsingular matrix B such that ut = Bε t . This matrix is not unique and suitable assumptions
must be imposed on its coefficients to identify it. The structural model, a B-model in the sense
of Lütkepohl (2005), is then obtained from (1) by applying the Granger Representation
Theorem:

                                      t −1              ∞
                               yt = L∑ ετ + Bε t + ∑ Ξτ* Bε t −τ + y 0                         (2)
                                     τ =1              τ =1


                                                                             −1
                                                    ⎡      ⎛       p −1
                                                                        ⎞ ⎤
where y is a vector of initial conditions, L := β ⊥ ⎢α ⊥ ' ⎜ I K − ∑ Γi ⎟ β ⊥ ⎥ α ⊥ ' B is a K × K
         0

                                                    ⎣      ⎝       i =1 ⎠ ⎦
matrix with rank K-r, α ⊥ , β ⊥ denote orthogonal complements of α , β , respectively, and the


                                                  3
matrices Ξ*j , j = 1,..., ∞ , are absolutely summable, i. e. lim Ξτ* = 0 . Hence, in terms of
                                                                               τ →∞

structural interpretation, L is the long run multiplier matrix of the structural shocks ε t and B is
the corresponding short run impact matrix. We have to propose and justify (at least)
 K ( K − 1) / 2 restrictions on B =: ( bij ) and L =: ( lij ) to identify the structural shocks. Thus for
K = 5 , we need at minimum ten restrictions to identify the five structural shocks of interest2.

Many structural models can be approximated by the type of moving average representation
given in (2), e. g. most linearized stochastic dynamic general equilibrium models. To set
ideas, it is useful to imagine the underlying data generating process as potentially being
derived from a representative agent model where there is a final good sector and an
investment good sector, and where technology in each sector is stochastic. Moreover, the
representative agent in this model economy is allowed to be subject to stochastic changes in
preferences. The idea of technological news in such a setting can be captured by assuming
that the representative household learns about productivity innovations before they are
effectively implemented in the economy (news shocks can be interpreted as diffusion lags in
technology). In a web appendix (www.wiso.uni-hamburg.de/beaudry-lucke), we present an
extended RBC model that incorporates all these characteristics. The illustrative model we
present in that appendix is also an example of a model that satisfies the type of identification
assumptions we will pursue here to recover structural shocks.

Many papers, e.g. Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (2008), question the plausibility of structural
VAR methodology being used to identify structural shocks. For this reason, in our web
appendix we use artificial data generated from the structural model to explore whether the
identification strategies we use in this paper are likely to allow identification. When the model
is calibrated to deliver a variance decomposition similar to that observed in US data, we find
that the methodology works well.

A priori, it is not obvious that our five shocks of interest can be identified, that is, it is not
obvious that there exists a vector y with corresponding B and L matrices which exhibit 10
theoretically plausible restrictions. However, as we will show, by choosing the vector y
carefully, the desired identification can be achieved quite easily by exploiting a set of
properties that are common to most contemporary models embodying such shocks. In fact, we
will advance two main identification schemes to isolate the shocks of interest. While these
two identification schemes share some common restrictions, they will also differ
considerably. Since in many models both these schemes should achieve the same
identification, it is of interest to know whether their empirical implementation renders similar
results. If they do lead to similar results, it will offer support to the claim that we have isolated
the shocks of interest. In fact, in the robustness section we will study a broad variety of
identification schemes related to the two basic settings and show that our findings are very
robust across these schemes.

The five observable variables on which we will base our primary analysis are: measured Total
Factor Productivity (TFP), the inverse of the relative price of investment goods, a stock
market index, a measure of economic activity (such as hours worked, investment,
consumption or output), and finally the rate of interest on Fed Funds. Details on the
construction of the variables are discussed in the next section. Intuitively, the reasons we
choose these variables are that; (i) measured TFP should help identify innovations to
disembodied technology, (ii) the value of the stock market should help isolate news about

2
    Since the long-run matrix is singular, ten restrictions may not be sufficient for identification.

                                                             4
future technological developments, (iii) the fed funds rate should help identify monetary
policy shocks, (iv) we need a measure of economic activity since it is our main focus, and
finally, (v) since the relative price of investment goods is modelled by most researchers as an
indicator of investment specific technological change, it therefore is likely helpful in
identifying investment specific technological shocks.3

Since in most of the business cycle literature TFP is considered a driving force, we will
exploit this property to help identify shocks. In particular, we will begin by assuming the
following properties for the relationship between TFP and the structural shocks.

Assumption A1: Only TFP shocks may have contemporaneous effects on TFP.


Assumption A2: Preference shocks and monetary shocks have no long run effects on TFP.


Without loss of generality, if we let the order of dependent variables in the vector yt be total
factor productivity, inverse of relative investment price, stock price index, activity and federal
funds rate, and let the order of the structural ε t -shocks be TFP-shock, IST-shock, news shock,
preference shock and monetary shock, then Assumptions A1 and A2 imply the identifying
restrictions b12 = b13 = b14 = b15 = 0 and l14 = l15 = 0 , respectively.

Assumptions A1 and A2 follow directly from common assumptions regarding TFP as a
driving force of economic fluctuations. In particular, it is quite natural to assume that the TFP
process is independent of preference shocks and monetary shocks both in the short and long
run. In addition, in the literature on IST, the process for TFP is generally modelled as
independent of innovations in investment specific technological change. With respect to news
about future technological change, by definition, these shocks have no impact effects on TFP
(following Beaudry and Portier (2006)) or IST but are allowed to predict long run movements
in tTFP. Since measured TFP may be contaminated by changes in the price of capital, we will
later explore the effect of dropping the restrictions b12=0.

The second identification restriction we will impose in this section is that monetary shocks
affect economic activity only with delay, as stated under Assumption A3. This assumption has
been widely used in the literature aimed at identifying the effects of monetary disturbances,
(cf. e. g. Bagliano and Favero (1998)). Since we want to be consistent with this literature, we
maintain this assumption. A3 yields the identifying restriction b45 = 0 .



3
  For example, Greenwood, Hercowitz and Krusell (1997) and most others model IST as different vintages of
capital goods. A new vintage has the property that a more productive capital good can be produced at the
resource cost of one consumption good than in previous vintages. Hence, the price of investment goods in
constant (base year) quality declines over time relative to the price of consumption goods. If the capital stock Kt
is measured in constant quality investment goods I t , the capital accumulation equation is

                                              K t +1 = (1 − δ ) K t −1 + Vt I t

where   Vt is the inverse of the relative price of investment goods. Since we are interested in identifying shocks to
IST, we will include the ratio of the consumer price index to an investment price index in the SVECM.

                                                             5
Assumption A3: Monetary shocks do not have a contemporaneous effect on economic
activity.


Assumption A1, A2 and A3 provide seven restrictions. To identify the five shocks of interest
we therefore need at least three additional restrictions. We will begin by suggesting two sets
of additional restrictions. In both cases, these restrictions will exploit properties of the
relative price of investment. Our first approach is to examine impact restrictions implied by
the literature that incorporates investment specific technological change into macro models. In
most of this literature, the final good can be transformed to investment goods using a linear
technology, and it is shocks to this linear technology that are referred to as investment specific
technology shocks. The market implementation of this technology implies that the relative
price of investment goods in terms of consumption goods reflects the investment specific
technology. Since the process for investment specific technological change is modelled as a
process driven by one shock, it follows that monetary shocks, preference shocks and news
shocks should have no contemporaneous effects on the relative price of investment goods.
This feature is captured by Assumption B1.


Assumption B1: News shocks, preferences shocks and monetary shocks have no
contemporaneous effects on the relative price of investment.


Assumption B1 implies the restrictions b23 = b24 = b25 = 0 . The combination of assumptions
A1, A2, A3 and B1 provides sufficient theoretical restrictions for isolating the five shocks of
interest. As we shall later show, adding the restriction b21 = 0 to this system – which becomes
an over-identifying restriction - is not rejected by the data and does not alter results. We will
refer to the identifying scheme embodying assumptions A1, A2, A3 and B1 as ID1. The
restrictions associated with ID1 are summarized below, where the set of restrictions on
matrices B and L is shown explicitly.

                             ⎛*   0 0 0 0⎞        ⎛* *         * 0 0⎞
                             ⎜            ⎟       ⎜                   ⎟
                             ⎜*   * 0 0 0⎟        ⎜* *         * * *⎟
                         B = ⎜*   * * * * ⎟ , L = ⎜* *         * * *⎟                         (3)
                             ⎜            ⎟       ⎜                   ⎟
                             ⎜*   * * * 0⎟        ⎜* *         * * *⎟
                             ⎜*           ⎟       ⎜* *         * * * ⎟⎠
                             ⎝    * * * *⎠        ⎝

Here, starred entries denote unrestricted elements of B and L. Note that under ID1 the news
shock is identified by postulating zero effects on both types of technology on impact, but
allowing for unrestricted long-run effects. Thus, under this identification scheme news can be
news about both TFP and IST innovations. Similarly, under ID1, the notion of a preference
shock can be given a far more general interpretation than the term may suggest. For example,
our identification strategy is compatible with the preference shocks representing any kind of
temporary non-monetary demand shocks (e. g. increases in government spending or foreign
demand) or with changes in market structure (e. g. transitory changes in markups). It is also
compatible with non-technology expectational shocks (e. g. socially inefficient market rushes
in the sense of Beaudry, Collard and Portier (2006) or even sunspot shocks and bubbles).
Thus, while we label this shock a “preference” shock, the rather weak identifying assumptions
for this shock allow it to stand in for any non-monetary shock that is orthogonal to technology

                                                6
on impact and has no long run effect on TFP. One of the attractive features of ID1 is that it
mainly relies on impact restrictions, and therefore is less likely subject to the criticism
presented in Chari, McGrattan and Kehoe (2008) regarding the use of long run restrictions.

Most models which incorporate IST assume that the relative price of investment only reacts to
investment specific technological shocks. Our identification scheme ID1 imposes
considerably weaker restrictions e. g. the relative price of investment can react to any shock
with a lag. Nevertheless, ID1 might be criticised for ruling out that news, preference or money
shocks change the relative price of investment on impact. For example, if it is the case that
there are adjustment costs associated with investment, then the relative price of investment
may vary in the short run with any shock that increases investment. If this is the case,
Assumption B1 would not be valid. For this reason, it appears desirable to search for an
alternative identification scheme which is not subject to this criticism.

An alternative means to identify the shocks of interest is to drop assumption B1 and instead
focus on long run restrictions that models impose on the relative price of investment. This
approach is very similar to that proposed in Fisher (2006). In most of the literature
incorporating investment specific technological change, investment specific shocks are the
sole driver of the long run behaviour of the relative price of investment goods. This property
will also hold in models where there are adjustment costs to investment and therefore is not
subject to the previous criticism. Hence it is natural, at a minimum, to assume that monetary
shocks and preferences shocks do not affect the relative price of investment in the long run.

Assumption C1 expresses this property. We could in addition want to impose that news and
TFP shocks do not affect the long run behaviour of the relative price of investment, since this
would be consistent with the idea that only IST shocks drive the long run behaviour of the
relative price of investment. However, instead of imposing these additional restrictions, we
will examine whether such properties are supported by the data. In particular, we want to
allow news shocks to potentially contain information about future changes in the relative price
of investment since there is no a priori reason to eliminate such a possibility. As for TFP
shocks, we will show that the additional restriction in which TFP shocks do not affect relative
price of investment in the long run is easily accepted by the data.


Assumption C1: Preference shocks and monetary shocks have no long run effects on the
relative price of investment.


Assumption C1 implies the identification restrictions. l24 = l25 = 0 . If we combine assumption
A1, A2 and C1, this is insufficient to identify the 5 shocks of interest since there is nothing
that differentiates a news shock from an investment specific shock. Another common long run
property that characterizes investment specific shocks in most models is that such shocks do
not determine the long run behaviour of TFP. This property is expressed in Assumption C2.


Assumption C2: IST shocks do not have a long run effect on TFP.


Assumption C2 implies l12 = 0 . As we already noted in the parallel case of the B-matrix, we
might also have used the analogous restriction l21 = 0 (TFP shocks do not have a long run


                                              7
effect on IST). We keep this in mind as an overidentifying restriction to be tested in the
robustness section below.


Our second identification scheme, which we will refer to as ID2, will be comprised of
Assumption A1, A2, A3, C1 and C2. Note that this identification scheme (which we will refer
to as ID2) does not place any restriction on the short run behaviour of the relative price of
investment and therefore is not subject to our previous criticism.


Summing up, the just identifying restrictions for ID2 are as follows:

                            ⎛*   0 0 0 0⎞        ⎛* 0        * 0 0⎞
                            ⎜            ⎟       ⎜                  ⎟
                            ⎜*   * * * *⎟        ⎜* *        * 0 0⎟
                        B = ⎜*   * * * * ⎟ , L = ⎜* *        * * *⎟                         (4)
                            ⎜            ⎟       ⎜                  ⎟
                            ⎜*   * * * 0⎟        ⎜* *        * * *⎟
                            ⎜*           ⎟       ⎜* *        * * * ⎟⎠
                            ⎝    * * * *⎠        ⎝



3. Data

We will estimate our SVECM model using quarterly data from different sources. For the
economic activity variables, we use seasonally adjusted data for gross domestic product y,
personal consumption expenditures c and gross private nonresidential investment i from the
National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) of the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA),
Table 1.1.5. These variables are expressed in real terms using standard NIPA deflators taken
from the same source (Table 1.1.9). Hours of the non-farm business sectors h are drawn from
the US Basic Economics Database. All variables are in logs and y, c, i and h are in per capita
form using civilian non-institutional population, ages 16 and over. TFP data tfp are
constructed using data on capital services for the private non-farm business sector published
by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). We multiply capital services by the capacity
utilization rate in manufacturing drawn from the Federal Reserve Statistical Release G.17. For
TFP construction, hours and real GDP series are also for the non-farm business sector, the
latter taken from NIPA Table 1.3.5. The capital share is set at 0.31, the mean over the sample
compiled by the BLS.

To check robustness, we also construct a set of quality-adjusted (QA) variables. To this end,
we use quality-adjusted deflators for total investment and equipment as used in Fisher (2003,
2006). The one drawback of the quality adjusted data is that it is available only on a shorter
time span. To construct a quality adjusted capital stock we use the perpetual inventory method
with fixed nonresidential investment deflated by the QA deflator for total investment. This
deflator results in lower estimates of real investment prior to 2000 because all capital goods
are measured in constant year 2000 quality. The resulting real investment series is denoted iq.
The capital stock starting value is taken from the private nonresidential fixed assets series
published by the BEA, Table 4.1. Depreciation is set at 0.025 per quarter. We measure the
real GDP series yq in consumption units (deflator for nondurables and services), also in the
construction of QA-adjusted total factor productivity tfpq.



                                               8
The inverse of the real price of fixed non-residential investment pi is the log-difference of the
NIPA deflator for consumption and the respective NIPA investment price index. An
alternative measure, denoted pieq, uses the deflator for nondurables and services consumption
and for quality-adjusted equipment investment instead4. Real per capita stock prices sp are
derived as the log-difference between the Standard & Poors 500 index (SP500), the
population series and the NIPA consumption deflator. In the case of QA-adjusted variables
we use the deflator for nondurables and services and denot this series spq. The short-run
nominal interest rate int is the H15 effective rate on federal funds.

Capital services and capital stock are available only at annual frequency. They are converted
to quarterly data assuming constant growth rates within each year. Stock prices and the
federal funds rate were retrieved at monthly frequency from Global Insight; the quarterly
values are the monthly averages. The sample size is 1955.1-2007.2 for NIPA variables and
1955.1-2000.4 for all variables which rely on the QA deflators.


4. The Benchmark System

Our first set of results is based on the five variable system consisting of tfp, pi, sp, an activity
measure and int. The only deterministic series in the VAR is a constant. If the activity is x, we
call this the NIPA_x system. Using Akaike’s information criterion (AIC) to determine the
appropriate lag length, six lags are recommended for NIPA_h and NIPA_c, three lags for
NIPA_i and nine lags for NIPA_y. However, as Figure 1 shows, six lags seem to be a
reasonable specification for all theses systems. For the sake of maximum comparability we
therefore estimate all systems with six lags (i.e. five lags in differences).

                                                           Figure 1

                                      AICs for Lags 1-10, NIPA system with activity h, i, y or c


                  h, y, c -31.0                                                                         -28.6   i


                          -31.2                                                                         -28.8


                          -31.4                                                                         -29.0


                          -31.6                                                                         -29.2


                          -31.8                                                                         -29.4


                          -32.0                                                                         -29.6


                          -32.2                                                                         -29.8
                                  1     2      3       4      5       6       7     8       9      10

                                                       h          i       y        c


Turning to cointegration properties, one might expect from theory that the NIPA systems are
driven by two stochastic trends representing disembodied and investment-specific technical
progress. Johansen tests for cointegration (using six lags in levels) generally give support for

4
  Fisher (2003) states that the relative price of quality adjusted equipment may be a better measure of IST than
the relative price of quality adjusted total investment.

                                                               9
this conjecture, finding either evidence of two or three cointegrating vectors. As three
cointegrating vectors are consistent with our prior of having two stochastic trends in the
system, we will assume three cointegrating vectors in the benchmark system and consider the
possibility of only two cointegrating vectors when we study robustness.

We proceed by estimating a vector error correction model (VECM) for the NIPA_h system,
which will be our benchmark. We impose three cointegrating vectors and five lags in
differences. Note that we do not assume that all variables in this system have a unit root. The
stationarity properties of hours, in particular, has been the subject of much debate, cf.
Christiano, Eichenbaum, Vigfusson (2004). These authors show that the maintained
assumption on whether or not hours have a unit root implies vastly different conclusions for
its response to technological innovations if VARs in differences are used. In a VECM
framework, by contrast, we do not need to impose any assumptions on the stationarity
properties of hours, for if hours were in fact stationary, one of the cointegrating vectors would
give nonzero weight only to the hours variable, so that the level of hours affects the first
differences of the other variables in the VECM via the error correction term. Of course, if
hours were trend stationary, the cointegrating combination should allow for a linear trend, but
the hours series we use does not seem to have a discernible trend, cf. Figure 2.

                                                          Figure 2

                                                     Hours per capita

                         -7.44                                                              -7.44


                         -7.48                                                              -7.48


                         -7.52                                                              -7.52


                         -7.56                                                              -7.56


                         -7.60                                                              -7.60


                         -7.64                                                              -7.64


                         -7.68                                                              -7.68
                                 55   60   65   70   75     80   85     90   95   00   05




a) Identification ID1

We begin by estimating a structural decomposition of the VECM5 using identification scheme
ID1. The variables are ordered as tfp, pi, sp, h, int. We compute impulse responses (IR) and
forcast error variance decompositions (FEVD).

The FEVDs, cf. Figure 3, show the contributions of the identified structural shocks to the
forecast error variances of each dependent variable over a business cycle horizon of 32
quarters. In discussing the results, we will refer to the shocks as the surprise TFP, surprise
IST, news, preference and monetary shock.


5
    We use the free Jmulti software, cf. www.jmulti.de.

                                                            10
The most interesting findings from the FEVDs are the following: First, surprise TFP and IST
shocks contribute almost nothing to the variance of hours at all horizons. The single most
important contributor to hours variance is the news shock, in our interpretation the
anticipation of future technological possibilities. Only in the very short run (the first three
quarters), the preference shock dominates the variance of hours. The monetary shock explains
a sizable share (about 20%) of the variance of hours after two years while most of the rest
(roughly 70%) is due to the news shock.

Second, stock prices are mainly driven by the news shock, accounting for roughly 80% of the
variance at all horizons. Much of the remaining variance seems to be due to preference
shocks. Again, it is remarkable that “fundamentals” as represented by surprise TFP and IST
shocks seem to be quite unimportant for stock prices. This would be consistent with the view
that most technological innovations are known before they are implemented on a scale large
enough to have a significant impact on the economy. In fact, the FEVDs show that news
shocks contribute up to 30% of the variance of tfp at business cycle horizons, and this share
increases further as time goes by, for instance, it is 60% after 15 years. Since this finding is,
as we will show, very robust across different modifications of our benchmark system, it seems
appropriate to infer that the major component of what we label a news shock reflects
information about future disembodied technology.

Third, we have a negative result for our measure of IST. The relative investment price itself
seems quite disconnected from other shocks. News shocks, in particular, which might also
contain information about future IST, do not play a major role in its variance, at least not to
the extent they do for disembodied technical progress. We will return to this issue after having
discussed the impulse responses, to which we now turn, cf. Figure 4.

Impulse responses in Figure 4 display the responses of each dependent variable row-wise with
the columns representing the shocks. Responses are given for the first 32 quarters.

As can be seen in the fifth column, monetary policy shocks are found to have effects on hours
similar to those documented elsewhere in the literature, with the effect setting in gradually,
peaking after about two years and then phasing off back to zero.

Preference shocks (fourth column) feature positive responses of hours and interest rates for at
least the first year along with a prolonged negative response of stock prices. There is a small
short-run negative impact on measured TFP and an apparently long-run positive response of
the IST-variable. We do not emphasize the latter, however, since this effect is quantitatively
negligible, cf. the FEVD of pi, and - as our further analysis will show – it is one of the few
features that is not robust with respect to using quality adjusted variables.

News shocks (third column) have effects very similar to those found in Beaudry and Portier
(2006), although their analysis focused mainly on a bivariate system and never included
information on the relative price of investment. The news shock seems to convey information
about TFP growth that starts 8 to 10 quarters in the future. This shock nevertheless causes an
immediate expansion in hours lasting for about ten quarters. These news shocks also appear to
be associated with an increase in nominal interest rates, although this estimate is mostly not
significant. Moreover, news shocks seem to have a marginally significant positive effect on
IST within the first four years or so. Note that the effect of news on hours is transitory, in line
with the standard assumption of hours being a stationary series. However, as we will see



                                                11
                       Figure 3
      FEVDs of the NIPA_h System, identification ID1

tfp                        pi                                             sp




h                          int




                                                       monetary shock
                                                       preference shock
                                                       news shock
                                                       surprise IST shock
                                                       surprise TFP shock




                           12
                                                   Figure 4: Impulse responses of NIPA_h, identification ID1

             surprise TFP                          surprise IST                               news                        preference shock                              money


tfp




pi




sp




 h




int


      Impulses are given in columns, responding variables in rows. Solid lines are estimated impulse responses, dashed are two standard errors bootstrapped confidence intervalls (Hall)




                                                                                             13
below, news shocks cause permanent effects on output, investment and consumption, which
strongly suggests that the identified news are predominantly technological.

Surprise shocks to TFP cause a somewhat unconventional short run response for TFP itself
which may indicate the presence of measurement error in the form of a rapidly mean-
reverting transitory component on top of the stochastic trend. However, the most important
finding in this column seems to be that TFP shocks have no significant effects on hours at all.
Moreover we find that the negative initial response of hours to positive technology shocks
emphasized by Galí (1999) is insignificant and even the point estimate is almost zero for the
first quarters. For the three types of technology shocks (TFP, IST and news shocks)
considered in this exercise, only the news shock causes a significant response of hours and
this response is unambiguously positive.

Although minor in total stock price variance, IST-shocks seem to cause a positive response of
stock prices. (The point estimate is positive for all business cycle frequencies and
significantly so after three years.) This could be in line with higher profitability of existing
firms or with successfully developing equipment producers which make it into the SP500
after a number of years.

Note that the largest responses of tfp are due to surprise TFP shocks in the short run and to
news shocks in the long run. Further, tfp seems to initially decrease slightly in response to
news, preference and monetary shocks. This probably indicates that these shocks require
some factor usage in order to adjust to these shocks, e. g. reorganisation which is not captured
by measured output. The marginally significant positive response of tfp to IST shocks in the
long run is probably due to incomplete quality adjustment in the capital stock series.


b) Identification ID2

As noted previously, our identification scheme ID1 may be criticised for its short run
restrictions on the relative price of investment. For this reason, we now turn to reporting
results based on using identification scheme ID2. Recall that the rational of ID2 is that, under
a long run perspective, the real price of investment is likely to be a good measure of IST. It is
less clear whether this is also true for the short run, which is why ID1 may be questioned as
an appropriate identification strategy.

The results of the structural decomposition obtained under ID2, where a selection is given in
Figures 5 and 6, are found to be very close to those we obtained under identification ID1. In
fact, a simple correlation analysis confirms that the two identification schemes yield more or
less the same type of shocks: Computing the correlation matrices of the shocks retrieved from
ID1 with those retrieved from ID2, we find that all diagonal elements are higher than .8 and
the off-diagonal elements are – with few exceptions - small in absolute value, cf. Table 1.

Fisher (2003, 2006) expresses output and productivity in consumption units. We checked if
our results hinge on using the GDP-deflator in the computation of TFP and real stock prices.
Redefining these variables with either the CPI or a price index for the consumption of
nondurables and services (also for pi) has almost no effect on the variance decomposition of
hours, both under ID1 and ID2. The only major change is a smaller news shock share in TFP
and a larger news shock share in pi. But note that TFP may be biased if total output is deflated
by a consumption price index, because the output of investment goods will be understated.


                                               14
Figure 5: FEVDs for NIPA_h, identification ID2
                    tfp                                             h




                                                                                         monetary shock
                                                                                         preference shock
                                                                                         news shock
                                                                                         surprise IST shock
                                                                                         surprise TFP shock



Figure 6: Impulse Responses for NIPA_h, identification ID2

         surprise TFP           news                 surprise TFP            news   preference shock          money


  tfp                                            h




                                                                        15
                                                      Table 1
                           Correlation Matrix for NIPA_h Shocks Identified by ID1 and ID2

                                                Shocks identified by ID2
                         1.00           0.00              0.00             0.00       0.00
   Shocks                0.00           0.82              0.49             -0.29      0.07
identified by            0.00           -0.46             0.87             0.16       -0.04
    ID1                  0.00           0.33              0.00             0.94       0.01
                         0.00           -0.08            0.00              0.01       1.00


Thus, it is not too surprising that the IRs and FEVDs of ID2 are quite similar to those of ID1.
In particular the news shock always explains most of the variance of hours, followed by the
preference shock. By contrast, both IST and TFP shocks are negligible for hours variance.



5. Quality Adjusted Systems

An apparent difficulty in interpretation of our first set of results is the permanently negative
response of nominal interest rates to IST shocks. This response (prevalent under both ID1 and
ID2) is related to the sizable share of federal funds rate variance attributable to IST shocks at
long horizons, cf. Figure 36. Both results are hard to explain and could be due to pi being an
imperfect measure of IST. A possible remedy is the use of variables with improved
investment quality adjustment. Moreover, it may be the case that our finding that IST shocks
play little role in hours fluctuations is due to mis-measurement of the relative price of
investment.

To address these issues, consistency requires some changes in the variables in order to create
a quality adjusted system. In particular, the use of a QA-deflator for investment implies
different quantities for investment, output and the capital stock. Hence we use the series iq, yq
(in the construction of TFP) and tfpq as described above. We measure the inverse of the
relative price of investment as the ratio of the NIPA deflator for consumption of nondurables
and services divided by the quality-adjusted deflator for equipment investment pieq, since
Fisher (2003) argues that the equipment price series might capture IST somewhat better than
the relative price of total investment. To ensure comparability, we retain the settings of three
cointegrating vectors and five lags in differences in the VECM. We begin with identification
ID1.

a) Identification ID1

Results for the FEVD associated with the quality adjusted system are presented in Figure 7.
Somewhat surprisingly we find that adjusting for quality in the construction of investment
price changes little the results. We still have the central finding that TFP shocks and IST
shocks do not explain much of hours or stock price variance. Instead, the news shock is by far
the most important contributor to hours variance and it also explains up to 30% of tfpq-
variance at the low business cycle frequencies (increasing further at longer horizons). The
importance of the preference shock, while reduced in hours, has increased substantially in the
variance of stock prices. The role of the monetary shock is similar to its role in the NIPA

6
    The FEVD is similar under ID2.

                                                   16
system. Note that now the IST shock explains less of the long run variance of nominal interest
rates.

Turning to the impulse responses of the QA-system, cf. Figure 8, we confirm that the change
from NIPA- to QA-variables does not matter much. The monetary policy impulse of hours is
virtually unchanged, as is the significant long run response of TFP to news shocks. We have a
strong positive response of hours to anticipated technological innovations (news) and only a
minor, though now significant, negative response to surprise TFP shocks. Unlike in the
NIPA_h system, news shocks cause a small positive response of the investment price variable
variable over the first four years or so, but this effect, which may be due to using a variable
which better captures IST, is small in terms of the variance of the relative price of investment.

There are minor changes in the responses to preference shocks, column 4 of Figure 8. The
short-run response of hours to the preference shock is less pronounced. The preference shock
still has a tiny positive long-run impact on the relative price of investment (denoted pieq)¸ but
it becomes significant only after the 32 quarters depicted in Figure 8. Similarly, the negative
effect on stock prices is transitory, but it takes more than 32 quarters to return to the initial
level – the long-run effect is actually positive. Thus, while there are quantitative changes, the
interpretation of the preference shock given for the NIPA_h system continues to hold.


b) Identification ID2

Turning to identification ID2, we obtain more or less the same results, see the selection shown
in Figures 9 and 10. Under both schemes, the counterintuitive significant long run response of
the nominal interest rate to IST shocks has vanished, but in its place we observe (with
opposite sign) a marginally significant long run response to TFP shocks (not shown for ID2,
but similar to the response in Figure 8). The news shock remains by far the most important
shock for hours with the monetary shock a distant second.

We correlate the structural residuals obtained from NIPA_h under ID1 with the structural
residuals from QA_h under ID2. As the QA_h sample is shorter, we only use the NIPA_h
residuals up to 2000.4. Thus, we correlate residuals obtained from different samples,
estimated with different variables and decomposed under different identifying assumptions.
The results (cf. Table 2) show that most diagonal elements of the correlation matrix are still in
the range of .8 or higher. The one exception is the correlation between the identified IST
shocks, which is .6. Thus, the bottom line from our analysis with QA-variables seems to be
that the usage of QA variables might have a notable impact on the identification of IST
shocks – but not on much more. In particular, the finding that IST shocks appear unimportant
for economic fluctuations remains unchallenged.




                                               17
                       Figure 7
       FEVDs of the QA_h System, identification ID1

tfpq                       pieq                                          sp




 h                         int




                                                      monetary shock
                                                      preference shock
                                                      news shock
                                                      surprise IST shock
                                                      surprise TFP shock




                           18
                                                     Figure 8: Impulse responses of QA_h, identification ID1

              surprise TFP                          surprise IST                               news                        preference shock                              money


tfpq




pieq




 sp




  h




 int

       Impulses are given in columns, responding variables in rows. Solid lines are estimated impulse responses, dashed are two standard errors bootstrapped confidence intervalls (Hall)




                                                                                              19
                                                 Table 2
                 Correlation Matrix for NIPA_h Shocks Identified by ID1 and QA_h Shocks
                                            Identified by ID2

                                       QA_h Shocks identified by ID2
                      0.82          -0.11         0.12             0.16             0.04
  NIPA_h
                      -0.19         0.60          0.30            -0.33             0.04
   Shocks
                      -0.04         -0.36         0.89            -0.05             -0.04
identified by
                      -0.22         0.26          0.21             0.88             0.03
    ID1
                      -0.09         -0.04        -0.02            -0.02             0.94


Summing up, the differences between NIPA_h and QA_h seem relatively small and even with
(possibly) improved variables there is very little evidence that IST-shocks drive a substantial
fraction of macroeconomic fluctuations. The most notable qualitative change in the QA-
system seems to be a more plausible long-run response of the nominal interest rate to IST
shocks. But as we will show below, this property can be enforced on the NIPA_h system
without any essential changes elsewhere. Thus, while we continue to use QA variables in
some of the robustness checks below, we prefer to work with NIPA variables as these exploit
more information in terms of the time span of the available sample.


5. Robustness:

a) Other activities

We now study the robustness of our results by looking at other measures of activity in both
the NIPA and the QA systems, focussing on identification ID1. (We still use QA variables
here to make sure that results do not differ when activity is measured by variables which are
themselves quality adjusted.) Hence, we substitute out the hours series and replace it by
investment (i or iq), output (y or yq) or consumption (c). We use the same (ID1) identification
throughout. The FEVDs of these exercises are given in Figure 11 (activities only). As in the
case of hours, we see that IST shocks do not matter much – and they matter even less in QA
systems than in NIPA-systems. Surprise TFP shocks rarely account for more than 10% of the
variance, the exception being the variance of output where the TFP-share sometimes reaches
20-30%. The preference shock seems generally more important in NIPA-systems than in QA-
systems and is basically a short-run phenomenon. The importance of the money shock is also
mostly smaller in QA systems than in NIPA-systems and consumption seems to be the
activity most receptive to monetary policy. The one shock which clearly dominates the
FEVDs of all activity measures is the news shock with rarely less than 50% of the variance.

Selected impulse responses are given in Figure 12, where the six rows represent, from top to
bottom, the systems NIPA_i, NIPA_y, NIPA_c, QA_iq, QA_yq and QA_c. TFP seems to
respond to TFP shocks with much the same kind of transitory dynamics in all systems and
news shock generally have a positive long-run effect on TFP in line with Beaudry and Portier
(2006). For investment, output and consumption, both TFP shocks and news shocks have
permanent effects, unlike the responses for hours in either the NIPA or QA system. These
permanent effects strongly suggest that news shocks are essentially technological. Recall that
the identification would, in principle, also be compatible with non-technological news or
sunspot shocks, but given the estimated impulse responses such an interpretation seems hard
to support.

                                              20
Figure 9: FEVDs for QA_h, identification ID2
                   tfpq                                             h




                                                                                         monetary shock
                                                                                         preference shock
                                                                                         news shock
                                                                                         surprise IST shock
                                                                                         surprise TFP shock



Figure 10: Impulse Responses for QA_h, identification ID2

         surprise TFP           news                 surprise TFP            news   preference shock          money


  tfp                                          h




                                                                        21
                                                                        Figure 11
                            FEVDs of activities in NIPA systems (top panel) and QA systems (bottom panel) , identification ID1

                        i                                                 y                                                c




                        iq                                                yq                                               c




top of bar to bottom:           monetary shock         preference shock            news shock     surprise IST shock        surprise TFP shock




                                                                              22
Figure 12: Selected Impulse Responses for NIPA_i, NIPA_y, NIPA_c, QA_iq, QA_yq, QA_c (top to bottom rows), identification ID1
                                             Responses of TFP (left) and Activities (right)

           surprise TFP                        News                             surprise TFP                         news                 preference shock                      money


  tfp                                                                   i




  tfp                                                                   y




  tfp                                                                   c




tfpq                                                                   iq




tfpq                                                                  yq




tfpq                                                                    c

        Impulses are given in columns, responding variables in rows. Solid lines are estimated impulse responses, dashed are two standard errors bootstrapped confidence intervalls (Hall)




                                                                                                          23
The preference shock on activity is generally more pronounced in the NIPA systems than in
the QA systems. Its effect on activity is clearly transitory. Note that neither the long run
effects of news shocks nor those of preference shocks are imposed through the identifying
assumptions. The responses of activity to monetary shocks are very similar in all systems.

All activities display a gradual increase over a year or so in response to a news shock. Clearly,
this cannot be attributed to standard factor adjustment costs, because the response of activity
to a preference shock is an instantaneous jump. In fact, this difference in the initial responses
seems to be an interesting distinguishing feature of news and preference shocks. It can
support the interpretation of news shocks as an expectational variable, because news about
future technological developments may well at first be skeptically received by many agents
but a few particularly dynamic or risk-loving entrepreneurs. Thus, there may be some sort of
sluggishness in the adjustment of expectations responsible for the shape of the responses to
news shocks, while behavioral changes or changes in the economic environment captured by
our notion of a preference shock cause an instantaneous response of activity.


b) Two cointegrating vectors

As an additional robustness check we examine what happens if we change assumptions about
co-integration. When we estimate the baseline NIPA_h system with only two cointegrating
vectors, the results are mostly similar to the case of three cointegrating vectors. This is true
for both identification schemes. The most notable change is the impulse response of hours to
the monetary shock, which now seems to have a persistent effect, cf. Figure 13 for ID1. This
is also clearly visible in the variance decomposition of hours. As this is not in line with
standard theory, we do not follow this approach further. The QA_h system with two
cointegrating vectors has similar properties.

                                        Figure 13
             NIPA_h estimated with two cointegrating vectors, identification ID1

                       h                                    Response of h to a monetary shock




                                                    monetary shock
                                                    preference shock
                                                    news shock
                                                    surprise IST shock
                                                    surprise TFP shock


c) Overidentifying restrictions

Up to now we have not imposed any over-identifying restrictions in our estimating procedure.
Here we examine the effects of imposing such restrictions. For example, identification ID1
did not impose the restriction b21 = 0 , which is a natural counterpart to the restriction b12 = 0

                                               24
implied by Assumption A1. We therefore proceed by subjecting the NIPA_h system to
identification scheme ID1 and the additional restriction b21 = 0 . We find that the P-value of
the likelihood-ratio (LR) statistic for over-identifying restrictions is 0.081, thus the restriction
can be reasonably accepted. More importantly, we find that when imposing the additional
restriction there are almost no changes in the estimated FEVDs and IRs.

Identification ID2 did not impose the restriction l21 = 0 , which is the natural counterpart to the
restriction l12 = 0 implied by Assumption C2. Overidentifying the NIPA_h system with ID2
and the additional restriction l21 = 0 , we find a P-value of the LR statistic of 0.67, so this
restriction is easily accepted. There are again no noteworthy changes in the IRs and FEVDs
when this restriction is imposed.

We also explored the imposition of the overidentifying restriction l52 = 0 on ID1, i. e. a
restriction aimed at eliminating the counterintuitive permanent effect of IST shocks on the
Federal Funds rate7. This restriction is clearly rejected by the LR-test. If, however, we ignore
the test result and estimate the structural decomposition nonetheless, we again get results very
close to those in Figures 3 and 4. Even the response of int to IST-shocks does not change by
much during the first 32 quarters, i. e. the enforced convergence back to zero is quite slow.

d) Short-run response of hours to monetary policy

To help identify the monetary shock we assumed that activity does not respond on impact to
monetary policy, i. e. b45 = 0 (Assumption A3). We here replace this restriction in ID1 by the
long-run restriction l25 = 0 . i. e. monetary policy does not affect IST in the long run. In the
case of three cointegrating vectors the two long-run restrictions l15 = l25 = 0 immediately
imply that the monetary shock is a transitory shock, i. e. all elements in the last column of L
are zero (with probability one). We find that computing the structural decomposition under
this alternative assumption does not change our benchmark results in any remarkable way.8
We therefore continue to use the b45 = 0 restriction in the following exercise.

e) No restrictions on IST shocks.

So far, our results suggest that IST shocks are not very important for business cycle
fluctuations. Given that this finding may be contentious, we thus explore an alternative
identification scheme where we take care not to put any restrictions on the IST shock, neither
in the short nor in the long run. Moreover, the relative price of investment may react on
impact to any shock. Rather, identification is achieved by adopting the assumption that in the
long run only IST shocks affect IST.

We call this scheme identification ID3, its restrictions are conveniently summarized in (5).
Note that news shocks are taken to be news with respect to TFP, but not to IST. Thus, if there
are, in fact, IST-specific news then identification ID3 will project these shocks onto the IST
shock since this is the only shock with a long run effect on IST. In our opinion, ID3 is an
identification strategy that is very unlikely to be biased against finding IST shocks to be the
important if this is actually the case.

7
 It is not possible to over-identify ID2 with this restriction.
8
  In the case of two cointegrating vectors (i. e. with nonzero elements in the last column of L) the only
noteworthy difference is, again, the permanent effect of monetary policy on activity, cf. Figure 13.

                                                   25
                                 ⎛*    * 0 0 0⎞      ⎛* *                 * 0 0⎞
                                 ⎜            ⎟      ⎜                           ⎟
                                 ⎜*    * * * *⎟      ⎜0 *                 0 0 0⎟
                             B = ⎜*    * * * *⎟, L = ⎜* *                 * * *⎟                               (5)
                                 ⎜            ⎟      ⎜                           ⎟
                                 ⎜*    * * * 0⎟      ⎜* *                 * * *⎟
                                 ⎜*           ⎟      ⎜* *                 * * * ⎟⎠
                                 ⎝     * * * *⎠      ⎝

Yet the results of this structural decomposition for NIPA_h (a selection is given in Figures 14
and 15) are very close to those we obtained under the benchmark identification ID1. In fact,
computing the correlation matrices of the shocks retrieved from ID1 with those retrieved from
ID3, we find the diagonal elements are mostly around .9 or higher and the off-diagonal
elements are mostly small in absolute value, cf. Table 3.

                                                     Table 3
                          Correlation Matrix for NIPA_h Shocks Identified by ID1 and ID3

                                                    Shocks identified by ID3
                         1.00               -0.03             0.01                 -0.01              0.00
   Shocks                0.03               0.88             -0.33                 0.33               -0.08
identified by            0.00               0.37              0.93                 -0.05              0.01
    ID1                  0.00               -0.29             0.16                 0.94               0.01
                         0.00               0.07             -0.04                 0.01               1.00


f) Explaining Fisher (2003, 2006)

Our results stand in remarkable contrast to the findings of Fisher (2003, 2006) who suggested
that investment-specific technical change explains a lot of hours variance. His benchmark
system is a VAR in the growth rate of the relative (QA) equipment price, the growth rate of
labor productivity and the level of hours. Fisher uses a Blanchard-Quah (1989) approach
which relies exclusively on long-run restrictions. He imposes that only IST shocks affect IST
in the long run and only IST shocks or neutral technology shocks affect labor productivity in
the long run. Our identification scheme ID3 is very similar in spirit to that of Fisher as it
imposes no restrictions on the IST shock, and it imposes that the investment specific shock is
the only shock that drives the relative price of investment in the long run.

To try to understand the difference between our results and those of Fisher, we move to a
four-dimensional system (denoted NIPA4_pi) by eliminating stock prices. In line with
Johansen tests, we assume two cointegrating vectors, i. e. we allow for two stochastic trends –
likely trends associated with the two technology processes. Identification is achieved by
eliminating the third column and row from both B and L in ID3 and by allowing for l24 ≠ 0 ,
cf. (6).9 As before, this identification is very close to Fisher’s. It is slightly overidentified in
order to make it as similar as possible to the previous identification scheme ID3.




9
 Removing only the third row and column from B and L in (5) results in an invalid set of identifying restrictions,
because the number of independent restrictions for any shock must be smaller than the dimension of the system,
cf. Lucke (2008), Proposition 2. By lifting l24 = 0 we ensure that this condition is satisfied for the money shock.

                                                       26
Figure 14: FEVDs for NIPA_h, identification ID3
                    tfp                                             h




                                                                                            monetary shock
                                                                                            preference shock
                                                                                            news shock
                                                                                            surprise IST shock
                                                                                            surprise TFP shock



Figure 15: Impulse Responses for NIPA_h, identification ID3

         surprise TFP           news                 surprise TFP            news   preference shock           money


  tfp                                          h




                                                                        27
                                ⎛*     * 0 0⎞   ⎛* *             0 0⎞
                                ⎜           ⎟   ⎜                   ⎟
                                  *    * * *⎟     0 *            0 *⎟
                              B=⎜             L=⎜                                                   (6)
                                ⎜*     * * 0⎟   ⎜* *             * *⎟
                                ⎜           ⎟   ⎜                   ⎟
                                ⎝*     * * *⎠   ⎝* *             * *⎠

The results for this decomposition, see Figures 16 and 17, are very different from what we
obtained so far. If we mechanically use the labels TFP shock, IST shock, preference shock
and monetary shock—dropping any reference to news shocks—we find that “surprise IST”
shock explains roughly 60% of hours variance across all horizons - which is more or less
Fisher’s finding. This shock also accounts for an increasing share of TFP variance as time
goes by, both qualitatively and quantitatively in much the same way as the news shock did in
the five-dimensional systems. It thus seems to be the case that the news shock, which cannot
be distinguished from an IST shock in this four variable system, is mostly being picked up by
the shock associated with the second column in (6).

To investigate this conjecture we compute the correlations between this “surprise IST” shock
and the structural residuals in NIPA_h under benchmark identification ID1. The highest
correlations are found with the NIPA_h IST shock (0.61) and the NIPA_h news shock
(0.45)10 – and they are of almost the same order of magnitude. Thus under identification (6) it
seems that both the former IST shock and the former news shock are projected on the second
column and this explains the higher explanatory power of IST shocks in Fisher-type
identification schemes. However, if IST shocks and news shocks are allowed to compete, as
in our approach, the IST shock is completely marginalized.


g) Eliminating the relative price of investment

Our analysis suggests that the relative price of investment does not add much to the
explanation of macroeconomic fluctuations. We therefore explore how our results change
when we drop the relative investment price. (We continue to use standard NIPA concepts and
denote this system NIPA4_sp). The identification in this system is analogous to the five-
dimensional case, as we only need to rely on assumptions A1, A2 and A3, as seen in (7)
where the restrictions on B and L are made explicit:

                               ⎛*      0 0 0⎞   ⎛*           * 0 0⎞
                               ⎜            ⎟   ⎜                 ⎟
                                 *     * * *⎟     *          * * *⎟
                             B=⎜              L=⎜                                             (7)
                               ⎜*      * * 0⎟   ⎜*           * * *⎟
                               ⎜            ⎟   ⎜                 ⎟
                               ⎝*      * * *⎠   ⎝*           * * *⎠

Since the relative price of investment seemed to represent a stochastic trend of minor
importance for the other variables, we retain the assumption of three cointegrating vectors and
estimate the VECM again in five lags in differences11. The variance decompositions of TFP
and hours are given in Figure 18 and a selection of the resulting impulse responses
(corresponding to those in Figure 12) is given in Figure 19. There is no essential change to the
results in the five-dimensional system, except a somewhat greater share of preference shocks

10
   There are also nonzero correlations with the NIPA_h preference (0.40) and money shocks (-0.39). The
correlation with the NIPA_h surprise TFP shock is essentially zero (-0.03).
11
   A Johansen test of less than three cointegrating vectors has a rather inconclusive P-value of 0.07.

                                                 28
Figure 16: FEVDs for NIPA4_pi under identification (6)
                    tfp                                                               h




                                                                                                                            monetary shock
                                                                                                                           preference shock
                                                                                                                           “IST” shock
                                                                                                                           surprise TFP shock



Figure 17: Impulse Responses for NIPA4_pi under identification (6)

           surprise TFP             surprise IST                  surprise TFP              surprise IST        preference shock               money


  tfp                                                      h


Note: The identified shocks in NIPA4_pi under identification (6) are quite different from the structural residuals retrieved elsewhere in this paper. We mechanically use the same
labels to denote the shocks, but it should be understood that the former are better thought of as linear combinations of the latter.




                                                                                       29
in the variances of TFP and hours across all horizons. We again conclude that IST-shocks
appear rather inessential for business cycle analysis.

h) The role of stock prices

Given the seemingly highly important role of news shocks for macroeconomic fluctuations
one might argue that it should be possible to replace the stock price variable used in our
analysis by any other macroeconomic variable which responds on impact to the news shock.
For instance, if consumption behaviour is a rapidly adjusting forward-looking variable as
postulated by standard theory, then consumption should well be suited to replace stock prices
in our system. We thus examine this conjecture by estimating a four-dimensional system
(denoted NIPA4_c) with consumption replacing stock prices as the second variable. The
results, cf. Figures 20 and 21, seem to confirm our conjecture, the only apparent difference
being that the money shock response of hours is not significant any more.

A closer analysis, however, reveals that this approach is only moderately successful. The
correlation of the suspected news shock extracted from this system with the news shock from
NIPA_h is a mere 0.47. While this is clearly more than its correlations with the TFP-, IFP-
and preference shocks from NIPA_h (which are all zero), its correlation with the NIPA_h
monetary shock is -0.67. This and the fact that the response of hours to the monetary shock is
not significant in this system indicates that the decomposition may project part of the
monetary shock on news, i. e. the system may have more trouble extracting news correctly
from consumption that for stock prices. This may not be too surprising in view of the vastly
different degree of attention real-world consumers and stock market traders typically pay to
news about technological advances. The TFP shock, on the other hand, seems to be correctly
identified – its correlation with its NIPA_h analogue is 0.95. As such it is interesting to see
that TFP shocks explain only a negligible share of hours variance – and mostly less than 10%
of the variance of consumption. The combined news/monetary shock clearly dominates the
variance of consumption across all horizons, and plays an important role in hours variance as
well. It still contains a substantial amount of information about future disembodied
technology (cf. the variance decomposition of tfp) and causes responses from tfp and hours in
much the same way as in the NIPA_h system.


i) Robustness with respect to identifying assumptions

Finally, we want to check the robustness of our results for the (five-dimensional) benchmark
NIPA_h system with respect to a more systematic exploration of “reasonable” identifying
assumptions where ID1, ID2 and ID3 can be seen as special cases. In particular we want to
perform this exercise to illustrate that our results are not knife edge. The intersection of the
three sets of identifying assumption used to this point is given by the restrictions R:
b13 = b14 = b15 = b45 = l14 = l15 = 0 . Moreover, we always use either restrictions
R s : b24 = b25 = 0 or R l : l24 = l25 = 0 to express the idea that pi is a technology process.
Thus we have essentially two basic sets of identifying restrictions, R1 := R ∪ R s and
 R2 := R ∪ R l , each of which comprises eight restrictions. Just identification requires two
additional restrictions. In principle, the logic we have used to this point(based on the structure
of standard macro-models) suggests that one should be able to use any two of the following
six restrictions in set A to identify the shocks of interest, where A:
b12 = b21 = b23 = l12 = l21 = l23 = 0 . Note that ID1, ID2 and ID3 are all based on using
restrictions from this set.
                                               30
Figure 18: FEVDs for NIPA4_sp (NIPA_h without pi)
                     tfp                                           h




                                                                                        monetary shock
                                                                                        preference shock
                                                                                        news shock
                                                                                        surprise TFP shock



Figure 19: Impulse Responses for NIPA4_sp (NIPA_h without pi)

        surprise TFP           news                 surprise TFP        news   preference shock       money


  tfp                                        h




                                                                   31
Figure 20: FEVDs for NIPA4_c (c replaces sp)
                    tfp                                               c                                         h




top of bar to bottom:     monetary shock           preference shock        news shock    surprise TFP shock


Figure 21: Impulse Responses for NIPA4_c (c replaces sp)

         surprise TFP           news                  surprise TFP           news       preference shock      money


  tfp                                          c




                                                                      32
There are 15 different pairs of restrictions in A which can be added to R1 or R2 to achieve
identification. We will study each of these cases. This gives 30 different identification
schemes (among them ID1, ID2, and ID3). Not all of these schemes actually achieve
identification, since in some cases e. g. the rank condition for local identification can be
violated, cf. Lütkepohl (2005, proposition 9.4). But most schemes work and we summarize
the results by reporting the shares of hours variance at 8 quarters explained by the two
surprise technology shocks and the news shock, cf. Table 4.

It turns out that 24 of the 30 possible sets of restrictions are sufficient for identification, with
22 of these schemes delivering very similar results as those found so far in terms of FEVDs
and impulse responses. In particular, the third shock in the system, which we interpret as news
shock, is found to be of major importance for hours variance (around 60%), while the first
two shocks, interpreted as surprise technology shocks, are not (less than 10%). In all cases,
we find that the monetary and the preference shock combined account for about 30% of
fluctuations. For two identifications, however, it is the second shock which is dominating
hours variance. These two cases have in common that they both use the restrictions
b21 = l21 = 0 , which imply that TFP-shocks are orthogonal to pi on impact and in the long run.
This result may appear to suggest that IST should not be dismissed too quickly as a
potentially important source of fluctuations. However, a closer look suggests that this is likely
the wrong inference. First, let us note that under these two identification schemes, it is the
third shock which dominates the variance of pi at all frequencies and not the second shock.
This suggests that the third shock may more appropriately be considered the IST shock.
Furthermore, we find that the impulse response associated with the second shock in these two
cases looks almost identical to that we were previously calling the news shock. In particular,
the impulse responses indicate that following an innovation in the second shock, TFP does not
change much for about 8 quarters and then starts growing for several periods. This is precisely
the type of pattern we view as being associated with the news shock. The only difference in
these impulse responses and those that we previously interpreted as reflecting a news shock is
that in these two cases measured TFP falls slightly following an innovation in the second
shock (although the effect is not significant). Thus it seems unreasonable to interpret the
second shock in these two cases as representing an IST shock. Instead, we view the two
identification schemes based on b21 = l21 = 0 as having difficulty properly separating an IST
shock and a news shock since the only restriction imposed to separate them in this case
is b12 = 0 . However, there is no a priori reason not to believe that both the IST shock and the
news shock should have no contemporaneous effect on TFP, which explains why this
identification scheme should be ruled out.




                                                33
                                                       Table 4
                                        Robustness with respect to identification

Restrictions         b12 = 0              b21 = 0             b23 = 0              l12 = 0             l21 = 0              l23 = 0
from A
b12 = 0                                                            0.02                 0.02                                     0.02
                                               n.i.                0.06                 0.06                 n.i.                0.02
                                                                   0.63                 0.63                                     0.66
b21 = 0                                                            0.03                 0.02                0.19                 0.02
                           n.i.                                    0.06                 0.05                0.51                 0.03
                                                                   0.63                 0.65                0.02                 0.66
b23 = 0                   0.02                 0.03                                     0.06                0.02
                          0.01                 0.01                                     0.02                0.06                  n.i.
                          0.73                 0.73                                     0.63                0.63
l12 = 0                   0.02                 0.01                0.02                                     0.03                 0.01
                          0.11                 0.10                0.01                                     0.06                 0.04
                          0.63                 0.66                0.73                                     0.63                 0.66
l21 = 0                                        0.21                0.02                 0.03                                     0.02
                           n.i.                0.53                0.01                 0.12                                     0.02
                                               0.02                0.73                 0.62                                     0.66
l23 = 0                   0.02                 0.02                                     0.01                0.03
                          0.05                 0.05                 n.i.                0.06                0.05
                          0.70                 0.70                                     0.70                0.70
Results below (above) the diagonal are for identifications combining R1 (R2) and the respective row and column restrictions. Entries give the
share of hours variance at eight quarters for the TFP shock, the IST shock and the news shock (in descending order). n.i.=not identified.




6. Conclusions

The main driving forces behind macroeconomic fluctuations remain the subject of much
debate. After decades of research, not even a consensus on the relative importance of
technological versus non-technological shocks has emerged. In a structural vector error
correction exercise designed as a horserace between several main contenders we find a
surprisingly clear result: Technology matters a lot, but it is expected rather than surprise
technological progress which drives activity.

In fact, the joint contribution of surprise technology shocks to measures of TFP and IST rarely
exceeds 20% of the variance of hours, investment or consumption. News shocks, however,
often account for variance shares exceeding 50% of activity variance and generate patterns in
impulse responses and variance decompositions which strongly suggest they are essentially
technological.

This result is obtained under identification schemes where news shocks have to satisfy more
restrictions than the surprise TFP shocks or the investment specific shocks. Thus, if anything,
the horserace seems biased against news shocks. Nevertheless, news shocks not only emerge
as more important, they essentially marginalize surprise technology shocks. This result is
robust across many possible modifications in terms of specification and identification.
Previous results in the literature which emphasized the importance of surprise technology
shocks seem to be due to an identification strategy which does not include news shocks and
does not include stock prices which reveal information about expectations .



                                                                    34
In the short run, the second-most important shock is often what we call a preference shock.
This shock has mostly transitory effects, e. g. increases in activity and interest rates and
decreases in stock prices and, possibly, measured TFP. It may be well explained by a
transitory change in consumer demand which stimulates competition. We hasten to add that
similar effects might be caused by changes in the economic environment (e. g. deregulation or
globalization) rather than preference shocks. The evidence we have on this shock may be
compatible with various interpretations. At least some of them can be mapped on a transitory
change in a preference parameter and only in this broad sense do we state that preference
shocks matter for the short-run dynamics of investment and other activities.

Since money shocks are also found to explain a minor, but not negligible share of business
cycle variances, our main finding is one of four relevant macroeconomic shocks: Expectation
shocks on future TFP as the main driving force along with smaller roles for preference
shocks, monetary shocks and - particularly in the case of output - surprise TFP-shocks. As
such, it seems not advisable to reduce structural business cycle analysis to systems of
dimension three or lower as this would make it impossible to properly disentangle the main
shocks and analyze their propagation mechanisms.




                                             35
References:

Bagliano, F. C., Favero, C. A. (1998): Measuring Monetary Policy with VAR Models: An
      Evaluation, European Economic Review 42, pp. 1069-1112.
Beaudry, P., and Portier, F., (2006): Stock Prices, News and Economic Fluctuations,
      American Economic Review, Vol. 96, pp. 1293-1307
Blanchard, O. J., and Kiyotaki, N. (1987): Monopolistic Competition and the Effects of
        Aggregate Demand, American Economic Review 77, pp. 647-666.
Blanchard, O., and Quah, D., (1989): The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate Demand and
        Aggregate Supply Disturbances, American Economic Review 79, pp. 655-673.
Chari, V. V., Kehoe. P. J., McGrattan, E. R., (2008): Are structural VARs with long-run
        restrictions useful in developing business cycle theory?, Journal of Monetary
        Economics 55 (8), pp. 1337-1352.
Christiano, L. J., Eichenbaum, M., and Vigfusson, R., (2004): The Response of Hours to a
        Technology Shock: Evidence Based on Direct Measures of Technology, NBER
        Working Paper 10254.
Cummins, J., and Violante, G., (2002): Investment-Specific Technical Change in the United
      States (1947-2000): Measurement and Macroeconomic Consequences, Review of
      Economic Dynamics 5, pp. 243-284.
Fisher, J. D. M., (2003): The Technology Shocks Matter, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
      WP 2002-14, December 2003.
Fisher, J. D. M., (2006): The Dynamic Effects of Neutral and Investment-Specific Technology
      Shocks, Journal of Political Economy 114, pp. 413-451.
Galí, J., (1999): Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle: Do Technology Shocks
        Explain Aggregate Fluctuations?, American Economic Review 89, pp. 249-271.
Gordon, R., (1989): The Measurement of Durable Goods Prices, Chicago, University of
        Chicago Press.
Greenwood, J., Hercovitz, Z., Krusell, P. (1997): Long-Run Implications of Investment-
        Specific Technological Change, American Economic Review, Vol. 87, No. 3, pp. 342-
        362.
Lucke, B., (2008): Identification and Overidentification in SVECMs, Discussion Paper,
        University of Hamburg.
Lütkepohl, H., (2005): New Introduction to Multiple Time Series Analysis, Springer Verlag,
        Berlin.




                                            36
