                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 EVALUATING RUBIN'S CAUSAL MODEL FOR MEASURING THE CAPITALIZATION
                    OF ENVIRONMENTAL AMENITIES

                                         H. Allen Klaiber
                                         V. Kerry Smith

                                       Working Paper 14957
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14957


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2009




Partial support for this research was provided ASU Decision Center for a Desert City. Thanks are due
H. Spencer Banzhaf for providing an initial version of the GAMS code to implement the assignment
model. Thanks are also due Nick Kuminoff, Chris Timmins, and Randy Walsh for helpful discussions
on several aspects of this research. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by H. Allen Klaiber and V. Kerry Smith. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Evaluating Rubin’s Causal Model for Measuring the Capitalization of Environmental Amenities
H. Allen Klaiber and V. Kerry Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 14957
May 2009
JEL No. C21,D61,Q51

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper outlines a new framework for gauging the properties of quasi-experimental estimates of
the willingness to pay (WTP) for changes in environmental and other non-market amenities. As a
rule, quasi-experimental methods cannot offer alternative hypotheses to judge the quality of their quasi
random assignments of treatment and control outcomes to economic agents. Their results must be
judged by the explanation of the event used to construct the assignment and the counter examples
offered as robustness checks for the logic of each application. This paper develops a four-step procedure
for situations that rely on housing price capitalization. It is a computational analog to Chetty’s [2009]
call for considering the measurement objectives as part of evaluating the relevance of reduced versus
structural form modeling strategies. Two diverse applications are used to establish the method’s relevance
for environmental problems. The first examines the value of a conversion of land cover from xeric
to wet landscape. The second examines the clean-up of hazardous waste sites. We find that even when
quasi-experimental methods have access to statistically ideal instruments their performance in measuring
general equilibrium WTP depends on other aspects of each application.


H. Allen Klaiber
Department of Economics
Arizona State University
Tempe, Arizona 85287
allen.klaiber@asu.edu

V. Kerry Smith
Department of Economics
W.P. Carey School of Business
P.O. Box 873806
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85287-3806
and NBER
kerry.smith@asu.edu
                                                                                         2




I. Introduction

       Quasi‐experimental techniques have been proposed as offering the best

strategies for improving measures of the costs and benefits of policies that enhance

environmental quality. This assertion relies on both the logical appeal of the Rubin

[1974] causal model (RCM) and the persuasive arguments found in an array of

recent environmental applications of that logic. Nonetheless, as Greenstone and

Gayer [2009] suggest, transparency in the variation serving to identify an effect

does not in itself guarantee that this strategy measures an economically consistent

benefit or cost concept. To address this issue the analysis must be structured within

an economic model that is consistent with the design used in quasi‐experimental

methodology.

       An assessment of arguments for and against the RCM logic (versus structural

modeling) for applied welfare analysis requires a controlled setting. This paper

proposes such a framework and illustrates how it can be used. The framework

checks the economic robustness of quasi experimental applications. More

specifically, most applications of the RCM logic argue for their superiority to

structural models largely because they assume less and focus more on what is

revealed by the exogenous events identifying the outcomes analysts can observe.

Their asserted advantages arise from a composite of each author’s logical arguments

(together with the documentation of background detective work) along with the

properties of the statistics used to measure the effects of interest. Each application
                                                                                                   3

using quasi experimental methods for price capitalization has a set of assumptions

forming a composite maintained hypothesis about economic outcomes.

        Our proposal uses the information that must be assembled for applications

involving housing price capitalization to calibrate a consistent structural model.

This model provides the basis for developing a set of alternative hypotheses for

judging the economic robustness of the RCM logic. To demonstrate that our

suggestion is feasible we illustrate it with two “real” environmental applications.

The two applications were selected to describe commonly observed, but quite

different, types of environmental applications with hedonic models. The first case

has a transformation in an environmental amenity that would be treated as a

discrete influence to housing prices. This is represented with a change in the

residential landscape for a set of subdivisions from desert (xeric) land cover to

vegetative or “wet” cover with cultivated vegetation, grass, and plants requiring

water.1 The second is a discrete change in conditions due to a policy where the

effect would be represented as a change in a continuous measure of the negative

stigma (or risk) of a specific type of land use. This example is represented with the

cleanup of landfills with hazardous substances. The result is characterized using

changes in the proximity of private homes to these landfills.

        In each case estimates of actual hedonic price functions are used to calibrate

households’ preferences. A large, spatially delineated, data base on housing

1 As Imbens and Wooldridge [2009] suggest these are often the foci of quasi experiments. Indeed, in a

more recent set of comments on critiques of the RCM Imbens [2009] argues there is a clear value in
these types of evaluations, noting that: “Even if simple average effects of these interventions [as
binary treatments] are not directly answering the questions about plausible economic policies, they
are often closely related to the effects of such policies and therefore are viewed as quantities of
interest” (p.6). The bracketed phrase and a correction for a typo were inserted. “The” was originally
before “answering” in the quoted statement.
                                                                                                  4

transactions in Maricopa County, Arizona is used to define a fixed supply of houses

that is relevant for each application. This dimension of our example is important

because it illustrates how we convey to an abstract evaluation method the specific

features of the houses and neighborhoods along with the associated spatial

correlations that would be present with each application. Each situation exploits the

logic of an assignment model to represent the locational equilibria (see Wheaton

[1974]) before and after the simulated exogenous change in environmental

conditions2. The results of the assignment solutions are used to estimate the

hedonic price equilibrium with and without the exogenous changes to the amenities

involved. These data provide the basis for evaluating the quasi experimental logic

against a wide array of alternatives.

        Our results indicate Greenstone‐Gayer cautions were warranted. Three

conclusions emerge highlighting the potential importance of developing an

evaluation strategy to judge how well quasi experimental methods measure the

incremental benefits of a policy. First, for the use of a discrete change in landscape

identifying the exogenously “treated” houses that switch from dry to wet (or the

reverse), conventional cross section hedonic models dominate hedonic difference

models with or without ideal instruments that exactly identified treated and control



2 A concern with the assignment approach to representing the changes in the hedonic equilibrium
has been demonstrating the existence of unique equilibria in both the base and control solutions of
each paired experiment. Our normalization strategy assumes the parameter for income in the
indirect utility function is unity for all households. The remaining parameters are structured to be
heterogeneous and vary based on what is estimated in each example, as we explain below. This effect
and the single crossing property assure that the highest income household would be assigned to the
“best” house. This logic defines a unique starting point for computing the equilibrium prices in the
base control solutions. It reduces concerns about the uniqueness of the two equilibria. While we do
not have a formal proof of uniqueness, the logic we are applying is consistent with what would be
needed to develop one (see the logic outlined in the Epple et.al [1993] ).
                                                                                                     5

households. The instrumental variable (IV) estimator, whether using hedonic price

or a difference specification, tends to overestimate the mean general equilibrium

willingness to pay (WTP). OLS hedonic models, by contrast, underestimate the WTP,

but the errors are generally less than ten percent.

        Second, in the case of the hypothetical policies intended to represent

hazardous waste cleanups as changes in a continuous measure of a stigma or risk,

the quasi‐experimental methods – whether hedonic price or difference models ‐

provide superior estimates of the GE willingness to pay. Finally, the heterogeneity in

households’ preferences together with the role of sorting responses to exogenous

changes in local amenities imply that judgments about the relative performance of

conventional cross‐section versus quasi‐experimental methods depend on the sub‐

sample selected for these evaluations. Thus our findings for willingness to pay

estimates are consistent with Imbens [2009] recent summary of the objectives and

accomplishments of the RCM literature.3

        Our analysis is developed in five sections after this introduction. Section two

outlines our proposal and explains how the quasi‐experimental framework has been

applied to evaluate environmental policy based on housing prices. Section three

describes the specific details of the calibration template for evaluating the RCM’s

logic for non‐market valuation. Sections four and five present our results. The first

tracks an evaluation using alternative hypotheses that assume we observe how


3His objective is to respond to criticisms of what seemed to others to be an exclusive reliance on the

RCM as the only reliable approach to evaluating policy. He observes in describing what the literature
has found that: “An important insight is that in settings with heterogeneous effects, instrumental
variables do not identify the average effect of the treatment. However, as shown by IA (Imbens and
Angrist) instrumental variables methods do identify the average treatment effect for a well defined
subpopulation…”(p.4)
                                                                                       6

people sort in response to the exogenous changes in amenities. The second assumes

the evaluation would be based on hypotheses derived from tracking the price

changes of the same houses before and after a policy change that is considered as a

treatment. The last section summarizes our findings and the potential for wider use

of calibrated models in judging the robustness of quasi experimental applications.



II. Evaluating Quasi‐Experimental Strategies for Non‐Market Valuation



       Recently, Imbens and Wooldridge [2009] have decomposed the logic of the

RCM into three elements: (a) the distinction between potential and realized

outcomes; (b) the properties of assignment mechanisms that “select” treated and

control entities; and (c) the potential for interaction and / or general equilibrium

effects that might link treatment and control entities through market or non‐market

processes. Such links might confound analysts’ ability to isolate the source of

variation in the condition applied to treated subjects. We exploit the Imbens‐

Wooldridge structure in designing the features of the examples we use to describe

our methodology.



       A. Using Calibrated Preferences to Frame Alternative Hypotheses for an

          RCM Application



       Our framework has four elements. First, we follow the Cropper et al [1988]

adaptation of the Koopmans‐Beckman‐Wheaton description for how equilibrium
                                                                                          7

prices in a housing market could be computed by interactively solving an

assignment problem. Second, the actual data underlying each proposed quasi

experiment is used for model calibration. Most environmental applications

measuring economic benefits or costs of a policy (as opposed to health related

outcomes) are likely to involve housing transactions and actual site specific effects

of the policies. This process assures the spatial correlations in these features,

observed in any particular sample of the housing transactions that would be

involved in estimating the price responses to a policy, will be embedded in the

evaluation. Preferences are calibrated by linking the parameters in the preference

function used in defining the bid functions for the assignment problem to the results

from estimated hedonic price functions. Third, alternatives relevant to the specific

details of each quasi experimental application are framed as a set of scenarios that

might influence price outcomes. By using the actual data these alternatives match

the spatial attributes of the actual sample of housing units selected for each

proposed quasi experiment. The alternative hypotheses are then derived as

different simulations using the calibrated preferences for a set of households

generated to be consistent with the calibrated preference heterogeneity and a

sample of housing units spatially located to mimic the effects of each policy. Finally,

the computed equilibrium prices for baseline and treatment scenarios in each case

are used to estimate different statistical models for each scenario. In this context it

is possible to judge how the features of each alternative affect the performance of a

quasi experimental strategy for estimating the benefits (or the costs) of a policy that

is expected to influence housing prices.
                                                                                            8




        B. Concepts Measured



        For most applications associated with environmental policy questions

economists are asked to provide estimates of individuals’ willingness to pay for

changes in amenities. If we assume Vi (mi, p, q) is the ith individual’s indirect utility

function with mi the income, p a vector of prices for private goods, and q a vector of

non‐market environmental resources available to this person, then equation (1)

provides one definition for a person’s general equilibrium willingness to pay, WTPi.

For this definition we assumed the change in q, Δq , is large enough to change

relative prices for private goods (from p to p˜ ) but not income.



Vi (mi − WTPi , p˜ ,q + Δq) = Vi (mi p,q)                                           (1)



Analysts need to have estimates of the WTPi’s and costs before the policy is

undertaken. Because real experiments with random assignment are usually

technically and / or politically impossible, we must “make do” with observed

variation in q across different places or time periods. The challenge is to use

observable variables, such as the housing prices, that might reveal how differences

in q motivated people to select one place over another and what this implies for the

tradeoffs each would make for Δq . The new focus on quasi‐experimental methods

has argued these selections should also seek to mimic, as nearly as possible,
                                                                                          9

information that allows the analyst to distinguish the tradeoff of interest from other

objectives that also motivate sorting in response to differences in spatial amenities.

         There are two aspects of adapting the Imbens – Wooldridge [2009] logic to

this task. The first receives virtually all of the attention in the literature and involves

the internal validity of the estimates measuring the treatment effect. The second

focus, a key element in our evaluation template, arises because what we observed as

the “outcome measure” is not WTP. In many cases it is a housing (or land) price (or

rent).

         Greenstone and Gayer effectively summarize how the use of an instrumental

variable can address the problems posed by internal validity and the estimation

concerns for conventional approaches for estimating the capitalization of site

specific amenities into housing prices. As a result we focus on the economic concept

that is measured using estimates of the price capitalization.

         The interpretation of capitalization measures has a long history in

economics. Scotchmer’s early papers [1985, 1986] make the key points directly. For

non‐marginal changes in spatially delineated amenities she noted that “…even in the

simplest case of homogenous populations, neither the long‐run nor short‐run

benefits is a simple difference in hedonic prices.” (p. 63) The problem in linking

price capitalization with benefit measurement is not confined to short run

adjustment. Kannemoto [1985] demonstrated that price differences overestimate

long‐run benefits.

         The literature on non‐market valuation has established that the marginal

willingness to pay can be recovered from hedonic price models. However, estimates
                                                                                     10

are subject to the identification concerns raised by the quasi‐experimental literature

that are an important focus of the Greenstone‐Gayer discussion. Nonetheless, if

identification is resolved, as Scotchmer notes, “At best the observer makes local

observations, localized at the endogenous choices of the consumer.” (p. 66) Her

examples highlight how heterogeneous income among consumers, as well as

complementarity (or substitution) relationships in preferences for the amenity, the

amount of land, or other spatially delineated attributes confound the relationship

between price measures and willingness to pay. Equally important, other

differences among consumers’ preferences distinguish the appropriate short run

measure of benefits from price capitalization measures. Indeed, even in the case

when one postulates that the “correct” hedonic price function implies a constant

marginal price, this does not mean the underlying marginal willingness to pay

function will be constant.

       Greenstone and Gallagher’s [2008] use of price capitalization for land

improvements to estimate the benefits of those improvements illustrates how the

issues raised by Scotchmer are important to the economic meaning of what is

measured by the RCM logic. Figure 1 reproduces part of their figure 1b for the case

of a perfectly inelastic supply of residential land. Assume an improvement takes

place in the site specific amenities relevant to this land. The demand for land would

increase (in the example represented in the figure from D0 to D1 ). Greenstone and

Gallagher assume the effect is small enough that the hedonic price function does not

change and they argue the gain is measured as P0 P1 DC –“…the mean change in

prices times the number of residential parcels….” (p.965) Their argument and the
                                                                                                    11

implicit assumptions of the diagram are subtle. Conventional practice would assume

the gain from the improvement in site specific amenities would be measured by the

increase in the consumer surplus fromP0 AC to P0 BDC or ABDC. The change in land

prices from P0 to P1 affects how this gain is divided between residents and

landowners. Greenstone and Gallagher’s argument is that the gain is perfectly

captured with the price capitalization. This outcome is consistent with their diagram

due to the parallel shift of the demand function (and the area of the parallelogram P0

P1 DC)4. If we alter the assumed effect of the site specific amenity on the demand for

land –assuming the demand pivoted at A, instead of a parallel shift, the

correspondence between price capitalization effects and the benefits of the amenity

change no longer holds. This difference illustrates in simple terms the Scotchmer

arguments5.

        These results are recognized by those proposing structural and reduced form

models based on hedonic price functions. What is at issue in these discussions is the

“size” of the exogenous change providing the identifying variation, the

interrelationships between the attributes of houses in preferences and the spatial

correlations inherent in the supply of homes for each application. Considering the

first of these, the exogenous change linked to the environmental service or amenity



4 We are grateful to Chris Timmins for reminding us of this relationship that is central to using the

diagram to illustrate the arguments Scotchmer’s arguments.
5 A closely related set of issues are raised in Starrett [1981] analysis of how to interpret price

capitalization measures. He provides two conditions that guarantee the benefits of an exogenous
change or project will be translated to land rents thru the intensive margin. The first he describes a
requiring the benefits be intramarginal. Or in the terminology of revealed preference approaches to
non‐market valuation he assumes weak complementarity holds for households in the boundary
region. Second he assumes residents do not sort within the town according to their relative
preference. Neither of these assumptions will be satisfied by our framework. Sorting mitigatres
capitalization. pp.313‐314.
                                                                                                  12

of interest, that is also inducing the price change, the variation needs to be sufficient

(and exogenous) to assure the analysis has successfully identified a casual change in

outcome of interest. However, large changes, such as those associated with past,

exogenous, policy outcomes, can alter the economic interpretation of the measure

attributed to the treatment effect. Price capitalization, as we suggested, is not

guaranteed to measure either the marginal or the incremental (for large changes)

willingness to pay. Nor does it relate to either a short run or long run measure of the

benefits associated with a given policy change. Its interpretation depends on the

assumptions we make about how the amenity is measured; how it contributes to

individual utility; how diverse preferences for the amenity are across households

being represented with the market effects of the amenity change; and how the

markets, in the case of housing price capitalization, come to equilibrium. To address

these interpretation issues we need an analytical structure with a set of maintained

assumptions for each of the factors contributing to the equilibrium market

adjustment. This structure is what we propose. It is a computational analog to the

rubric that Chetty [2008] outlined for basing the choices between reduced form and

structural models on the ability of each to measure the economic concept sought in

each application6. His strategy uses an analytical framework for policy interactions

that alter prices in accepted ways.

        For environmental policies there are different types of connections between

the non‐market services and the private goods (i.e. the land and housing) bundled

with them. As a result, the prices for these private goods are affected in a variety of

6He highlighted the importance of a set of strategic assumptions assuring that the reduced form
estimates involved offer a sufficient economic statistic.
                                                                                                 13

ways by the policies of interest. Thus, in these cases, an interpretation of what can

be measured is more complicated and, in large part, specific to each application.

Analysts do not know what would be a robust specification for the correlation of the

important non‐market amenities with other site and housing attributes. Our

strategy addresses these limitations by using the actual details of each application to

calibrate a model for the process that allows outcomes to be simulated. We can then

evaluate whether quasi‐experimental methods with housing price capitalization can

be interpreted as a sufficient statistic for the general equilibrium willingness to pay

for the policies involved.




       C. The Assignment Problem



       The formal definition for a housing market equilibrium using the assignment

logic maintains the indirect utility function in equation (1) can be redefined in terms

of a vector of housing attributes, Aj, a vector of household characteristics, Ci, with j

an index for houses and i the index for households as in equation (2).



       ν ij = Vi (mi − B ji , A j , C i )                                                 (2)




B ji (Vi ) is household i’s bid for house j with its utility level at vij . Assume X ji = 1 if

household i occupies house j and X ji = 0 otherwise. An assignment equilibrium

arises when there is (for a given, fixed supply of N houses and fixed number, N,
                                                                                            14

households) a set of utilities ν* = (ν1*, ν2*, … νN*) and housing prices (P1*, P2*, … PN*)

with the NxN matrix X such that the four equations in (3) are satisfied.



B ji (v i *) = P j * if X ji = 1 for all j and i



B ji (v i *) ≤ P j * if X ji = 0 for all j and i




∑
    N
          X ji = 1   j=1, …, N
    i=1




∑
    N
          X ji = 1   i=1, …, N                                                      (3)
    j=1




            The first component of equation (3) equates the equilibrium price for each

house to the maximum willingness to pay of the household occupying it. The second

equation states that no one is willing to pay more for a house than the person

assigned to the house. The last two equations imply that all households have houses

and all houses are occupied, respectively.

            Our calibration of preferences, selection of the supply of housing units, and

authentic spatial delineation of each policy assure that our computation analog

offers information to judge the performance of quasi‐experimental methods in each

application as part of judging their robustness. The specifics of each of our examples

are discussed in the next section. Each requires two solutions to the assignment

model. The first corresponds to a baseline condition defined by the actual spatial
                                                                                        15

distribution of the amenity (or disamenity) associated with the sample of houses

selected for each problem. The second corresponds to changes in the spatially

delineated amenity that are associated with discrete policies.

       Our design allows for household specific preference parameters – based on

applying the Brown and Rosen [1982] logic for each application. Because each set of

preference parameters is assumed to represent a household we can track the re‐

sorting of these agents among houses from baseline to policy solutions. This

tracking allows two separate interpretations of how a quasi‐experimental analysis

might take place. The first matches each household recording their baseline and

policy scenario housing assignments and associated prices. The second matches

each house keeping track of the differences in the households (and their

characteristics) assigned to each house in the baseline and policy equilibrium

solutions.

       For the first of these matches, with the household held constant, it is clear

that households’ preferences are the same and the challenge is to use different

housing choices made by each household following the change to recover their

willingness to pay for the environmental change. In the second type of match, with

the house the same, different households may be present in the baseline and policy

solutions. As a result, the challenge for estimation is to ask how the capitalization

relates to each household’s willingness to pay for the environmental change.

       The first of these matches corresponds more closely to applications of the

quasi‐experimental framework in labor and health related applications than it does

to those for environmental policies. The second is comparable (except for the level
                                                                                     16

of aggregation) to the hedonic applications to air quality (Chay and Greenstone

[2005]) and the cleanup of hazardous waste landfills (Greenstone and Gallagher

[2008]).

       These contrasting uses of the benchmark and policy samples highlight the

reason why Imbens and Wooldridge discuss the importance of distinguishing

general heterogeneity in the unit effect of a treatment from heterogeneity that is

causal. For benefit measurement we often assume households have different

willingness to pay for changes in amenities. In the context of models that use

capitalization measures to estimate an average effect, the equilibrium sorting of

households influences what can be recovered and the Imbens’ argument (cited

earlier) for the importance of distinguishing the local average treatment effects.

       In the more typical case where the analyst tracks the house – the households

are different! This is the issue explicitly raised in the conclusions from Scotchmer’s

analysis. We observe the re‐valuation of the properties due to the effect of the

change on the equilibrium but to measure the incremental benefits associated with

the change we need to be able to recover the willingness to pay of the household

who occupies the house after the change.

       Some applications argue the change is small in relation to the market so

households don’t move. This is the implicit assumption in figure 1. It is also what is

assumed in cases where the marginal price from a hedonic price function is used to

estimate marginal willingness to pay (and linear approximations used for the

benefit measures for large changes). While this logic may be a reasonable

characterization of the relationship between the effect estimated with a hedonic
                                                                                       17

price equation and the marginal willingness to pay, it does not consider the ability of

the statistical model to identify the actual effect of the amenity. This latter concern is

the focus of the quasi‐experimental literature. Simultaneity and omitted variables

confound the ability to isolate these effects. Under that argument an exogenous

change is needed to distinguish the effect of the amenity from the endogenously

determined matching that lead to the cross sectional hedonic function. This conflict

is one motivation for developing our computational analog to Chetty’s framework.

Within such a framework it is possible to evaluate the relative importance of the

statistical limitations in interpreting the welfare properties of capitalization

measures for large changes in spatially delineated amenities versus the econometric

limitations in assuming estimates from a snapshot of the equilibrium isolate reliable

estimates for the economic tradeoffs.



III. Development of the Evaluation Framework



       A. Estimation of Hedonic Price Functions



       Before getting into the specific details of each application, it is important to

acknowledge that each is a “story.” Our primary interest is illustrating our

evaluation method. Our approach provides insight into what might be the expected

error bounds for a benefit interpretation of the capitalization measures derived

from each quasi‐experiment. Thus we seek to assure the relative magnitudes of the

calibrated parameters are consistent with the data and what would be observed in
                                                                                          18

practice. We also want the supply structure of houses to represent the correlations

in housing and location specific attributes. Our estimates of each hedonic price

function are used to define the “true” value of the preference parameters.

       The first of our examples involves the tradeoffs households are prepared to

make to live in “wet” or irrigated landscapes as compared to desert (xeric)

landscapes in metropolitan Phoenix. Given the scarcity of water, this question has

attracted increasing policy interest. Land cover in the Phoenix area is predominantly

xeric due to the high summer temperatures and limited rainfall. Nonetheless for

historic reasons, due in part to the allocation of water rights to agriculture, a large

number of residential neighborhoods consist of predominantly “wet” landscaping.

Recent research (see Smith et al [2009]) has shown that households are willing to

make significant tradeoffs to reduce minimum summer nighttime temperatures in

the Phoenix metropolitan area. In addition, Brazel et. al. [2007] have shown that

water intensive land cover is associated with cooler nighttime temperatures.

       We use these results to motivate our first application. Using land cover data

developed at the Central Arizona Project Long Term Ecological Research Site (CAP‐

LTER), together with the Stefanov et al. [2001] classification system, we matched

land cover designation to individual housing parcels. Because temperature is also

related to land‐cover, we developed predictions for minimum summer

temperatures. Appendix A outlines the details. Our prediction process assures that

the temperature measure is correlated with land cover. Both are specified in the

hedonic price function and treated as separate arguments of the household

preference function.
                                                                                     19

       Our estimates for the hedonic price function are based on housing sales from

1980 through 2004 in Maricopa County (before the “housing bubble” in the area).

We estimate a semi‐log specification for the price equation using housing attributes

– square feet of living space, lot size in acres, number of stories, age of home,

presence of a pool, presence of a garage, and two landscape‐related variables – a

dummy variable for the wet / xeric classification and our estimate of the July

minimum temperature for each parcel. We also measured the distance to the central

business district. The model included fixed effects for the year of the home sale.

There are 398, 200 observations and as one might expect (with this large a sample)

we are able to estimate the housing and site attributes with considerable precision.

Table 1 reports summary statistics for the sample as well as our estimates of the

first stage hedonic model we use for the landscape application.

       Our second application was designed to consider a continuous measure for

the disamenity associated with hazardous waste sites. We selected the inverse of

distance to the closest site with hazardous substances as a measure of the

disamenity. This selection was partially motivated by the recent Greenstone‐

Gallagher study calling into question most past hedonic analysis and because the

Phoenix area offers an ideal location for studying this issue. The Phoenix area

contains no less than seven sites on the National Priorities List (NPL). Our analysis

considered three of these sites: Motorola 52nd street, 19th Avenue Landfill, and

Indian Bend Wash. Appendix B provides a brief description of the three sites. As

shown in figure 1, the Motorola and Indian Bend sites are located relatively close to

each other, while the 19th Avenue Landfill site is located away from other NPL sites.
                                                                                                      20

We use these geographic features to vary the effects of cleanup on our measure of

the disamenity effects of proximity to a hazardous waste site.7 For this application

we limit our sample of housing sales in Phoenix to the years 1990 to 1999. This

selection assures that the seven hazardous waste sites were listed as NPL sites and

known to the public. There were 242,827 single family residential transactions

during this period. In addition to the housing attributes used for the landscape

application, we included city and block group fixed effects to account for other

spatially varying unobservable factors that could impact housing prices, as well as

temporal fixed effects. Table 2 reports the sample characteristics and the estimates

for the first stage semi‐log specification in this case.



        A. Preference Estimates and Simulating Household Heterogeneity



        Following Brown and Rosen [1982], if we assume a common preference

structure together with independent identifying variation distinguishing marginal

price and virtual price equations for attributes, hedonic price functions can be used

to estimate preference parameters8. Equation (4) provides the preference

specification of our example. It is the Generalized Leontief function expressed in

terms of housing attributes (the Ajk’s), household income (mi), and the rental price

of housing type k (Pk ).


7 This design is intended to reflect the concerns Nancy Bockstael raised with the Greenstone‐

Gallagher use of census aggregates in attempting to detect the effects of cleanup of hazardous waste
sites on housing values.
8 Here we are using the algebraic logic and not requiring the exogenous variation distinguishing

marginal price and virtual price functions, since the objective is to calibrate a preference function for
gauging the robustness of each quasi experiment to different alternative hypotheses.
                                                                                                   21




         L
ν ik = ∑ α j A jk
                       1                           1
                           2   + β (mi − Pk )          2
                                                                                             (4)
         j =1




The virtual price function for an attribute, for example A1, (with ПA1 the virtual price

for A1 )is then given as in equation (5).



                                               1
         ν ikA         ⎛ α ⎞⎛ m − Pk      ⎞        2
Π A1 =          1
                    = ⎜⎜ 1 ⎟⎟⎜⎜           ⎟⎟                                (5)
          ν ikm        ⎝ β ⎠⎝ A1k          ⎠



Or taking the logarithm of both sides we have equation (6).



              α
ln Π A1 = ln⎛⎜ 1 ⎞⎟ + 1 ln(m − Pk ) − 1 ln Π 1k                             (6)
             ⎝ β⎠      2               2




In general the parameter β cannot be separately identified from the α j ’s9. In our

case we normalized it to unity. We estimate the preference parameters for all of the

attributes jointly, using the estimates from the marginal price equations for each



9This same logic could be adapted with alternative preference specifications. We selected the
generalized Leontief because it has advantages over the translog in representing substitution
patterns between the attributes of differentiated goods when these substitution elasticities are
relatively small. In a related application Kuminoff, Parameter and Pope [2009] (KPP) evaluated the
sensitivity of the Cropper Deck and McConnell[1988] conclusions about the properties of alternative
hedonic specifications to omitted variables. The KPP study considers whether fixed effect and
temporal differences alter the guidance offered by Cropper et al. KPP found their conclusions on the
effects of omitted variables and spatial fixed effects were not influenced by the functional form used
to characterize household preferences. While our objectives are different, their findings suggest that
consideration of a wide array of functional specification may not need to be a component of the
evaluation rubric we are proposing for quasi experimental applications.
                                                                                     22

hedonic function. The resulting estimates for the αj’s provide the basis for

calibrating the preference functions for each of our applications. The estimated

covariance matrix for the estimates of the α’s provides the basis for introducing

heterogeneity in preferences across the households in our simulation. Our estimate

for household income is derived from the Census and corresponds to the block

group mean assigned to each house within a particular block group. Housing price is

annualized at a rate of 11%. Appendix C reports the specific estimates for the

second stage hedonic preference estimation. We considered all of our experiments

using the estimated heterogeneity as well as greater levels of heterogeneity, induced

by scaling the covariance structure by a factor of ten. This increase did not alter any

of our findings. As a result, our models are based on the heterogeneity estimated for

the sample in each application.



       B. Samples of Houses



       Both of our examples are based on samples of 1000 houses from the same

Phoenix area used for the hedonic models. For the first experiment, we identified

23,000 unique subdivisions from the Maricopa County assessor GIS files. For each

subdivision, we calculate the percentage of homes classified as either “wet” or

desert and restrict attention to subdivisions with a minimum of 25 single family

residential parcels. For each of those subdivisions, we define a subdivision as wet if

at least 90% of the houses within it are classified wet and we define a desert

subdivision as having no wet houses. Using the reduced sample of houses with only
                                                                                       23

wet and dry subdivisions, 20 houses were selected from each of 25 wet and 25 xeric

subdivisions.10 By selecting subdivisions that are either wet or xeric, rather than just

selecting 1000 houses randomly, our sample reflects unobserved spatial correlation

between distinct types of subdivisions that would be expected in an actual

application of the quasi‐experimental methodology to estimate the economic effects

of a landscape amenity on housing prices.

          Our strategy for the second experiment was also structured to portray the

spatial array of houses in relation to NPL sites in a way that reflects proximity in

Maricopa County. We focus on three hazardous waste sites that we identified earlier

as important to our experiments. 500 houses were randomly selected based on

being located within 3 miles of both Indian Bend Wash and the Motorola 52nd Street

plant. The remaining 500 houses are randomly drawn from within 3 miles of the

19th Avenue Landfill and are not within three miles of any other hazardous waste

site. Furthermore, our selection criteria assured that we compiled 250 houses

whose closest site was Indian Bend and 250 houses whose closest site was

Motorola. As our preference structure assumes the disamenity effect is for the

nearest hazardous waste site, we do not allow for effects from the more distant site

even though it is within 3 miles of each house.



          C. Design of Experiments




10   Only wet houses were selected from wet neighborhoods.
                                                                                        24

       As noted above the landscape treatment assumes a discrete change in

conditions. Half of the baseline wet homes switch to desert landscape and half the

xeric to wet. The instruments in this case correspond to dummy variables

identifying the specific homes switching from wet to dry or the reverse. The second

case involving the cleanup of hazardous waste sites can describe a wider array of

alternative implications for the resulting dis‐amenity effect influencing housing

prices. Here the non‐market effect is represented through a continuous variable (i.e.

the inverse distance to the closest site). As a result, the calibrated preference

specification for the hazardous waste case was used in two separate ways. Both

hazardous waste experiments share a common baseline with different assumed

treatment effects. In the first experiment we specify that the Motorola site present

in the baseline hedonic price function was cleaned up leading to a change in distance

to the closest site for a subset of the houses. The houses whose initial closest site

was Motorola become closest to the Indian Bend site after the cleanup. Thus the

quality change is represented as an increase in the distance to the closest site with

hazardous substances. Figure 2 displays the positioning of the two sites along with

the overlap in the areas with homes that could be affected by the cleanup of one of

the sites. This overlap is the basis for a cleanup altering the site which is closest to a

subset of the homes (i.e. some of the ones closet to Motorola become closer to

Indian Bend when the Motorola site is cleaned up).

       The second treatment maintains a policy that simultaneously changes two

sites and thus the new prices would reflect sorting in response to both changes as

they affect different houses in the set of 1000 contributing to the equilibrium. One of
                                                                                        25

the changes involves the assumed cleanup of the Motorola site, as before. For those

houses close to the Motorola site, their closest site is once again the Indian Bend

site. The second cleanup is based on the 19th Avenue Landfill. To maintain an

isolated NPL site for a comparison following the cleanup, we divide the 500 houses

selected near the 19th Avenue site into two groups of 250 houses, chosen randomly.

In effect, this converts the single, isolated 19th Avenue Landfill site into two isolated

sites with an identical structure for the underlying unobserved spatial correlation.

The policy cleans up only one of these sites, reducing the dis‐amenity effect of

proximity to zero. Thus, while there is a differential effect for each of the houses

close to this site (because in the baseline they are all different distances from the

site), after the treatment some houses no longer experience an effect of any

hazardous waste site influencing the preferences of those simulated households

living near the cleaned up site.

       The analysis challenge in the first cleanup case arises because a subset of the

houses close to Indian Bend in the treated sample experienced an improvement. The

analyst using the ex post cross sectional sample would not know which ones. For the

second case distance changes mean different things depending on which site was

cleaned up. While the preference specification treats them as affecting distance to

the disamenity and thus they would have equivalent effects, this need not be the

case and the analyst does not have this information when specifying instruments for

separating each potential policy change. This is important because we can define

different types of instruments to reflect the exogenous identifying information
                                                                                        26

associated with the treatment that would be added as part of the logic of the quasi

experimental method.

       For the case of the experiments measuring the cleanup effects for hazardous

waste sites, we have several different instruments. In the first of these experiments,

cleaning a single site, it would be the identification of which of the homes close to

Indian Bend in the treated sample were initially close to Motorola and therefore

received the cleanup. For the second example, this variable along with the

identification of the houses close to the isolated site that was cleaned could be used

as instruments. These two instruments can be compared to the situation where we

simply have a dummy variable identifying that a house is close (in the baseline

sample) to a site that was “cleaned‐up”. The issue we consider is whether this

distinction enhances the properties of the quasi experimental estimates.



       D. Reduced Form Models



       Our experimental design allows two different ways of interpreting the

treatment components of each of our experiments. Each has different implications

for the reduced form models used to estimates the effects of a treatment on

equilibrium housing prices. The first matches the baseline and treatment price

equilibrium by the simulated household. This formulation, as we noted, is more

consistent with the objective of measuring the willingness to pay for each change

but implies we observe the household in different homes. For hedonic applications,

to our knowledge, this level of resolution simply does not exist in any of the existing
                                                                                       27

applications.11 The second approach matches houses and is more consistent with

the practice adopted for environmental applications. It implies that potentially

different households will occupy each house in the benchmark and treated

solutions. For each situation a somewhat different set of models is likely to

characterize what would be used in practice to implement the quasi‐experimental

method. We will not attempt to consider every possible alternative. Instead, a

representative set of models are used: single cross sectional models, difference

models, and instrumental variable models used to represent the quasi‐experimental

methods. In practice the specifications of this later group can be variations on one of

the first two types. The results reported in the next two sections were selected to

document a set of general conclusions that emerge from our experiments.



           E. What is the Standard?



           The final issue to be considered in evaluating our models concerns what we

assume is the true value to be measured. Our experiments assume each household

has different preference parameters, income, and thus will have a different

willingness to pay for the environmental changes represented in each experiment.

As a result, our standard could be the average of these values. Alternatively, if we

assume the policy is a change in a site‐specific amenity – we might use the “true”

willingness to pay of those observed to be directly affected by the change. This

distinction is important because the matched samples reflect the policy’s effects in


11   This matching is more characteristic of the applications in labor economics.
                                                                                     28

different ways. When we consider the same households in the baseline and treated

circumstances we could consider individuals selecting houses with the improved

state. By contrast, with matched houses we could consider willingness to pay of

households in the affected houses before or after the exogenous change. This is an

important element in the Kuminoff and Pope [2009] discussion of the results of

what can be expected from empirical models of capitalization. Hedonic models

estimated with the baseline sample reveal marginal willingness to pay for small

changes in attributes before the “large” exogenous treatment, while those after are

for the prices defining the new equilibrium. This result is consistent with the point

raised by Schotchmer and identified in Kuminoff and Pope’s extension to Epple’s

[1995] analytical derivation of the hedonic price function. To account for these

issues, our summary includes both sample means and sub‐sample results to allow

for comparisons.



IV. Results – Match on Individuals



       As our discussion to this point has suggested, there are a number of aspects

of the property value capitalization framework that distinguish it from the

traditional one used to describe quasi‐experimental methods. In this case, none of

the three Imbens‐Wooldridge attributes exactly “fit” the conventional setting. The

potential outcome that is measured, even under ideal conditions, does not

correspond to what we would like to estimate. The treatment is usually assigned to

houses (or groups of houses) while estimates of the tradeoffs are what households
                                                                                     29

would make. These tradeoff measures should be the focus if the objective is to

measure the benefits from a policy.

       Everyone in the market “experiences” the treatment through the interactions

that define a hedonic equilibrium. Assuming the household in a treated house is the

only one experiencing the effect ignores this general equilibrium process. Equally

important stratification at spatial thresholds can arise as a byproduct of sorting to a

new equilibrium. For these reasons we evaluated the two sets of equilibrium prices

in each experiment in two ways – (a) matching the simulated households with

information on the houses they selected in the baseline and treatment equilibria and

(b) matching the houses with the information on which households occupy them in

these two situations. This section describes our findings for the case of matching the

households before and after the simulated treatments for each of our three

experiments.

       Our preference specification assures a closed form expression for the

willingness to pay measure associated with each policy experiment. In each case we

assume the willingness to pay is for the change in the environmental service we

seek to measure with the treatment effect. We adopt a general equilibrium

perspective and view each change as a discrete transformation in the conditions.

Thus, for the landscape case the tradeoff is for an irrigated (or wet) set of conditions

and the general equilibrium dimension arises because of re‐sorting, a new set of

house prices, and an income effect to homeowners that arise due to the price

changes in their initially assigned houses.
                                                                                                    30

        The two experiments involving sites with hazardous substances use a

continuous index to represent the dis‐amenity effect. They involve the inverse of the

distance to the closest site. For the first experiment we assume policy leads to the

cleanup of the Motorola site. This change will alter the closest site for those houses

closest to the Motorola site. As noted earlier, after the simulated clean‐up they will

be closest to the Indian Bend site. Inverse distance enters household preferences so

this policy implies a different change for each house. Moreover, with sorting,

households can relocate. Some of the households closest to Indian Bend following

the cleanup of Motorola will be the same ones that were closest to Indian Bend

before the simulated policy (i.e. in the baseline case). Others will not have moved

houses but directly experience the policy. Still others will re‐locate into houses that

are now closer to Indian Bend. Each group of households will experience different

types of changes along with price changes implied by the new equilibrium.

        The second hazardous waste policy involving the clean‐up of multiple

landfills has two types of changes. For some houses, closest to the cleaned up

component of the 19th Avenue Landfill, the disamenity effect is removed by the

treatment. In these cases the inverse distance measure is zero after the policy for

these houses12. For houses closest to the Motorola site, the change is the same as

with the first hazardous waste experiment. Cleanup implies these houses will now

be closest to the Indian Bend site. Both site cleanups contribute in the same way to

preferences – a change in inverse distance. In addition to accounting for the initial


12 Our preference specification does not treat this case differently. Some studies have argued that the
elimination of a stigma or dis‐amenity has a larger effect than simply reducing the disamenity effect
to zero. To consider this type of effect would require a different preference specification.
                                                                                       31

cleanups, households can relocate thereby adding to the complexity associated with

the general equilibrium perspective which takes explicit account of re‐sorting in

response to large changes.

       The simultaneous changes to the two sites are considered as one experiment

because the analyst could decide to represent these types of changes differently. We

discuss the results from each experiment separately using the individual matched

sample and then offer a comparative summary at the end of this section.



       A. Landscape Findings



       Table 3 presents the mean, median, and thresholds for the 5 and 95

percentiles for the true willingness to pay and the same statistics for each model’s

estimates of the willingness to pay. These findings are reported for the overall

sample and for a sub‐sample confined to households living in homes with irrigation

after the change. Both linear and semi‐log specifications are used for cross sectional

hedonic, difference, and the instrumental variable estimates. The first column in

each of our results tables identifies the true value for the willingness to pay and then

the model specification used for each of the models used. The second column

describes the sample used to construct the summary statistics. The third provides

the specification used for the empirical model and the fourth identifies the

instruments used in the IV models. The remaining columns provide the summary

statistics. For the semi‐log estimates with qualitative independent variables we use

the Halvorsen‐Palmquist [1980] interpretation for the estimated coefficient for the
                                                                                       32

dummy variable along with Goldberger’s [1968] suggested correction for bias with

logarithmic transformations.

       The implications are direct and robust in that they hold for a wide range of

models and sub‐samples. The cross sectional hedonic models, whether on the

baseline sample or using the equilibrium prices after the change, offer the best

estimates of the mean willingness to pay. The errors with hedonic models range

from 1.8% to 5.7% using the full sample means. All of the hedonic models with

instruments intended to mimic the quasi experimental logic in this case are inferior

to these simple cross sectional strategies and yield estimates for the mean WTP that

exceed the true mean by twenty‐nine percent or more for the full sample. There is

some relative improvement in the difference and instrumental variable models for

the sample in the irrigated houses in the treatment equilibrium. This improvement

seems to arise because the true value for mean willingness to pay is larger for this

group and the estimates remain about the same. The simple hedonic models remain

superior but in this case understate the true value by about four percent with the

treatment sample offering the best estimate.

       The models considered include specifications using price differences in

linear and semi‐log form, as well as instrumental variable models using both

specifications with several instrument definitions. We refer to one formulation as

involving a “general” instrument because it assumes knowledge of whether a house

changed its state between baseline and treated samples. It does not identify whether

the change was from a desert to an irrigated sub‐division or the reverse. An

unrestricted set of instruments assumes that these two changes can be
                                                                                     33

distinguished. In general, models based on the unrestricted information are

superior.

       The true willingness to pay measures span a wide range and none of these

reduced form models is able to track individual heterogeneity in the true values. At

best, they offer imprecise measures of average willingness to pay. The bottom line

conclusion from this experiment would be that a hedonic price model estimated

under baseline conditions without adjustment for potential endogeneity provides a

superior estimate for the overall mean willingness to pay. A hedonic applied to the

treatment sample is superior in estimating willingness to pay for households

selecting irrigated homes after the treatment. Nonetheless, the difference in before

and after hedonic estimates is small and substantially less than the error in the

quasi‐experimental estimates.



       B. Cleanup of One Hazardous Waste Site



       Table 4 reports the same summary statistics for the “true” willingness to pay

as well as several models accounting for the cleanup of the Motorola site. Our design

implies 250 houses experience the cleanup. About forty percent of the households in

these affected homes (85 of 250) move to new locations. Thus, re‐sorting is an

important element in understanding the results. Of those who move the majority

(246 of the 250) select homes that are close to Indian Bend, the closest landfill after

the simulated cleanup. This re‐allocation of simulated households is important

when we consider analysis of the results matched by house. In this case identifying
                                                                                          34

the house affected by the policy does not assure the household in that house will be

the same before and after the change. This difference will not have a large effect on

the marginal willingness to pay but can be expected to affect the use of these results

to approximate the general equilibrium willingness to pay for site cleanup.

       For this experiment the quasi‐experimental methods, using the first

difference specification that includes a fixed effect identifying whether the initial

location is a house affected by the policy together with the changes in other housing

attributes, offers the best estimates for mean willingness to pay. This method

exploits an ideal instrument that assumes knowledge of whether each individual

initially lived in a house affected by the policy. The linear specification has about a

4.5% overstatement. With the semi‐log specification the error for the model’s

estimate of the mean general equilibrium WTP increases to 8.6%. The conventional

cross section hedonic and first difference models (ignoring the instrument)

understate the willingness to pay and are inferior estimates with errors exceeding

sixteen percent.

       One might argue that comparisons for the full sample are less relevant than

for the households in the homes affected by the policy after the simulated cleanup.

This argument would be consistent with a focus on local average treatment effects.

Their choices reveal greater concern about proximity to sites with hazardous

substances. The second set of results in Table 4 present the findings for this

subsample. As expected, the “true” general equilibrium willingness to pay is larger

but the relative ranking of methods does not change. As with the full sample the

relative superiority of the quasi‐experimental method relies on both the instrument
                                                                                      35

and the fixed effect identifying whether the house was one impacted by the cleanup

policy.



          C. Cleanup of Two Hazardous Waste Sites



          The second hazardous waste example introduces a number of complexities

for the evaluation problem. The policy is assumed to impact two sites in different

ways. As a result, the GE sorting responses are more complex. In these cases half of

the houses near the 19th Avenue Landfill are no longer impacted by the negative

effects of a site with hazardous waste. Those near the Motorola site experience the

same type of change as in our one site example. That is, with the Motorola site

cleaned they are now close to the Indian Bend site. Thus, households can sort into

houses that are not close to a hazardous waste site or they can alter their proximity

to a site. In the one‐site scenario every house had some disamenity consequences

from proximity to a waste site. The true GE benefit measure is capturing the change

from the baseline distance to the 19th Avenue Landfill to a situation with no effect

on household preferences

          Table 5 summarizes the results. Consider first the implications of adding

sites with the prospect of avoiding the disamenities due to sites with hazardous

waste for the market equilibrium. Over 200 of the original households in these

cleaned 19th Avenue houses remained when they faced the opportunities posed

with altered distances, housing attributes, and prices. Thirty‐eight moved accepting

proximity to a site in exchange for other desirable attributes – housing attributes or
                                                                                      36

prices that were available as a result of the new equilibrium alternatives. In this

scenario we have two GE willingness to pay measures: a distance change and the

elimination of the effect of a site (a distance change to zero). These are compared for

the full sample and the two sub‐samples corresponding to households in houses

initially experiencing either the change in the Motorola cleanup or those

experiencing the 19th Avenue cleanup.

       An important issue in interpreting of these findings is the selection of the

sample used in evaluating performance. Using the standard of households

experiencing the policy, the quasi‐experimental models with the difference

specification, whether linear or semi‐log, using one instrument (identifying houses

that experience any cleanup of a site) provide superior estimates. The case of two

instruments has approximately comparable performance in a few cases with semi‐

log models. In these situations the estimates tend to understate the true GE

willingness to pay. By contrast, the hedonic model using transactions prices before

the policies overestimate the GE willingness to pay for the 19th Avenue Landfill

sample with errors of 38 percent and 32 percent for linear and semi‐log

specifications, respectively. For the sample associated with the Motorola site

cleanup the estimates understate the effect and are larger in absolute magnitude.

The other cross‐sectional hedonic models yield larger errors. If we were to use the

full sample estimates of WTP and the sub‐sample means for the true values as the

standard, the conclusions would be the same.

       Overall, it appears that the advantages of “ideal” instruments in quasi‐

experimental methods are realized with continuous measures of the environmental
                                                                                     37

amenity. When the change in site specific conditions is discrete, as with our example

of xeric versus wet landscaping, the cross sectional hedonic (before or after the

simulated policy change) provided superior estimates of the general equilibrium

willingness to pay. In contrast, for both of the examples involving hazardous waste

sites when cleanup led to changes in the continuous indicator for the disamenity the

quasi‐experimental models using the price differences and accounting for changes

in other housing attributes provided superior estimates of the GE willingness to pay.



V. Results for Matched Houses



       Most quasi‐experimental analyses measuring the benefits of environmental

policies are closer to a match of control and treated samples based on the houses in

each category. As a result, this section considers the same three experiments but re‐

analyzes the results based on matching the houses in the baseline sample to those in

the treated sample. As noted earlier, different households can be in each house for

the two samples. This difference must be considered in determining which

household’s willingness to pay is used in evaluating the performance of each model.

We propose to use the household selecting the house after the change. As a result,

the mean values reported for the “true” willingness to pay are associated with the

households occupying the houses after the exogenous treatment.



       A. Landscape Findings
                                                                                      38

       Table 6 reports the findings for the matched house landscape models. Using

either the full sample or the sample of houses with irrigated landscape, the quasi‐

experimental estimates with the discrete indicator of a change to an irrigated status

as an instrument are closer to the mean willingness to pay of households who

ultimately select the houses in the treated sample. For the full sample the semi‐log

quasi experimental specification provides the best estimates while the linear quasi

experimental specification is preferred in the subsample of wet houses. Under the

linear specification for the full sample and the semi‐log specification for the wet

sample, the simple cross section provides superior estimates with errors of less than

6% compared to over 10% with the quasi experimental estimates. Overall these

findings indicate a simple cross section hedonic based on equilibrium prices after

the change provides estimates comparable to the quasi experimental IV models and

doesn't require the consistent identification of the “correct” instrument.



       B. Cleanup of One Hazardous Waste Site



       Table 7 provides estimates for the cleanup of the Motorola site using the

house matched sample so each price change is for the same house. In this case only

the proximity to the hazardous waste site changes between baseline and treated

samples. We follow the same convention and use the willingness to pay of the

household in each house after the cleanup. The overall sample and a subset of the

houses near the Motorola site are each considered. The results are consistent

regardless of the sample with the conventional first difference model (for both
                                                                                     39

specifications linear and semi‐log) providing the best estimate of mean GE

willingness to pay using the final household as the standard. While the differences

between the quasi‐experimental and this simple approach can be small – a 9% error

with the conventional first difference versus 12% with the quasi‐experimental IV

estimator for the full sample, the ranking is consistent for all samples and model

specifications. As a result, in this case a quasi experimental estimation strategy

offers little advantage over conventional first difference models that do not attempt

to isolate an instrument for the source of the “treated” houses experiencing cleanup

outcomes.



       C. Cleanup of Two Hazardous Waste Sites



       Table 8 provides the estimates for the analysis matching houses before and

after the simulated policy cleaning up two sites. Here only the sub‐samples of

houses affected by each change provide the basis for evaluation. For the Motorola

site the quasi‐experimental difference models provide mean GE willingness to pay

estimates closest to the “true” mean for willingness to pay for households who

select the cleaned house after the change, with errors of 9% for the linear and 12%

for the semi‐log. For the case of eliminating the disamenity effects of the 19th

Avenue Landfill site, the quasi‐experimental difference is again the best with the

conventional cross‐sectional difference and hedonic models using prices after the

change resulting in much larger errors.
                                                                                      40

       Considering all models for both of the hazardous waste cleanup scenarios the

results for the matched houses suggest the quasi‐experimental methods are

generally superior to simple cross‐sectional hedonic or difference models. This

conclusion relies on selecting the ideal instrument and using the willingness to pay

of households who select the houses after the treatment.



VI. Implications



       Under ideal conditions (where we know how to correctly measure

environmental amenities) our results imply conventional hedonic practice can yield

estimates closer to the true mean general equilibrium willingness to pay. However

in other cases the quasi experimental estimates for the overall mean as well as for

special sub‐groups would be superior. Quasi experimental estimates tend to be

superior when the policy changes are complex. The performance gain can be

substantial. This conclusion is relevant to the environmental applications where

hedonic property value studies have been conducted using the same house before

and after a policy change and the proxy measure for the amenity service is

continuous. This is true even though different households will occupy the house

before and after the change providing the source of a treatment and the associated

identifying variation. The estimated price differential exploiting the exogenous

treatment as an instrument provides a measure of the mean general equilibrium

willingness to pay for the change in the amenity resulting from that treatment for

those households occupying the treated houses following the change. The
                                                                                      41

performance gain of this estimate over simple hedonic approaches varies with

application but can be large.

       For a discrete condition that shifts preferences – wet versus xeric – the

advantage does not appear present. Indeed, in this case we have more than simply a

direct example of how our proposed method would work. That is, the simulation of

market equilibria under different circumstances confirms that our cross sectional

hedonic price function used in calibration would have been the best choice to

estimate the tradeoffs households would make for wet landscapes in their sub‐

divisions. As a result, we can conclude that the hedonic estimates of the willingness

to pay for green landscape are likely to provide a reliable gauge of the value of “wet”

landscape. We found that the analysis can rely solely on the cross sectional variation

across subdivision in xeric versus wet conditions.

       The performance of conventional versus quasi experimental methods is also

not as clear for the case of cleanup of a single hazardous waste site (with matched

house sample). The preferred estimator can in this case depend on the specification

selected for the hedonic price equation.

       When we consider samples tracking households the challenge is greater

because households can alter the mix of attributes and the complementarity or

substitution between these attributes. In addition, preferences can influence the

ability to successfully control for the interacting effects that result from the

exogenous treatment. At a conceptual level these factors were the reasons for

Starrett’s conditions guaranteeing capitalization measured benefits of external

changes to a community (see note #5) as well as for Schotchmer’s general point
                                                                                       42

concerning the difficulty in measuring general equilibrium willingness to pay with a

hedonic price equation. It is also what we observed with the matched individual

results. Quasi‐experimental methods were not always best in terms of their

estimates for the mean GE willingness to pay.

       Our focus was primarily on the mean estimates. The true values for WTP

displayed considerable heterogeneity and all of the approaches failed to capture

these differences. All the methods are reduced forms so this result should not be

surprising. Quasi‐experimental methods acknowledge the difficulties in estimating

conditional means that attempt to capture the role of observable sources of this

heterogeneity.

       Nonetheless these findings need to be interpreted carefully in relation to the

studies with actual data that motivated our inquiry. They assume ideal instruments

are known. We did not consider other cases because there are no clear guides to

distinguish good from “poor” instruments. Thus, with strict adherence to the quasi‐

experimental admonition that analysts must be prepared to devote considerable

effort (the proverbial equivalent of the “shoe leather”) in identifying instruments,

our results confirm some of the current enthusiasm for this strategy where the

equilibrium prices are influenced by a complex sorting response to a policy change.

       There are some important caveats to these general conclusions. First, as we

noted earlier, our standard was a mean effect not differential values based on

observable attributes of households. Second, it assumed the analyst is working with

the actual prices for each house not summary statistics for sets of houses, such as

the means or medians used in Chay and Greenstone and in Greenstone and
                                                                                       43

Gallagher. Third, our results rely, as we noted above, on knowledge of the ideal

instrument and correct specifications (i.e. no omitted variables) for the hedonic

functions, including the measure for the non‐market amenity. Finally, it assumed the

spatial linkages connecting houses and households to environmental amenities are

known. With these caveats our proposal offers a new method consistent with the

logic developed in the Chetty and the Imbens and Wooldridge frameworks to

evaluate when structural and quasi experimental methods are likely to be best. It is

directly relevant to a large number of environmental applications when the

empirical models must use price capitalization to recover the tradeoffs that

motivate general equilibrium adjustment of households in response to changes in

spatially delineated amenities.

       An important final question is how do our specific results relate to other

situations with different types of spatial interconnections? In effect, what general

implications can be extracted from these detailed case studies designed to match

real world conditions in a specific metropolitan area? The best answer we can offer

is that we have demonstrated this is the wrong question to ask. One of the points of

this paper is that numerical generalizations are unlikely to be effective in addressing

the issues of when quasi experimental methods provide advantages over

conventional hedonic price functions in measuring willingness to pay thru housing

price capitalization. Instead, we need a framework that can be undertaken for each

application. We have demonstrated this strategy is feasible. Our computational

rubric offers a tractable approach to conducting an assessment with no more

information than is routinely available with quasi experiments involving housing
                                                                                                     44

price capitalization. By following our proposed four step method each new quasi‐

experimental application can be used to calibrate preferences within an application‐

specific assignment study and use this template to establish the likely error bounds.

Formal statistical decision rules could also be derived by repeating the process in a

Monte Carlo framework13.




13 Our approach to this point has focused on using the estimated covariance matrix for the calibrated

parameters as the basis for inducing preference heterogeneity rather than a reflection of estimation
uncertainty. Any evaluation of the performance of tests or our computational rubric would require a
full specification of the sources of error in the equilibrium price vectors used to gauge the effects of
changes in spatially delineated environmental amenities.
                                                                                   45

                                     References

Beatty, Timothy K.M. and Jay P.Shimshack, 2008, “School Buses, Diesel Emissions,
       and Respiratory Health”, unpublished paper, Tulane University, September.

Brown, J.M and H. Rosen 1982, “On the Estimation of Structural Hedonic Price
      Models,” Econonmetrica, Vol. 50 (): 765‐768.

Chay, Kenneth Y. and Michael Greenstone, 2005, “Does Air Quality Matter: Evidence
       from the Housing Market” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 113 (2): 376‐
       424.

Chetty, Raj, 2008, “Sufficient Statistics for Welfare Analyses: A Bridge Between
       Structural and Reduced‐Form Methods” NBER Working Paper 14399,
       October.

Cropper, M.L., Deck, N. Kishor and K.E. McConnell, 1993, ”Valuing Product Attributes
      Using Single Market Data: A Comparison of Hedonic and Discrete Choice
      Approaches’, Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 75, ( ): 225‐232.

Cropper, M.L., L.B. Deck and K.E. McConnell, 1988, “On the Choice of Functional
      Form for Hedonic Price Equations’, Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol.
      70: (November): 668‐75.

Duflo, E., M., Greenstone and R. Hanna, 2007, “The Health and Economic Impacts of
       Indoor Air Pollution: Evidence from a Randomized Study in Orissa, India”
       unpublished working paper, Department of Economics, MIT.

Epple, Dennis, 1987, “Hedonic Prices and Implicit markets: Estimating demand and
       Supply Functions for Differentiated Products” Journal of Political Economy,
       Vol.95,(February): 59‐80.

Epple, Dennis, Radu Filimon, and Thomas Romer, 1993, “Existence of Voting and
       Housing Equilibrium I a System of Communities with Property Taxes”,
       Regional Science and Urban Economics, Vol. 31,( ):585‐610.

Ferraro, P, J., C. McIntosh, and M. Ospina, 2007, “The Effectiveness of the U.S.
      Endangered Species Act: An econometric Analysis Using Matching Methods”
      Journal of Environmental Economics and Management Vol54(3):245‐261.

Greenstone, Michael and Justin Gallagher, 2008, “Does Hazardous Waste Matter?
      Evidence from Housing Market and Superfund Program” Quarterly Journal of
      Economics, Vol. 123 (August): 951‐1004.
                                                                                    46

Greenstone, Michael and Ted Gayer, 2009, “Quasi‐Experimental and Experimental
      Approaches to Environmental Economics” Journal of Environmental
      Economics and Management, Vol. 57,(January): 21‐44.
Imbens, Guido M. ,2009, “Better LATE than Nothing: Some Comments on
      Deaton(2009) and Heckman and Urzua(2009)” NBER working paper No.
      14896, April.

Imbens, Guido M. and Jeffrey M. Wooldridge, 2009, “Recent developments in the
      Econometrics of Program Evaluation” Journal of Economic Literature Vol. 47,
      (March): ,also NBER working paper # 14251, August, 2008.

Kiel, Katherine A. and Michael Williams, 2007, “The Impact of Superfund Sites on
        Local Property Values: Are All Sites the Same?” Journal of Urban Economics,
        Vol 61, (1):170‐192.

Kuminoff, Nicholai V., Christopher F. Parmeter, and Jaren C. Pope, 2009, “Avertin
     Hidden Danger: Developing Hedonic Specifications that Mitigate Omitted
     Variable Bias ” unpublished paper Virginia Tech March.

Kuminoff, Nicholai V. and Jaren C. Pope, 2008, “Capitalizational and Welfare
     Measurement in the Quasi Experimental Hedonic Model” unpublished paper
     Virginia Tech, December.

Pope, Jaren C., 2008, “Do Seller Disclosures Affect Property Values? Buyer
       Information and the Hedonic Model,” Land Economics, Vol. 84 (4): 551‐572.

Rubin, D. B. 1973, “The Use of Matched Sampling and Regression Adjustments to
       Remove Bias in Observational Studies” Biometrika, Vol 29. 185‐203

Rubin,D.B.,1974, “Estimating Casual Effects of Treatments in Randomized and Non‐
      Randomized Studies” Journal of Educational Statistics , Vol 66,688‐701.

Rubin, D.B. 2006 Matched Sampling for Casual Effects (Cambridge,U.K. Cambridge
       University Press)

Scotchmer, Suzanne, 1985, “Hedonic Prices and Cost/Benefit Analysis” Journal of
      Economic Theory, Vol.37,(1):55‐75.

Scotchmer, Suzanne, 1986, “The Long‐run and Short‐run Benefits of Environmental
      Improvement” Journal of Public Economics, Vol.30, (June):61‐83

Smith, V. Kerry, Eric M. Moore, and Sharon L. Harlan, 2009, “Will Households
       Mitigate Urban Heat Islands?” unpublished working paper under
       revision,CEESP Arizona State University, April.
                                                                                   47

Starrett, David A., 1981, “Land Value Capitalization in Local Public Finance” Journal
       of Political Economy, Vol.89, (April): 306‐327.

Stefanov, William L., Michael S. Ramsey, and Phillip R. Christensen,
       2001,”Monitoring Urban land Cover Change: An Expert System Approach to
       Land Cover Classification of semiarid to Arid Urban Centers” Remote Sensing
       of Environment, Vol. 77, 173‐185.

Wheaton, William C., 1974, “Linear Programming and Locational Equilibrium: The
     Herbert Stevens Model Revisited” Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 1 (3):
     278‐287.
Table 1: Landscape calibration first‐stage hedonic

                              Hedonic Estimates                                         Summary Statistics
Variable                Estimate    Std Err      t‐stat                        Mean      Std Dev       Min      Max
                a
Constant / Price           8.010      0.027 297.330                            16,048    10,583      1,870   184,250
Square feet (100s)         0.040      0.000 327.600                             17.81      6.42       6.00     45.00
Acres                      0.149      0.002     69.120                           0.22      0.22       0.05     19.96
Stories                   ‐0.182      0.001 ‐127.530                             1.14      0.34       1.00      4.00
Bathrooms                  0.140      0.001 128.420                              2.43      0.81       0.50      6.00
Age                       ‐0.003      0.000 ‐80.080                             17.71     15.92       1.00     85.00
Pool                       0.112      0.001 110.300                              0.26      0.44       0.00      1.00
Garage                     0.125      0.002     61.520                           0.95      0.22       0.00      1.00
Wet                        0.070      0.001     61.370                           0.18      0.38       0.00      1.00
July min temp             ‐0.006      0.000 ‐17.970                             78.75      2.01      67.16     86.30
CBD distance               0.002      0.000     21.750                          14.13      5.94       0.51     42.84
                 Year Dummy Variables
1981                      ‐0.277      0.013 ‐20.770
1982                      ‐0.402      0.015 ‐26.360
1983                       0.102      0.009     11.790
1984                       0.149      0.008     17.720
1985                       0.204      0.008     24.930
1986                       0.238      0.008     29.730
1987                       0.228      0.008     28.490
1988                       0.226      0.008     28.250
1989                       0.236      0.008     29.310
1990                       0.222      0.008     27.810
1991                       0.214      0.008     27.000
1992                       0.229      0.008     29.180
1993                       0.293      0.008     37.440
1994                       0.353      0.008     45.680
1995                       0.432      0.008     55.980
1996                       0.501      0.008     65.470
1997                       0.570      0.008     74.700
1998                       0.624      0.008     82.440
1999                       0.695      0.008     92.070
2000                       0.767      0.008 101.670
2001                       0.820      0.008 108.790
2002                       0.870      0.008 115.550
2003                       0.963      0.008 127.060
2004                       1.049      0.008 137.790
                       Statistics
# Observations           398,200
           2
Adjusted R                0.7751
b
    Price is based on 11% of sale value and corresponds to summary statitics
                                                                                                                       49

                                                                               a
Table 2: Hazardous waste calibration first‐stage hedonic

                                Hedonic Estimates                                           Summary Statistics
Variable                 Estimate     Std Err      t‐stat                           Mean    Std Dev         Min       Max
                b
Constant / Price             8.803      0.061 145.350                              14,558     9,063       1,870    151,085
Square feet (100s)           0.032      0.000 228.740                               18.46      6.49         6.00     45.00
Acres                        0.098      0.002     47.650                             0.24      0.30         0.05     20.00
Stories                     ‐0.084      0.002 ‐52.420                                1.14      0.34         1.00      4.00
Bathrooms                    0.054      0.001     43.570                             2.53      0.81         0.50      6.00
Age                         ‐0.006      0.000 ‐70.340                               14.46     14.60         1.00     80.00
Pool                         0.066      0.001     59.710                             0.29      0.45         0.00      1.00
Garage                       0.053      0.002     21.890                             0.96      0.20         0.00      1.00
NPL inverse distance        ‐0.021      0.006     ‐3.220                             0.15      0.18         0.02     14.04
CBD distance                 0.001      0.001      0.550                            14.72      5.98         0.51     72.17
                  Year Dummy Variables
1991                        ‐0.005      0.003     ‐1.880
1992                         0.026      0.003      9.690
1993                         0.098      0.003     37.470
1994                         0.167      0.003     65.920
1995                         0.240      0.003     95.580
1996                         0.299      0.002 121.490
1997                         0.355      0.002 145.610
1998                         0.415      0.002 173.430
1999                         0.487      0.002 204.360
                        Statistics
# Observations            242,827
           2
Adjusted R                 0.8396
a
    City fixed effects not reported
b
    Price is based on 11% of sale value and corresponds to summary statitics
Table 3: Landscpae WTP using matched individuals

                                                                                                                 Estimated WTP
                                                                                     a                                                         b
Model                          Sample Specification Instruments                                       Mean    Median       5%     95%    % Error
True WTP                         Full                                                                 467.4    474.9     191.8   720.1      0.0%
CS Before                        Full     Linear                                                      476.0    476.0     476.0   476.0      1.8%
CS After                         Full     Linear                                                      494.2    494.2     494.2   494.2      5.7%
Difference                       Full     Linear                                                      358.6    358.6     358.6   358.6    ‐23.3%
IV ‐ CS After                    Full     Linear         Wet                                          641.9    641.9     641.9   641.9     37.3%
IV ‐ Difference                  Full     Linear        General                                       611.1    611.1     611.1   611.1     30.7%
IV ‐ Difference                  Full     Linear         Wet                                          603.8    603.8     603.8   603.8     29.2%
IV ‐ Difference                  Full     Linear       Wet, Dry                                       602.5    602.5     602.5   602.5     28.9%
CS Before                        Full   Log‐Linear                                                    479.9    476.5     465.3   504.0      2.7%
CS After                         Full   Log‐Linear                                                    492.8    490.1     478.3   516.1      5.4%
Difference                       Full   Log‐Linear                                                    362.0    360.0     351.3   379.0    ‐22.6%
IV ‐ CS After                    Full   Log‐Linear       Wet                                          639.5    636.0     620.7   669.7     36.8%
IV ‐ Difference                  Full   Log‐Linear      General                                       622.6    619.1     604.3   651.9     33.2%
IV ‐ Difference                  Full   Log‐Linear       Wet                                          615.1    611.7     597.0   644.1     31.6%
IV ‐ Difference                  Full   Log‐Linear     Wet, Dry                                       613.5    610.1     595.5   642.4     31.3%
True WTP                       Wet Only                                                               518.3    520.4     225.0   750.2      0.0%
CS Before                      Wet Only   Linear                                                      476.0    476.0     476.0   476.0     ‐8.2%
CS After                       Wet Only   Linear                                                      494.2    494.2     494.2   494.2     ‐4.6%
Difference                     Wet Only   Linear                                                      358.6    358.6     358.6   358.6    ‐30.8%
IV ‐ CS After                  Wet Only   Linear          Wet                                         641.9    641.9     641.9   641.9     23.9%
IV ‐ Difference                Wet Only   Linear        General                                       611.1    611.1     611.1   611.1     17.9%
IV ‐ Difference                Wet Only   Linear          Wet                                         603.8    603.8     603.8   603.8     16.5%
IV ‐ Difference                Wet Only   Linear       Wet, Dry                                       602.5    602.5     602.5   602.5     16.2%
CS Before                      Wet Only Log‐Linear                                                    483.8    481.2     466.1   507.7     ‐6.6%
CS After                       Wet Only Log‐Linear                                                    496.6    493.7     479.2   519.2     ‐4.2%
Difference                     Wet Only Log‐Linear                                                    364.7    362.6     352.0   381.4    ‐29.6%
IV ‐ CS After                  Wet Only Log‐Linear       Wet                                          644.4    640.7     621.9   673.8     24.3%
IV ‐ Difference                Wet Only Log‐Linear      General                                       627.3    623.7     605.4   655.9     21.0%
IV ‐ Difference                Wet Only Log‐Linear       Wet                                          619.8    616.2     598.1   648.0     19.6%
IV ‐ Difference                Wet Only Log‐Linear     Wet, Dry                                       618.2    614.6     596.6   646.3     19.3%
a
    Wet = Dry to wet switch; Dry = wet to dry switch; General = Any switch, regardless of direction
b
    Error computed based on mean willingness to pay
                                                                                                                                                                      51



Table 4: Single hazardous waste model performance using matched individuals

                                                                                                                              Estimated WTP
                                                                                          a                                                                       b
Model                               Sample Specification Instruments                                     Mean         Median                  5%     95%    % Error
True WTP                              Full     Linear                                                      1.9           0.0                 ‐7.9    15.6      0.0%
CS Before                             Full     Linear                                                      0.7           0.0                 ‐5.7     7.5    ‐62.4%
CS After                              Full     Linear                                                      1.3           0.0                ‐10.9    14.3    ‐28.5%
Difference                            Full     Linear                                                      1.4           0.0                ‐11.1    14.7    ‐26.8%
IV ‐ CS After                         Full     Linear                                                     20.3           0.0               ‐163.7   215.4   975.1%
IV ‐ Difference                       Full     Linear        Switch                                        2.0           0.0                ‐15.9    20.9      4.5%
IV ‐ Difference                       Full     Linear          Mot                                         1.3           0.0                ‐10.6    13.9    ‐30.5%
CS Before                             Full   Log‐Linear                                                    0.7           0.0                 ‐5.5     7.5    ‐62.5%
CS After                              Full   Log‐Linear                                                    1.4           0.0                ‐10.6    14.4    ‐27.6%
Difference                            Full   Log‐Linear                                                    1.4           0.0                ‐10.8    14.6    ‐26.5%
IV ‐ CS After                         Full   Log‐Linear                                                   20.4           0.0               ‐158.7   216.1   984.6%
IV ‐ Difference                       Full   Log‐Linear      Switch                                        2.0           0.0                ‐15.9    21.6      8.6%
IV ‐ Difference                       Full   Log‐Linear        Mot                                         1.3           0.0                ‐10.4    14.1    ‐29.1%
True WTP                            Motorola   Linear                                                      6.1           4.3                 ‐7.2    21.7      0.0%
CS Before                           Motorola   Linear                                                      2.1           1.8                 ‐3.0     7.8    ‐64.6%
CS After                            Motorola   Linear                                                      4.1           3.4                 ‐5.7    14.9    ‐32.8%
Difference                          Motorola   Linear                                                      4.2           3.5                 ‐5.9    15.2    ‐31.2%
IV ‐ CS After                       Motorola   Linear                                                     61.4          51.7                ‐86.2   224.0   911.1%
IV ‐ Difference                     Motorola   Linear        Switch                                        6.0           5.0                 ‐8.4    21.8     ‐1.7%
IV ‐ Difference                     Motorola   Linear          Mot                                         4.0           3.3                 ‐5.6    14.5    ‐34.7%
CS Before                           Motorola Log‐Linear                                                    2.2           1.8                 ‐3.0     8.0    ‐64.5%
CS After                            Motorola Log‐Linear                                                    4.2           3.4                 ‐5.8    15.4    ‐31.5%
Difference                          Motorola Log‐Linear                                                    4.2           3.4                 ‐5.9    15.7    ‐30.4%
IV ‐ CS After                       Motorola Log‐Linear                                                   62.3          50.7                ‐86.6   230.9   926.4%
IV ‐ Difference                     Motorola Log‐Linear      Switch                                        6.2           5.1                 ‐8.7    23.1      2.8%
IV ‐ Difference                     Motorola Log‐Linear        Mot                                         4.1           3.3                 ‐5.7    15.1    ‐32.9%
a
    Switch = Indicates individual's moving into a house initially Motorola; Mot = Indicates households initially living nearest Motorola
                                                                                                                                                             52



Table 5: Multiple hazardous waste model performance using matched individuals

                                                               Estimated WTP ‐ Distance Reduction                   Estimated WTP ‐ Site Removed
                                                     a                                                  b                                                b
Model             Sample Specification Instruments          Mean    Median       5%       95% % Error       Mean      Median      5%       95%     % Error
True WTP             Full     Linear                          9.8        3.7    ‐8.9      43.0      0.0%     41.3       41.8     16.3      66.6       0.0%
CS Before            Full     Linear                          3.4        1.8    ‐6.4      14.7    ‐65.5%     38.8       37.8     19.2      58.2      ‐6.1%
CS After             Full     Linear                          6.8        3.6 ‐12.9        29.4    ‐30.8%     23.5       21.4     13.9      42.3     ‐43.2%
Difference           Full     Linear                          1.7        0.9    ‐3.2       7.2    ‐83.0%     13.7       12.5      8.1      24.8     ‐66.7%
IV ‐ CS After        Full     Linear     Land, Mot          102.6      54.9 ‐195.2       445.3    947.4%    355.3      323.3    210.5     640.6    760.1%
IV ‐ Difference      Full     Linear       Switch            10.3        5.5 ‐19.6        44.7      5.2%     35.7       32.5     21.1      64.3     ‐13.6%
IV ‐ Difference      Full     Linear     Land, Mot            8.6        4.6 ‐16.3        37.1    ‐12.7%     29.6       27.0     17.5      53.4     ‐28.3%
CS Before            Full   Log‐Linear                        3.3        1.8    ‐6.1      14.0    ‐66.7%     37.7       36.8     18.4      56.0      ‐8.8%
CS After             Full   Log‐Linear                        6.9        3.8 ‐12.9        29.7    ‐29.1%     24.2       22.3     14.2      43.0     ‐41.5%
Difference           Full   Log‐Linear                        1.5        0.8    ‐2.8       6.4    ‐84.7%     13.9       12.8      8.1      24.7     ‐66.5%
IV ‐ CS After        Full   Log‐Linear   Land, Mot          102.0      55.9 ‐189.1       436.5    941.3%    354.8      327.1    208.2     631.8    758.9%
IV ‐ Difference      Full   Log‐Linear     Switch            10.7        5.9 ‐19.8        45.7      9.1%     37.2       34.3     21.8      66.2     ‐10.0%
IV ‐ Difference      Full   Log‐Linear   Land, Mot            8.8        4.8 ‐16.3        37.7    ‐10.1%     30.7       28.3     18.0      54.6     ‐25.8%
True WTP          Motorola    Linear                          7.4        5.0    ‐7.7      25.4      0.0%
CS Before         Motorola    Linear                          2.4        1.8    ‐3.6       8.8    ‐67.2%
CS After          Motorola    Linear                          4.9        3.6    ‐7.3      17.7    ‐34.3%
Difference        Motorola    Linear                          1.2        0.9    ‐1.8       4.3    ‐83.9%
IV ‐ CS After     Motorola    Linear     Land, Mot           73.5      54.9 ‐109.8       268.4    893.7%
IV ‐ Difference   Motorola    Linear      Switched            7.4        5.5 ‐11.0        27.0     ‐0.2%
IV ‐ Difference   Motorola    Linear     Land, Mot            6.1        4.6    ‐9.2      22.4    ‐17.1%
CS Before         Motorola Log‐Linear                         2.4        1.8    ‐3.6       9.0    ‐67.3%
CS After          Motorola Log‐Linear                         5.1        3.8    ‐7.6      19.1    ‐30.4%
Difference        Motorola Log‐Linear                         1.1        0.8    ‐1.6       4.1    ‐85.0%
IV ‐ CS After     Motorola Log‐Linear    Land, Mot           75.5      56.3 ‐111.4       279.9    921.7%
IV ‐ Difference   Motorola Log‐Linear     Switched            7.9        5.9 ‐11.7        29.3      7.1%
IV ‐ Difference   Motorola Log‐Linear    Land, Mot            6.5        4.9    ‐9.6      24.2    ‐11.7%
True WTP           Landfill   Linear                                                                         31.1        29.7    12.1      50.8      0.0%
CS Before          Landfill   Linear                                                                         42.8        46.5    19.1      59.3     37.7%
CS After           Landfill   Linear                                                                         21.7        17.3    13.7      42.5    ‐30.2%
Difference         Landfill   Linear                                                                         12.7        10.2     8.0      24.9    ‐59.1%
IV ‐ CS After      Landfill   Linear     Land, Mot                                                          328.4       262.3   207.4     643.6    956.9%
IV ‐ Difference    Landfill   Linear      Switched                                                           33.0        26.3    20.8      64.6      6.1%
IV ‐ Difference    Landfill   Linear     Land, Mot                                                           27.4        21.9    17.3      53.7    ‐11.9%
CS Before          Landfill Log‐Linear                                                                       41.0        44.9    18.1      56.7     32.1%
CS After           Landfill Log‐Linear                                                                       22.0        17.9    13.9      43.0    ‐29.1%
Difference         Landfill Log‐Linear                                                                       12.6        10.3     7.9      24.7    ‐59.4%
IV ‐ CS After      Landfill Log‐Linear   Land, Mot                                                          323.4       263.6   203.6     631.8    940.7%
IV ‐ Difference    Landfill Log‐Linear    Switched                                                           33.9        27.6    21.3      66.2      9.0%
IV ‐ Difference    Landfill Log‐Linear   Land, Mot                                                           27.9        22.8    17.6      54.6    ‐10.1%
                                                                                                                               53




Table 6: Landscpae WTP using matched houses

                                                                                             Estimated WTP
                                                                            a                                              b
Model                                    Sample Specification Instruments       Mean    Median        5%      95%    % Error
True WTP                                   Full                                 467.4    474.9      191.8    720.1      0.0%
CS ‐ After                                 Full     Linear                      494.2    494.2      494.2    494.2      5.7%
Wet to Dry ‐ Difference                    Full     Linear                      618.5    618.5      618.5    618.5     32.3%
Any Wet ‐ Difference                       Full     Linear                       36.0     36.0       36.0     36.0    ‐92.3%
IV ‐ CS After                              Full     Linear         Wet          523.0    523.0      523.0    523.0     11.9%
CS ‐ After                                 Full   Log‐Linear                    488.5    485.8      474.2    511.6      4.5%
Wet to Dry ‐ Difference                    Full   Log‐Linear                    624.4    620.9      606.1    653.9     33.6%
Any Wet ‐ Difference                       Full   Log‐Linear                     30.9     30.8       30.0     32.4    ‐93.4%
IV ‐ CS After                              Full   Log‐Linear       Wet          460.9    458.3      447.3    482.6     ‐1.4%
True WTP                                 Wet Only                               518.3    520.4      225.0    750.2      0.0%
CS ‐ After                               Wet Only   Linear                      494.2    494.2      494.2    494.2     ‐4.6%
Wet to Dry ‐ Difference                  Wet Only   Linear                      618.5    618.5      618.5    618.5     19.3%
Any Wet ‐ Difference                     Wet Only   Linear                       36.0     36.0       36.0     36.0    ‐93.1%
IV ‐ CS After                            Wet Only   Linear         Wet          523.0    523.0      523.0    523.0      0.9%
CS ‐ After                               Wet Only Log‐Linear                    492.2    489.4      475.1    514.7     ‐5.0%
Wet to Dry ‐ Difference                  Wet Only Log‐Linear                    629.2    625.6      607.2    657.9     21.4%
Any Wet ‐ Difference                     Wet Only Log‐Linear                     31.2     31.0       30.1     32.6    ‐94.0%
IV ‐ CS After                            Wet Only Log‐Linear       Wet          464.4    461.7      448.1    485.5    ‐10.4%
b Error based on median true WTP after
                                                                                                                   54



Table 7: Single hazardous waste model performance using matched houses

                                                                                  Estimated WTP
                                                                                                               b
Model                          Sample Specification Instrument       Mean    Median        5%     95%    % Error
True WTP                         Full                                  1.9      0.0       ‐7.9    15.6      0.0%
CS ‐ After Distance Change       Full     Linear                       1.3      0.0        0.0     9.9    ‐28.5%
CS ‐ After Distance Total        Full     Linear                       1.2      0.0        0.0     8.6    ‐37.9%
Difference                       Full     Linear                       1.7      0.0        0.0    12.6     ‐9.3%
IV ‐ Difference                  Full     Linear       Mot             1.6      0.0        0.0    12.1    ‐12.9%
IV ‐ CS After                    Full     Linear       Mot             2.9      0.0        0.0    21.4     54.2%
CS ‐ After Distance Change       Full   Log‐Linear                     1.4      0.0        0.0    10.1    ‐27.6%
CS ‐ After Distance Total        Full   Log‐Linear                     1.1      0.0        0.0     8.2    ‐41.1%
Difference                       Full   Log‐Linear                     1.7      0.0        0.0    12.7     ‐8.7%
IV ‐ Difference                  Full   Log‐Linear     Mot             1.7      0.0        0.0    12.3    ‐11.5%
IV ‐ CS After                    Full   Log‐Linear     Mot             2.7      0.0        0.0    19.8     41.8%
True WTP                       Motorola                                7.7      5.8        0.0    22.2      0.0%
CS ‐ After Distance Change     Motorola   Linear                       5.4      3.4        0.4    16.0    ‐29.9%
CS ‐ After Distance Total      Motorola   Linear                       4.7      3.0        0.3    13.9    ‐39.1%
Difference                     Motorola   Linear                       6.8      4.4        0.5    20.4    ‐11.1%
IV ‐ Difference                Motorola   Linear       Mot             6.6      4.2        0.5    19.5    ‐14.6%
IV ‐ CS After                  Motorola   Linear       Mot            11.6      7.4        0.8    34.6     51.2%
CS ‐ After Distance Change     Motorola Log‐Linear                     5.5      3.5        0.4    17.1    ‐29.0%
CS ‐ After Distance Total      Motorola Log‐Linear                     4.4      2.8        0.3    13.9    ‐42.2%
Difference                     Motorola Log‐Linear                     6.9      4.4        0.5    21.6    ‐10.5%
IV ‐ Difference                Motorola Log‐Linear     Mot             6.7      4.3        0.5    20.9    ‐13.2%
IV ‐ CS After                  Motorola Log‐Linear     Mot            10.7      6.8        0.8    33.5     39.1%
                                                                                                                                                                  55



Table 8: Multiple hazardous waste model performance using matched houses

                                                                                   Estimated WTP ‐ Motorola                      Estimated WTP ‐ Landfill
                                                                  a                                                 b                                               b
Model                           Sample Specification Instruments           Mean     Median      5%     95%    % Error   Mean    Median      5%        95%     % Error
True WTP                           Full                                      9.8         3.7   ‐8.9    43.0      0.0%    41.3     41.8     16.3       66.6       0.0%
CS ‐ After Not Site Specific       Full     Linear                           6.8         0.0    0.0    27.2    ‐30.8%     6.8       0.0     0.0       27.2     ‐83.6%
CS ‐ After Site Specific           Full     Linear                           5.6         0.0    0.0    22.6    ‐42.5%    ‐4.2       0.0   ‐16.8         0.0   ‐110.1%
Difference                         Full     Linear                           7.1         0.0    0.0    28.5    ‐27.5%     7.6       0.0     0.0       30.4     ‐81.7%
IV ‐ Difference                    Full     Linear     Mot, Clean           10.7         0.0    0.0    42.9      9.1%    10.7       0.0     0.0       42.9     ‐74.1%
IV ‐ CS After                      Full     Linear     Mot, Clean           11.9         0.0    0.0    47.6     21.1%    11.9       0.0     0.0       47.6     ‐71.3%
CS ‐ After Distance Change         Full   Log‐Linear                         6.9         0.0    0.0    27.4    ‐29.1%     6.9       0.0     0.0       27.4     ‐83.2%
CS ‐ After Distance Total          Full   Log‐Linear                        ‐1.9         0.0   ‐7.7     0.0   ‐119.8%   ‐10.7       0.0   ‐42.2         0.0   ‐125.8%
Difference                         Full   Log‐Linear                         6.9         0.0    0.0    27.1    ‐30.0%     7.6       0.0     0.0       30.2     ‐81.5%
IV ‐ Difference                    Full   Log‐Linear   Mot, Clean           10.7         0.0    0.0    42.4      9.6%    10.7       0.0     0.0       42.4     ‐74.0%
IV ‐ CS After                      Full   Log‐Linear   Mot, Clean           12.1         0.0    0.0    47.8     23.4%    12.1       0.0     0.0       47.8     ‐70.7%
True WTP                        Motorola                                     8.3         6.5    0.0    23.0      0.0%
CS ‐ After Distance Change      Motorola    Linear                           5.7         3.6    0.4    16.9    ‐31.2%
CS ‐ After Distance Total       Motorola    Linear                           4.7         3.0    0.3    14.1    ‐42.9%
Difference                      Motorola    Linear                           6.0         3.8    0.4    17.7    ‐27.9%
IV ‐ Difference                 Motorola    Linear     Mot, Clean            9.0         5.7    0.6    26.7      8.5%
IV ‐ CS After                   Motorola    Linear     Mot, Clean            9.9         6.3    0.7    29.6     20.4%
CS ‐ After Distance Change      Motorola Log‐Linear                          6.0         3.8    0.4    18.9    ‐27.2%
CS ‐ After Distance Total       Motorola Log‐Linear                         ‐1.7        ‐1.1   ‐5.3    ‐0.1   ‐120.3%
Difference                      Motorola Log‐Linear                          5.9         3.8    0.4    18.6    ‐28.1%
IV ‐ Difference                 Motorola Log‐Linear    Mot, Clean            9.3         5.9    0.7    29.2     12.4%
IV ‐ CS After                   Motorola Log‐Linear    Mot, Clean           10.5         6.7    0.7    32.8     26.6%
True WTP                         Landfill                                                                                31.6      30.3     11.8       51.3      0.0%
CS ‐ After Distance Change       Landfill   Linear                                                                       21.4      17.3     13.7       41.9    ‐32.2%
CS ‐ After Distance Total        Landfill   Linear                                                                      ‐13.2     ‐10.7    ‐25.9       ‐8.5   ‐141.9%
Difference                       Landfill   Linear                                                                       23.9      19.3     15.3       46.8    ‐24.3%
IV ‐ Difference                  Landfill   Linear     Mot, Clean                                                        33.8      27.3     21.6       66.1      7.0%
IV ‐ CS After                    Landfill   Linear     Mot, Clean                                                        37.5      30.3     24.0       73.3     18.7%
CS ‐ After Distance Change       Landfill Log‐Linear                                                                     21.8      17.7     13.8       41.9    ‐31.1%
CS ‐ After Distance Total        Landfill Log‐Linear                                                                    ‐33.5     ‐27.2    ‐64.4      ‐21.3   ‐205.9%
Difference                       Landfill Log‐Linear                                                                     24.0      19.5     15.2       46.1    ‐24.2%
IV ‐ Difference                  Landfill Log‐Linear   Mot, Clean                                                        33.6      27.4     21.4       64.8      6.5%
IV ‐ CS After                    Landfill Log‐Linear   Mot, Clean                                                        37.9      30.8     24.1       72.9     20.0%
Figure 1: Greenstone and Gallagher Illustration of Price Capitalization

F
                                  57




Figure 2: Hazardous Waste Sites
                                                                                            58

Appendix A. Estimating minimum temperature



       Estimating a model similar to Brazel et al. [2007], who found that water

intensive land cover is associated with cooler nighttime summer temperatures; we use

actual temperature monitoring data along with land cover data to generate predictions of

July minimum low temperatures for each block group in the study area. The source of

land cover data is satellite interpreted images using the Stefanov et al [2001]

classification system. This system analyzes differences in reflectivity to assign one of 12

land cover types to a 30x30 meter square. The land cover types include cultivated

vegetation, cultivated grass, vegetation, fluvial and lacustrine sediments (canals), water,

undisturbed, disturbed soil with agricultural water rights, compacted soil, disturbed

(commercial/industrial), disturbed (asphalt and concrete), disturbed (mesic residential),

and disturbed (xeric residential).

       To predict temperatures, we estimate a model relating low temperatures to

neighborhood land cover. We use daily observed low temperatures at 20 NOAA

monitoring stations located across Phoenix for the years 2000 through 2008 and attach

those temperature monitors to any Census 2000 block group centroid located within 1

mile of each monitor. In total, this results in 308 block groups assigned actual

temperature data. For each block group we calculate the average low temperature for

each month forming our dependent variable. Our independent variables consist of

household income reported by the Census 2000 at the block group, elevation, the

diversity of land cover types, the percentage asphalt, and the percent vegetative cover in

each block group. In addition, we include a series of year and monthly dummy variables.
                                                                                          59

Results from this regression are reported in table A.1 and show that vegetative land cover

is predictive of lower summertime temperatures as is the percent of water, higher

elevation, and diversity of types of land cover. Asphalt is associated with higher

temperatures, as expected.

       Using the regression results relating land cover to temperature, we predict the

2005 July low temperatures in each block group across the Phoenix region. By

construction, this temperature measure is correlated with land cover, both of which we

specify to enter the "true" utility function for households. Summary statistics for the

predicted July low temperatures are reported in table A.2. In total, we predict

temperatures for 2,113 block groups with July low temperatures ranging from a low of

just over 72 degrees to a high of nearly 86.5 degrees. The mean block group predicted

low temperature is slightly over 80 degrees.
                                                     60

Table A.1: Minimum temperature regression

Variable           Estimate     Std Err     t‐stat
Constant             44.743      0.483     92.650
% Vegetative          ‐8.711     0.566    ‐15.400
% Asphalt              5.546     0.490     11.320
% Water             ‐10.675      2.310     ‐4.620
Elevation             ‐0.005     0.000    ‐13.170
Diversity             ‐0.038     0.041     ‐0.920
            Monthly Dummy Variables
February               0.432     0.234      1.850
March                  6.485     0.234     27.690
April                10.992      0.231     47.520
May                  21.244      0.233     91.120
June                 28.077      0.231    121.680
July                 37.097      0.233    159.090
August               35.817      0.233    153.650
September            28.002      0.239    117.160
October              18.925      0.240     78.780
November               5.944     0.239     24.890
December              ‐1.683     0.241     ‐6.990
              Year Dummy Variables
2001                   0.202     0.212      0.950
2002                  ‐0.324     0.207     ‐1.560
2003                   0.716     0.205      3.490
2004                   0.121     0.207      0.590
2005                   0.777     0.206      3.780
2006                   0.332     0.208      1.600
2007                   1.185     0.212      5.600
2008                  ‐0.080     0.239     ‐0.340
                     Statistics
# Observations       38,424
Adjusted R2          0.6766

Table A.2: Predicted 2006 July low temperatures

  Temperature Prediction
Block Groups         2113
Mean                80.56
Std Dev               1.22
Min                 72.05
Max                 86.45
                                                                                            61

Appendix B. Description of hazardous waste sites



       The Indian Bend Wash site was proposed for listing on the National Priorities List

(NPL) in December, 1982 and received final listing on September, 1983. The site was

listed due to contaminated ground water and includes 12 square miles of land stretching

from Scottsdale to Tempe. As a result of the contamination of ground water, six city

wells were closed. Over 350,000 people live in the contaminated area. The site received

"construction completed" status in 2006 but has yet to be fully deleted from the active

NPL list.

       The second hazardous waste site we focus on is the Motorola 52nd Street plant.

This site was proposed for listing in June, 1988 and received final listing in December,

1989. To date, the site has not received construction complete status and remains an

active cleanup site. This site is located on a former semiconductor manufacturing plant

and encompasses 90 acres in the midst of a residential and commercial area. As a result

of a leaking underground storage tank, groundwater and soil were contaminated. The

contaminated water has spread several miles underground, but is not being used for

drinking water, but resulted in the closure of several wells.

       The third and final site we examine is the Nineteenth avenue landfill which was

proposed for listing in December, 1982 and received final listing in September, 1983. The

site was deleted in September, 2006. The 213 acre landfill is located in an industrial area

adjacent to the Salt River. Within six miles of the site live over 16,000 people with the

closest people located only 1/3rd of a mile away. As with the previous two sites, this site

is responsible for contaminated ground water and has been made worse intermittently due
                                                                                         62

to flooding of the nearby Salt River which had breached areas of the closed landfill.

Unlike the other two sites, there are no residential wells located in the immediate vicinity

of the landfill. Cleanup of the site ultimately cost of 22 million dollars.
                                                                                            63

Appendix C. Second-stage hedonic preference parameter estimates

 Table C.1: Preference calibration second‐stage hedonic

                                    Landscape                      Hazardous Waste
 Variable                Estimate      Std Err      t‐stat   Estimate    Std Err   t‐stat
 Square feet (100s)         1.828       0.007     276.580       1.834     0.006 291.610
 Acres                      0.803       0.003     302.660       0.591     0.002 285.920
 Stories                   ‐3.294       0.007    ‐455.330      ‐1.780     0.004 ‐471.370
 Bathrooms                  2.613       0.009     298.320       1.288     0.004 320.140
 Age                       ‐0.120       0.000    ‐257.260      ‐0.223     0.001 ‐303.920
 Pool                       2.045       0.005     434.570       1.313     0.003 405.220
 Garage                     3.178       0.006     495.070       1.559     0.003 501.870
 Wet                        1.333       0.003     474.880         n/a       n/a      n/a
 July min temp             ‐0.967       0.002    ‐520.850         n/a       n/a      n/a
 NPL inverse distance         n/a         n/a         n/a      ‐0.157     0.000 ‐489.130
 CBD distance               0.115       0.000     316.660       0.038     0.000 344.120
