NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PATTERNS OF INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL RAISINGS
Juan Carlos Gozzi
Ross Levine
Sergio L. Schmukler
Working Paper 14961
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14961

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2009

We received very helpful comments from Charles Engel, Chris Meissner, Nirvikar Singh, two anonymous
referees, and participants at presentations held at Brown University, the ESRC-WEFRP/IMF International
Macro-Finance Conference (Washington, DC), the LACEA-LAMES Annual Meetings (Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil), and the NIPFP-DEA workshop (Delhi, India). We are grateful to Francisco Ceballos, Tomislav
Ladika, Mercedes Politi, and Aleksandar Zaklan for excellent research assistance. We thank the World
Bank Finance Research Program and Research Support Budget for ample financial support. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the views of the World Bank. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Juan Carlos Gozzi, Ross Levine, and Sergio L. Schmukler. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Patterns of International Capital Raisings
Juan Carlos Gozzi, Ross Levine, and Sergio L. Schmukler
NBER Working Paper No. 14961
May 2009
JEL No. F20,F36,G15
ABSTRACT
This paper documents several new patterns associated with firms issuing stocks and bonds in foreign
markets that motivate the need for and help guide the direction of future research. Three major patterns
stand out. (1) A large and growing fraction of capital raisings, especially debt issuances, occurs in
international markets, but a very small number of firms accounts for the bulk of international capital
raisings, highlighting the cross-firm heterogeneity in financial globalization. (2) Changes in firm performance
following equity and debt issuances in international markets are qualitatively similar to those following
domestic issuances, suggesting that capital raisings abroad are not intrinsically different from those
in domestic markets. (3) Firms continue to issue securities both abroad and at home after accessing
international markets, suggesting that international and domestic markets are complements, not substitutes.
Existing theories do not fully account for these patterns.

Juan Carlos Gozzi
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
Juan_Carlos_Gozzi_Valdez@brown.edu
Ross Levine
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
ross_levine@brown.edu

Sergio L. Schmukler
The World Bank
MSN MC3-301
1818 H Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20433
Sschmukler@worldbank.org

1. Introduction
Financial globalization has reshaped international and corporate finance over the last two
decades. About 30 percent of all capital raised by firms through stock and bond issues over the
period 1991-2005 occurred in securities markets outside their home countries. Obstfeld and
Taylor (2004) show that a historically unprecedented percentage of the world’s financial capital
now flows across international borders. Furthermore, the amount raised by firms in foreign
markets has grown almost four-fold since 1991, approaching one trillion U.S. dollars in 2005.
Yet, basic questions about the internationalization of capital markets remain incompletely
answered. Why do firms sell stocks and bonds in foreign markets? What are the effects of
issuing securities in foreign markets on firm performance? What are the cross-firm distributional
effects from international capital raisings? The lack of firm-level information on equity and debt
issuances in both foreign and domestic markets limits our understanding of the causes and effects
of financial globalization at the macro and micro level.
To help address these questions, we provide the first documentation of several salient
firm-level patterns associated with international capital raisings.1 First, we illustrate the
characteristics of firms that raise capital through the issuance of equity and debt abroad and
document how these firms differ from both firms that only raise capital domestically and firms
that do not issue securities locally or internationally. We analyze numerous firm-level
characteristics, including firm size, growth, investment, profitability, capital structure, and
corporate valuation. Second, we show what happens to firms after issuing equity or debt abroad
and compare these patterns to firms that raise capital domestically. Third, we compare how firms
1

The international finance literature increasingly stresses the desirability of using firm-level evidence to understand
the underpinning of financial globalization, which has been studied extensively at the aggregate level. See, for
example, Forbes (2007), Henry (2007), and Kose, Prasad, Rogoff, and Wei (2009). Moreover, a separate, though
complementary, literature studies firm-level patterns in international trade. For a survey, see Bernard, Jensen,
Redding, and Schott (2007).

1

use domestic bond and equity markets before and after they internationalize. Rather than testing
hypotheses or formulating new theories, we contribute to the literature by documenting new
patterns and relating them to existing theories. As a result, our research both advertises the need
for and helps guide the direction of future research.
To analyze the firm-level patterns associated with international capital raisings, we
construct a new database. The dataset includes 168,513 equity and debt issues in domestic and
international capital markets, conducted by 45,969 firms from 116 countries, and covers the
period 1991-2005. We match these data with comprehensive information on firm balance sheets
and income statements for 38,801 firms.
Three broad categories of findings emerge from our analysis. We first summarize the
findings and then relate them to existing theoretical and empirical work on capital raisings and
international financial integration.
First, a large and growing fraction of capital raisings, especially debt issuances, is
conducted in international markets, but only a small proportion of firms actually uses
international markets, and of this small fraction, a very small sub-sample accounts for the bulk of
international capital raisings. Of the total capital raised through security issuances in capital
markets in 2005, firms from developing and developed countries raised, respectively, 51 and 39
percent outside their home countries. This share is higher for debt than for equity issues. Debt
issuances abroad accounted for 35 percent of the total amount raised through debt issuances in
capital markets over the period 1991-2005, while equity issues abroad represented ten percent of
total amount raised through equity issues over the same period. Furthermore, about 15 percent of
the almost 46,000 firms that issued any securities in public markets during our sample period
accessed international markets, and only one-tenth of these firms (less than 700 firms) collected

2

about two-thirds of all the funds raised internationally. Finally, firms raising capital abroad are
larger, slower growing, and more leveraged than firms that only raise capital domestically.
Second, changes in firm performance following equity and debt issues in international
markets are qualitatively similar to those that follow the issuance of securities in domestic
markets. Whether firms issue securities in domestic or international markets, they tend to
become larger and experience a decrease in their growth rate and profitability following capital
raisings. These patterns suggest that issues in international markets are not intrinsically different
from those in domestic markets. Furthermore, the differences between firms that raise capital
abroad and those that only issue securities domestically exist many years before firms actually
access international markets.
Third, although issues abroad tend to be significantly larger than issues at home, firms (1)
continue to issue securities in both international and domestic markets after accessing
international markets and (2) increase the amount of money raised in domestic markets after
internationalizing. In particular, for firms from developing (developed) countries, the median
issuance in international markets is about 18 (two) times larger than the median issuance in
domestic markets. Furthermore, firms do not opt out of domestic markets once they
internationalize. To the contrary, while continuing to use international markets, firms
significantly increase their capital raisings at home. For example, following internationalization,
the typical developed country firm more than triples the average annual amount raised in
domestic markets, increases the amount raised domestically relative to assets, and also captures a
larger fraction of the total capital raising activity in its domestic market.
Our findings relate to three theories of the causes and effects of international capital
raisings. First, the segmentation view argues that firms internationalize to circumvent

3

regulations, poor accounting systems, taxes, and illiquid domestic markets that discourage
foreign investors from purchasing their shares (Black, 1974; Solnik, 1974; Stapleton and
Subrahmanyam, 1977; Errunza and Losq, 1985; Alexander, Eun, and Janakiramanan, 1987; and
Domowitz, Glen, and Madhavan, 1998). Thus, firms internationalize to gain access to less
expensive capital (Foerster and Karolyi, 1999, and Miller, 1999). Second, the ‘‘bonding’’ view
argues that firms internationalize to bond themselves to a better corporate governance framework
that limits the extraction of private benefits by corporate insiders (Stulz, 1999; Coffee, 2002;
Reese and Weisbach, 2002; and Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz, 2004). This makes firms more
attractive to potential investors, reducing their cost of capital, and inducing an enduring
improvement in firm performance. Third, the market timing view suggests that firms raise capital
abroad to exploit temporarily high prices for their securities during ‘‘hot’’ markets (Errunza and
Miller, 2000 and Henderson, Jegadeesh, and Weisbach, 2006).
While the patterns we document do not formally reject or confirm existing theories, they
suggest that there are large gaps in the ability of these theories to account for noteworthy features
of international capital raisings. For instance, the finding that the changes in firm characteristics
following international capital raisings are qualitatively similar to those that follow domestic
capital raisings are difficult to reconcile with the bonding view, which argues that capital raisings
in international markets are intrinsically different from capital raisings in domestic markets and
should therefore have qualitatively different effects on firm performance. Similarly, our finding
that firms do not opt out of domestic markets after raising capital abroad, but actually increase
their participation in these capital markets, does not fit the predictions of simple segmentation
arguments that international markets offer unambiguously better services and/or less expensive
capital than local markets (once firms meet the conditions required for going abroad). In terms of

4

market timing, the argument that hot international markets for firms’ securities are driving the
decision to raise capital abroad does not fully explain why only very few firms actually raise
capital abroad.2
Furthermore, theories of internationalization and corporate finance need to account for
three patterns associated with international capital raisings that are not the focus of existing
research. First, debt markets tend to be more internationalized than equity markets. Second, firms
that raise capital abroad are different from firms that only raise capital at home before they
internationalize; these differences in firm characteristics do not emerge after firms
internationalize. Third, firms raise capital in both international and domestic markets after
accessing international markets. In sum, our findings indicate that current theories have
substantive limitations in accounting for firm-level experiences and highlight directions for
developing more precise theories of the internationalization process and its implications.
In addition, our paper extends several strands of empirical literature related to capital
market internationalization. Henderson, Jegadeesh, and Weisbach (2006) analyze aggregate
patterns of capital raising activity around the world and document how internationalization varies
across security types and regions. We expand their work by analyzing the extent of
internationalization at the firm level. Several other papers analyze the characteristics of firms that
list their shares abroad, through either direct cross-listings or depositary receipts (see, for
example, Pagano, Roell, and Zechner, 2002; Lang, Lins, and Miller, 2003; Lang, Raedy, and
Yetman, 2003; Claessens and Schmukler, 2007; and Gozzi, Levine, and Schmukler, 2008). In
contrast, we focus on capital raisings, not on equity market cross-listings. Moreover, while most
studies ignore debt issuances, we analyze both equity and debt markets. Indeed, we find that debt
2

DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and Stulz (2007) make a similar argument when analyzing SEOs in the U.S., highlighting
that many firms do not issue stocks during an open financing window, which is inconsistent with theories that stress
the role of market timing as the driving force for stock issues.

5

issues in public markets are a much more important source of capital for firms than equity issues,
and debt markets are far more internationalized than equity markets. Our paper also relates to
research on the firm-level effects of lowering barriers to international capital flows (see, for
example, Chari and Henry, 2004, 2008; Patro and Wald, 2005; and Schmukler and Vesperoni,
2006). However, we do not directly study the effects of relaxing those barriers. Instead, we
analyze the changes in firm performance and capital raising activity associated with security
issuances in international capital markets.
This paper also identifies patterns relevant for the large corporate finance literature on the
motivations for issuing debt and equity (see, for example, Loughran and Ritter, 1995, 1997;
Pagano, Panetta, and Zingales, 1998; Baker and Wurgler, 2000, 2002; DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and
Stulz, 2007; and Kim and Weisbach, 2008). We contribute to this literature by tracing the
evolution of firm characteristics, including capital structure, investment, and profitability, after
firms issue debt and equity securities in domestic and international markets. These time-series
patterns for a broad array of firms from around the world provide new evidence regarding the
motivations for security issuances. Furthermore, the finding that firms issue debt and equity
securities in both domestic and foreign markets following internationalization suggests that
future research needs to account for these corporate financing patterns.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data. Section
3 documents the extent of internationalization of securities markets and analyzes the
characteristics of those firms that raise capital abroad. Section 4 analyzes the evolution of firm
characteristics and performance following capital raisings in international markets and compares
these patterns to firms that only raise capital in domestic securities markets. Section 5 examines

6

the international and domestic capital raising activity of firms that have accessed international
markets. We conclude in Section 6.

2. Data
To document patterns of international capital raisings and analyze the characteristics and
performance of firms that raise capital through security issues in international capital markets,
we assemble a comprehensive dataset on firms’ security issuances in capital markets around the
world and match this information with balance sheet and income statement data.
We focus our analysis of international capital raisings on security issuances in public
capital markets. Firms may also access foreign financing by, among other things, borrowing
directly from foreign banks and issuing syndicated loans abroad. These financing alternatives
constitute a significant source of cross-border capital for firms and have been the focus of
substantial previous research (see Carey and Nini, 2007 for a general overview of international
syndicated loan markets; Claessens, 2006 reviews the literature on cross-border banking). In this
paper, we analyze security issuances in public capital markets, rather than relationship lending
associated with syndicated bank loans, because basic questions and theories of the causes and
consequences of these capital raisings remain incompletely addressed.
Our data on firms’ capital raising activity come from Security Data Corporation’s (SDC)
New Issues Database, which provides transaction-level information on new issues of common
and preferred equity and bonds with an original maturity of more than one year, starting in the
1970s. Given that SDC does not collect data on debt issues with a maturity of less than one year,
our dataset does not include commercial paper issues with such short-term maturities.

7

The SDC database is divided into twelve regional sub-databases covering different
markets: Asian Pacific Domestic (Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore,
Taiwan, and Thailand,); Australian/New Zealand Domestic (Australia, New Zealand, and Papua
New Guinea); Canadian Domestic (Canada); Continental European Domestic (Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy,
Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, and
Switzerland); Indian and Subcontinent (Bangladesh, India, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka);
International (Eurobonds and other cross-border issues); Japanese Domestic (Japan); Korean
Domestic (South Korea); Latin American Domestic (Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Ecuador, Guatemala, Mexico, Panama, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela); United States
(United States); United Kingdom Domestic (United Kingdom); and Rest of the World (countries
not included in other SDC regional sub-databases, such as China). The academic version of SDC
to which we have access does not include the Canadian and Korean Domestic sub-databases.
Therefore, we exclude all Canadian and South Korean firms from our analysis. While data for
public issues in the U.S. start in the 1970s, coverage of other markets starts later, with most
regional databases starting in 1991. Therefore, we restrict our sample to the period 1991-2005.
SDC collects data on security issuances mostly from filings with local regulatory agencies
and stock exchanges. These data are augmented with data from other sources such as offering
circulars, prospectus, surveys of investment banks, brokers, and other financial advisors, news
sources, trade publications, and wires. Although SDC constitutes the most comprehensive
databases on security issuances around the world, SDC’s coverage may be less comprehensive
for those regions for which it relies mostly on informal sources, instead of collecting data from
filings with regulatory agencies and stock exchanges.

8

Since our analysis focuses on corporate capital raising activity, we exclude all public
sector bond issuances, comprising debt issued by national, local, and regional governments,
government agencies, regional agencies, and multilateral organizations. We also exclude security
issuances by investment funds, investment companies, and real estate investment trusts (REITs),
as well as mortgage-backed securities and other asset-backed securities. Moreover, since we
focus on capital raising activity in public markets we exclude all private placements.3 After these
exclusions, we are left with a database covering 168,513 security issuances by 45,969 firms from
116 economies over the period 1991-2005. Appendix Table 1 lists the economies included in our
dataset and their regional and income level classification. Appendix Table 2 presents data on the
number of observations by region and income level.
To classify security issuances as domestic or international, we consider the main exchange
where the issues are listed and compare it to the issuing firm’s nationality.4 For offerings that
take place in more than one market, we consider issues in each market as separate issues. In the
case of subsidiaries, one could consider the nationality of the firm’s parent company instead of
its own nationality for classifying issues as foreign or domestic. For instance, an equity issue by
a British subsidiary of a U.S. firm in the London Stock Exchange would be classified as
international, instead of domestic as in our classification. Which approach provides a better
criterion for classifying security issues depends on the degree of integration of financing
decisions between firms and their subsidiaries, among other factors. If financial decisions are
highly integrated, considering firms’ parent nationality may provide a more accurate
3

Excluding private placements may affect the observed regional patterns of capital raising activity, as some regions
may have more active private markets than others. This may be particularly relevant for debt markets, as private
bond markets in some regions are as active, or even more active, than public bond markets.
4
SDC classifies Eurobonds as being listed on the Luxembourg exchange, although these securities are issued all
over Europe and trade mostly over the counter. This implies that Eurobond issues by firms from Luxembourg are
classified as domestic issues, even though they may trade in other European countries. However, the number of
firms from Luxembourg carrying out bond issuances at home according to SDC is relatively low. We re-did all our
analyses excluding these firms and obtained results similar to those reported below.

9

classification of security issuances. But if financing decisions are relatively decentralized,
considering subsidiaries’ own nationality may be a better criterion. Actual decision-making
policies may lie somewhere in-between these two extremes, with multinational firms possibly
coordinating financing decisions with their subsidiaries across several markets. All the results
reported in the paper are obtained classifying issues as foreign or domestic based on subsidiaries’
nationality. In unreported robustness tests, we classified issues by subsidiaries based on their
parents’ nationality and obtained results similar to those reported throughout the paper.
To analyze the characteristics and performance of firms that raise capital through security
issues in international capital markets, and compare them to firms that raise capital in domestic
markets and to firms that do not raise capital during our sample period, we match the data on
security issuances from SDC with firm-level accounting and income statement data. These data
come from Compustat North America for U.S. firms and Worldscope for firms from the rest of
the world. We combine both datasets because Worldscope’s coverage of U.S. firms is very
limited. To ameliorate possible concerns about data comparability and to control for any
differences across datasets, we include country- or firm-level fixed effects in our analyses. We
also conducted all our analyses using only data from Worldscope and excluding U.S. firms,
obtaining results similar to those reported throughout the paper. In addition, we conducted these
analyses including the small sample of U.S. firms with firm-level data available from
Worldscope and also obtained similar results.
After eliminating firms with missing data, outliers, and firms with less than three annual
observations for our variables of interest, we are left with a sample of 38,801 firms from 60
economies covering the period 1991-2005, totaling 335,539 firm-year observations.5, 6 Of these

5

Appendix Table 3 shows the number of observations and firms classified by their capital raising activity by region
and income level.

10

firms, 21,634 issued securities in public markets over the sample period according to SDC, while
the remaining 17,167 did not raise capital in public capital markets over this period.7
Throughout the paper we group issues into equity and debt. Equity issues include initial
public offerings (IPOs) and seasoned equity offerings (SEOs). Debt issues include convertible
and non-convertible debt issues and preferred shares issues. Preferred shares have features of
both equity and debt securities and therefore could be classified in either of the two categories.
Given that these issues represent a relatively low percentage of capital raisings, the criterion used
to classify them does not affect the observed patterns of capital raising activity. All the results
reported in the paper classify preferred shares issues as debt issues. As a robustness test, we
classified preferred shares issues as equity issues and obtained results similar to those reported
throughout the paper.

3. Which Firms Raise Capital Abroad?
This section analyzes the extent of internationalization of capital raising activity around the
world and the characteristics of those firms that issue securities in international capital markets.
In particular, we address three questions. First, what is the role of international capital markets
relative to domestic markets in providing firm financing and has this changed over time? Second,
what fraction of firms raises capital in international markets? Third, what are the characteristics
of firms that raise capital abroad, compared to firms that only raise capital domestically and to
firms that are listed in their domestic stock markets but do not raise capital by issuing securities
over our sample period?
6

Firms from the U.S. and Japan represent about 39 and 13 percent of the observations in our dataset of firm-level
characteristics, respectively. Excluding firms from both countries does not affect our conclusions.
7
The number of firms with capital raising activity in our merged dataset is lower than the number of firms included
in the SDC dataset because many firms that raise capital through security issuances according to SDC do not have
accounting data available from Worldscope or Compustat North America.

11

3.1 Patterns of Global Capital Raising Activity
As a first step towards analyzing the extent of internationalization of capital markets,
Figure 1 shows the evolution of the aggregate amount of capital raised by firms from developed
and developing economies through security issues in public markets over the period 1991-2005,
differentiating between issues at home and abroad.
Figure 1 shows that the aggregate amount of capital raised in public markets by firms from
developed and developing economies increased significantly over our sample period. The total
amount raised by firms from developed economies increased from 826 billion U.S. dollars at
2005 prices in 1991 to more than two trillion U.S. dollars in 2005. The amount of capital raised
in public capital markets by firms from developing economies over this period showed
significant volatility, with large decreases associated with the 1994-1995 Mexican crisis, the
1997-1998 East Asian and Russian crises, and the 2001 Argentine crisis. Despite these setbacks,
the total amount raised in capital markets by firms from developing economies increased more
than three-fold over the sample period, from 42 billion U.S. dollars at 2005 prices in 1991 to 138
billion U.S. dollars in 2005.
Figure 1 also shows that security issuances abroad grew faster than issuances in domestic
markets over the period 1991-2005. This pattern was particularly marked in the case of
developing economies, where the aggregate ratio of the amount of capital raised abroad to total
capital raised increased from 25.3 percent in 1991 to 50.8 percent in 2005. In the case of
developed economies, the aggregate share of capital raised abroad increased from 25.3 in 1991 to
39.4 percent in 2005. For both groups of countries, issuances in international capital markets
represent a significant share of the total amount raised by firms in public markets.
Figure 2 indicates that debt markets are more internationalized than equity markets, and
that developing country firms are more intensive users of international markets than firms from
12

developed economies. Figure 2 presents data on the aggregate share of capital raised abroad for
developing and developed economies for selected years, differentiating between equity and debt
issues. The top panel of Figure 2 shows that equity issues by developing country firms are far
more internationalized than those of firms from developed economies. Also, the degree of
internationalization of equity issues for developing economies has increased over our sample
period. The amount raised through equity issues outside firms’ home country represented 15
percent of the total amount raised through equity issues by developing country firms in 1995, and
this ratio increased to 59.4 percent in 2005. In the case of developed economies, the share of
equity issues abroad has remained relatively stable over this period, standing at nine percent in
1995 and 8.6 percent in 2005.
The bottom panel of Figure 2 shows that debt issues are highly internationalized in both
developed and developing economies. For both groups of countries the amount raised through
corporate debt offerings abroad represented almost half of the total amount raised through
corporate debt issues in 2005, reaching 46.1 percent in the case of developed economies and 43.5
percent for developing economies.
Table 1 further stresses the importance of international securities markets for capital
raisings and the comparatively high degree of internationalization of debt markets relative to
equity markets, while also showing that debt markets are a much larger source of corporate
finance than equity markets around the world. Table 1 provides information on the aggregate
amounts raised through security issuances in domestic and international markets over the period
1991-2005 for different regions, differentiating between equity and debt issues. Three main
features of the aggregate patterns of capital raisings are visible from the data.

13

First, debt issues in public markets are a more important source of capital for firms than
equity issues at the aggregate level during our sample period. Firms raised 19.8 trillion U.S.
dollars at 2005 prices between 1991 and 2005 through debt issues in public markets, which
represents 80 percent of the total amount raised through security issues over this period.8
Second, consistent with the patterns shown in Figure 1, international markets account for a
large share of capital raising activity, both for developing and developed economies. Firms from
developed economies raised about 7 trillion U.S. dollars at 2005 prices in international capital
markets over our sample period, which represents 29.7 percent of the total amount they raised in
public markets. In the case of developing country firms, capital raised outside their home
countries between 1991 and 2005 totaled 459.5 billion U.S. dollars at 2005 prices, representing
37.9 percent of the total amount raised through security issuances during this period.
Finally, as highlighted by Figure 2, debt markets are more internationalized than equity
markets. In the case of developed countries, the total amount raised through equity issues abroad
represents 7.8 percent of the total amount raised through equity issues over our sample period.
This statistic is over four times higher in the case of debt offerings, reaching 34.7 percent. For
developing country firms, the share of equity issues abroad over the 1991-2005 period reached
27.8 percent, compared to 47.3 percent in the case of debt issuances. Moreover, the higher
degree of debt market internationalization, compared to equity markets, is a consistent pattern
across all regions shown in Table 1.9,10

8

The value of debt issues is not directly comparable to that of equity issues, since equity issues have no maturity,
while debt issues must be repaid. Part of the proceeds from debt issues are typically used to repay maturing debt and
therefore only a fraction of debt issues can be considered new capital. Henderson, Jegadeesh, and Weisbach (2006)
try to adjust the data on debt issues to take this fact into account and conclude that even with these adjustments debt
issues constitute a larger source of new capital than equity issues at the aggregate level.
9
Out of 99 economies for which we have data on bond issuances, the internationalization of equity markets is
higher than the internationalization of debt markets in only nine countries.
10
One could argue that we may observe a higher share of international debt issues in the aggregate data not due to
underlying differences between equity and debt issuances, but rather because those firms that tend to access

14

3.2 Firms’ Access to International Markets
Although the aggregate patterns documented in Section 3.1 show that equity and debt
markets are highly internationalized and that the amount of capital raised in international markets
has grown significantly over the last 15 years, these observations do not provide information on
developments at the firm level. To address this issue, this section describes firms’ access to
international capital markets.
The results presented in Table 2 show that, among those firms that issue securities in
capital markets, the proportion that do so outside their home countries is relatively low,
suggesting that internationalization is restricted to a small set of firms. Table 2 provides
information on the total number of firms that issued securities in domestic and international
markets over the period 1991-2005 for different regions, differentiating between equity and debt
issues. Out of a total of 45,969 firms raising capital in public markets between 1991 and 2005,
only 6,661 (14.5 percent) issued securities outside their home market.
Differentiating by type of security issuance, Table 2 shows that a very small percentage of
those firms that issue equity tend to do so in international markets, while a larger proportion of
firms that issue debt conduct these operations in international markets. Only 5.2 percent of the
firms from developed economies that raised capital through equity issues did so through
offerings outside their home markets. In the case of developing countries, this statistic reaches
6.3 percent. This suggests that only a relatively small set of firms may be able to meet the
requirements to access equity markets outside their home country. The percentage of firms
raising capital abroad through debt issues is much higher. For developed countries, 36.3 percent

international markets are also more likely to issue debt securities, both at home and abroad. However, when
analyzing only those firms that raise capital outside their home countries we find that the share of capital raised
abroad is on average higher for debt than for equity issues. This suggests that debt issuances abroad may be less
costly and/or more beneficial for firms than equity issues in international markets.

15

of the firms that issued debt securities during our sample period conducted these operations
abroad. In the case of developing countries, the share of firms issuing debt abroad during our
sample period stands at 26.6 percent.
Figure 3 shows that capital raising activity in international markets is highly concentrated
among the small proportion of firms that access international markets. Figure 3 shows the
distribution of the total amount raised abroad between 1991 and 2005 among those firms that
access international capital markets at some point during this period for developed and
developing economies. For developed economies, the top ten (20) percent of firms accounted for
69.4 (82.7) percent of the total capital raised abroad by developed country firms over our sample
period. A similar pattern is visible in the case of developing economies, with the top ten (20)
percent of firms accounting for 53.9 (69.5) of the total amount raised abroad by developing
country firms over the 1991-2005 period.
In sum, the data presented in Table 2 and Figure 3 indicate that (1) few firms access
international markets, and (2) of those few firms that raise capital abroad, a very small fraction
accounts for most of the cross-border capital raising activity. These results suggest that a better
understanding of the characteristics of those firms that issue securities in international capital
markets and how they may differ from firms that only raise capital at home may provide useful
insights regarding the internationalization process. We now turn to this issue.
3.3 Characteristics of Firms that Raise Capital Abroad vs. Those that Do Not
This section analyzes the characteristics of firms that raise capital through security issues
in international capital markets, comparing them to firms that only raise capital in domestic
markets and to firms that are listed in their domestic stock markets but do not raise capital over

16

our sample period. We analyze a broad set of firm-level characteristics, including measures of
size, growth, investment, profitability, capital structure, and valuation.
Table 3 presents the medians of several firm-level variables for different groups of firms
classified according to their capital raising activity. Similar patterns are visible for most firm
characteristics if we compare means across the different groups of firms instead of medians. A
possible concern when comparing different groups of firms is that differences in firm-level
characteristics may reflect differences in the nationality and industry of firms. To account for
this, Table 3 reports median regressions of the different firm characteristics on country and
industry dummies and a dummy variable that equals one for those firms that raise capital abroad
and zero otherwise.11 This variable captures differences between firms that raise capital abroad
and other groups of firms classified according to their capital raising activity (firms that are listed
in their domestic stock markets but do not raise capital over our sample period in column (a) and
firms that only raise capital in domestic markets during our sample period in column (b)).
Appendix Table 4 presents the definition of the different variables used in the analysis.
Two patterns emerge. First, firms that raise capital abroad are very different from those
that are listed in local stock markets but do not issue securities in either domestic or foreign
markets over the 1991-2005 period.12 In particular, firms that raise capital abroad tend to be
larger, grow at a faster pace, have higher capital expenditures and R&D investments, and are
more profitable. Firms that raise capital abroad also differ from non-capital raising firms in
terms of their capital structure. They have higher levels of indebtedness and their debt tends to
11

These regressions are estimated adjusting the standard errors for clustering at the firm level. Since there is no
analytical solution for estimating clustered standard errors in quantile regressions, we estimate the standard errors
through bootstrapping with clustering at the firm level. Similar results are obtained if we use standard errors that are
robust to heteroskedasticity of unknown form.
12
Similar differences are visible between firms that only raise capital at home and firms that do not raise capital
during our sample period. In unreported robustness tests, we found that most of the differences between these two
groups of firms observable in Table 3 are statistically significant, after controlling for country and industry
dummies.

17

have a longer maturity (a lower ratio of short-term debt to total debt). Also, firms that raise
capital abroad tend to have higher valuations, as measured by Tobin’s q.
Second, Table 3 indicates that there are significant differences between firms that raise
capital at home and abroad. Firms that raise capital abroad are significantly larger than firms that
only raise capital at home, with the difference in median assets between both sets of firms
reaching 1.6 billion U.S. dollars. Firms that raise capital abroad also tend to grow slower than
firms that only raise capital in domestic markets. In terms of their investment, firms that raise
capital in international markets show higher capital expenditures and R&D investments. Firms
that raise capital abroad also show higher levels of indebtedness and exhibit longer debt
maturities. Finally, as shown in the last column of Table 3, when we condition on industry and
country fixed effects, firms that raise capital outside their home countries have significantly
higher median Tobin's q than firms that only raise capital at home.
The differences between firms that raise capital abroad and the other groups of firms
reported in Table 3 do not simply reflect differences between larger and smaller firms. In
unreported robustness tests, we found that our conclusions hold when we analyze only those
firms in the top quartile according to firm size (as measured by total assets in U.S. dollars).

4. What Happens to Firms after Raising Capital Abroad?
This section analyzes the evolution of the characteristics and performance of firms that
raise capital through debt and equity issuances. First, we compare the characteristics of firms that
raise capital abroad relative to firms that only raise capital in domestic markets, making these
comparisons before and after firms first access international markets. By tracing firms through
time, we are able to test whether firms that raise capital abroad differ from firms that only raise

18

capital at home before they actually access international capital markets or whether the crossfirm differences we observe in Table 3 materialize after internationalization. Second, we provide
a detailed dynamic analysis by tracing the performance of firms over time after capital raisings,
differentiating between equity and debt issues and capital raisings at home and abroad. This
analysis allows us to better understand how raising capital abroad affects firms and whether these
effects differ from those of domestic capital raisings.
4.1 Changes in Firm-Level Variables after Raising Capital Abroad
Tables 4 and 5 present regressions of the firm-level characteristics analyzed in Table 3 on
dummies that identify firms’ activity in international capital markets for SEOs and debt issues,
respectively. These regressions include both those firms that conduct the specific type of capital
raising under analysis in each case and a control group. In the case of SEOs abroad, the control
group includes those firms that conduct SEOs in their home markets. Similarly, in the case of
debt issues abroad, the control group includes those firms that issue debt securities at home.13
These regressions include country-year dummies to control for cross-country differences,
industry dummies to account for cross-industry differences, and two dummy variables that
identify firm’s capital raising activity in international markets.14 The first one is a dummy
variable that captures the period after capital raisings abroad, which equals one on the year of the
first capital raising abroad of each type and in all subsequent years. This dummy variable equals
zero before firms raise capital in international markets and for firms that do not raise capital
abroad. This variable captures differences between firms that raise capital abroad and the control
group after capital raisings outside firms’ home country. The second dummy variable equals one
13

Similar results are obtained if we use as a control group firms that conduct any type of capital raising at home or if
we use as control group both firms that raise capital at home and firms that are listed in their domestic stock markets
but do not raise capital over our sample period.
14
These regressions are estimated with standard errors adjusted for clustering at the firm level. Similar results are
obtained if we adjust the standard errors for clustering at the country level.

19

before firms raise capital in international markets and zero afterwards. It is zero for those firms
in the control group. This dummy captures differences between firms that raise capital abroad
and firms in the control group that existed before accessing international markets.
The results in Tables 4 and 5 indicate that most of the differences between firms that raise
capital abroad and those that issue securities domestically exist before these firms access
international securities markets. In particular, both firms that conduct SEOs and debt issuances
abroad are larger and have higher capital expenditures and R&D investments than firms that only
raise capital at home before actually going abroad. Also, firms that raise capital abroad have
higher valuations than firms that only raise capital in local markets before accessing international
markets.
The results in Tables 4 and 5 also show that capital raisings in international markets are
related to significant changes in firm-level characteristics. For example, firms that conduct SEOs
abroad tend to have higher growth and higher Tobin’s q before going abroad than firms that only
conduct SEOs at home, but not afterwards. Firms that issue debt in international markets tend to
have faster growth rates, greater profits, and larger Tobin’s q ratios before going abroad than
firms that issue debt in local market. But these differences become smaller (or even disappear)
following debt issuances in international markets.
Moreover, we find no support for the view that the decision to raise capital abroad in the
future induces a firm to change before it actually internationalizes and that this behavior drives
the patterns we observe. For instance, the prospect of issuing securities abroad may allow firms
to raise more capital domestically and expand. Therefore, the finding that firms that raise capital
abroad are larger than domestic firms before actually going abroad could be explained by the
decision to internationalize, and not be a pre-existing difference across firms. To address this

20

concern, in unreported robustness tests we estimated the regressions in Tables 4 and 5 using
different dummies for each year before and after capital raisings in international markets. These
robustness tests indicate that the observed differences between firms that raise capital abroad and
at home generally existed three or more years before these firms actually issued securities in
international markets, suggesting that the results in Tables 4 and 5 are largely capturing preexisting differences across firms.
4.2 Time Patterns of Firm-Level Variables Following Capital Raising Activity
An important and yet incompletely answered question regarding the process of
internationalization is whether capital raisings abroad have different effects than domestic capital
raisings. In this section, we compare the evolution of firm characteristics following capital
raisings at home and abroad. Note, however, that we do not attempt to deal formally with
identifying the exogenous effects of international capital raisings on firm performance.
Therefore, the patterns presented in this section are only a first step towards addressing this
question.
Tables 6 and 7 analyze the time-series patterns of firm-level variables following SEOs at
home and abroad, respectively. Tables 8 and 9 show similar data for debt issuances in domestic
and international markets. Specifically, these tables present regressions of firm characteristics on
a series of dummy variables that trace out annual patterns after capital raisings. The variable
“Year of SEO at home dummy,” for instance, equals one on the year that a firm conducts a SEO
in its domestic market, and zero otherwise. Similarly the “More than three years after SEO at
home dummy” equals one more than three years after a firm conducts a SEO at home and zero
afterwards. We construct corresponding dummy variables for the years following each type of
capital raising. The sample in these regressions includes only the firms that conduct the specific

21

type of capital raising under analysis in each case. Since we want to focus on the within-firm
changes that follow the different types of capital raisings, these regressions include firm-level
fixed effects. Therefore, we are comparing each firm to itself before raising capital. The
regressions also include year dummies to control for global time effects.
The regression results in Tables 6 to 9 indicate that the time-series patterns of firm-level
variables are broadly similar for issues at home and abroad. In the case of SEOs, Tables 6 and 7
show that firms expand following both SEOs at home and abroad. Also, firms tend to experience
a long-term decrease in growth and profitability (measured by return on equity) following SEOs.
Loughran and Ritter (1997) also find evidence of a decrease in profitability following domestic
SEOs by U.S. firms. They interpret this evidence as consistent with market timing arguments
that emphasize that firms raise capital after periods of high performance, which may make their
securities more attractive to investors. The observed worsening of firm performance could also
be the result of earnings management, as insiders may have incentives to window-dress company
accounts before raising capital (Rangan, 1998 and Teoh, Welch, and Wong, 1998).15 In terms of
investment, although the absolute size of capital expenditures and R&D investments increases,
when scaling expenditures by sales the results show that investment does not increase
permanently (and even tends to decrease) following SEOs both at home and abroad. The results
also indicate that firm valuation, as measured by Tobin’s q, decreases in the long run following
SEOs.
In the case of debt issuances, Tables 8 and 9 show that the time patterns of firm-level
variables are broadly similar for issues at home and abroad. Firms tend to expand following debt
15

Inflated expectations by investors and earnings management that leads investors to overestimate the earnings
potential of issuing firms are not the only possible reason for poor post-issue operating performance. Jensen and
Meckling (1976) argue that the interests of managers and other stockholders become less closely aligned as
managers’ stakes decline and ownership becomes more disperse. These increased agency problems may result in
worse post-issue performance.

22

issues and experience a long-term decrease in profitability and growth. Debt issues, both at home
and abroad, are associated with increases in indebtedness levels, improvements in debt maturity
profiles, and decreases in Tobin’s q. As mentioned above, the finding that the changes in firm
performance that follow equity and debt issuances in international markets are broadly similar to
those that follow equity and debt issuances at home suggests that issues in international markets
are not intrinsically different from issues in the domestic market.16
A possible concern regarding the patterns presented in Tables 6 to 9 is whether they are
affected by other capital raisings coinciding with the timing of the specific issuances analyzed in
these tables. For instance, if following capital raisings abroad firms also issue securities at home,
then the observed patterns of firm performance may be partially reflecting the effects of these
subsequent domestic capital raisings. To address this concern, we re-estimated all the regressions
from Tables 6 to 9 including only capital raisings that took place without other concurrent
security issuances. Specifically, we considered only those capital raisings in which firms did not
carry out other security issuances in a five-year window around the capital raising under
analysis. The results obtained using this reduced sample of capital raisings are qualitatively
similar to those reported in Tables 6 to 9. Firms tend to expand and experience a decrease in their
growth rate and profitability following capital raisings. Moreover, the time-series patterns of
firm-level variables are broadly similar for issues at home and abroad.

16

As a robustness test, we estimated the regressions of the evolution of firm performance following SEOs and debt
issues abroad reported in Tables 7 and 9 restricting the sample to issuances by foreign firms in U.S. capital markets.
If U.S. markets have a particularly effective investor protection environment, then focusing on the U.S. would
provide a more powerful test of whether firms that internationalize into stronger investor protection regimes
experience an enduring improvement in firm performance, as bonding arguments predict. When restricting the
sample to foreign issues in U.S. markets, we find results similar to those reported in Tables 7 and 9, that is, firms
tend to expand following capital raisings and experience a long-term decrease in profitability and growth.

23

5. The Capital Raising Activity of Firms that Raise Capital Abroad
This section addresses three broad questions about internationalization: Are issues in
international markets different from domestic issues in terms of their size? How do firms that
raise capital abroad distribute their capital raising activity between domestic and international
markets? After firms raise capital abroad, does their use of domestic capital markets change? If
so, how?

5.1 Size Differences between Issues at Home and Abroad
Although the aggregate evidence presented in Tables 1 and 2 suggests that issues in
international markets are larger than domestic issues, we now provide more direct evidence in
this regard by analyzing the distribution of the amount raised per issue for issues at home and
abroad and comparing median issue sizes across markets. Figure 4 shows the cumulative
distribution of the amount raised per issue by firms from developed and developing economies,
differentiating between issues at home and abroad.
Figure 4 shows that issues at home tend to be smaller than issues abroad. In the case of
developed country firms, for instance, while 63 percent of issues at home during our sample
period raised 100 million U.S. dollars at 2005 prices or less, only 39.6 percent of issues abroad
were below this size threshold. In the case of firms from developing economies, more than 91
percent of issues at home during our sample period raised 100 million U.S. dollars at 2005 prices
or less. In the case of issues abroad, only 49.5 percent of issues by developing country firms
were below this size threshold.
To analyze the size differences between issues abroad and at home in more detail, Table 10
compares the median proceeds of issues in domestic and international markets for firms from

24

developed and developing economies, differentiating between equity and debt issues. Similar
results are obtained when using means instead of medians. A possible concern regarding these
comparisons is that they may reflect differences in the nationality and industry of those firms that
raise capital in the different markets and not actual differences between cross-border and
domestic issues. For instance, firms that raise capital abroad may come mostly from industries
that tend to make larger issuances. To address this concern, Table 10 reports median regressions
of the amount raised per issue on country and industry dummies and a dummy variable that
equals one if the issue was conducted abroad and zero otherwise.17 This variable captures
differences between issues abroad and at home.
Table 10 shows that when analyzing all issues, those conducted abroad tend to be
significantly larger than those conducted at home, consistent with the results displayed in Figure
4. In the case of developed economies, the median proceeds from equity issues at home over the
1991-2005 period were 26.9 million U.S. dollars at 2005 prices, compared to 54.3 million for
equity issues abroad. In the case of debt, the median amount raised per debt issue at home was
85.1 million U.S. dollars at 2005 prices, while the same statistic reached 138 million in the case
of debt issues abroad. In both cases, the differences between issues at home and abroad are
statistically significant at the one percent level, after controlling for country and industry
dummies. Even larger differences between issues at home and abroad are visible in the case of
developing economies. The median amount raised per equity issue abroad by developing country
firms over our sample period was more than 16 times higher than the median amount raised per

17

These regressions are estimated adjusting the standard errors for clustering at the firm level. Since there is no
analytical solution for estimating clustered standard errors in quantile regressions, we estimate the standard errors
through bootstrapping with clustering at the firm level. Similar results are obtained if we use standard errors that are
robust to heteroskedasticity of unknown form.

25

equity issue at home (62 and 3.8 million U.S. dollars at 2005 prices, respectively).18 Similar
differences across markets are visible in the case of debt issues by developing country firms. All
these differences are robust to controlling for country and industry dummies and are statistically
significant at the one percent level.
The larger size of issues abroad does not simply reflect the fact that firms that raise capital
abroad are different, and in particular larger, than firms that raise capital at home. In particular,
Table 10 shows the median amount raised per issue in domestic and international markets,
restricting the sample to issues by firms that raise capital both at home and abroad at some point
during our sample period.19 The results show that in the case of developed economies, the
median amount raised per equity issue at home over the 1991-2005 period by these firms was
126.5 million U.S. dollars at 2005 prices, compared to 116.2 million for equity issues abroad.
However, once we control for country and industry dummies we find that equity issues abroad
tend to be larger than issues at home and this difference is statically significant at the one percent
level. In the case of debt issues, the median amount raised per issue at home by these firms was
105.9 million U.S. dollars at 2005 prices, while the same statistic reached 155.8 million in the
case of debt issues abroad, with the difference being statistically significant at the one percent
level. In the case of developing economies, Table 10 shows that both equity and debt issues
abroad are larger than issues at home when analyzing only issues by firms that raise capital both
18

Although part of the size difference between equity issues abroad and at home can be explained by the fact that
the latter include a larger share of IPOs (which tend to be smaller than SEOs), there are large differences in issue
sizes across markets even if we compare SEOs and IPOs separately. For developing country firms, IPOs at home
over our sample period have a median size of 1.8 million U.S. dollars at 2005 prices, compared to 61.5 million for
IPOs abroad. In the case of SEOs, the differences are smaller but still quite large and statistically significant at the
one percent level, with the median size of SEOs in domestic securities markets by developing country firms
reaching 16.3 million U.S. dollars at 2005 prices, compared to 62.6 million for SEOs in international markets.
19
In the results reported in Table 10, issues at home by firms that raise capital both at home and abroad include
issues carried out by these firms before their first capital raising abroad. These issues may not be directly
comparable to issues abroad by these firms, as firms may change after accessing international markets, which might
affect the size of their domestic and international security issues. As a robustness test, we restricted the sample of
domestic issues by these firms only to issues carried out after their first capital raising in international markets and
obtained results similar to those reported in Table 10.

26

at home and abroad. In sum, the results indicate that even if we restrict the sample to issues by
firms that raise capital both at home and abroad, issues abroad tend to be larger than domestic
ones.20

5.2 Where Do Firms Raise Capital After Internationalizing?
This section analyzes how firms divide their capital raisings between domestic and
international markets after their first capital raising abroad. Table 11 shows the average across
firms of the ratio of capital raised at home to total capital raised in public markets for each year
following firms’ first capital raising abroad, differentiating between equity and debt issues.
The Table 11 results indicate that while firms raise most of their capital abroad in the year
when they first access international markets, the share of capital raised at home subsequently
increases, remaining quite high in the long run. In the case of firms from developed economies,
the results show that in the year when they first raise capital abroad, firms raise on average only
18 and eight percent of their equity and debt capital in domestic markets, respectively. However,
the share of capital raised at home increases significantly in subsequent years. In the case of
equity issues, firms conduct most of their subsequent capital raisings at home, with domestic
issues accounting on average for 87 percent of the total amount raised through equity issuances
more than three years after firms first access international markets. In the case of debt issues,
firms that internationalize tend to conduct most of their issuances in international markets, but

20

We also conducted other robustness tests to analyze whether issues abroad are larger than issues at home when
comparing issues by the same firm. First, we estimated ordinary least squares regressions of the amount raised per
issue on firm-level dummies, year dummies, and a dummy identifying whether issues were conducted at home or
abroad, including only firms that raise capital both at home and abroad at some point during our sample period.
Second, for each firm that raised capital both at home and abroad at some point during our sample period we
calculated the difference in proceeds between issues in domestic and international markets conducted in the same
year and averaged these differences at the firm level. We then tested whether the median and mean across firms of
this variable are different from zero. Both types of analysis indicate that, in most cases, issues abroad tend to be
larger than domestic issues, consistent with the idea that firms raise larger amounts when issuing securities in
international markets.

27

domestic markets remain significant, accounting on average for 40 percent of the total amount
raised by these firms through debt issues more than three years after internationalizing. Similar
patterns are visible in the case of developing economies. Firms from developing economies that
access international markets tend to raise most of their capital at home in the long run, with the
average ratio of capital raised at home to total capital raised in public markets reaching 60 (63)
percent for equity (debt) issues more than three years after firms first raise capital abroad.
The results from Table 11 indicate that firms that access international capital markets
remain active in domestic markets, conducting a significant share of their capital raisings in these
markets. This suggests that these firms are not just opting out of domestic markets, but rather that
they are choosing to use both domestic and international markets. This is consistent with the idea
that these markets may provide different services and firms will access one or the other
depending on their particular financing needs and market conditions.

5.3 Changes in Capital Raising Activity in Domestic Markets after Raising Capital Abroad
Having shown that firms continue using domestic capital markets quite actively after they
access international markets, we now test whether firms change their use of domestic markets
after raising capital abroad. Table 12 compares the amount raised domestically per year by firms
that raise capital abroad before and after they first access international markets, differentiating
between equity and debt issues. Since the amount raised per year is censored at zero, Table 3
displays Tobit regressions of this variable on a dummy variable that equals one on the year of the

28

first capital raising abroad and in all subsequent years, and zero before.21 This variable captures
changes in capital raising activity in domestic markets following internationalization.22
Table 12 shows that there is an increase in the amount of capital raised in domestic markets
per year after a firm first raises capital abroad. In the case of developed economies, the amount
raised at home per year through equity issues by these firms averages 7.7 million U.S. dollars at
2005 prices before raising capital abroad and jumps to 20.5 million afterwards. A similar pattern
is visible for debt issues, with the average amount raised per year by firms that issue securities
abroad increasing from 36.8 million U.S. dollars at 2005 prices to 129.8 million following
internationalization. In both cases, the Tobit regressions show that these differences are positive
and significant at the one percent level. Similar results are obtained in the case of firms from
developing economies. For equity issues, the average amount raised per year by firms that raise
capital abroad increases from 3.2 million U.S. dollars at 2005 prices to 5.6 million following
internationalization. Similarly, the average amount raised at home per year through debt
issuances by these firms increases more than four-fold after firms’ first capital raising abroad,
from 1.6 million U.S. dollars at 2005 prices to 6.9 million.
The increase in the domestic capital raisings of firms that access international markets does
not simply reflect the fact that firms grow after raising capital abroad. In particular, Table 12
reports data on the amount raised per year in domestic markets divided by the firms’ assets at the
moment of the capital raising. The Tobit regressions show that, even when scaling the amount

21

These regressions are estimated with standard errors adjusted for clustering at the firm level.
The displayed coefficients in Table 12 are the effects of discrete changes in the dummy variable on the expected
value of the observed dependent variable. Similar conclusions are obtained if we analyze the effects of these
changes on the expected value of the observed dependent variable conditional on being uncensored.

22

29

raised at home by the firms’ assets, we still find evidence of a significant increase in firms’
capital raisings at home.23
While these results indicate that firms tend to raise more capital in their domestic markets
after accessing international markets, both in absolute terms and relative to firm size, this does
not necessarily imply that firms increase their participation in domestic capital raising activity
after they internationalize, relative to other firms. In other words, do firms capture a larger share
of total domestic market capital raising activity following security issuances in international
markets?
The results from Table 12 show that firms are indeed capturing a larger percentage of total
domestic market capital raising activity following their first capital raising abroad. In the case of
developed economies, each firm that raises capital abroad accounts on average for 0.1 percent of
the total capital raised in their domestic markets per year before internationalization and this
share increases to 0.3 percent afterwards. A similar pattern is visible in the case of developing
economies, with the average share of domestic market activity accounted by each firm that raises
capital in international markets increasing from 0.3 percent to 0.5 percent following the first
capital raising abroad. In all cases, the Tobit regressions show that there is a statistically
significant increase in the relative participation of firms in domestic capital markets following
internationalization.24

23

The results reported in Table 12 show that for the amount raised at home through equity issues scaled by assets for
developing country firms and the amount raised at home through debt issues over asset for firms from developing
economies the mean for the period before the first capital raising abroad is larger than the mean for the period
following internationalization. However, the tobit regression results, which account for the censored nature of the
data, show a significant increase in both of these variables following internationalization.
24
A possible concern regarding the results reported in Table 12 is that we are pooling all the firms that raise capital
abroad at some point during our sample period. As a robustness check, we analyzed the within-firm change in
capital raising activity in domestic markets following internationalization. To do this, we estimated for each firm
that raises capital abroad the difference between the average amount raised at home before and after going abroad
and then tested whether the mean across firms of this variable is different from zero. The results are broadly similar

30

6. Conclusions
In this paper, we characterize patterns of equity and debt issuance activities in domestic
and international capital markets, and also document the dynamics of firm performance
following these distinct corporate financing activities. To do so, we compile a new database on
worldwide capital raisings that allows us to compare firms that issue securities abroad with firms
that issue securities domestically. We also compare these capital raising firms with corporations
that are listed in the local stock markets but do not issue new securities over our sample period.
This provides new firm-level information about the patterns of international capital raisings.
Several findings relate to existing theories of international finance and motivate future
research. First, debt markets dwarf equity markets both in terms of how corporations raise capital
and in terms of the internationalization of securities markets. Over the period 1991-2005,
corporations raised almost four times more money through bond sales relative to equity issues.
Moreover, bonds markets are more internationalized. About 35 percent of all capital raised
through debt issues was raised in markets other than the firm’s home market, while the
corresponding figure for equity issues is ten percent. Since most empirical studies of financial
globalization ignore debt markets and since major theories, such as market segmentation,
bonding, and market timing, focus on the cross-listing of equities and the integration of equity
markets, our findings (1) indicate that financial markets are more internationalized than
suggested by only considering equity markets and (2) advertise the need for additional work that
accounts for the internationalization of debt markets.

to those reported in Table 12, that is, firms increase the amount raised at home and tend to capture a larger share of
domestic market activity following internationalization.

31

Second, while firms expand and invest more after raising debt or equity abroad, they (1)
do not become more profitable or experience an increase in valuation and (2) these changes in
firm performance are qualitatively similar to the changes that firms experience when they issue
debt or equity domestically. These findings suggest that firms get bigger, but not necessarily
“better” following internationalization. Furthermore, they suggest that capital raisings abroad are
not intrinsically different from capital raisings at home. While capital raisings abroad are bigger,
the changes in firm performance following debt and equity issuance in international markets are
broadly similar to those in domestic markets. These findings are difficult to reconcile with
arguments that firms access international markets to bond themselves to a better corporate
governance system because internationalization does not seem to spark enduring improvements
in corporate performance that differ from the dynamics that follow domestic issuances
Third, firms continue to use domestic debt and equity markets after they raise capital
abroad and indeed significantly expand their use of domestic securities markets. Thus, after firms
internationalize, they issue debt and equity securities in both the domestic and foreign markets,
using foreign markets for relatively larger issuances. These observations are difficult to reconcile
with the view that international markets provide less expensive capital, but there are high fixed
costs associated with initially accessing these markets. Furthermore, these patterns complicate
the study of corporate finance since firms participate in multiple debt and equity markets
simultaneously, which is not the focus of research on the determinants of corporate financing
choices.
Finally, very few firms use international markets, and of the few that access international
debt or equity markets, a very small number raises most of the capital garnered through the sale
of securities in international markets. As emphasized by Levine and Schmukler (2006, 2007),

32

this suggests that financial internationalization could have cross-firm distributional effects that
affect those firms that rely solely on local markets. Firms that access international markets both
grow relative to other corporations in the local market and account for a higher percentage of the
total capital raised in domestic markets following internationalization. Future research could
assess whether these changes affect the ability of smaller firms to obtain financing for growth.

33

References
Alexander, G.J., Eun, C.S., Janakiramanan, S., 1987. Asset pricing and dual listing on foreign
capital markets: A note. Journal of Finance 42, 151-158.
Baker, M., Wurgler, J., 2000. The equity share in new issues and aggregate stock returns. Journal
of Finance 55, 2219-2257.
Baker, M., Wurgler, J., 2002. Market timing and capital structure. Journal of Finance 57, 1-32.
Bernard, A., Jensen, J.B., Redding, S., Schott, P., 2007. Firms in international trade. Journal of
Economic Perspectives 21, 105-130.
Black, F., 1974. International capital market equilibrium with investment barriers. Journal of
Financial Economics 1, 337-352.
Carey, M., Nini, G., 2007. Is the corporate loan market globally integrated? A pricing puzzle.
Journal of Finance 62, 2969-3007.
Chari, A., Henry, P.B., 2004. Risk sharing and asset prices: Evidence from a natural experiment.
Journal of Finance 59, 1295-1324.
Chari, A., Henry, P.B., 2008. Firm-specific information and the efficiency of investment. Journal
of Financial Economics 87, 636-655.
Claessens, S., 2006. Competitive implications of cross-border banking, in: Caprio, G., Evanof,
D., Kaufman, G., (Eds.), Cross-Border Banking: Regulatory Challenges. World Scientific
Publishing Co., New Jersey, pp. 151-182.
Claessens, S., Schmukler, S., 2007. International financial integration through equity markets:
Which firms from which countries go global? Journal of International Money and
Finance 26, 788-813.
Coffee, J.C. Jr, 2002. Racing towards the top? The impact of cross-listings and stock market
competition on international corporate governance. Columbia Law Review 102, 17571831.
DeAngelo, H., DeAngelo, L., Stulz, R.M., 2007. Fundamentals, market timing, and seasoned
equity offerings. NBER Working Paper No. 13285.
Doidge, C., Karolyi, G.A., Stulz, R.M., 2004. Why are firms that list in the U.S. worth more?
Journal of Financial Economics 71, 205-238.
Domowitz, I., Glen, J., Madhavan, A., 1998. International cross-listing and order flow migration:
Evidence from an emerging market. Journal of Finance 53, 2001-2027.
Errunza, V., Losq, E., 1985. International asset pricing under mild segmentation: Theory and
test. Journal of Finance 40, 105-124.

34

Errunza, V., Miller, D.P., 2000. Market segmentation and the cost of capital in international
equity markets. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 35, 577-600.
Foerster, S.R., Karolyi, G.A., 1999. The effects of market segmentation and investor recognition
on asset prices: Evidence from foreign stocks listing in the United States. Journal of
Finance 54, 981-1013.
Forbes, K., 2007. The microeconomic evidence on capital controls: No free lunch, in: Edwards,
S. (Ed.), Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Policies, Practices,
and Consequences. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 171-199.
Gozzi, J.C., Levine, R., Schmukler, S., 2008. Internationalization and the evolution of corporate
valuation. Journal of Financial Economics 88, 607-632.
Henderson, B.J., Jegadeesh, N., Weisbach, M.S., 2006. World markets for raising new capital.
Journal of Financial Economics 82, 63-101.
Henry, P.B., 2007. Capital account liberalization: Theory, evidence, and speculation. Journal of
Economic Literature 45, 887-935.
Jensen, M.C., Meckling, W.H., 1976. Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs and
ownership structure. Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-360.
Kim, W., Weisbach, M.S., 2008. Motivations for public equity offers: An international
perspective. Journal of Financial Economics 87, 287-307.
Kose, M.A., Prasad, E., Rogoff, K., Wei, S.J., 2009. Financial globalization: A reappraisal. IMF
Staff Papers 56, 8-62.
Lang, M., Lins, V., Miller, D.P., 2003. ADRs, analysts, and accuracy. Does cross listing in the
United States improve a firm's information environment and increase market value?
Journal of Accounting Research 41, 317-345.
Lang, M., Raedy, J.S., Yetman, M.H., 2003. How representative are firms that are cross-listed in
the United States? An analysis of accounting quality. Journal of Accounting Research 41,
363-386.
Levine, R., Schmukler, S., 2006. Internationalization and stock market liquidity. Review of
Finance 10, 153-187.
Levine, R., Schmukler, S., 2007. Migration, liquidity spillovers, and trade diversion: The effects
of internationalization on stock market activity. Journal of Banking and Finance 31,
1595-1612.
Loughran, T., Ritter, J.T., 1995. The new issues puzzle. Journal of Finance 50, 23-51.
Loughran, T., Ritter, J.T., 1997. The operating performance of firms conducting seasoned equity
offerings. Journal of Finance 52, 1823-1850.

35

Miller, D.P., 1999. The market reaction to international cross-listings: Evidence from depository
receipts. Journal of Financial Economics 51, 103-123.
Obstfeld, M., Taylor, A.M., 2004. Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crises, and Growth.
Cambridge University Press, New York.
Pagano, M., Panetta, F., Zingales, L., 1998. Why do companies go public? An empirical
analysis. Journal of Finance 53, 27-64.
Pagano, M., Roëll, A., Zechner, J., 2002. The geography of equity listing: Why do companies list
abroad? Journal of Finance 57, 2651-2694.
Patro, D., Wald, J., 2005. Firm characteristics and the impact of emerging market liberalizations.
Journal of Banking and Finance 29, 1671-1695.
Rangan, S., 1998. Earnings management and the performance of seasoned equity offerings.
Journal of Financial Economics 50, 101-122.
Reese, W.A. Jr., Weisbach, M.S., 2002. Protection of minority shareholder interests, crosslistings in the United States, and subsequent equity offerings. Journal of Financial
Economics 66, 65-104.
Schmukler, S., Vesperoni, E., 2006. Financial globalization and debt maturity in emerging
economies. Journal of Development Economics 79, 183-207.
Solnik, B.H., 1974. Why not diversify internationally rather than domestically? Financial
Analysts Journal 30, 48-54.
Stapleton, R., Subrahmanyam, M., 1977. Market imperfections, capital market equilibrium, and
corporate finance. Journal of Finance 32, 307-319.
Stulz, R., 1999. Globalization, corporate finance, and the cost of capital. Journal of Applied
Corporate Finance 12, 8-25.
Teoh, S.H., Welch, I., Wong, T.J., 1998. Earnings management and the long-run market
performance of initial public offerings. Journal of Finance 53, 1935-1974.

36

Table 1
Amount of Capital Raised in Public Markets by Issuer Country/Region and Type of Issue
(Million U.S. dollars at 2005 Prices)
This table shows the aggregate amount of capital raised by firms from each country/region through different types of security issues in public markets over the 1991-2005 period. Issues at home are
those carried out in a public market in the firm's home country. Issues abroad are those carried out in a public market outside the firm's home country. Data are in constant 2005 U.S. dollars. See
Appendix Table 1 for a list of the economies included in each region and income group.

6.4%
0.5%
0.3%

Home
(d)
1,607,551
862,201
7,561,312

Debt issues
Abroad
Total
(e)
(f)=(d)+(e)
866,841
2,474,392
407,570
1,269,771
1,246,166
8,807,478

21,189
592,939
136,505
48,063
147,651
26,332
1,619,552
65,199

31.7%
25.3%
8.7%
37.5%
28.4%
58.2%
10.5%
100.0%

457
111,892
33,531
270
267,925
0
2,398,492
52

13,312
190,380
252,064
52,245
151,364
20,972
3,303,331
428,016

504,026

4,955,703

10.2%

12,843,684

4,030,375

341,953

4,372,328

7.8%

421,302

162,074

583,375

27.8%

Germany
Japan
United States

Home
(a)
268,908
465,464
1,539,283

Equity issues
Abroad
Total
(b)
(c)=(a)+(b)
18,261
287,170
2,433
467,897
3,923
1,543,205

Africa
Asia
Australia & New Zealand
Eastern Europe & Central Asia
Latin America & Caribbean
Middle East
Western Europe
Other

14,466
442,918
124,665
30,027
105,778
11,011
1,449,157
0

6,724
150,021
11,840
18,036
41,873
15,321
170,395
65,199

Total

4,451,676

Developed economies
Developing economies

% abroad

% abroad

Total
Abroad
Total
(h)=(b)+(e) (i)=(g)+(h)
885,102
2,761,562
410,003
1,737,668
1,250,089
10,350,683

35.0%
32.1%
14.1%

Home
(g)=(a)+(d)
1,876,460
1,327,665
9,100,595

% abroad

13,769
302,272
285,595
52,515
419,289
20,972
5,701,823
428,067

96.7%
63.0%
88.3%
99.5%
36.1%
100.0%
57.9%
100.0%

14,923
554,810
158,195
30,297
373,704
11,011
3,847,649
52

20,035
340,400
263,905
70,282
193,237
36,293
3,473,726
493,214

34,958
895,211
422,100
100,578
566,941
47,304
7,321,375
493,266

57.3%
38.0%
62.5%
69.9%
34.1%
76.7%
47.4%
100.0%

6,932,260

19,775,944

35.1%

17,295,360

7,436,287

24,731,647

30.1%

12,512,004

6,634,818

19,146,822

34.7%

16,542,379

6,976,771

23,519,150

29.7%

331,679

297,442

629,122

47.3%

752,981.0

459,516

1,212,497

37.9%

32.1%
23.6%
12.1%

Table 2
Number of Firms Raising Capital in Public Markets by Issuer Country/Region and Type of Issue
This table shows the number of firms from each country/region conducting different types of security issues in public markets over the 1991-2005 period. Issues at home are those carried out in a
public market in the firm's home country. Issues abroad are those carried out in a public market outside the firm's home country. Since firms may conduct several different types of issues in different
markets, the number of firms in the total columns may differ from the sum of the different columns. See Appendix Table 1 for a list of the economies included in each region and income group.

Equity issues
Abroad
Total
29
843
24
3,236
90
8,460

% abroad
3.4%
0.7%
1.1%

Home
456
867
4,339

Debt issues
Abroad
Total
225
569
703
1,193
534
4,613

Total

Germany
Japan
United States

Home
823
3,227
8,391

% abroad
39.5%
58.9%
11.6%

Home
1,198
3,779
11,546

Abroad
247
722
623

Total
1,306
4,026
11,852

% abroad
18.9%
17.9%
5.3%

Africa
Asia
Australia & New Zealand
Eastern Europe & Central Asia
Latin America & Caribbean
Middle East
Western Europe
Other

215
11,324
2,116
190
960
37
6,105
0

43
594
57
56
155
176
524
175

249
11,780
2,150
236
1,005
210
6,466
175

17.3%
5.0%
2.7%
23.7%
15.4%
83.8%
8.1%
100.0%

3
661
129
9
2,097
0
2,680
1

26
644
152
130
381
44
1,783
391

29
1,188
264
138
2,322
44
3,917
392

89.7%
54.2%
57.6%
94.2%
16.4%
100.0%
45.5%
99.7%

218
11,736
2,178
199
2,691
37
8,228
1

67
1,148
206
178
491
217
2,223
539

274
12,482
2,330
360
2,917
248
9,634
540

24.5%
9.2%
8.8%
49.4%
16.8%
87.5%
23.1%
99.8%

Total

33,388

1,923

34,810

5.5%

11,242

5,013

14,669

34.2%

41,811

6,661

45,969

14.5%

Developed economies

23,362

1,257

24,313

5.2%

8,713

4,171

11,504

36.3%

29,770

5,245

32,989

15.9%

Developing economies

10,026

666

10,497

6.3%

2,529

842

3,165

26.6%

12,041.0

1,416

12,980

10.9%

Table 3
Firm Characteristics by Capital Raising Activity
This table reports the median of different firm-level characteristics for different groups of firms classified according to their capital raising activity over the 1991-2005 period. Firms with no
capital raising activity are those that do not raise capital through security issues in public markets neither at home nor abroad over the sample period. Firms that only raise capital at home are
those that raise capital through security issues in public markets in their home country at some point during the sample period but that do not raise capital through security issues outside their
home country during the sample period. Firms that raise capital abroad are those that raise capital through security issues in public markets outside their home country at some point during
the sample period. These include firms that raise capital both at home and abroad. The number of observations used to calculate the medians in each case is in parentheses. Columns (a) and
(b) report the results of median regressions of the different firm characteristics on a dummy identifying firms that raise capital abroad, country dummies, and industry dummies. Only the
coefficient on the abroad dummy is reported. Standard errors are estimated through bootstrapping with clustering at the firm level. z-statistics are in brackets. See Appendix Table 4 for the
definition of the variables. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively.

Firm characteristics
Size
Total assets in million U.S. dollars
Sales in million U.S. dollars
Growth
Log of (1+annual percentage change in assets in U.S. dollars)
Log of (1+annual percentage change in sales in U.S. dollars)
Investment
Capital expenditures in million U.S. dollars
R&D expenditures in million U.S. dollars
Capital expenditures/sales
R&D expenditures/sales
Profitability
Return on assets
Return on equity
Capital structure
Total debt/total assets
Short-term debt/total debt
Valuation
Tobin's q

Firms with no
capital raising
activity
Median

Firms that only
raise capital at
home
Median

Median

99.3
(146,133)
53.5
(149,100)

153.0
(157,419)
110.1
(157,608)

1,745.4
(24,173)
921.2
(24,241)

1,519.0 ***
[16.969]
769.2 ***
[18.328]

1,504.0 ***
[17.466]
749.8 ***
[16.787]

4.6%
(124,412)
5.9%
(119,148)

7.7%
(133,103)
9.6%
(130,148)

7.0%
(23,444)
7.5%
(23,215)

2.7% ***
[14.11]
2.3% ***
[11.149]

-0.4% **
[-2.14]
-1.0% ***
[-4.589]

1.6
(131,004)
0.0
(78,065)
2.8%
(129,111)
0.0%
(77,181)

4.4
(143,742)
0.1
(82,258)
3.8%
(141,525)
0.0%
(80,578)

48.6
(21,769)
9.1
(11,000)
5.0%
(20,908)
1.1%
(10,283)

42.8 ***
[17.781]
5.9 ***
[5.307]
1.6% ***
[19.255]
0.0%
[0.000]

41.4 ***
[17.026]
5.6 ***
[4.976]
1.3% ***
[12.47]
0.0%
[-0.263]

1.9%
(122,912)
6.6%
(122,683)

2.5%
(132,887)
7.8%
(132,370)

2.0%
(21,561)
7.6%
(21,517)

0.2% **
[2.488]
2.2% ***
[12.606]

-0.2% ***
[-3.031]
0.4% **
[1.995]

18.5%
(140,475)
46.1%
(122,238)

20.4%
(152,971)
40.5%
(135,554)

29.6%
(23,682)
38.4%
(22,764)

8.2% ***
[16.363]
-13.9% ***
[-24.648]

7.3% ***
[13.484]
-9.6% ***
[-15.348]

1.120
(98,094)

1.208
(106,682)

1.154
(20,588)

0.094 ***
[10.714]

0.048 ***
[5.838]

Firms that raise capital abroad
Median regression
Coefficient on difference
Coefficient on difference
with firms with no capital
with firms that only raise
raising activity
capital at home
(a)
(b)

Table 4
Before and After Comparisons between Firms Conducting Seasoned Equity Offerings at Home and Abroad
This table reports ordinary least square regressions of different firm-level characteristics on dummies that identify the capital raising activity of firms in international markets over the 1991-2005
period. The sample includes both firms that conduct seasoned equity offerings (SEOs) abroad at some point during the sample period and firms that conduct SEOs at home at some point during
the sample period. The before SEO abroad dummy equals one before a firm raises capital through an SEO in a public market outside its home country and zero otherwise. The after SEO abroad
dummy equals one on and after the year when a firm raises capital through an SEO in a public market outside its home country and zero otherwise. Both dummies equal zero for firms that only
conduct SEOs at home. The first seasoned equity offering in a public market outside firms' home country during the sample period is used to identify firms' capital raising activitiy abroad. Column
(c) reports the difference between the coefficients on the after SEO abroad dummy and the before SEO abroad dummy and the result of a Wald test of equality of these coefficients. F-statistics
from these tests are in parentheses. All regressions include country-year dummies and industry dummies. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the firm level. t-statistics are in brackets. See
Appendix Table 4 for the definition of the variables. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively.

Dependent variable
Size
Log of total assets in million U.S. dollars
Log of sales in million U.S. dollars
Growth
Log of (1+annual percentage change in assets in U.S. dollars)
Log of (1+annual percentage change in sales in U.S. dollars)
Investment
Log of capital expenditures in million U.S. dollars
Log of R&D expenditures in million U.S. dollars
Capital expenditures/sales
R&D expenditures/sales
Profitability
Return on assets
Return on equity
Capital structure
Total debt/total assets
Short-term debt/total debt
Valuation
Tobin's q

Industry
dummies

No. of obs.

Yes

Yes

100,090

10,465

550

Yes

Yes

97,776

10,252

536

Yes

Yes

88,773

10,064

538

Yes

Yes

86,280

9,758

522

Yes

Yes

86,383

9,707

512

Yes

Yes

28,040

3,448

241

Yes

Yes

89,492

10,030

515

Yes

Yes

51,162

5,779

271

0.016 **
[2.485]
0.014
[1.178]

Yes

Yes

87,616

9,990

521

Yes

Yes

87,237

9,991

521

0.003
[0.391]
-0.068 ***
[-5.439]

Yes

Yes

97,762

10,359

543

Yes

Yes

87,940

9,634

498

Yes

Yes

74,366

8,966

505

Before SEO
abroad dummy
(a)

After SEO
abroad dummy
(b)

0.488 ***
[4.064]
0.455 ***
[3.538]

1.212 ***
[11.80]
1.102 ***
[10.65]

0.068 ***
[5.779]
0.070 ***
[5.944]
0.744
[5.552]
0.651
[3.037]
0.032
[3.120]
0.083
[2.092]

***
***
***
**

-0.007
[-0.507]
0.032
[1.499]
-0.007
[-0.672]
-0.058 ***
[-3.754]
0.450 ***
[3.914]

No. of firms
raising
capital
No. of firms
abroad

Countryyear
dummies

0.003
[0.488]
-0.001
[-0.201]
1.309 ***
[12.18]
1.164 ***
[7.218]
0.018 **
[2.354]
0.024
[1.079]

0.026
[0.465]

After SEO
dummy - Before
SEO dummy
(c)=(b)-(a)
0.724 ***
(44.21)
0.647 ***
(32.51)
-0.065 ***
(25.4)
-0.071 ***
(32.33)
0.565 ***
(20.49)
0.513 ***
(7.26)
-0.014
(1.84)
-0.059 **
(4.99)
0.022 *
(3.62)
-0.017
(0.64)
0.011
(0.98)
-0.010
(0.43)
-0.424 ***
(16.1)

Table 5
Before and After Comparisons between Firms Conducting Debt Issues at Home and Abroad
This table reports ordinary least square regressions of different firm-level characteristics on dummies that identify the capital raising activity of firms in international markets over the 1991-2005
period. The sample includes both firms that raise capital through debt issues abroad at some point during the sample period and firms that raise capital through debt issues at home at some point
during the sample period. The before debt issue abroad dummy equals one before a firm raises capital through a debt issue in a public market outside its home country and zero otherwise. The
after debt issue abroad dummy equals one on and after the year when a firm raises capital through a debt issue in a public market outside its home country and zero otherwise. Both dummies equal
zero for firms that only issue debt at home. The first debt issue in a public market outside firms' home country during the sample period is used to identify firms' capital raising activity abroad.
Column (c) reports the difference between the coefficients on the after debt issue abroad dummy and the before debt issue abroad dummy and the result of a Wald test of equality of these
coefficients. F-statistics from these tests are in parentheses. All regressions include country-year dummies and industry dummies. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the firm level. tstatistics are in brackets. See Appendix Table 4 for the definition of the variables. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively.

Dependent variable
Size
Log of total assets in million U.S. dollars
Log of sales in million U.S. dollars
Growth
Log of (1+annual percentage change in assets in U.S. dollars)
Log of (1+annual percentage change in sales in U.S. dollars)
Investment
Log of capital expenditures in million U.S. dollars
Log of R&D expenditures in million U.S. dollars
Capital expenditures/sales
R&D expenditures/sales
Profitability
Return on assets
Return on equity
Capital structure
Total debt/total assets
Short-term debt/total debt
Valuation
Tobin's q

Before debt issue
abroad dummy
(a)

After debt issue
abroad dummy
(b)

1.182 ***
[18.87]
1.049 ***
[16.73]

1.241 ***
[21.80]
1.105 ***
[19.13]

0.034 ***
[7.534]
0.030 ***
[6.576]

-0.014 ***
[-4.492]
-0.012 ***
[-3.695]

1.075 ***
[14.83]
0.761 ***
[6.207]
0.006
[0.984]
-0.007
[-1.546]

1.055 ***
[15.63]
0.759 ***
[6.997]
-0.005
[-1.124]
0.003
[0.440]

0.009 ***
[3.547]
0.040 ***
[5.609]

-0.006 ***
[-2.726]
0.000
[0.0321]

0.027 ***
[3.166]
0.016 *
[1.850]

0.085 ***
[11.79]
-0.010
[-1.416]

0.163 ***
[4 643]
[4.643]

0.048 *
[1 793]
[1.793]

No. of firms
raising
capital
No. of firms
abroad

Countryyear
dummies

Industry
dummies

No. of obs.

Yes

Yes

55,010

4,916

1,599

Yes

Yes

54,615

4,925

1,622

Yes

Yes

52,027

4,920

1,690

Yes

Yes

51,715

4,903

1,686

Yes

Yes

45,930

4,518

1,552

Yes

Yes

14,609

1,517

675

Yes

Yes

48,724

4,796

1,551

Yes

Yes

31,233

3,066

816

Yes

Yes

49,749

4,767

1,560

Yes

Yes

49,478

4,759

1,558

Yes

Yes

54,165

4,884

1,589

Yes

Yes

53,121

4,847

1,581

Yes

Yes

38,882

3,928

1,464

After debt issue
dummy - Before
debt issue
dummy
(c)=(b)-(a)
0.059
(1.03)
0.056
(0.94)
-0.048 ***
(120.6)
-0.042 ***
(86.67)
-0.020
(0.09)
-0.002
(0)
-0.012 **
(4.26)
0.010 **
(4.62)
-0.015 ***
(47.77)
-0.039 ***
(29.58)
0.058 ***
(48.22)
-0.027 ***
(9.58)
-0.116 ***
(15 1)
(15.1)

Table 6
Evolution of Firm Characteristics Following Seasoned Equity Offerings at Home
This table reports regressions of firm-level characteristics on dummies that identify the capital raising activity of firms. The first four dummy variables equal one in the designated year and zero otherwise. The
more than three years after SEO at home dummy equals one after the third year following a seasoned equity offering (SEO) at home and zero before. The sample includes only firms that conduct SEOs in a
public market in their home country at some point during the sample period. The first SEO at home during the sample period is used to identify firms' capital raising activity. The regressions are estimated with
fixed effects at the firm level. All regressions include year dummies. t-statistics are in brackets. See Appendix Table 4 for the definition of the variables. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one
percent, respectively.

Dependent variable
Size
Log of total assets in million U.S. dollars
Log of sales in million U.S. dollars
Growth
Log of (1+annual percentage change in assets in U.S. dollars)
Log of (1+annual percentage change in sales in U.S. dollars)
Investment
Log of capital expenditures in million U.S. dollars
Log of R&D expenditures in million U.S. dollars
Capital expenditures/sales
R&D expenditures/sales
Profitability
Return on assets
Return on equity
Capital structure
Total debt/total assets
Short-term debt/total debt
Valuation
Tobin's q

Year of SEO at
home dummy

One year after
SEO at home
dummy

Two years after
SEO at home
dummy

Three years
after SEO at
home dummy

More than
three years
after SEO at
home dummy

Firm
dummies

Year
dummies

No. of obs.

No. of
firms

Yes

Yes

97,475

10,131

Yes

Yes

95,237

9,928

0.425 ***
[52.12]
0.298 ***
[31.32]

0.472 ***
[53.06]
0.405 ***
[39.14]

0.488 ***
[49.70]
0.441 ***
[38.58]

0.496 ***
[45.89]
0.468 ***
[37.22]

0.485 ***
[42.80]
0.471 ***
[35.74]

0.140 ***
[31.94]
0.055 ***
[12.17]

-0.058 ***
[-12.38]
-0.018 ***
[-3.740]

-0.095 ***
[-18.20]
-0.073 ***
[-13.68]

-0.106 ***
[-18.59]
-0.091 ***
[-15.46]

-0.120 ***
[-19.50]
-0.110 ***
[-17.45]

Yes

Yes

86,528

9,751

Yes

Yes

84,109

9,456

0.448 ***
[29.84]
0.264 ***
[15.34]
0.013 ***
[5.193]
-0.006
[-1.046]

0.561 ***
[34.18]
0.415 ***
[21.94]
0.011 ***
[3.888]
-0.006
[-0.969]

0.483 ***
[26.54]
0.454 ***
[21.68]
-0.009 ***
[-2.847]
-0.002
[-0.351]

0.401 ***
[19.97]
0.491 ***
[21.29]
-0.019 ***
[-5.668]
-0.007
[-0.945]

0.351
[16.45]
0.525
[21.46]
-0.025
[-6.973]
-0.014
[-1.698]

***

Yes

Yes

84,056

9,401

***

Yes

Yes

27,024

3,302

***

Yes

Yes

87,109

9,717

*

Yes

Yes

50,053

5,616

0.011 ***
[4.230]
-0.020 ***
[-2.725]

0.020 ***
[7.512]
-0.048 ***
[-6.183]

0.012 ***
[4.146]
-0.059 ***
[-6.814]

0.014 ***
[4.222]
-0.062 ***
[-6.562]

0.011 ***
[3.125]
-0.068 ***
[-6.682]

Yes

Yes

85,420

9,682

Yes

Yes

85,036

9,684

-0.043 ***
[-23.37]
-0.013 ***
[-3.957]

-0.030 ***
[-14.90]
-0.009 ***
[-2.646]

-0.021 ***
[-9.538]
-0.012 ***
[-2.987]

-0.017 ***
[-6.950]
-0.013 ***
[-2.939]

-0.016 ***
[-6.185]
-0.003
[-0.606]

Yes

Yes

95,225

10,032

Yes

Yes

85,677

9,346

-0.044 **
[-2.358]

-0.304 ***
[-15.08]

-0.403 ***
[-18.13]

-0.483 ***
[-19.77]

-0.536 ***
[-20.34]

Yes

Yes

72,126

8,667

Table 7
Evolution of Firm Characteristics Following Seasoned Equity Offerings Abroad
This table reports regressions of firm-level characteristics on dummies that identify the capital raising activity of firms. The first four dummy variables equal one in the designated year and zero otherwise. The
more than three years after SEO abroad dummy equals one after the third year following a seasoned equity offering (SEO) abroad and zero before. The sample includes only firms that conduct SEOs in a
public market outside their home country at some point during the sample period. The first SEO abroad during the sample period is used to identify firms' capital raising activity. The regressions are estimated
with fixed effects at the firm level. All regressions include year dummies. t-statistics are in brackets. See Appendix Table 4 for the definition of the variables. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one
percent, respectively.

Dependent variable
Size
Log of total assets in million U.S. dollars
Log of sales in million U.S. dollars
Growth
Log of (1+annual percentage change in assets in U.S. dollars)
Log of (1+annual percentage change in sales in U.S. dollars)
Investment
Log of capital expenditures in million U.S. dollars
Log of R&D expenditures in million U.S. dollars
Capital expenditures/sales
R&D expenditures/sales
Profitability
Return on assets
Return on equity
Capital structure
Total debt/total assets
Short-term debt/total debt
Valuation
Tobin's q

Year of SEO
abroad dummy

One year after
SEO abroad
dummy

Two years after
SEO abroad
dummy

Three years
after SEO
abroad dummy

More than
three years
after SEO
abroad dummy

Firm
dummies

Year
dummies

No. of obs.

No. of
firms

Yes

Yes

4,926

550

Yes

Yes

4,779

536

0.503 ***
[15.27]
0.381 ***
[9.799]

0.540 ***
[15.04]
0.415 ***
[9.787]

0.537 ***
[13.57]
0.421 ***
[9.005]

0.519 ***
[11.95]
0.375 ***
[7.319]

0.406 ***
[8.541]
0.212 ***
[3.778]

0.097 ***
[5.256]
0.012
[0.585]

-0.092 ***
[-4.663]
-0.094 ***
[-4.412]

-0.118 ***
[-5.469]
-0.141 ***
[-6.059]

-0.146 ***
[-6.225]
-0.148 ***
[-5.813]

-0.166 ***
[-6.342]
-0.170 ***
[-5.967]

Yes

Yes

4,490

538

Yes

Yes

4,371

522

0.510 ***
[8.477]
0.290 ***
[4.370]
0.025 **
[2.386]
-0.006
[-0.295]

0.474 ***
[7.273]
0.372 ***
[5.161]
0.008
[0.685]
0.009
[0.439]

0.435 ***
[6.022]
0.484 ***
[6.110]
-0.007
[-0.596]
-0.014
[-0.583]

0.357 ***
[4.513]
0.449 ***
[5.102]
-0.002
[-0.136]
-0.018
[-0.673]

0.126
[1.460]
0.325 ***
[3.288]
-0.013
[-0.860]
-0.017
[-0.574]

Yes

Yes

4,418

512

Yes

Yes

1,832

241

Yes

Yes

4,432

515

Yes

Yes

1,984

271

0.017 *
[1.755]
-0.013
[-0.474]

0.002
[0.192]
-0.078 ***
[-2.641]

-0.008
[-0.736]
-0.070 **
[-2.139]

-0.005
[-0.429]
-0.115 ***
[-3.228]

-0.023
[-1.645]
-0.113 ***
[-2.841]

Yes

Yes

4,273

521

Yes

Yes

4,269

521

-0.033 ***
[-4.786]
-0.003
[-0.229]

-0.022 ***
[-2.903]
-0.018
[-1.201]

-0.014 *
[-1.681]
0.004
[0.259]

-0.018 **
[-1.996]
0.010
[0.540]

-0.019 *
[-1.913]
0.042 **
[2.156]

Yes

Yes

4,824

543

Yes

Yes

4,460

498

-0.073
[-0.960]

-0.490 ***
[-5.988]

-0.656 ***
[-7.302]

-0.836 ***
[-8.448]

-0.949 ***
[-8.643]

Yes

Yes

4,346

505

Table 8
Evolution of Firm Characteristics Following Debt Issues at Home
This table reports regressions of firm-level characteristics on dummies that identify the capital raising activity of firms. The first four dummy variables equal one in the designated year and zero otherwise. The
more than three years after debt issue at home dummy equals one after the third year after a firm raises capital through a debt issue at home and zero before. The sample includes only firms that raise capital
through a debt issue in a public market in their home country at some point during the sample period. The first debt issue at home during the sample period is used to identify firms' capital raising activity. The
regressions are estimated with fixed effects at the firm level. All regressions include year dummies. t-statistics are in brackets. See Appendix Table 4 for the definition of the variables. *, **, *** mean
significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively.

Dependent variable
Size
Log of total assets in million U.S. dollars
Log of sales in million U.S. dollars
Growth
Log of (1+annual percentage change in assets in U.S. dollars)
Log of (1+annual percentage change in sales in U.S. dollars)
Investment
Log of capital expenditures in million U.S. dollars
Log of R&D expenditures in million U.S. dollars
Capital expenditures/sales
R&D expenditures/sales
Profitability
Return on assets
Return on equity
Capital structure
Total debt/total assets
Short-term debt/total debt
Valuation
Tobin's q

More than
three years
after debt issue
at home dummy

Year of debt
issue at home
dummy

One year after
debt issue at
home dummy

0.239 ***
[24.89]
0.181 ***
[17.08]

0.243 ***
[23.86]
0.208 ***
[18.61]

0.226 ***
[20.78]
0.192 ***
[16.00]

0.202 ***
[17.22]
0.181 ***
[14.00]

0.068 ***
[5.450]
0.062 ***
[4.493]

0.052 ***
[11.07]
0.013 **
[2.524]

-0.047 ***
[-9.664]
-0.029 ***
[-5.677]

-0.058 ***
[-11.25]
-0.053 ***
[-9.664]

-0.075 ***
[-13.56]
-0.058 ***
[-9.768]

0.291 ***
[15.26]
0.151 ***
[6.352]
0.006 **
[2.018]
0.000
[0.00811]

0.297 ***
[14.71]
0.186 ***
[7.394]
-0.002
[-0.544]
0.001
[0.519]

0.206 ***
[9.545]
0.159 ***
[5.930]
-0.013 ***
[-3.706]
-0.002
[-0.697]

-0.005 ***
[-2.776]
-0.014 *
[-1.660]

-0.006 ***
[-3.047]
-0.036 ***
[-4.037]

0.048 ***
[20.53]
-0.096 ***
[-24.18]
-0.081 ***
[-5.149]

Two years after
debt issue at
home dummy

Three years
after debt issue
at home dummy

Firm
dummies

Year
dummies

No. of obs.

No. of
firms

Yes

Yes

46,788

4,139

Yes

Yes

46,300

4,134

-0.080 ***
[-13.40]
-0.070 ***
[-10.92]

Yes

Yes

44,245

4,136

Yes

Yes

43,991

4,121

0.141 ***
[6.103]
0.143 ***
[4.968]
-0.017 ***
[-4.470]
-0.003
[-1.107]

-0.025
[-1.023]
0.113 ***
[3.694]
-0.023 ***
[-5.841]
-0.006 *
[-1.767]

Yes

Yes

38,879

3,759

Yes

Yes

12,065

1,218

Yes

Yes

41,710

4,039

Yes

Yes

28,295

2,722

-0.010 ***
[-4.686]
-0.037 ***
[-3.949]

-0.010 ***
[-4.689]
-0.038 ***
[-3.769]

-0.006 ***
[-2.715]
-0.032 ***
[-2.888]

Yes

Yes

42,373

4,018

Yes

Yes

42,126

4,011

0.047 ***
[19.32]
-0.096 ***
[-22.76]

0.047 ***
[18.03]
-0.087 ***
[-19.34]

0.045 ***
[15.94]
-0.077 ***
[-15.77]

0.030 ***
[10.05]
-0.041 ***
[-7.857]

Yes

Yes

46,148

4,116

Yes

Yes

45,242

4,085

-0.124 ***
[-7.606]

-0.151 ***
[-8.726]

-0.166 ***
[-9.018]

-0.173 ***
[-8.774]

Yes

Yes

31,623

3,214

Table 9
Evolution of Firm Characteristics Following Debt Issues Abroad
This table reports regressions of firm-level characteristics on dummies that identify the capital raising activity of firms. The first four dummy variables equal one in the designated year and zero otherwise. The
more than three years after debt issue abroad dummy equals one after the third year after a firm raises capital through a debt issue abroad and zero before. The sample includes only firms that raise capital
through a debt issue in a public market outside their home country at some point during the sample period. The first debt issue abroad during the sample period is used to identify firms' capital raising activity.
The regressions are estimated with fixed effects at the firm level. All regressions include year dummies. t-statistics are in brackets. See Appendix Table 4 for the definition of the variables. *, **, *** mean
significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively.

Dependent variable
Size
Log of total assets in million U.S. dollars
Log of sales in million U.S. dollars
Growth
Log of (1+annual percentage change in assets in U.S. dollars)
Log of (1+annual percentage change in sales in U.S. dollars)
Investment
Log of capital expenditures in million U.S. dollars
Log of R&D expenditures in million U.S. dollars
Capital expenditures/sales
R&D expenditures/sales
Profitability
Return on assets
Return on equity
Capital structure
Total debt/total assets
Short-term debt/total debt
Valuation
Tobin's q

Year of debt
issue abroad
dummy

One year after
debt issue
abroad dummy

Two years after
debt issue
abroad dummy

Three years
after debt issue
abroad dummy

More than
three years
after debt issue
abroad dummy

Firm
dummies

Year
dummies

No. of obs.

No. of
firms

Yes

Yes

18,354

1,599

Yes

Yes

18,381

1,622

0.417 ***
[28.07]
0.316 ***
[18.35]

0.475 ***
[30.36]
0.372 ***
[20.53]

0.508 ***
[30.26]
0.389 ***
[19.98]

0.508 ***
[28.26]
0.378 ***
[18.10]

0.286 ***
[15.90]
0.208 ***
[9.992]

0.034 ***
[4.792]
-0.003
[-0.381]

-0.068 ***
[-9.081]
-0.053 ***
[-6.327]

-0.093 ***
[-11.87]
-0.087 ***
[-9.833]

-0.110 ***
[-13.22]
-0.102 ***
[-10.84]

-0.164 ***
[-18.90]
-0.143 ***
[-14.72]

Yes

Yes

18,586

1,690

Yes

Yes

18,496

1,686

0.356 ***
[10.86]
0.209 ***
[5.967]
-0.003
[-0.550]
0.005
[1.447]

0.408 ***
[11.71]
0.222 ***
[6.019]
-0.010 *
[-1.879]
0.006
[1.450]

0.317
[8.433]
0.280
[7.000]
-0.027
[-4.496]
0.008
[1.795]

0.192
[4.762]
0.252
[5.831]
-0.041
[-6.516]
0.010
[2.271]

-0.102 **
[-2.490]
0.175 ***
[4.003]
-0.063 ***
[-9.762]
0.007
[1.467]

Yes

Yes

15,703

1,552

Yes

Yes

6,465

675

Yes

Yes

15,595

1,551

Yes

Yes

7,852

816

-0.010 ***
[-3.959]
-0.024 *
[-1.876]

-0.021 ***
[-7.669]
-0.058 ***
[-4.308]

-0.030 ***
[-10.48]
-0.085 ***
[-5.976]

-0.037 ***
[-11.86]
-0.102 ***
[-6.661]

-0.043 ***
[-13.62]
-0.089 ***
[-5.645]

Yes

Yes

16,724

1,560

Yes

Yes

16,673

1,558

0.070 ***
[18.96]
-0.133 ***
[-20.11]

0.082 ***
[21.13]
-0.130 ***
[-18.62]

0.093 ***
[22.42]
-0.124 ***
[-16.57]

0.098 ***
[21.90]
-0.054 ***
[-6.737]

0.088 ***
[19.75]
-0.046 ***
[-5.709]

Yes

Yes

18,057

1,589

Yes

Yes

17,862

1,581

-0.081 ***
[-3.723]

-0.200 ***
[-8.783]

-0.233 ***
[-9.534]

-0.253 ***
[-9.651]

-0.320 ***
[-12.08]

Yes

Yes

15,909

1,464

***
***
***
*

***
***
***
**

Table 10
Size of Capital Raisings in Public Markets by Type of Issue
This table shows the median amount raised per security issue for different types of issues in public markets over the 1991-2005 period. The number of observations used to calculate the medians
in each case is in parentheses. Issues at home are those carried out in a public market in the firm's home country. Issues abroad are those carried out in a public market outside the firm's home
country. Firms that raise capital both at home and abroad are those that issue securities both outside their home country and in their home country at some point during the sample period.
Columns (a), (b), and (c) report the results of median regressions of the amount raised per security issue on a dummy identifying issues abroad, country dummies, and industry dummies. Only the
coefficient on the issue abroad dummy is reported. Standard errors are estimated through bootstrapping with clustering at the firm level. z-statistics are in brackets. See Appendix Table 1 for a list
of the economies included in each income group. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively.
Equity issues

Debt issues
Median
regression

Median

Issues at
home

Issues
abroad

26.9
(40,696)

54.3
(2,182)

3.8
(11,577)

Coefficient
on difference
between
issues abroad
and at home
(a)

All issues
Median
regression

Median

Issues at
home

Issues
abroad

25.66 ***
[6.836]

85.1
(71,986)

138.0
(26,671)

62.0
(1,092)

31.45 ***
[7.151]

7.2
(9,260)

126.5
(2,882)

116.2
(600)

27.41 **
[2.483]

57.3
(650)

82.8
(389)

27.89 ***
[4.113]

Coefficient
on difference
between
issues abroad
and at home
(b)

Median
regression

Median

Coefficient
on difference
between
issues abroad
and at home
(c)

Issues at
home

Issues
abroad

52.02 ***
[7.394]

57.3
(112,682)

131.2
(28,853)

77.94 ***
[21.06]

122.4
(1,778)

90.42 ***
[20.396]

5.6
(20,837)

101.5
(2,870)

71.80 ***
[15.693]

105.9
(32,067)

155.8
(16,681)

42.16 ***
[4.53]

106.2
(34,949)

154.5
(17,281)

40.11 ***
[4.807]

32.0
(1,243)

132.8
(695)

71.62 ***
[9.437]

42.2
(1,893)

124.0
(1,084)

58.21 ***
[10.597]

Amount raised per security issue
(million U.S. dollars at 2005 prices)
All issues
Developed economies

Developing economies

Issues by firms that raise capital both at home and abroad
Developed economies

Developing economies

Table 11
Capital Raising Activity in Domestic Markets Following Capital Raisings Abroad
This table analyzes the capital raising activity in domestic markets of firms that raise capital through security issues in
public markets abroad at some point during the 1991-2005 period. The displayed variable is the average across these firms
of the ratio of capital raised at home to total capital raised in public markets in each year following their first capital raising
abroad. The number of observations used to calculate the averages in each case is in parentheses. Issues at home are those
carried out in a public market in the firm's home country. Issues abroad are those carried out in a public market outside the
firm's home country. See Appendix Table 1 for a list of the economies included in each income group.

Equity issues

Debt issues

All capital
raisings

Year of first capital raising abroad

17.5%
(1,362)

8.0%
(4,097)

8.6%
(5,238)

One year after first capital raising abroad

59.6%
(512)

30.5%
(2,498)

34.2%
(2,872)

Two years after first capital raising abroad

71.9%
(263)

37.5%
(1,503)

41.9%
(1,695)

Three years after first capital raising abroad

74.1%
(166)

43.5%
(1,075)

46.6%
(1,187)

More than three years after first capital raising abroad

86.6%
(246)

40.4%
(1,504)

46.2%
(1,693)

Year of first capital raising abroad

11.7%
(670)

5.0%
(800)

6.0%
(1,400)

One year after first capital raising abroad

51.3%
(130)

22.7%
(339)

27.9%
(439)

Two years after first capital raising abroad

55.9%
(82)

32.9%
(199)

38.0%
(264)

Three years after first capital raising abroad

68.2%
(44)

48.2%
(129)

51.7%
(164)

More than three years after first capital raising abroad

59.8%
(55)

63.5%
(179)

61.9%
(223)

Capital raised at home/total capital
raised in public markets in each year
(average across firms)
Developed economies

Developing economies

Table 12
Capital Raising Activity in Domestic Markets of Firms that Raise Capital Abroad
This table analyzes the capital raising activity in domestic markets of firms that raise capital through security issues in public markets abroad at some point during the 1991-2005 period. The first variable
analyzed is the amount raised in domestic capital markets per year by these firms before and after their first capital raising abroad. The second variable analyzed is the amount raised in domestic capital
markets divided by total assets before raising capital per year before and after their first capital raising abroad. The third variable analyzed is the ratio of the amount raised in domestic capital markets per firm
to the total amount raised in these markets per year before and after their first capital raising abroad. For firms with multiple security issues in the same year, the amount raised divided by assets before raising
capital is calculated as the weighted average of the ratio of amount raised to total assets for each issue in the year, weighted by the amount raised per issue. For the three variables, years without capital
raising activity are assigned a zero. Issues abroad are those carried out in a public market outside the firm's home country. Columns (a), (b), and (c) report the results of tobit regressions of the different
variables on a dummy identifying the period after the first capital raising abroad and a constant. The effect of a discrete change in the dummy variable on the expected value of the observed dependent
variable is reported. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the firm level. t-statistics are in brackets. See Appendix Table 1 for a list of the economies included in each income group. *, **, *** mean
significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively.
Equity issues
Mean

Debt issues
Tobit regression

Before first
capital
raising
abroad

After first
capital
raising
abroad

Developed economies

7.70
(35,919)

20.50
(42,751)

Developing economies

3.21
(9,791)

Developed economies

Developing economies

Mean

All capital raisings
Mean
Tobit regression

Tobit regression

Before first
capital
raising
abroad

After first
capital
raising
abroad

8.93 ***
[5.626]

36.83
(35,919)

129.76
(42,750)

5.59
(11,438)

3.58 ***
[4.686]

1.62
(9,782)

0.112
(35,677)

0.039
(42,481)

0.128 ***
[3.231]

0.001
(9,656)

0.021
(11,245)

Developed economies

0.001
(30,428)

Developing economies

0.002
(7,912)

Before first
capital
raising
abroad

After first
capital
raising
abroad

81.75 ***
[8.231]

44.53
(35,916)

150.26
(42,749)

92.03 ***
[9.032]

6.95
(11,435)

5.23 ***
[5.181]

4.83
(9,779)

12.54
(11,432)

9.14 ***
[7.005]

0.012
(35,009)

0.013
(41,055)

0.066 ***
[2.587]

0.126
(34,796)

0.048
(40,847)

0.314 ***
[3.483]

0.040 **
[2.555]

0.011
(9,681)

0.007
(11,184)

0.031 ***
[2.612]

0.013
(9,559)

0.028
(11,026)

0.073 ***
[3.481]

0.003
(37,627)

0.001 ***
[5.969]

0.001
(27,649)

0.003
(34,566)

0.003 ***
[9.542]

0.001
(31,126)

0.003
(37,933)

0.002 ***
[10.638]

0.004
(9,534)

0.002 ***
[4.725]

0.003
(3,600)

0.004
(8,024)

0.001 **
[2.396]

0.003
(8,034)

0.004
(10,124)

0.003 ***
[6.547]

Change following
first capital raising
abroad
(a)

Change following
first capital raising
abroad
(b)

Change following
first capital raising
abroad
(c)

Annual amount raised in domestic markets
per firm (million U.S. dollars at 2005 prices)

Annual amount raised in domestic
markets/total assets per firm

Annual amount raised in domestic markets
per firm/total amount raised in domestic markets

Figure 1
Evolution of Capital Raising Activity in Public Markets Around the World
This figure shows the evolution of the aggregate amount of capital raised by firms from developed and developing economies through
security issues in public markets in each year over the 1991-2005 period. Issues at home are those carried out in a public market in the
firm's home country. Issues abroad are those carried out in a public market outside the firm's home country. Data are in constant 2005
U.S. dollars. See Appendix Table 1 for a list of the economies included in each income group.

Amount Raised by Firms from Developed Economies
(Billion U.S. dollars at 2005 prices)
2,500

2,000

1,500

Issues at Home

1,000

500
Issues Abroad
1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Amount Raised by Firms from Developing Economies
(Billion U.S. dollars at 2005 prices)
160
140
120
100
80
60
Issues at Home
40
20
Issues Abroad
1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Figure 2
Degree of Internationalization of Capital Markets
This figure shows the aggregate amount of capital raised abroad as a percentage of the total amount of capital raised by firms from
developed and developing economies through security issues in public markets for different types of issues. Issues abroad are those
carried out in a public market outside the firm's home country. See Appendix Table 1 for a list of the economies included in each income
group.

Equity Issues
(Amount Raised Abroad/Total Amount Raised)

80%

59.4%

60%

40%

36.1%

20%

15.0%
9.0%

8.6%

6.8%

0%
Developed Economies

Developing Economies

Debt Issues
(Amount Raised Abroad/Total Amount Raised)

60%

50%

46.1%

44.0%

43.5%

40%
33.9%
30%

28.8%

27.0%

20%

10%

0%
Developed Economies

Developing Economies
1995

2000

2005

Figure 3
Concentration of Capital Raising Activity in International Markets
This figure shows the distribution of the amount raised abroad over the 1991-2005 period among those firms that raise capital abroad at
some point during this period. Firms are divided in deciles according to the amount raised abroad over the sample period. Issues abroad
are those carried out in a public market outside the firm's home country. See Appendix Table 1 for a list of the economies included in
each income group.

Distribution of Capital Raised Abroad by Firms from Developed Economies

Fraction of Total Capital Raised Abroad

75%

60%

45%

30%

15%

0%
1

2

3

4

5
6
Firm Deciles

7

8

9

10

Distribution of Capital Raised Abroad by Firms from Developing Economies

Fraction of Total Capital Raised Abroad

60%

45%

30%

15%

0%
1

2

3

4

5
6
Firm Deciles

7

8

9

10

Figure 4
Size Differences Among Issues at Home and Abroad
This figure shows the cumulative distribution of the amount raised per security issue in public markets by firms from developed and
developing economies over the 1991-2005 period. Issues with size above the 95th percentile are excluded. Issues at home are those
carried out in a public market in the firm's home country. Issues abroad are those carried out in a public market outside the firm's home
country. See Appendix Table 1 for a list of the economies included in each income group.

Cumulative Distribution of Amount Raised per Issue
by Firms from Developed Economies
1.0

Issues at
Home
0.8

Issues Abroad
0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

Amount Raised per Issue (Million U.S. dollars at 2005 Prices)

Cumulative Distribution of Amount Raised per Issue
by Firms from Developing Economies
1.0

Issues at
Home
0.8

Issues Abroad
0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

400

Amount Raised per Issue (Million U.S. dollars at 2005 Prices)

450

500

Appendix Table 1
Country Classification
This table presents the list of economies included in the different regions and their classification by income level. Economies are classified as developed or developing based on income level in
2005. Developed economies correspond to high-income economies according to the World Bank classification, which are economies with a GNI per capita of 10,725 U.S. dollars or higher in 2005.
Developing economies correspond to low- and middle-income ecoonomies according to the World Bank classification, which are economies with a GNI per capita below 10,725 U.S. dollars in
2005. * means the economy is classified as developed.

Africa
Australia *
Germany *
Japan *
New Zealand *
United States *

Algeria
Central African Rep.
Egypt
Ghana
Kenya
Liberia
Malawi
Mauritius
Morocco
Nigeria
Senegal
South Africa
Sudan
Tanzania
Tunisia
Zambia
Zimbabwe

Asia
Bangladesh
China
Hong Kong, China *
India
Indonesia
Macao, China *
Malaysia
Myanmar
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore *
Sri Lanka
Taiwan *
Thailand
Vietnam

Eastern Europe &
Central Asia
Bulgaria
Croatia
Czech Republic
Estonia
Hungary
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Lithuania
Poland
Romania
Russia
Slovakia
Turkey
Ukraine
Uzbekistan

Latin America &
Caribbean
Argentina
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Guatemala
Mexico
Panama
Peru
Uruguay
Venezuela

Middle East
Bahrain *
Iran
Israel *
Jordan
Kuwait *
Lebanon
Oman
Qatar *
Saudi Arabia *
United Arab Emirates *

Western Europe
Austria *
Belgium *
Cyprus *
Denmark *
Finland *
France *
Greece *
Iceland *
Ireland *
Italy *
Liechtenstein *
Luxembourg *
Malta *
Monaco *
Netherlands *
Norway *
Portugal *
Slovenia *
Spain *
Sweden *
Switzerland *
United Kingdom *

Other
Antigua *
Aruba *
Bahamas *
Bermuda *
British Virgin Islands *
Cayman Islands *
Falkland Islands *
Faroe Islands *
Gibraltar *
Guernsey *
Isle of Man *
Jersey *
Netherlands Antilles *
Papua New Guinea
Puerto Rico *

Appendix Table 2
Data on Capital Raisings
This table shows the number of observations from each country/region included in our dataset on
capital raising activity. The data cover the period 1991-2005. The dataset includes only security issues
by firms in public markets. Each observation corresponds to a security issue. Issues at home are those
carried out in a public market in the firm's home country. Issues abroad are those carried out in a
public market outside the firm's home country. See Appendix Table 1 for a list of the economies
included in each region and income group.

Issues at home
(a)
6,940
8,932
64,795

Number of observations
Issues abroad
(b)
3,966
1,939
3,326

Total
(c)=(a)+(b)
10,906
10,871
68,121

Africa
Asia
Australia & New Zealand
Eastern Europe & Central Asia
Latin America & Caribbean
Middle East
Western Europe
Other

304
16,048
3,563
346
12,328
72
23,387
1

127
2,620
1,418
303
1,263
594
13,529
2,712

431
18,668
4,981
649
13,591
666
36,916
2,713

Total

136,716

31,797

168,513

Developed economies

112,931

28,901

141,832

Developing economies

23,785

2,896

26,681

Germany
Japan
United States

Appendix Table 3
Data on Firm-Level Characteristics
This table shows the number of observations and firms from each country/region included in our analyses of firm-level characteristics. The data cover the period 1991-2005. Firms with capital raising activity are
those that raise capital through security issues in public markets at some point during the sample period. Firms with capital raisings at home are those that raise capital through security issues in public markets in
their home country at some point during the sample period. Firms with capital raisings abroad are those that raise capital through security issues in public markets outside their home country at some point during the
sample period. Since firms may raise capital both at home and abroad, the number of observations and firms in columns (b) and (e) may differ from the sum of the capital raising activity at home and capital raising
activity abroad columns. See Appendix Table 1 for a list of the economies included in each region and income group.

Number of observations
Firms with capital raising activity

Firms with no
capital raising
activity
(a)
4,943
14,913
65,382

Total
(b)
6,144
29,370
66,173

Africa
Asia
Australia & New Zealand
Eastern Europe & Central Asia
Latin America & Caribbean
Middle East
Western Europe
Other

3,893
20,725
4,392
2,673
3,907
594
28,449
144

Total

Firms with
Firms with
capital raising capital raising
activity at
activity
home
abroad

Number of firms
Firms with capital raising activity

Firms with no
capital raising
activity
(d)
480
1,221
7,492

Total
(e)
668
3,032
7,163

5,983
27,761
65,957

868
7,687
3,187

Total
(c)=(a) + (b)
11,087
44,283
131,555

520
34,257
6,440
983
5,150
538
35,687
262

386
32,293
6,322
801
4,960
128
33,772
69

205
5,152
529
304
1,719
458
6,051
207

4,413
54,982
10,832
3,656
9,057
1,132
64,136
406

554
2,717
640
384
518
86
3,046
29

150,015

185,524

178,432

26,367

335,539

Developed economies

125,524

158,354

153,068

21,242

Developing economies

24,491

27,170

25,364

5,125

Germany
Japan
United States

Firms with
Firms with
capital raising capital raising
activity at
activity
home
abroad
654
2,909
7,144

75
587
250

Total
(f)=(d) + (e)
1,148
4,253
14,655

61
4,816
1,016
115
572
84
4,059
48

45
4,542
999
95
550
16
3,831
12

23
602
56
34
161
74
591
37

615
7,533
1,656
499
1,090
170
7,105
77

17,167

21,634

20,797

2,490

38,801

283,878

14,041

18,123

17,525

1,934

32,164

51,661

3,126

3,511

3,272

556

6,637

Appendix Table 4
Series Description and Data Sources
This table shows the description of the data used and their sources.
Series Name

Description

Source

Amount of capital raised in
public markets

Gross proceeds from security issues in public markets by firms in constant 2005 U.S.
dollars. Data include only capital raisings by firms. Debt issues include only issues with an
original maturity greater than one year. Data exclude debt issued by the public sector
(including national, local and regional governments, government agencies, regional
agencies, and non-government agencies), and capital raisings by investment funds,
investment companies, and REITs. Data also exclude issues of mortgage-backed securities
and other asset-backed securities. Amounts are converted to constant 2005 U.S. dollars
from data in current U.S. dollars using the U.S. CPI.

SDC Global New Issues
Database

Total assets before raising
capital

Total assets at the end of the fiscal quarter prior to issuing securities in public markets in
current U.S. dollars.

SDC Global New Issues
Database

Total assets (million U.S.
dollars)

Total assets at the end of the most recent fiscal year, converted to U.S. dollars using the
fiscal year end exchange rate.

Compustat North America and
Worldscope

Sales (million U.S. dollars)

Net sales or revenues, converted to U.S. dollars using the fiscal year end exchange rate.

Compustat North America and
Worldscope

Capital expenditures (million
U.S. dollars)

Funds used to acquire fixed assets other than those associated with acquisitions. It includes,
but is not restricted to, additions to property, plant, and equipment and investments in
machinery and equipment. Data are converted to U.S. dollars using the fiscal year end
exchange rate.

Compustat North America and
Worldscope

R&D expenditures (million
U.S. dollars)

All direct and indirect costs related to the creation and development of new processes,
techniques, applications, and products with commercial possibilities. Data are converted to
U.S. dollars using the fiscal year end exchange rate.

Compustat North America and
Worldscope

Return on assets

Net income over previous year's total assets.

Compustat North America and
Worldscope

Return on equity

Net income over previous year's common equity.

Compustat North America and
Worldscope

Total debt

Interest bearing and capitalized lease obligations. It is the sum of long- and short-term debt.

Compustat North America and
Worldscope

Short-term debt

Portion of debt payable within one year, including current portion of long-term debt and
sinking fund requirements of preferred stock or debentures.

Compustat North America and
Worldscope

Tobin's q

Ratio of market value of a firm's assets to their replacement cost, at the end of the most
recent fiscal year. Market value of assets is calculated as the book value of debt, computed
as book value of assets minus book value of equity, plus market capitalization of equity.
The replacement value of assets is proxied by the book value of assets.

Compustat North America and
Worldscope

