NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DISTINCT EFFECTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND COMMUNICATION
TECHNOLOGY ON FIRM ORGANIZATION
Nicholas Bloom
Luis Garicano
Raffaella Sadun
John Van Reenen
Working Paper 14975
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14975

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2009

We would like to thank the ESRC for help with financing this research at the Centre for Economic
Performance. We thank participants at the LSE Labor workshop, at the NBER Summer Institute in
Labor and Personnel Economics, at the Harvard/MIT workshop in Organizational Economics and
at the Microsoft Economics workshop for their useful comments. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Nicholas Bloom, Luis Garicano, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The distinct effects of Information Technology and Communication Technology on firm organization
Nicholas Bloom, Luis Garicano, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen
NBER Working Paper No. 14975
May 2009
JEL No. F23,O31,O32,O33
ABSTRACT
Empirical studies on information communication technologies (ICT) typically aggregate the "information"
and "communication" components together. We show theoretically and empirically that these have
very different effects on the empowerment of employees, and by extension on wage inequality. If managerial
hierarchies are devices to acquire and transmit knowledge and information, technologies that reduce
information costs enable agents to acquire more knowledge and 'empower' lower level agents. Conversely,
technologies reducing communication costs substitute agent's knowledge for directions from their
managers, and lead to centralization. Using an original dataset of firms in the US and seven European
countries we study the impact of ICT on worker autonomy, plant manager autonomy and spans of
control. Consistently with the theory we find that better information technologies (Enterprise Resource
Planning for plant managers and CAD/CAM for production workers) are associated with more autonomy
and a wider span of control. By contrast, communication technologies (like data networks) decrease
autonomy for both workers and plant managers. Our findings are robust to using exogenous variation
in cross-country telecommunication costs arising from differential regulatory regimes.

Nicholas Bloom
Stanford University
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
nbloom@stanford.edu

Raffaella Sadun
Centre for Economic Performance
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
R.Sadun@lse.ac.uk

Luis Garicano
Departments of Management and Economics
and Centre for Economic Performance
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
and CEPR
luis.garicano@gmail.com

John Van Reenen
Department of Economics
London School of Economics
Centre for Economic Performance
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
and NBER
j.vanreenen@lse.ac.uk

1

Introduction

Most studies of the impact of information and communication technologies (ICT) on firm organization, inequality and productivity treat ICT as an aggregate homogeneous capital stock.
However, these technologies have at least two distinct components. First, through the spread
of cheap storage and processing of data, information stored in databases is becoming cheaper
to access. Second, through the spread of cheap wired (IP-based) and wireless communications, agents find it easier to communicate with each other (e.g. e-mail and mobile devices).
Reductions in the cost of accessing information stored in databases and of communicating information among agents can be expected to have a very diﬀerent impact on firm organization.
While cheaper communication technology facilitates specialization, generating a reduction in
the variety of tasks performed by workers as agents can specialize further and rely more on
others, cheaper information access has an ‘empowering’ eﬀect, allowing agents to handle more
of the problems they face without relying on others. This diﬀerence matters not just for firms,
but also in the labor market, as information access and communication technology changes can
be expected to aﬀect the wage distribution in opposite directions.1 In this paper, we utilize
a new international firm-level data set with directly measured indicators of organization and
technologies to study whether indeed ICTs have these distinct eﬀects.
Our starting point is the analysis in Garicano (2000) on the hierarchical organization of
expertise. Decisions involve solving problems and thus acquiring the relevant knowledge for
the decision. In determining at what hierarchical level decisions should be made, firms face
a trade-oﬀ between information acquisition costs and communication costs. Making decisions
at lower levels implies increasing the cognitive burden of agents at those levels. For example,
decentralizing from the corporate head quarters (CHQ) to plant managers over the decision
whether to invest in new equipment requires training plant managers to better understand
financial decision making, cash flows, etc. To the extent that acquiring this knowledge is
expensive, the knowledge of the plant manager can be substituted for by the knowledge of those
at corporate head quarters. Relying more on the direction of corporate head quarters reduces
the cognitive burden on the manager and so lowers the total information acquisition costs. But
this comes at the price of increasing communication between levels in the hierarchy, increasing
total communication costs. From a cognitive perspective, decentralized decision making thus
implies an increase in the cost of information acquisition to economize on communication costs:
1

For example, Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg (2006) analyze theoretically this impact on wages.

1

trading-oﬀ knowing versus asking for directions.
The level at which decisions are taken responds to the cost of acquiring and communicating information. Reductions in the cost of communication allows for a reduction in knowledge
acquisition costs through the increasing use of ‘management by exception’, e.g. local managers
rely more on corporate managers for decision making. Reductions in the cost of information access, on the other hand, reduce the cognitive burden imposed by decentralized decision making
and thus make more decentralization eﬃcient. Consequently, information and communication technologies aﬀect diﬀerently the hierarchical level at which diﬀerent decisions are taken.
Improvements in information technology should push decisions ‘down’ leading to decentralization while improvements in communication technology should push decisions ‘up’ leading to
centralization.
In this paper, we study this cognitive view of hierarchy by testing for the diﬀerential impact
on the organization of firms of these two types of technologies (information vs. communication).
To do this, we extend Garicano (2000) to consider two types of decisions and discuss in each
case technologies that make it easier for agents to acquire the information necessary to make
them and their technologies that improve communication. This extension is methodologically
important as the data available to researchers on real authority has multiple types of decisions
(e.g. worker decisions on the production line vs. managerial decisions on investment). First,
we consider non-production decisions. These decisions can either be taken at the central
head quarters by corporate oﬃcers, or delegated to a business unit (in our case, the plant
manager). The specific decisions that we study are capital investment, hiring new employees,
new product introductions and sales and marketing decisions. The key piece of information
technology that has recently aﬀected information access by these managers is, as we discuss in
Section 2, Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP ). These ERP systems increase dramatically
the availability of information to decision makers in the company, that is they reduce the cost
of acquiring information to solve a problem2 . It follows that they should increase the autonomy
of the plant manager.
Second, we consider factory floor production decisions. These are decisions on the production process that can either be taken by factory floor employees or by those in the plant
hierarchy, such as which tasks to undertake and how to pace them. Here, a key technological
change in the manufacturing sectors we focus on has taken place reducing the cost for workers of
being informed: Computer Assisted Design/Computer Assisted Manufacturing (CAD/CAM ).
2
We present survey evidence consistent with our discussions with technology experts that ERP primarily
reduces information acquisition costs rather than reducing communication costs.

2

A worker with access to those machines can solve problems better, and thus needs less access
to his superiors in making decisions. This technology should increase their autonomy and, by
reducing the amount of help they need from plant managers, increase the span of control of
plant managers.
On the other hand, as we argued above, we expect communication technologies to centralize
decision making. This will be true both for production workers (so that plant-managers will
take more of their decisions), and also for plant-managers (so that the central head quarters
will take more of their decisions). A key technological innovation aﬀecting communication
is the growth of networks and connectedness. We thus also test whether the availability of
networks reduced the decision making autonomy in production decisions of workers, and in
non-production decisions of managers.
We utilize a new data set that combines plant-level measures of organization and ICT
across the US and Europe. The organizational questions were collected as part of our own
management survey work (see Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007; Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen,
2008) and were asked to be directly applicable to the theories we investigate. The technology
dataset is from a private sector data source (Harte-Hanks) that has been used mainly to
measure hardware utilization in large publicly listed firms (e.g. Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson and
Hitt, 2002), whereas we focus on the less used software components of the survey.
In terms of identification, we mainly focus on simple conditional correlations between the
diﬀerent ICT measures and three dimensions of the organization of the firm, guided by our
theoretical predictions. But we also utilize the fact that the diﬀerential regulation of the
telecommunication industry across countries generates exogenous diﬀerences in the eﬀective
prices of networks. We show that industries that exogenously rely more on networks are at a
greater disadvantage in countries with high communication costs, and use this to identify the
eﬀect of communication costs on centralization.
In short, we find evidence that is broadly supportive of the theory. Technologies that lead
to falling information costs for non-production decisions (like ERP ) tend to empower plant
managers (relative to the CHQ) and technologies that lead to falling information costs for
production decisions (like CAD/CAM ) tend to empower workers relative to plant managers.
Information technologies also widen the span of control. By contrast, technologies that reduce
communication costs (like networks) lead to more centralization and have ambiguous eﬀects
on the span of control (in the theory and the data).
Much previous empirical work on has tended to aggregate ICTs together as one homogenous technology due to data constraints, often simply measured by computers per person.

3

As noted above, this is problematic since hardware will simultaneously reduce information
and communication costs, and we show that these should have very diﬀerent eﬀects on firm
organization. One strand of the literature looks for complementarities between ICT and organizational aspects of the firm, but takes organization as exogenous3 . A second branch tries
to endogenize organization, but does not discriminate between types of ICT4 . A third branch,
which we are perhaps closest to, looks more closely at the eﬀects of ICT on organization but
does so in the context of a single industry in a single country5 . What is unique about our
study is the disaggregation of types of ICT and organization across a number of industries and
countries.
An alternative to our cognitive perspective is that hierarchies may be a solution to incentive
problems (e.g. Calvo and Weillisz, 1978; Aghion and Tirole, 1997; Dessein, 2002), linked to
automation (Autor et al, 2003) or the result of coordination issues (Cremer et al. 2007 and
Alonso et al, 2008). Although we are not rejecting the importance of other mechanisms, we
think our information perspective is first order and provide some empirical support for this in
a range of robustness tests6 .
We proceed as follows. We first discuss in Section 2 the key technological changes in
production aﬀecting information and communication costs. We then propose a basic theoretical
framework and suggest its implications in our context (Section 3). We then discuss our data
(Section 4), and present our results (Section 5). The final section oﬀers some concluding
comments.

2

Technological Changes in Information and Communication
Costs

In this section we study three key technical changes: the introduction of intranets (N ET W ORK);
the widespread adoption of CAD/CAM technologies; and the introduction of large, real time,
connected databases, in the form most notably of ‘enterprise resource planning’ (ERP ) sys3

See the survey in Draca, Sadun and Van Reenen (2007). Examples include Bartel, Ichinowski and Shaw
(2007), Black and Lynch (2001), Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2007) and Bresnahan, Brynjolsson and Hitt
(2002).
4
For example see Acemogluet al (2007), Caroli and Van Reenen (2001), Colombo and Delmastro (2004),
Crepon et al (2004) and Aubert et al (2004). To explain the evidence for trend delayering described in Rajan
and Wulf (2006), Guadalupe and Wulf (2008) emphasis competition rather than ICT.
5
See, for example, Baker and Hubbard (2003, 2004) or the case studies in Blanchard (2004).
6
Our work also relates to the wider theoretical literature on firm delegation. For example, see Baron and
Besanko (1992), Melumad et al (1995), Mookherjee (2006), Baker et al (1999), Radner (1993) and Hart and
Moore (2005).

4

tems.7 The reason we focus on these technologies is that they are major advances in the
manufacturing sector that we study, as well as other sectors like retail, wholesale and banking.
We also believe they map clearly into reductions in communication costs (N ET W ORK) and
reductions in information acquisition costs for non-production decisions (ERP ) and production
decisions (CAD/CAM ).

2.1

The Rise of Intranets: Facilitating Communication through the Organization

Over the last thirty years firms have experienced substantial falls in communication costs.
Probably the key change over the last decade has been the introduction of corporate intranets.
These allow companies to connect all the plants to corporate head quarters, reducing the cost
of communication between head quarters and local managers. In the past, for example, sharing
documentation with head quarters required the use of fax or mail. These high communication costs made speedy decisions from the centre head quarters extremely diﬃcult and costly,
leading to the delegation of day-to-day control of the plant to local management. Once the
leased-lines and corporate intranet is installed, the cost of communication between local and
central managers is reduced. This allows for the use of more experienced central management
to be swiftly alerted to signs of production problems - for example identifying specific types
of output variations as fault indicators - and able to provide swift decision making support.
Intranets also reduced the cost of communication inside the production plants, facilitating the
flow of information between the shop floor and the plant manager. These network technologies
are equally important in retail, wholesale and retail banking. Other general communication
technologies include cell phones and e-mail.

2.2

Computer Assisted Design and Manufacturing (CAD/CAM): Increasing Information Access at the Shop Floor

New manufacturing orders generally require design, testing and redesign, typically by the engineering department. In the past, the process traditionally started with the design being
provided by the supplier - for example an exhaust pipe for a new military vehicle - which the
engineers would mock-up and produce in a trial run. Once this was successful the engineers
would go to the manufacturing facility, e.g. the exhaust factory, to supervise a small scale production run, and produce the first prototypes. The local manager would oversee this process,
working with the engineers to ensure his plant could implement the designs in-house, or have
7
We thank software engineers at Sun Microsystems and EDS/HP, and consultants at McKinsey and Accenture
for many useful discussions that shaped our thinking on these matters.

5

these externally procured. These initial production runs would then be shown to the customer,
refined in a further design iteration, and finally set-up for the full-scale production run by the
engineers. The introduction of CAD/CAM resulted in important changes in this process. The
CAD part of the CAD/CAM software allows the plant to directly implement the initial design
stage for modifications of standard products, and the CAM enables this team to program up
the Computer Numerical Control equipment to produce the key parts.8
In this way, CAD/CAM has increased the amount of information available to the production team and enabled them to carry out the initial prototype design and production stage,
reducing the involvement of both the plant manager and the remotely based central head
quarters engineering team.
Similar technologies in retail and banking, like customer databases and relationship management tools, have empowered store-level employees to cross-sell other products like insurance
and credit (e.g. Hunter et al 2000).

2.3

Connected Real Time Data Bases: Increasing Managerial Information

Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP ) is the generic name for software systems that integrate
several data sources and processes of an organization into a unified system. These applications
are used to store, retrieve and share information on any aspect of the production and sales
process in real time. This includes standard metrics like production, waste, deliveries, machine
failures, orders and stocks, but also broader metrics on human resource and a range of financial
variables. An ERP system is based on a common database and a modular software design. The
main sellers of ERP are SAP and Oracle, both used by more than half of large US business.
The introduction of ERP systems is typically the largest investment in information technology
in manufacturing related business: in 2006, ERP was estimated to represent just under one
third of all application IT spend in large US companies.9
To understand the impact of ERP consider again the example for an exhaust factory. After the introduction of SAP 5.0, such a production plant would have all its data collected and
stored in one unified computing system, allowing the plant manager (and all other managers)
to easily access and compare data across a range of processes. For example, if a filter supplier
were to shut-down due to a fire, the plant manager could use his ERP system to generate
an on-line inventory of current filter stocks, a read-out of work-in-progress, and customer or8
Traditionally these would be used to drive numerically controlled programming tools (see for example, the
description of their use in the valve industry in Bartel et al, 2007). Major players in the CADCAM supply
industry are UGS Corp (owned by Siemens), Dassault Systèmes and Hitachi Zosen.
9
These estimates are from Shepard and Klein, (2006) who conducted 175 interviews with IT managers in
U.S. based companies with 1,000 or more employees.

6

ders outstanding, to evaluate which customer orders were most at risk from shortages. This
would enable him to re-schedule filter stocks towards the most imminent customer orders,
and pause production of less imminent orders until alternative suppliers could be found. He
would also able to call-up a list of alternative filters and their suppliers to source a replacement
supplier. Once the local manufacturing sites and the company head quarters are integrated
in the company-wide ERP system, plant managers and the central head quarters have a full
company-level overview of production, inventory, orders and finance across the company. The
parallels with coordination across multiple stores in a big retail chain are apparent. Therefore,
the development of ERP enables managers to access timely information at an unprecedented
rate, empowering plant managers to make decisions on a range of activities including investment, hiring, pricing and product choice10 . We further discuss (with the help of some data
we collected) the role of ERP and how it maps into information access after discussing the
theory.
To sum up, three important technological changes that have been observed:
• A reduction in the cost of communicating information between managers, particularly as
a result of the growth in corporate intranets (N ET W ORK).
• An improvement in the access to information by production workers and shop floor
workers as a result of CAD/CAM and customer databases
• An improvement in the access to information by all managers across the organization as
a result of the introduction of ERP
In what follows, we set up a simple model of a hierarchy that is involved in acquiring
and using information in order to develop some hypothesis on the impact of information and
communication technology on the organization of firms.

3
3.1

Theory: Communication, Information Access and Organization
The Trade-oﬀ Between Communication and Information Access

Garicano (2000) proposes a theory of a hierarchy as a cognitive device. In the model the role of
hierarchy is to facilitate the acquisition of knowledge by increasing its utilization rate. Here we
10
By improving the access of managers to local time information ERP also allows managers to make better
decisions (see Davenport et al, 2002).

7

present a simplified version of Garicano (2000), which allows us to extend the theory towards
a setting with diﬀerent types of decisions (production and non-production).
Each production worker draws a unit measure of problems (or tasks or decisions) in [0, 1]
per unit of time. Production only takes place if all the problems are dealt with by someone in
the organization. We normalize to 1 the output per agent and per unit of time once problems
are solved. Problems are distributed according to a density function f (z). Without loss of
generality, we reorder problems so that f 0 (z) < 0, i.e. more common problems have a lower
index. Agents can only deal with a problem or task if they have the relevant knowledge. The
cost incurred by an agent i to acquire the knowledge to deal with all problems is ai . This cost
may depend on the technology available to diﬀerent agents and their skill. Thus an agent
who acquires the information required to perform all the tasks produces 1 − ai .11 The cost of
training agents can be reduced through a hierarchy in which production agents autonomy is
reduced, so that they only need enough knowledge to deal with the most common problems
- that is, those in (0, zp )- and ask for help on the rest (the ‘exceptions’) to an agent who is
specialized in problem solving, whom we call m (for manager).12 Figure 1 illustrates this task
allocation.
[Figure 1 about here]
The value of the additional layer of problem solvers is that by reducing workers’ autonomy,
the cost of training them is reduced. The cost of hierarchy is the time wasted, since problem
solvers do not produce output, but instead use their time to help others solve their problems.
Suppose a team must deal with N problems per unit of time. The team needs then N
production workers in layer 0 and nm managers or problem solvers. The profits generated
by this hierarchy with N production workers, each receiving a wage wp , and nm managers
specialized in ‘problem solving’ or ‘helping’, receiving a wage wm , is13 :
π = N − N (ap zp + wp ) − nm (am zm + wm )

(1)

11
The cost of information acquisition was denoted “c” in earlier versions to be consistent with Garicano (2000).
The change in notation was made to avoid confusion with communication, or helping, cost “h”.We assume the
cost of learning is linear so that learning z problems costs az. This is without loss, as we can redefine problems
of tasks so that f (z) is the frequency of a renormalized (equal cost) problem.
12
In Garicano (2000), there are as many layers of problem solvers as necessary, and agents can decide which
problems to do and which ones not to do at all. It is shown that the organization set up in the model (characterized by ‘management by exception’) is optimal. Intuitively, if those lower in the hierarchy learnt exceptions
(rather than routine tasks), the tasks could be swapped, reducing communication costs. Here, in our basic
model, there are only two layers and all problems are (eventually) solved; the only choice is who learns the
solution. The model with two types of problems in Section 3.2. extends the framework in Garicano (2000).
13
We are solving throughout for the partial equilibrium eﬀects (taking wages as given) as is common in the
literature (see e.g. Milgrom and Roberts, 1990). For a general equilibrium analysis with heterogeneous workers
(i.e. where wages are adjusting) see Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg (2006).

8

Figure 1: Delegation of tasks in the Basic Model

0

z0
Delegated Tasks

1

Centralized Tasks

Notes: z ∈ [0, z0 ] Performed by lower level agents
z ∈ [ z0 ,1] Passed on to the higher level

that is, when the N production workers have autonomy zp they must learn the zp most common
problems. We further assume that the learning technology is such that managers know all the
tasks that workers also know, so that knowledge overlaps.14 Since all tasks must be dealt with
zm = 1. Whenever production workers confront problems or decisions for which they do not
have enough information, so that they need help, a communication cost h (for helping cost)
per question posed must be incurred. This communication cost is only incurred when the
problem could not be solved at first and help must be sought. A production agent can deal
with a fraction F (zp ) of the tasks and passes on (1 − F (zp )). Thus a manager spends time
h(1 − F (zp )) helping each production worker. Since there are N agents, the needed number of
managers or problem solvers is N h(1 − F (zp )) = nm , resulting in a span, or ratio of workers
per manager of s = N/nm . This constraint determines a trade-oﬀ between what the agents
below can do and how many managers are needed. The more knowledge acquired by lower
level agents, the less managers are needed. Figure 2 provides an overview of the model.
The problem of the hierarchy is to decide the size or span of the hierarchy (s) and the
degree of worker autonomy (zp ) so as to maximize profits per problem. Substituting for nm in
equation (1) we obtain:
π ∗ = max[N (1 − (ap zp + wp ) − h(1 − F (zp )) (am + wm ))]
zp

[Figure 2 about here]
The following comparative statics follow immediately.
Proposition 1

1. A drop in communication (or ‘helping’) costs (h) reduces worker auton-

omy (zp ) and has an ambiguous impact on span of control s = N/nm (more questions
are asked, but each one takes less time).
2. A reduction in the cost of acquiring information of all agents (a = am = ap ), or one
aﬀecting only lower level agents, ap , increases lower level autonomy (zp ) and increases
managerial span of control, s (as less questions are asked).
3. A reduction in the cost of acquiring information by managers only (am ) reduces lower
level autonomy (zp ) and reduces span of control (workers ask more questions).
14
This may be the case because the learning takes place on the job or because the process of learning involves
learning the ‘easy’ tasks first. The assumption is without loss, as it is easy to see that all the comparative statics
are unchanged if knowledge is non overlapping, and managers know only what workers do not know, that is
1 − zp . The overlapping knowledge restriction seems more reasonable in our empirical application.

9

Figure 2: Management span and autonomy
Manager (expert)
Span of control:
number of
workers reporting
t manager
to

1
Centralized
Tasks
Z0

Worker autonomy: low
if managers take most
decisions (Zo close to
zero);
) high
hi h if workers
k
take most decisions
(Z0 is close to one)

Delegated
Tasks

0

Workers (agents)

The formal proof of the above is straightforward. Note first that f 0 (z) < 0 implies that
the second order conditions for optimization is met, ∂ 2 π/∂zp2 < 0. Then the first result follows
from the fact that
∂2π
∂zp ∂ap

∂2π
∂zp ∂h

> 0 . Second, letting ap = am = a, we have that:

< 0, i.e. if workers can learn cheaper they do more. Finally,

∂2π
∂zp ∂a

∂2π
∂zp ∂am

< 0. Similarly

> 0. The changes

in span follow straightforwardly from s = N/nm = 1/ (h(1 − F (zp ))) .
The intuition for these results is as follows. First, higher communication cost raises the
value of additional worker knowledge, since that economizes on communication. Second, higher
information acquisition costs for all agents raise the value of asking questions for workers, economizing on expensive information acquisition. Third, when the technology used by managers
to acquire information improves, more managers can be hired per worker so that each worker
can ask more questions and acquire less information. Essentially, while communication cost
reductions facilitate the reliance of specialist problem solvers and decrease what each worker
can do, reductions in the cost of acquiring information make learning cheaper and reduce the
need to rely on specialized problem solvers for help with solutions.

3.2

Extension: Production and Non Production Decisions

Middle managers perform two broadly diﬀerent functions. First, they are at the top of the
production hierarchies, dealing with the problems that production workers could not handle,
as outlined in the model above. Second, they also are at the bottom of a non-production
hierarchy, potentially dealing with managerial decisions on things like hiring/firing, investment,
product introduction and marketing delegated to them by central head quarters. To study the
implications of the multiple roles played by middle managers, we extend the model in the
simplest possible way considering a multilayer hierarchy involving corporate managers, middle
managers (in our data, plant managers) and production workers.
In this extension, corporate head quarters and middle-managers deal with non-production
(management) decisions, x, while middle-managers and production workers deal with production decisions, z.
Production Decisions: As above, each production worker confronts one production decision
per unit of time, z ∈ [0, 1]. He can deal with a measure zp of these production decisions. That
is, for those z > zp , he asks a middle manager for help. Decisions are distributed according
to cdf F (zp ), with pdf f (zp ). As previously, optimality (management by exception) implies
f 0 (zp ) < 0, so that production workers specialize in the more common tasks. A cost h is
incurred each time the middle manager must be involved in production. Production workers
can acquire knowledge at cost ap and middle managers at cost am . A firm that must deal with

10

N production problems requires, as previously, h(1 − F (zp )) N = nm middle managers.
Non-Production Decisions: The existence of a hierarchy generates non-production decisions.
In particular, each middle manager generates a measure 1 of non-production decisions per unit
of time, where non-production decisions x ∈ [0, 1], are drawn from a density function g(x),

again with g 0 (x) < 0 implied by optimality. If the middle manager has the knowledge to deal

with these decisions, he does so instantaneously. If he does not, he passes on the problem to
corporate head quarters. Similarly to production workers, middle managers acquire knowledge
so that they can take a fraction xm of those decisions (they can solve those problems) . Thus
if the problem drawn is x < xm , a middle manager solves it; if not, the corporate manager
intervenes. A helping cost h is incurred as before when top managers have to intervene, that is
helping each middle manager costs (1 − G(xm ))h units of corporate manager’s time.15 For an
agent i to learn to take (all) of the non-production problems costs ai a cost dependent on the
technology available to manager i; thus training middle managers to deal with non production
problems costs am xm , while, analogously to the production decision case, corporate managers
can deal with all (a unit measure) of non-production problems at a cost ac (c for corporate),
with ac ≷ am . A hierarchy with nm non-production problems where middle managers have
knowledge xm requires (1 − G(xm ))hnm = nc corporate managers.
Thus the profits of a hierarchy with production workers, middle managers and corporate
managers are given by:
π∗ =

max

zp ,xm ,nm ,nc

N − (ap zp + wp )N − (am + am xm + wm )nm − (ac + wc )nc

(2)

The first term are the N units of output produced by N production workers. The second
term is the costs of employing production workers - their wage (wp ) and the costs of providing
them with enough information to deal with decisions z < zp (ap zp ). The third term is the cost
of nm middle managers - their wage (wm ), and training them to deal with production problems
(am ) and with a fraction xm of non-production problems. The cost of dealing with production
and non-production problems is assumed to be the same, since a given technology is available
to each manager to deal with these problems16 . The last term is the cost of nc corporate
managers - their wage (wc ) and training them to deal with a measure of 1 non-production
problems (ac ). The organization must choose the set of decisions dealt with by workers and
15

We assume communication or helping cost h is the same for production and non-production decisions for
simplicity since in our empirical application we cannot distinguish diﬀerent communication costs. Conceivably,
some technologies may aﬀect communication costs diﬀerently for production and non-production, and that
would have to be taken into account in the formulation.
16
This assumption can be weakened by assuming them diﬀerent, with the only cost being the extra notation.

11

middle managers, zp and xm (as illustrated graphically in Figure 3), as well as the number of
middle managers and corporate managers, subject to the time constraints of middle managers
and corporate managers.
[Figure 3 about here]
Replacing the number of middle managers nm and of corporate managers nc required to
manage N production workers, the profits per production worker can be written (dividing
equation (2) through by N, and noting that the profit function is constant returns to scale in
N ):
π∗
= max 1−(ap zp +wp )−(am +am xm +wm )h(1−F (zp )) −(ac +wc )h2 (1−F (zp ))(1−G(xm ))
zp ,xm
N
(3)
Which allows us to generalize in a straightforward manner the results above.
Proposition 2

1. A reduction in communications costs (h) leads to a reduction in produc-

tion decision making by production workers (zp ) and in non-production decision making
of middle managers (xm ), and has an ambiguous impact on spans of control.
2. A reduction in the cost of acquiring information of lower level agents (ap ) leads to an
increase in production workers autonomy (zp ) and in the span of control of middle managers (sm = N/nm ).
3. A reduction in the cost of acquiring information either by middle managers (am ) or
by them and corporate managers (ac and am ) increases autonomy of middle managers
in non-production decisions (xm ), and the span of corporate managers (sc = nm /nc );
it reduces the autonomy of production workers (zp ), and the span of control of middle
managers (sm ).
We show these results formally in Appendix A. The framework generates twelve comparative statics - the impact of three technological costs (ap , am , h) on four organizational outcomes
(xm , zp , sm , sc ), and our most general econometric specification will examine all of these predictions. However, data constraints imply that we have much more powerful tests of some of these
predictions than others (e.g. we only have a crude measure of CHQ span, s0 ). Consequently,
the baseline model focuses on a sub-set of six empirical tests illustrated in Table 1.
Table 1 considers the eﬀects of reductions in communication and information costs on
three organizational outcomes; plant manager autonomy, in column (1); workers’ autonomy, in
12

Figure 3: Delegation of tasks in the extended model
Non-Production
0
Decisions

xm
Delegated Tasks

Production
Decisions

0

Centralized Tasks

zp
Delegated Tasks

1

1
Centralized Tasks

Notes: This generalizes Figure 1 where we allow for non-production decisions
and production decisions. Non-production
Non production decisions below xm are performed by
plant managers, the rest by central head quarters. Production decisions below
z0 are performed by production workers, the rest by plant managers

column (2); and plant manager’s span, in column (3). Falling communication costs (proxied
by N ET W ORK) have negative eﬀects on autonomy and ambiguous eﬀects on spans (each
worker does more but will ask more question). Falling information acquisition costs for nonproduction decisions (proxied by ERP ) are instead predicted to raise autonomy for plant
managers. Finally, falls in information acquisition costs for production decisions (proxied
by CAD/CAM ) are predicted to increase both worker autonomy and plant manager’s span
(they can manage more workers if these workers are making more of their own decisions). To
reiterate, the intuition is broadly as in the previous section: better information access pushes
decisions down, as it allows for better decentralized decision making without an undue cognitive
burden to those lower in the hierarchy. Better communication pushes decisions up, as it allows
employees to rely on those further up the hierarchy to make decisions.

3.3

Alternative Theoretical Channels

We close the theory section with a brief discussion of alternative hypothesis through which
ICTs could aﬀect the allocation of decisions and span and how we might distinguish them
from the cognitive approach we emphasis in this paper.
3.3.1

Agency and Incentives

It is diﬃcult to have a general view of how technology aﬀects agency without being precise
about the channels. Specifically, would we expect delegation to increase or decrease as a
consequence of ICT improvements? The key characteristic that will aﬀect whether delegation
should increase or decrease is the extent to which technical changes facilitate monitoring inputs
or monitoring outputs. As Prendergast (2002) showed, a technology that results in better
measures of output will increase delegation, as incentives can be used to align decision making.
On the other hand, a technology that facilitates monitoring of inputs will reduce delegation.
Specific technologies, and specific instances of the technology, may have stronger impact on
inputs or on outputs.

For example, Baker and Hubbard (2004) have argued that a specific

piece of ICT, the on-board computers used in trucks, decrease the cost of monitoring a trucker’s
level of care in driving (an input). As a result, these on-board computers induced an increase
in vertical integration (less incentives and delegation). The opposite prediction may be easily
the consequence of a particular type of ICT. This may be particularly the case for ERP , which
provides better information about agents’ production decisions and so can facilitate delegation
with monetary incentives.
Absent a specific technology like on board computers, we believe that there may be multiple

13

channels through which the technologies that we examine may aﬀect incentive conflicts. Rather
than formulating a large range of hypothesis on incentives and decision making, we simply
note that if technology aﬀects output monitoring, it should also aﬀect delegation and incentive
payments. We can explicitly test whether this is driving our results by controlling in our
regressions for the impact of ICT on delegation holding incentives constant. We do this exercise
in Table 10 by including measures of the importance of incentive pay, and we show that our
key results appear robust to this extension.
3.3.2

Automation

Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003) have argued that the key way ICT impacts the division of
labor is through “automation”. Essentially, their argument is that the routine tasks of both
low human capital workers (like assembly line workers) and higher human capital workers (like
bank clerks) have been replaced by computerization and do not have to be either learned or
undertaken by workers or managers. In a bank, for example, information technology allows for
automatic sorting of checks.
We can extend our model to deal with this type of mechanism. Specifically, suppose that
a worker is in charge of tasks z0 , the machine is in charge of tasks m and the manager of tasks
1 − z0 − m. The impact of automation is to increase the number of tasks m undertaken by
the machine. Straightforward comparative statics show that the number of tasks undertaken
by a worker is reduced, as the machine does the more routine tasks. The reason is that the
marginal value of learning an additional task does not get increased by the machine doing the
most routine task, so z0 stays constant. Thus a worker does z0 − m tasks compared to z0 tasks
before, while the manager continues to do 1 − z0 tasks, thereby reducing the share of tasks
carried out by worker. The span of control remains unchanged as the number of tasks done by
the manager 1 − z0 are unchanged.
Our data allows testing of this channel since, if any of our ICT measures is having an impact
through automation, then this will reduce the number of tasks done by lower level agents,
reducing their autonomy. By contrast, our perspective predicts increases of the autonomy of
lower level agents in response to falls in information acquisition costs. Another distinguishing
feature of our theory is that we obtain specific predictions on the impact of networks, which
the automation perspective is largely silent on.

14

3.3.3

Coordination

One key aspect of ERP is that, in unifying multiple previously unrelated databases, it facilitates coordination between previously independently operated business units. In fact, by
creating a common language, ERP facilitates the substitution of ‘hierarchical’ communication by ‘horizontal’ or peer-to-peer communication, as Cremer, Garicano and Prat (2007) have
noted. As a result, if coordination across units is becoming easier and less hierarchical, we
could also expect (similarly to the eﬀect we predict in our theory) ERP to result in ‘empowerment,’ as managers of previously existing business units coordinate with those of others
without going through central management. This could also complement changes in incentives
towards horizontal communication, as in an Alonso et al. (2008) type model.
The pure coordination story where the main impact of the information and communication
changes is to decrease coordination costs, however, will be easy to tell apart from ours. First,
coordination theories do not have implications for spans of control. In fact, if horizontal
communication increases, we will see an increase in the amount of coordination that takes
place, and that could lead to a bigger role for managers and a smaller span when ERP is
introduced (contrary to our hypothesis). Second, if the changes in communication costs also
act through the coordination channel, they should also result in decentralization, rather then
centralization.
In other words, the coordination perspective does not result in a sharp distinction between
information costs (ERP and CAD/CAM ) and communication costs (N ET W ORK). Both
reduce coordination costs, and thus result in the same impact on decentralization (larger) and
on spans (ambiguous). The data will allow us to diﬀerentiate this perspective from ours, since
we expect changes in information and communication costs to have diﬀerent organizational
outcomes.

4

Data

We use a new international micro dataset combining novel sources from the US and several
European countries. Our two main sources of data are the Center for Economic Performance
(CEP) management and organization survey and the Harte-Hanks ICT panel. We also match
in information from various external data sources such as firm-level accounting data, industry
and macro-economic data.

15

4.1
4.1.1

The CEP management and organization survey
Overview

In the summer of 2006 a team of 51 interviewers ran a management and organizational practices
survey from the CEP (at the London School of Economics) covering over 4,000 firms across
Europe, the US and Asia. In this paper we use data on approximately 1,000 firms from the
US, France, Germany, Italy, Poland, Portugal, Sweden and the UK for which we were able
to match the organization data with ICT data from an independent database. Appendix C
provides detailed information on our sources, but we summarize relevant details here.
The CEP survey uses the “double-blind” technique developed in Bloom and Van Reenen
(2007) to try and obtain unbiased accurate responses to the survey questions. One part of
this double-blind methodology is that managers were not told they were being scored in any
way during the telephone survey. The other part of the double blind methodology is that
the interviewers knew nothing about the performance of the firm as they were not given any
information except the name of the company and a telephone number. Since these firms are
medium sized, large household names are not included.
The survey is targeted at plant managers in firms randomly drawn from the population of
all publicly listed and private firms in the manufacturing sector with between 100 and 5,000
employees. We had a response rate of 45% which was uncorrelated with firm profitability or
productivity. The interviews took an average of 45 minutes with the interviewers running an
average of 78 interviews each, over a median of 3 countries, allowing us to remove interviewer
fixed eﬀects. We also collected detailed information on the interview process, including the
interview duration, date, time of day, day of the week, and analyst-assessed reliability score,
plus information on the interviewees’ tenure in the company, tenure in the post, seniority and
gender. We generally include these variables plus interviewer fixed-eﬀects as ‘noise-controls’ to
help control for any potential measurement error.
4.1.2

Measuring Plant Manager Autonomy

As part of this survey we asked four questions on plant manager autonomy. First, we asked how
much capital investment a plant manager could undertake without prior authorization from the
central head quarters. This is a continuous variable enumerated in national currency (which
we convert into US dollars using Purchasing Power Parities). We also asked where decisions
were eﬀectively made in three other dimensions: (a) hiring a new full-time permanent shopfloor
employee, (b) the introduction of a new product and (c) sales and marketing decisions. These
more qualitative variables were scaled from a score of one, defined as all decisions taken at the
16

corporate head quarters, to a five, defined as complete power (“real authority”) of the plant
manager, and intermediate scores varying degrees of joint decision making. In Table A2 we
detail the individual questions (D1 to D4) and scoring grids in the same order as they appeared
in the survey.
Since the scaling may vary across all these questions, we converted the scores from the
four decentralization questions to z-scores by normalizing each score to have a mean of zero
and standard deviation one. In our main econometric specifications, we take the unweighted
average across all four z-scores as our primary measure of overall decentralization17 . We also
experiment with other weighting schemes and we also show what happens when the questions
are disaggregated into their component parts.
4.1.3

Measuring Worker Autonomy

During the survey we also asked two questions about worker autonomy over production decisions regarding the pace of work and the allocation of production tasks. These questions were
taken directly from Bresnahan et al. (2002) and are reported in Table A2 (questions D6 and
D7). These questions are scaled on a one to five basis, with a one denoting managers have full
control, and a five denoting workers have full control over the pace of work and allocation of
tasks. Our measure of workers’ autonomy is a dummy taking value one whenever decisions on
both pace of work and allocation of production tasks are mostly taken by workers (i.e. both
variables take values higher than three18 ). Again, we experiment with other functional forms.
4.1.4

Measuring Span of Control

We also asked about the plant manager’s span of control in terms of the number of people
he directly manages, as reported in Table A1 (question D8). The interviewers were explicitly
trained to probe the number of people that directly report to him rather than the total number
in the hierarchy below him. Unfortunately, we do not have such a direct measure of CHQ span
(since we did not interview the CEO). But we try to get a sense of senior management’s (CHQ)
span of control by asking about whether the firm was single or multi-plant firm, with the idea
being that multi-plant firms lead to larger spans at senior management level.
17

The resulting decentralization variable is itself normalized to mean zero and standard deviation one.
Decisions on pace of work are taken mostly by workers 11% of the times. Similarly, decisions on the
allocation of production tasks, are taken moslty by workers 12% of the times.
18

17

4.2

Harte-Hanks’ ICT Data

We use an plant level ICT panel produced by the information company Harte-Hanks (HH). HH
is a multinational firm that collects detailed hardware and software information to sell to large
ICT firms, like IBM and Cisco, to use for marketing. This exerts a strong market discipline
on the data quality, as major discrepancies in the data are likely to be rapidly picked up by
HH customers’. For this reason, HH conducts extensive internal random quality checks on its
own data, enabling them to ensure high levels of accuracy.
The HH data has been collected annually for over 160,000 plants across Europe since the
late-1990s. They target plants in firms with 100 or more employees, obtaining a 37% response
rate. We use the data for the plants we were able to match to the firms in the management
survey. Since this matching procedure sometimes leads to multiple plants sampled in HH per
firm, we aggregate ICT plant level data to the firm level, using employment weights. A number
of papers, such as Bresnahan et al (2002) and Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2003), have previously
used the US HH hardware data, but few papers have used the software data. And certainly
no one has combined the software data with information on organizational form in a single
country, let alone internationally as we do here.
The prior literature, which has focused on hardware, has typically used information on
firms aggregate ICT capital stock covering PCs, servers and infrastructure. But since these
simultaneously reduce information and communication costs we do not expect a clear result.
Our approach consists instead in considering the presence of specific technologies within the
organization, namely: networks, to proxy for communication costs; Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP ), to capture the reduction in information access costs for non-production decisions;
and CAD/CAM to capture the reduction in information access costs for production decisions.
This is depicted in relation to the model in Figure 4.
[Figure 4 about here]
HH contains information on the presence of all of these software types in the plant.
• HH distinguishes up to 17 distinct types of ERP s: the market leader is SAP, but Oracle,
IBM and many others all oﬀer products in this space.
• HH defines under “workstation applications” the presence of CAD/CAM ’s, software
tools that assist production workers, engineers and machinists.
• HH measures the presence of Leased Lines or Frame Relays (N ET W ORK), which are
18

Figure 4: Information and communication
Manager s information
Manager’s
costs: am & ap
Cost of managers
acquiring information,
measured
d using
i th
the
presence of ERP

CEO

Plant
Plant
Manager 1 Manager 2
Worker’s
information
costs: ap
Cost of
workers
acquiring
information,
measured
using
presence of
CAD/CAM

Workers

Workers

Plant
Manager 3

Workers

Communication
costs: h
Cost of
transmitting
information
between CEO
and PM, and
between PM
and workers,
measured by
presence of
networks

technologies used by businesses to connect oﬃces or production sites19 . We have, in
some years, direct information on Local Area Networks (LAN) and Wide Area Networks
(WAN) and find these to be both highly correlated with our N ET W ORK variable. In
the robustness tests we show the similarity of results when using this as an alternative
proxy for networks.
The presence of any of these technologies at the plant level is codified using binary variables,
and plant level employment weights are used to generate firm level indicators20 . In terms of
other technologies we condition on PC intensity, but note its theoretical ambiguity.
4.2.1

Does ERP mainly lower information costs rather than communication costs?

We have argued in Section 2 that ERP reduces information costs much more than communication costs, but this may be contentious. To investigate this issue in more detail, we collected
data in a survey of IT managers on ERP usage in 431 firms with 100 to 5000 employees (details
in Appendix B). Briefly, we asked managers specifically what was the impact of ERP in their
companies with regards to information and communication. Following the theory, we asked
them whether ERP was “used to endow top management with more and better information”
and respondents could answer on a Likert scale of 1 = “strongly disagree” to 5 = “strongly
agree”. About three quarters of respondents said that ERP was “likely” or “very likely” to
increase information flows (see Q1 in Figure 5 ). We also asked whether “ERP is used for
faster communication of information and directives from top management to other employees”
(again from 1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree). Only about a third of respondents
answered that ERP was “likely” or “very likely” to increase this form of communication (see
Panel Q2 in Figure 5 ). Using the cardinal scale, the mean of the information acquisition
answer was 3.8, whereas the mean of the communication answer was 2.8 with the diﬀerence
significant at the 1% level. A similar pattern is evident when respondents where asked about
information acquisition vs. communication for middle managers (see Panels Q3 and Q4 in
Figure 5). Appendix B has some further analysis, but this empirical evidence corroborates our
discussions with technology experts that ERP is primarily related to information acquisition
19

A leased line is a symmetric telecommunications line connecting two locations. It is sometimes known as a
‘Private Circuit’ or ‘Data Line’. Unlike traditional PSTN lines, a leased line does not have a telephone number,
because each side of the line is permanently connected to the other. Leased lines can be used for telephone,
data or Internet services. Frame relay is a data transmission technique used to send digital information (data
and voice) cheaply quickly, and is often used in local and wide area networks. These systems are predominantly
used to manage internal communication systems. They are not specifically about production or non-production
decisions, but aﬀects communication through out the firm.
20
The resulting variables have mass points at zero or one.We present robustness tests using just the discrete
versions of these technology indicators.

19

Figure 5: Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) use
Q1: “Our ERP System is used to endow
top management with more & better
i f
information”
ti ”

Q2: “Our ERP System is used to faster
communicate information and directives from
t managementt to
top
t employees”
l
”

Q3: “Our ERP System is used to endow
middle management with more & better
i f
information”
ti ”

Q4: “Our ERP System is used to faster
communicate information and directives from
middle
iddl managementt to
t employees”
l
”

Notes: Answers range from 1=“strongly disagree” to 5=“strongly agree”. Each bar represents the %
of respondents in the relevant bin from 431 firms. See Appendix B for details.

rather than communication.

4.3

Other Data

In addition to the organization variable, the CEP survey also provides a wide variety of other
variables such as human capital, demographics and management practices. Also, since the
CEP survey used accounting databases as our sampling frames from BVD (Amadeus in Europe
and ICARUS in the US), we have the usual accounting information for most firms, such as
employment, sales, industry, location, etc.
Table 2 contains some descriptive statistics of the data we use. In the largest sample we
have 949 plants with median employment of 252 employees (153 at the median).

5

Empirical Results

5.1

Econometric Model

We wish to estimate the following generic equation:
Oijk = αaijk + βhijk + x0ijk γ + uijk

(4)

where the dependent variable is Oijk which denotes the organizational form of firm i in industry
j in country k. Our theory oﬀers predictions over four types of organizational outcomes for
which we have data: the autonomy of the worker (O = AW), the autonomy of the plant
manager (O = AP), the span of control of the plant manager (O = SP) and the span of control
of the CHQ (O = SC). As in the theory, a denotes information access costs and h denotes
communication costs. The xijk denote other control variables and uijk is a stochastic error
term - we will discuss these in more detail later.
As discussed in the data section, we have direct measures of workers’ autonomy, managers’
autonomy and managers’ span of control from our survey. The management autonomy questions investigate the extent of “non-production” autonomy the plant manager has from the
central head quarters (e.g. how much investment could be made without central head quarters
approval). The worker autonomy questions relate to decisions the worker could have control
over compared to the plant manager (e.g. setting the pace of work).
The information costs and communication costs facing the firm are not directly observable, but we substitute in the relevant indicator from HH (N ET W ORK lowers h; ERP and
CAD/CAM lower a). To be more explicit the three regressions we will estimate are:
Autonomy of the plant managers

20

APijk = αAP ERPijk + β AP N ET W ORKijk + x0ijk γ AP + uAP
ijk

(5)

Autonomy of the worker
0
AW
+ uAW
AWijk = αAW (CAD/CAM )ijk + β AW
ijk N ET W ORKijk + xijk γ
ijk

(6)

Span of control of the plant manager
0
SP
ln(SPijk ) = αSP (CAD/CAM )ijk + β SP
+ uSP
ijk NET W ORKijk + xijk γ
ijk

(7)

Recall that Table 1 contains the main theoretical predictions of the model that we have
sketched together with the technologies we are using. Falls in information costs are associated
with greater plant manager autonomy and workers’ autonomy, and larger spans of control.
By contrast, falls in communication costs are associated with decreases in autonomy and
ambiguous eﬀects on spans.
We have a rich set of controls to draw on (xijk ), although we are careful about conditioning
on factors that are also directly influenced by technology. Consequently we consider specifications with very basic controls as well as those with a more extensive vector of covariates.
Since there is measurement error in the organizational variables we generally condition on
“noise controls” that include interviewer fixed eﬀects and interviewee controls (e.g. tenure of
manager) and interview controls (e.g. time of day). Other controls include a full set of three
digit industry and country dummies, plant age, skills (share of college educated workers), firm
and plant size and multinational status. We also perform robustness checks with many other
variables suggested in the literature which may potentially confound our key results.

5.2

Basic Results

Tables 3 through 5 present the main results, each table has a diﬀerent dependent variable
and corresponds to equations (5) to (7). Table 3 contains the empirical results for plant
managers’ autonomy. All columns control for size (through employment of the firm and the
plant), multinational status (foreign multinational or domestic multinational with the base as
a purely domestic firm), whether the CEO is located on the same site as the plant manager21 ,
“noise” controls as discussed in the data section (there are 60 controls including analyst fixed
eﬀects) and a full set of country and three digit industry dummies. Column (1) uses the
presence of Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP ) as a measure of information acquisition over
21
All results are robust to dropping size, multinational and ceo on site controls (results available upon requests). Note that firms where the CEO was the same individual as the plant manager are dropped.

21

non-production decisions. As the theory predicts, ERP is associated with more autonomy of
plant managers (relative to the central head quarters) as the plant manager is allowed greater
flexibility in making decisions over investment, hiring, marketing and product introduction.
In our model this is because ERP enables him to access information more easily and solve
more problems without referring them upwards. In terms of the other covariates. we find
that larger and more complex enterprises (as indicated by size and multinational status) are
more likely to decentralize decision-making to the plant manager. Column (2) includes firm
level skills, as measured by proportion of employees with college degrees. The variable takes
a positive and significant coeﬃcient, indicating that more skilled workplaces tend to be more
decentralized (consistent with Caroli and Van Reenen, 2001). This column also includes the
PC intensity of plant which enters with a negative and insignificant sign. The ambiguity of the
IT hardware variable should not be surprising as greater computer intensity simultaneously
lowers information costs and communication costs which, according to our theoretical model,
have opposite eﬀects on autonomy.
The third column of Table 3 includes an indicator for the presence of networks, which
indicates lower communication costs. As the theory predicts, there is a negative coeﬃcient
on the network variable (significant at the 5% level) which may reflect the fact that lower
communication costs imply that central head quarters make more decisions than the plant
manager as it is now easier to pass on solutions. This result is robust to including skills and PC
intensity in column (4). Columns (5) and (6) includes both information and communications
technologies at the same time. Since these are positively correlated, the results are a little
stronger. Table 3 is consistent with the theoretical model sketched earlier: falling information
costs are associated with decentralization, whereas falling communication costs are associated
with centralization.
The next two tables analyze the relationship between communication and information
technologies with workers’ autonomy and plant manager span of control (this follows exactly
the order outlined in Table 2). Table 4 is a probit model of workers’ autonomy where our
indicator of information acquisition over production decisions is CAD/CAM . In columns
(1) and (2), the coeﬃcient on CAD/CAM is positive and significant, indicating that such
technologies are associated with worker empowerment. In columns (3) and (4), by contrast, the
presence of networks has a negative coeﬃcient which is consistent with the theoretical notion
that greater communication leads to centralization. Although the coeﬃcient on N ET W ORK
is correctly signed, it is insignificant even when both technologies are included simultaneously
(in the final two columns).

22

Table 5 examines the plant manager’s span of control as measured by the number of employees who directly report to him. CAD/CAM is associated with significantly greater plant
manager span, consistent with the idea that production technologies that help worker information access enable them to do more tasks which makes it possible for the plant manager to
oversee more production workers (greater span). The coeﬃcient on N ET W ORK is positive
and insignificant (the theory does not have an unambiguous prediction for this coeﬃcient).
Comparing the empirical results with our expectations in Table 1, we obtain a reasonably close match. All the coeﬃcients are in the same direction as the theoretical predictions
(when they are unambiguous) and all are significant at the 5% level (with the exception of
N ET W ORK in the worker autonomy equation). The idea that information technologies are
associated with increased autonomy and span of control, whereas communications technologies
are associated with decreased autonomy appears to have some empirical content. By contrast,
the automation story would predict information technologies should be associated with centralization away from lower level employees and the coordination theories would predict that
communication technologies should be associated with decentralization (see sub-section 3.3.).
Thus, we interpret our evidence on ICT and firm organization as providing some support for
the cognitive view of hierarchies.

5.3

Magnitudes

Although the estimates are statistically significant and broadly consistent with our theory, are
they of economic significance? One way of examining this question is to simulate an increase in
the diﬀusion of our ICT indicators. Given the debate over whether the increasing productivity
gap between Europe and the US in the decade since 1995 was related to ICT (e.g. Bloom,
Sadun and Van Reenen, 2007), we simulate increasing the ICT diﬀusion measures by 60% (the
diﬀerence in the average level of the ICT capital stock per hour worked between the EU and
the US 2000-200422 ).
An increase in the penetration rate of ERP of 60% over the sample average of 36% is
22 percentage points. Using the final column of Table 3, this is associated with a 0.025 of
a standard deviation increase in plant manager autonomy. This is equivalent in eﬀect to an
increase in the proportion of college graduates by 26% (using the coeﬃcient on education),
which is broadly the increase in education achieved by the US between 1990 and 2000 of about
a quarter23 . So we regard this as a substantial eﬀect. Similar calculations show that increasing
22

This is based on the EU KLEMS data. See Timmer, Yppa and Van Ark (2003) Table 5 for a similar figure
for 2001 and a description of the data.
23
In 1990 25.7% of American workers had college degrees or equivalent and this rose to 31.8% by 2004, an

23

the penetration of N ET W ORK by 60% (21 percentage points at the mean) is associated with
a decrease in plant manger’s autonomy by 0.023 standard deviations, equivalent to reducing
the college share by 24%. This increase in N ET W ORK is associated with an increase in
plant manager’s span of 1.1% (equivalent to a 19% increase in the college share) and with
a reduction in worker autonomy of -0.005 standard deviations (equivalent to a 10.3% fall in
the college share)24 . So the “eﬀect” of falling communication costs (N ET W ORK ) appears
somewhat greater for plant manager autonomy than for worker autonomy, with span of control
in the middle. Finally, consider a 60% increase in CAD/CAM . This is associated with 0.2%
increase in plant manager’s span (equivalent to a 3.7% increase in the college share) and a
0.1% increase in worker autonomy (equivalent to a 1.6% increase in the college share). This is
lower because the mean of CAD/CAM is lower than the other technologies.
This implies that these technical changes appear very important for some aspects of organization (benchmarked against equivalent increases in skills), especially ERP on plant manager’s
autonomy and N ET W ORK on all three organizational dimensions.

5.4
5.4.1

Extensions and Robustness
Endogeneity

Tables 3 through 5 present conditional correlations that seemed to be broadly consistent with
the theory. The theoretical model suggests that the endogenous outcomes should covary in
systematic ways in equilibrium which is what we examine in the data. We are of course concerned about endogeneity bias as there may be some unobservable that is correlated with the
organizational outcomes and our measures of information and communication costs (especially
as these are all measured at the firm level). We take some reassurance in the fact that although
these ICT indicators are positively correlated in the data25 , their predicted eﬀects on the same
organizational variable can take opposite signs. For example, in the plant manager autonomy
equation the coeﬃcient on information acquisition technologies (proxied by ERP ) is opposite in sign to communication technologies (N ET W ORK) both theoretically and empirically.
For endogeneity to generate these results, the hypothetical unobservable positively correlated
with decentralization would have to mimic this pattern of having a negative covariance with
N ET W ORK and a positive covariance with ERP . This is always a theoretical possibility,
but it is not obvious what would generate this bias.
increase of 6.1 percentage points or 23.7% (Machin and Van Reenen, 2008).
24
These calculations use the coeﬃcients in the final columns in Tables 4 and 5.
25
For example, the pairwise correlation between the ERP and the NET W ORK variables is 0.168, significant
at the 1% level.

24

Nevertheless, we do consider an alternative approach to identifying the eﬀects of networks.
The cost of electronically communicating over networks diﬀers substantially between countries
because of diﬀerential degrees of the roll-out of high speed bandwidth and the pricing of
telecommunications. Although there have been moves to liberalize the telecommunication
sector in most countries, this has happened at very diﬀerent speeds and in some countries the
incumbent state run (or formerly state run) monopolists retain considerable pricing power (e.g.
Nicoletti and Scarpetta, 2003; Azmat et al, 2008; OECD, 2005, 2007). We discuss these more
in Appendix C.
We exploit these diﬀerential costs using OECD (2007) series on the prices of leased lines
used for networks (call this price pck ), which represent the cost of an annual subscription to a
leased line contract at 2006 PPP US$. An obvious empirical problem is that these measured
telecommunication price indices only vary across countries26 and not within countries, so they
are collinear with the country dummies. Industries will be diﬀerentially aﬀected by these
costs, however, depending on the degree to which they are reliant on networks for exogenous
technological reasons. We proxy this reliance by using the intensity of network use in the
industry pooling the data across all countries (N ET W ORKj ).27 We then estimate reduced
form models:
yijk = λ(pck ∗ N ET W ORKj ) + x0ijk μ + vijk

(8)

Note that the controls (x0ijk ) include a full set of industry and country dummies, so we are
essentially using pck ∗ N ET W ORKj as a direct proxy for h, with the prediction that λ > 0: for
the network-intensive industries we would expect to see more managerial autonomy in countries
where communication prices are high (like Poland) than where they are low (like Sweden).
The results for this experiment are presented in Table 6. The first column simply repeats
the baseline specification from column (4) of Table 3 showing that network presence is associated with centralization28 . The second column includes the key variable representing eﬀective
network prices. The positive coeﬃcient on this variable is consistent with the idea that higher
network costs reduces the use of networking technologies, and so enable plant managers to retain more autonomy. The magnitude of the coeﬃcient suggests that for an industry where 10%
26

This is only partially true as there is some within country variation. For example, the roll-out of broadband
proceeds at a diﬀerent rate across areas (see Stephenson, 2006).
27
This identification strategy parallels Rajan and Zingales (1998) We also considered specifications where we
used network intensive industries defined on US data only and dropped the US from the sample we estimated
on. This generated similar results.
28
Note that the sample is larger because we do not condition on ERP . This could also be endogenous and we
have no valid instrument for it. Results are similar if we condition on ERP throughout this table (for example
in column (2) the coeﬃcient on the price term is 5.189 with a standard error of 2.221).

25

of workers use networks doubling communication costs (e.g. moving from Sweden to Poland)
decreases autonomy by 0.48 of a standard deviation. A concern is that the country-level network price variable simply proxies some other variable so we include country-level schooling
and GDP per person in column (3). The network price variable remains positive and significant
in sign29 .
5.4.2

“Cross” Eﬀects of Technologies

We now consider some of the further “cross” eﬀects of technologies by saturating the empirical
models with all three types of technologies. Table 7 presents the full set of predictions from
the theory analogously to Table 1. We present the most general specifications for each of the
three main organizational variables in Table 8.
The first thing to note is that none of the earlier conclusions change with respect to the
earlier tests: N ET W ORK are associated with less autonomy, ERP is associated with more
autonomy for managers and CAD/CAM is associated with more autonomy for workers and
a larger span of control. In terms of the additional tests, the first row of Table 8 includes
CAD/CAM in the plant managers’ autonomy equation. This is insignificant, in line with the
theoretical prediction of a zero eﬀect. The last row includes ERP in the workers’ autonomy
equation, which is negative (as theory predicts), but insignificant. The last row also includes
ERP in the span of control regression, which takes a positive coeﬃcient. This is the only
place we obtain a sign which is contrary to the theory as it should be negative. We do not
regard this as undermining our general set-up, however, as the coeﬃcient is insignificant. The
robustness of the earlier results to these “cross eﬀects” is reassuring, but the insignificance of
the extra terms does imply that it is diﬃcult to pick up some of the more subtle cross eﬀects
of ICTs on firm organization.
5.4.3

Corporate Head Quarters’ Span of Control

Table 7 showed that the theory also generates predictions for the span of control of the CHQ.
Although we had a direct measure of the plant managers’ span (number of direct reports) we
do not have such a direct measure for the CHQ span. One proxy measure for this, however,
29

We also experimented with using pck ∗ NET W ORKj as an instrumental variable for NET W ORKijk . This
is ambitious because we do not know exactly how intensively networks are used so pck ∗ NET W ORKj may
reflect this. We found that although prices were negatively correlated with Network usage the first stage was
weak for NET W ORK (a |t| statistic of 1.5 on the instrument). Investigation revealed that this was because
of low correlation for the smaller firms which may be because the OECD’s communication price series includes
discounts which are only available to larger users. When we dropped firms with under 200 employees the first
stage was highly significant (a |t| statistic of 2.3). Running 2SLS on the larger firms generated a significantly
negative marginal eﬀect (-1.702 with a standard error of 0.95) suggesting downward bias on the OLS estimates.

26

is the number of plants in the firm, with more plants indicating a larger CHQ span. Because
this variable is likely measured with error we simply consider a dummy for a multiplant firm
as a measure of the CHQ span and regress this on information acquisition technology for the
Plant Manager (ERP ) and N ET W ORK in Table 9.
The clear theoretical prediction from Table 7 is that ERP should be associated with a
wider CHQ span because plant managers are able to make decisions more easily so CHQ finds
it easier to manage a larger number of them. This is supported by Table 8, ERP has a significant
and positive association with CHQ span of control in column (1) where we condition on the
standard controls and column (3) where we also condition on N ET W ORK 30 . The coeﬃcient
on N ET W ORK is positive and significant (it has a theoretically ambiguous sign).
5.4.4

An alternative mechanism: Incentives

At the end of the theory section we discussed alternative mechanisms, such as agency and
incentives, through which ICT could aﬀect organizational structure. We argued that the
cognitive approach we take here is first order, although they may still be important. One
simple way to investigate this is to explicitly condition on incentive pay in the regressions.
From the survey we know the proportion of managerial pay that was in bonus (direct incentive
pay) and the increase in pay upon promotion (a career concerns mechanism).
Columns (1) through (3) of Table 10 include a variable indicating the proportion of the
plant manager’s pay that was bonus (rather than flat salary)31 . Columns (4) through (6)
includes the proportionate increase in pay when promoted for a typical plant manager. It is
clear that the signs and significance of the technology variables are hardly aﬀected by this
additional variable. For example, in column (1) the incentive pay variable is positively and
significantly associated with greater autonomy of the plant manager. This seems sensible there is little point in having performance related pay if the manager has no discretion over
relevant decisions. Nevertheless, the coeﬃcient on ERP has fallen only to 0.115 (from 0.116 in
Table 3) and the coeﬃcient on N ET W ORK to -0.110 (unchanged from Table 3). The other
incentive pay proxies are insignificant in the other columns and do not change the qualitative
results.
Obviously this is a crude test as there are other dimensions of incentive pay we have not
captured (e.g. for production workers) and some incentive eﬀects may operate independently
of any remuneration scheme. But the robustness of our results to explicit controls for incentives
30

If we also include CAD/CAM the ERP coeﬃcient remains positive and significant. The theory predicts a
zero eﬀect of CAD/CAM which indeed has an insignificant coeﬃcient (-0.389 with a standard error of 0.432).
31
See Lemieux, MacLeod and Parent (2007) for how performance pay has grown in importance over time.

27

suggest that there is a role for the cognitive theory we emphasis when looking at the impact
of ICT.
5.4.5

Further Results

We have examined a large variety of robustness tests and some of these are presented in Table
11. Each panel presents a diﬀerent dependent variable with diﬀerent tests in each column
(Panel A for plant manager autonomy, Panel B for worker autonomy and Panel C for plant
manager span of control ). Column (1) simply repeats the baseline specifications from the final
column in Tables 3 through 5.
In Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2009) we found that product market competition and
cultural factors such as trust and non-hierarchical religions were associated with greater plant
manager autonomy. We control for these in column (2) by including a full set of regional
dummies and the industry-level Lerner Index of competition. None of the main results change,
with the exception of N ET W ORK in the worker autonomy equation. The sign is still negative,
which is consistent with the theory (falls in communication cost lower autonomy) but it is now
larger in absolute magnitude and significant at the 10% level, whereas it was insignificant
in the baseline regression. Column (3) includes a variety of additional firm level controls:
the capital-labor ratio, sales per employee, total employment in the group where the firm
belongs (i.e. consolidated worldwide employment for multinationals), firm age and a listing
dummy. The results are robust to these additional controls (which were individually and jointly
insignificant). Column (4) uses an alternative indicator of networks based on the presence of
LAN (Local Area Networks) or WAN (Wide Area Networks)32 . The LAN/WAN indicator
is highly correlated with N ET W ORK and the results are very similar to the baseline. The
only diﬀerence is that, again, N ET W ORK in the worker autonomy equation which is now
significant (at the 5% level) with a theory consistent negative sign. Note that our ICT variables
from HH are averaged over all the plants in the firm using plant employment as weights.
Although these are usually either one or zero, in-between values are also possible. We consider
a discrete alternative where all the firms with non-zero values of ICT are coded as unity and
present these results in column (5). Again, nothing much changes, nor does including the
Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) measure of management quality in column (6). Column (7)
considers alternative ways of constructing the dependent variable. For the plant manager
autonomy equation we use the principal component of the four questions and for the worker
32

We prefer our indicator of NET W ORK as LAN was included only in earlier years of the Harte-Hanks data
and WAN only in later years.

28

autonomy question we define it based only on the pace of work33 . The results again seem
robust to these alternatives. The final column drop the size controls as they are endogenous
in the theory with little impact on the results.

6

Conclusions

The empirical and theoretical literature that examines the economic eﬀects of information and
communication technologies (ICT) generally aggregates together the information technology
(IT) and communication technology (CT) into a single homogeneous mass. We argue that
this is a serious error because the impact of IT and CT on the organization of firms, and
ultimately income inequality, will be quite diﬀerent depending on the type of technology. Falls
in communication costs will tend to reduce employee autonomy, as decisions will be passed up
to the centre of the firm. Falls in information acquisition costs will have the opposite eﬀect,
facilitating more eﬀective employee decisions making.
We show these eﬀects formally in a “cognitive” model of firm organization which considers
two types of decisions within firms. First, we consider non-production decisions (investment,
hiring, new products and pricing). These decisions can either be taken by the CEO at central
head quarters or by the plant manager in the local business unit. The key piece of information
technology that has aﬀected these decisions is Enterprise Resource Planning. ERP provides a
range of data on metrics like production, waste, energy use, sales, inventories and HR. Modern
ERP systems increase dramatically the availability of information to managers, which should
be associated with decentralization of decision making.
Second, we consider factory floor decisions, on the allocation and pace of production tasks.
These production decisions can either be taken by factory floor employees or by their superiors
in the plant hierarchy, like the plant managers. Here, a key technological change has taken
the adoption of Computer Assisted Design and Computer Assisted Manufacturing. A worker
with access to those technologies can solve design and production problems better, and thus
needs less access to his superiors in making decisions. This should lead to the decentralization
of non-production decisions.
Of course both production and non-production decisions will also be impacted by reducing
communication costs. The key technological innovation in within-firm communications is the
growth of networks. The spread of networks should therefore be associated with centralization
33

The results are also robust to constructing the plant manager autonomy variable focusing solely on questions
coded between 1 and 5, i.e. excluding the question on how much capital investment a plant manager could
undertake without prior authorization from CHQ.

29

of both types of decisions within the firm, as decision making is more easily passed up the firm
to higher level managers.
We confirm these predictions on a new dataset that combines plant-level measures of organization and ICT hardware and software adoption across the US and Europe. The organizational
questions were collected as part our large international management survey, and were explicitly
targeted at the theories we investigate.
In terms of identification, we mainly focus on simple conditional correlations between the
diﬀerent ICT measures and the multiple dimensions of the organization of the firm, guided by
our theoretical predictions. But we also utilize the fact that the diﬀerential regulation of the
telecommunication industry across countries generates exogenous diﬀerences in the eﬀective
prices of networks. We show that industries that exogenously rely more in networks are at a
greater disadvantage in countries with high communication costs and use this to identify the
eﬀect of lower communication costs on decentralization.
There are several directions we are currently pursuing in this line of research. Firstly, we
are examining in more detail the reasons for diﬀerential adoptions of technologies across firms
and countries. This is of interest in itself, but is also important in order to get more closely at
the causal eﬀects of changes in ICT on organization. Although we have plausible exogenous
variation for network costs of communication, we do not have a similar quasi-experiment for
information access. Secondly, we are developing the theory to consider interactions between
diﬀerent type of production and non-production technologies at other layers of the hierarchy.
Finally, we are examining the eﬀect of diﬀerential type of IT adoption on other outcomes such
as productivity and wage inequality.

30

References
[1] Acemoglu Daron, Philippe Aghion, Claire Lelarge, John Van Reenen, and Fabrizio Zilibotti (2006) “Technology, Information and the Decentralization of the Firm” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 122 (4), 1759—1799
[2] Aghion, Philippe, and Tirole, Jean (1997), “Formal and Real Authority in Organizations,”
Journal of Political Economy, 105, 1-29.
[3] Alonso, Ricardo, Dessein, Wouter and Matouschek, Niko “When Does Coordination Require Centralization” (2008) American Economic Review, 98(1), pp. 145-179.
[4] Aubert, Patrick, Caroli, Eve, and Roger, Muriel (2006), “New Technologies, Workplace
Organization and the Structure of the Workforce: Firm-Level Evidence,” Economic Journal, 116, 73-93.
[5] Autor, David, Lavy, Frank and Murnane, Richard (2003) “The Skill Content of Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
118(4), 1279-1334
[6] Azmat, Ghazala, Manning, Alan, and Van Reenen, John (2008), “Privatization, Entry
Regulation and the Decline of Labour’s Share of GDP: A Cross-Country Analysis of the
Network Industries”, Centre for Economic Performance Discussion Paper No. 806
[7] Baker, George, Gibbons, Robert, and Murphy, Kevin (1999), “Informal Authority in
Organizations,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 15, 56-73.
[8] Baker, George, and Hubbard, Thomas (2003), “Make Versus Buy In Trucking: Asset
Ownership, Job Design and Information”, American Economic Review, 93, 551-72.
[9] Baker, George, and Hubbard, Thomas (2004), “Contractibility and Asset Ownership: On
Board Computers and Governance in US Trucking,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119,
1443-79.
[10] Baron, David, and Besanko, David (1992), “Information, Control, and Organizational
Structure”, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 1, 237-275.
[11] Bartel, Ann, Ichniowski, Casey and Kathryn Shaw (2007), “How Does Information Technology Really Aﬀect Productivity? Plant-Level Comparisons of Product Innovation,
Process Improvement and Worker Skills”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, No. 4,
1721-1758
[12] Black, Sandra, and Lynch, Lisa (2001), “How to Compete: The Impact of Workplace Practices and Information Technology on Productivity,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
83, 434-445.
[13] Blanchard, Olivier (2004) “The Economic Future of Europe”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18, 3-26.
[14] Bloom, Nick, Draca, Mirko and Van Reenen, John (2009) “Trade induced technical change:
The impact of Chinese imports on technology and jobs” LSE/Stanford mimeo
[15] Bloom, Nick, Sadun, Raﬀaella and Van Reenen, John (2007), “Americans do I.T. Better:
American multinationals and the productivity miracle” NBER Working Paper 13085
[16] Bloom, Nick, Sadun, Raﬀaella and Van Reenen, John (2009), “Measuring and Explaining
Organization across firms and countries” LSE/Stanford mimeo
31

[17] Bolton, Patrick, and Dewatripont, Mathias (1994), “The Firm as a Communication Network,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 809-839.
[18] Bresnahan, Timothy, Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Hitt, Lorin (2002), “Information Technology, Workplace Organization and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-level Evidence,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 339-376.
[19] Calvo, Guillermo, Wellisz, Stanislaw (1978), “Supervision, Loss of Control, and the Optimum Size of the Firm” Journal of Political Economy, 86, 943-952
[20] Caroli, Eve, and Van Reenen, John, (2001), “Skill Biased Organizational Change,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 1448-1492.
[21] Colombo, Massimo, and Delmastro, Marco (2004), “Delegation of Authority in business
organizations: An empirical test,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 52, 53-80.
[22] Cremer, Jacques, Garicano, Luis and Prat, Andrea (2007), “Language and the Theory of
the Firm” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1): 373-407
[23] Davenport, Thomas H. , Harris, Jeanne G., Catrell, Susan (2002), “The Return of Enterprise Solutions: The Director’s Cut.” Accenture Institure for High Performance Business
Research Report, October 2002.
[24] Dessein, Wouter (2002), “Authority and Communication in Organizations,” Review of
Economic Studies, 69, 811-838.
[25] Draca, Mirko, Sadun Raﬀaella and Van Reenen, John (2007), “Productivity and ICTs: a
Review of the Evidence”, in Robin Mansell, Chrisanthi Avgerou, Danny Quah and Roger
Silverstone (eds.) The Oxford Handbook of Information and Communication Technologies,
Oxford University Press.
[26] Garicano, Luis (2000), “Hierarchies and the Organization of Knowledge in Production,”
Journal of Political Economy, 108, 874-904.
[27] Garicano, Luis and Rossi-Hansberg, Estaban (2006), “Organization and Inequality in a
Knowledge Economy” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(4), pp. 1383-435.
[28] Guadalupe, Maria and Wulf, Julie (2008) “The Flattening Firm and Product Market
Competition: The Eﬀect of Trade Liberalization”, Harvard Business School Strategy Unit
Working Paper No 09-067
[29] Hart, Oliver, and Moore, John (2005), “On the Design of Hierarchies: Coordination versus
Specialization,” Journal of Political Economy, 113, 675-702.
[30] Harris,Jeanne G. and Davenport, Thomas H (2006),“New Growth from Enterprise Systems: Achieving High Performance through Distinctive Capabilities”, Accenture Institute
for High Performance Business Report.
[31] Hunter, Larry, Bernhardt, Annette, Hughes, Katherine, and Skuratowicz, Eva (2000)
“It’s not just the ATMs: Technology, firm strategies, jobs and earnings in retail banking”,
Wharton Financial Institutions Center Working Paper No. 00-31.
[32] Kretschmer, Tobias and Mahr, Ferdinand (2009) “Complementaries between technologies:
Survey Evidence”, University of Munich mimeo
[33] Manski, Charles (2004), “Measuring expectations”, Econometrica, LXXII (5), 1329-1376.

32

[34] Lemieux, Thomas, MacCleod, Bentley and Parent, Daniel (2007) “Performance Pay and
Wage Inequality” NBER Working Paper 13128, forthcoming Quarterly Journal of Economics
[35] Machin, Stephen and Van Reenen, John (2008) “Changes in Wage Inequality” in Weinberg, Bruce and Taber, Christopher (eds) New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, London:
Palgrave
[36] Melumad, Nahum, Mookherjee, Dilip, and Reichelstein, Stefan (1995), “Hierarchical Decentralization of Incentive Contracts,” Rand Journal of Economics, 26, 654-672.
[37] Milgrom, Paul, and Roberts, John (1990), “The Economics of Modern Manufacturing:
Technology, Strategy and Organization,” American Economic Review, 80, 511-528.
[38] Prendergast, Canice (2002) “The Tenuous Trade-oﬀ between Risk and Incentives” Journal
of Political Economy, 110 (5), 1071-1102
[39] Radner, Roy (1993), “The Organization of Decentralized Information Processing,” Econometrica, 61, 1109-1146.
[40] Rajan, Raghuram G and Zingales, Luigi (1998) “Financial Dependence and Growth”
American Economic Review, 88(3), 559-86
[41] Rajan, Raghuram, and Wulf, Julie (2006), “The Flattening Firm: Evidence from Panel
Data on the Changing Nature of Corporate Hierarchies,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 88 (4), 759-773
[42] Shepard, Jim and Eric Klein (2006), Enterprise Resource Planning Spending Report, 20062007. AMR Research.
[43] Stephenson, Betsy (2006) “The Impact of the Internet on worker flows”, Wharton Business
School mimeo
[44] Telecommunication Handbook, (2007), OECD: Paris
[45] World Development Indicators (2006) World Bank: Washington DC.

33

APPENDICES

A

Appendix A: Proofs

Recall the value of a firm with three layers is π ∗ = maxzp ,xm 1 − (ap zp + wp ) − (am + am xm +
wm )h(1 − F (zp )) − (ac + wc )h2 (1 − F (zp ))(1 − G(xm )). To show proposition 2, first take first
order conditions with respect to the two types of decisions, zp and xm . These are:
foczp : −ap + ((am + am xm + wm ) + (ac + wc )h(1 − G(xm ))) hf (zp ) = 0
focxm : [−am + (ac + wc )hg(xm ))]h(1 − F (zp )) = 0
To sign the Hessian, note first that the second cross derivatives are 0 at the optimum. To see
this take the second order condition
∂f ocxm
= [am − (ac + wc )hg(xm ))]hf (zp )
∂zp
Optimality when managers are used requires that [−am +(ac +wc )hg(xm ))] = 0 (since F (zp ) < 1
or else workers work on their own as they know everything), and thus the Hessian is:

H=

µ

((am + am xm + wm ) + (ac + wc )h(1 − G(xm )) hf 0 (zp )
0
0
h(ac + wc )g 0 (xm )

¶

Since f 0 (zp ) < 0 and g 0 (xm ) < 0 (management by exception— those higher up specialized in
exceptions), the solution of the first order conditions is a local optimum. Letting the vector
foc= (foczp focxm ):
∂foc
∂cp
∂foc
∂h

=
=

µ

µ

−1
0

¶

∂f oc
=
∂cm

;

µ

h(1 + xm )f (zp )
−1

sign

∂zp
∂ap
∂xm
∂ap

!

=

µ

;

((am + am xm + wm ) + 2h(ac + wc )(1 − G(xm )) f (zp )
(ac + wc )g(xm )

Let the vector vars = (zp xm ) .Then for each parameter,
Ã

¶

<0
0

¶

; sign

Ã

∂zp
∂am
∂xm
∂am

!

=

µ

>0
<0

∂vars
∂t

¶

¶

= −H −1 ∂f∂toc gives:

; sign

Ã

∂zp
∂h
∂xm
∂h

!

=

µ

>0
>0

¶

.

For the eﬀects in span, simply note that the span of control of corporate managers is sc =
nm /nc = 1/ ((1 − G(xm ))h) and that of middle managers: sm = N/nm = 1/ ((1 − F (zp )h) ,
sign

Ã

∂sm
∂ap
∂sc
∂ap

!

=

µ

<0
0

¶

; sign

Ã

∂sm
∂am
∂sc
∂am

!
34

=

µ

>0
<0

¶

; sign

µ

∂sm
∂h
∂sc
∂h

¶

=

µ

≶0
≶0

¶

.

To get the table in the paper, note that the predictions are with respect to a fall in these
costs and thus all of the signs must be reversed to obtain the prediction.
Finally, note also that if we let am be also the acquisition cost of CEOs, so that ERP aﬀects
both CEOs and plant managers equally nothing changes (as the proposition states), so that
ac = am . The first foc becomes f oczp : −ap +((am + am xm + wm ) + (am + wc )h(1 − G(xm )) hf (zp ),
f ocxm changes to: −am + (am + wc )hg(xm )), and
¶
µ
∂foc
((1 + xm ) + h(1 − G(xm )) hf (zp ) > 0
=
−1 + hg(xm ) = −wc hg(xm )/am < 0
∂am
Ã
! µ
¶
∂zp
>0
∂am
so that sign ∂x
=
is still true.
m
<0
∂a
m

B

Appendix B: Survey of IT Managers on the Impact of ERP

In the Summer and Fall of 2008 Kretschmer and Mahr (2009) conducted a survey of IT managers in medium-sized (100 to 5,000 employees) German and Polish firms that were randomly
chosen from the population of manufacturing firms. The aims of the survey were wider than
just ERP and collected information on management and other factors. At our request some
questions on the use of ERP were inserted. Answers to the questions where on a Likert Scale
from 1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree. The key questions for our purposes were the
following:
Q21
“Our ERP system is used to endow top management with more and better information”
Q24
“Our ERP system is used to endow middle managers with more and better information”
Q23
“Our ERP system is used to faster communicate information and directives from
top management to employees”
Q26
“Our ERP system is used to faster communicate information and directives from
middle management to employees”
Figure 5 shows the distribution of answers to these questions. It is clear from this figure
that most respondents were likely (a “4”) or very likely (a “5”) to agree with statements Q21
and Q24 suggesting ERP was related to information acquisition. By contrast, as many people
disagreed as agreed with the statements in Q23 and Q26 that ERP lowers communication
costs. The mean of the information question is 3.8 for Q24 and 4.03 for Q21 whereas for the
communication question it is 2.76 for Q23 and 2.71 for Q26.
Table A1 shows regression versions of these descriptive statistics. Likert scales between
respondents can be biased because each respondent implicitly has a diﬀerent scaling when
they answer such questions (Manski, 2004). We can deal with this by only comparing “within
respondent”, i.e. looking at the relative responses for the same individual across questions.
We construct several such variables, but the key one is “DIF1” the absolute diﬀerence between
“Our ERP system is used to endow middle managers with more and better information”
(Q24) and “Our ERP system is used to faster communicate information and directives from
top management to employees” (Q23). This is an index from -4 to 4 indicating the degree
to which ERP reduces information costs relative to communication costs. A positive value
of this index indicates that managers are more likely to view ERP as improving information
costs rather than reducing communication costs.
Column (1) of Table A1 shows that the mean value of this index is just above one and
that this is a significant diﬀerence. This is consistent with our assumption that ERP is used
more as an information acquisition tool than a communication tool. We condition on some
confounding influences - country dummies, industry dummies and size in column (2) which
35

shows the diﬀerence is robust. One might be concerned that the communication question relates
to top managers, so we also used “DIF2” which keeps the information question the same (Q21)
but deducts “Our ERP system is used to faster communicate information and directives from
middle management to employees” (Q26). The results of using this as a dependent variable
are in column (3) which are almost identical to column (2). Finally we checked whether ERP
is better at endowing top management with more information than middle management by
constructing “DIF3” the absolute diﬀerence between “Our ERP system is used to endow middle
managers with more and better information” (Q24) and “Our ERP system is used to endow
top management with more and better information” (Q21). This diﬀerence is positive but
completely insignificant. In terms of our theory this means that ERP shifts am downwards to
a similar extent as ac which is again, what we assumed for our interpretation of the empirical
results34 . See Kretschmer and Mahr (2009) for full details on the underlying survey.

C

Appendix C: Data Appendix

C.1
C.1.1

CEP Management and Innovation Survey Dataset
The Survey Sampling Frame

We use a sub-set of the CEP Management and Organization survey in this paper (see Bloom,
Sadun and Van Reenen, 2008, for full details of larger sample) where we have ICT data (see
below). Our sampling frame was based on the Bureau van Dijk (BVD) Amadeus dataset
for Europe (France, Germany, Italy, Poland, Portugal, Sweden and the U.K.) and Icarus for
the US. These databases all provide suﬃcient information on companies to conduct a stratified
telephone survey (company name, address and a size indicator). These databases also typically
have some accounting information, such employment, sales of capital assets. Apart from size,
we did not insist on having accounting information to form the sampling population, however.
Amadeus is constructed from a range of sources, primarily the National registries of companies (such as Companies House in the UK). Icarus is constructed from the Dun & Bradstreet
database, which is a private database of over 5 million US trading locations built up from
credit records, business telephone directories and direct research. In every country the sampling frame was all firms with a manufacturing primary industry code with between 100 and
5,000 employees on average over the most recent three years of data (typically 2002 to 2004)35 .
Interviewers were each given a randomly selected list of firms from the sampling frame.
This should therefore be representative of medium sized manufacturing firms. The size of the
sampling frame appears broadly proportional to the absolute size of each country’s manufacturing base, the US, has the most firms and Sweden and Portugal the least36 . In addition to
randomly surveying from the sampling frame described above we also tried to resurvey the
firms we interviewed in the 2004 survey wave used in Bloom and Van Reenen (2007). This
was a sample of 732 firms from France, Germany, the UK and the US, with a manufacturing
primary industry code and 50 to 10,000 employees (on average between 2000 and 2003). This
sample was drawn from the Amadeus dataset for Europe and the Compustat dataset for the
U.S. Only companies with accounting data were selected37 . As a robustness test we also drop
34

There are diﬀerences in the comparative statistcs if ERP or another technology reduced cc but not cm .
In the US only the most recent year of employment is provided. In Portugal the population of firms with
100 to 5000 employees was only 242, so we supplemented this with the 72 firms with 75 to 100 employees. We
checked the results by conditioning on common size bands (above 150 in all countries).
36
The size of the manufacturing sector can be obtained from http://laborsta.ilo.org/, a database maintained
by ILO.
37
So, for the UK and France this sampling frame was very similar to the 2006 sampling frame. For Germany
it is more heavily skewed towards publicly quoted firms since smaller privately held firms do not report balance
sheet information. For the US it comprised only publicly quoted firms. As a result when we present results we
35

36

the firms that were resurveyed from 2004.
C.1.2

Sample Representativeness

Comparing the aggregate number of employees for diﬀerent size bands from our sampling
frame with the figures for the corresponding manufacturing populations in each of the countries
(obtained from national census data), we find that in all countries but two the sampling frame
broadly matches up with the population of medium sized manufacturing firms. This suggests
our sampling frame covers the population of all firms. In Germany and Portugal the coverage
is less complete as the frame appears to cover around a third of manufacturing employees. To
address this problem we always include country fixed-eﬀects to try to control for any diﬀerences
across countries. Second, we control for size and industry. This should help to condition out
some of the factors that lead to under/over sampling of firms. Finally, we made sure the results
were robust to dropping Germany and Portugal.
45% of the firms we contacted took part in the survey: a high success rate given the
voluntary nature of participation. Of the remaining firms 17% refused to be surveyed, while
the remaining 38% were in the process of being scheduled when the survey ended. The decisions
to reject the interview is uncorrelated with revenues per worker, listing status of the firm or
firm age. Large firms and multinationals were more likely to respond although the magnitude
of this eﬀect is small (e.g. multinationals were about 7% more likely to agree to the interview
and firms about 4 percentage points more likely for a doubling in size). European firms were
slightly more likely to respond than US firms.

C.2

Harte Hanks Data

The ICT data used is constructed using the Ci Technology Database (CiDB) produced by
the international marketing and information company Harte Hanks (HH). Harte-Hanks is a
NYSE listed multinational that collects IT data primarily for the purpose of selling on to
large producers and suppliers of IT products (e.g. IBM, Dell etc). Their data is collected for
over 160,000 plants across 20 European countries, and another 250,000 across the US. The US
branch has the longest history with the company beginning its data collection activities in the
mid 1980s.
Harte Hanks surveys plants (referred to as “sites” in the CiTB database) on a rolling basis
with an average of 11 months between surveys. This means that at any given time, the data
provides a “snapshot” of the stock of a firm’s IT. The CiTDB contains detailed hardware,
equipment and software information at the plant level. Areas covered by the survey include
PCs, many types of software, servers, storage and IT staﬀ (including development staﬀ such as
programmers). The fact that HH sells this data on to major firms like IBM and Cisco, who use
this to target their sales eﬀorts, exerts a strong market discipline on the data quality. If there
were major discrepancies in the collected data this would rapidly be picked up by HH’s clients
when they placed sales calls using the survey data, and would obviously be a severe problem
for HH future sales38 . Because of this HH run extensive internal random quality checks on its
own data, enabling them to ensure high levels of data accuracy.
Another valuable feature of the CiDB is its consistency of collection across countries. The
data for Europe is collected via a central call centre in Dublin and this ensures that all variables are defined on an identical basis across countries. This provides some advantages over
alternative strategies such as (for example) harmonizing government statistical register data
collected by independent national agencies.
HH samples all firms with over 100 employees in each country. Thus, we do lose smaller
firms, but since we focus on manufacturing the majority of employees are in these larger firms.
always include controls for firm size.
38
HH also refunds data-purchases for any samples with error levels above 5%.

37

It is also worth noting this survey frame is based on firm employment - rather than plant
employment - so the data contains plants with less than 100 employees in firms with multiple
plants. Furthermore, HH only drops plants from the survey if they die or repeatedly refuse
to answer over several years, so that the sampling frame covers all firms that have had at 100
employees in any year since the survey began. In terms of survey response rate HH reports
that for the large European countries (UK, France, Germany, Italy, and Spain) they had a
response rate of 37.2% in 2004 for firms with 100 or more employees. Bloom, Draca and Van
Reenen (2008) provide further information on the HH dataset.

C.3

Firm level accounting data

Our firm accounting data on sales, employment, capital, profits, shareholder equity, long-term
debt, market values (for quoted firms) and wages (where available) came from Amadeus dataset
for Europe (France, Germany, Italy, Poland, Portugal, Sweden and the U.K.) and on Icarus
for the US

C.4

Leased Line Data

The data on cross national prices is given by OECD (2007). Although European prices have
been falling over the past decade due to liberalizations and pressures from the regulators (e.g.
European Commission DG-Competition), there remains considerable concern about diﬀerential
degrees of competition and regulation generating cross-national price disparities. “Local leased
line prices remain of concern where there is insuﬃcient competition. For users in these areas this
means that incumbents can continue to charge prices that are not disciplined by competition.
For new entrants it means that incumbents may price local leased circuits in an anti-competitive
manner” (OECD Communication Outlook, 2005).
“Leased lines are provided by traditional telecom operators. New market entrants have
their own networks but need to link their customers’ premises to it. This link is called a
‘leased line part circuit’ and is usually provided by the incumbent. The availability at the
wholesale level of these links at reasonable prices is a necessary condition for a competitive
leased lines retail market and for pro-competitive downstream ‘knock-on’ eﬀects” (European
Commission Report, 2002)
A major turning point in the pricing of leased lines took place in 1998 when a significant
number of European countries fully liberalized their telecommunication markets. The impact
of increasing liberalization is evident in the OECD’s Index of leased line prices. At the distances
of 50 and 200 kilometers the leased lines (2Mbit/s) index fell from 77 in 1997 to 31 by 2004.
This process happened at a much faster rate in some countries than others (see OECD, 2005).

38

TABLE 1 – SUMMARY OF MAIN THEORETICAL PREDICTIONS THAT WE EMPIRICALLY TEST

Reduction in Communication costs (h)

Reduction in Information acquisition costs (a)

(1)

(2)

(3)

Plant Manager
Autonomy
(Table 3)

Worker Autonomy
(Table 4)

Plant Manager Span
of Control
(Table 5)

Technology Indicator

NETWORK (h)

NETWORK (h)

NETWORK (h)

Theoretical Prediction

-

-

?

Empirical Finding

-

-

+

Technology Indicator

ERP (am)

CAD/CAM (ap)

CAD/CAM (ap)

Theoretical Prediction

+

+

+

Empirical Finding

+

+

+

Notes: This table presents the theoretical predictions and the empirical findings. Column (1) refers to plant manager autonomy; Column (2) refers to workers’ autonomy; and
Column (3) refers to span of control (for plant manager and CEO). NETWORK denotes the presence of a network (leased line/frame relay), ERP denotes the presence of
Enterprise Resource Planning and CAD/CAM denotes the presence of Computer Assisted Design/Computer Assisted Manufacturing. A “+” denotes an increase, a “-’’ a
decrease a “0” denotes no effect and “?’’ denotes an ambiguous sign. All empirical findings except for reduction in communication costs in Column (2) and (3) are
statistically significant at the 5% level.

39

TABLE 2 - SUMMARY STATISTICS
Variable
Employment (Firm)
Employment (Plant)
Plant Manager Autonomy
Workers' Autonomy
Ln(Plant Manager SPAN)
CEO Span (Multi-plant dummy)
PC per Employee
ERP
CADCAM
NETWORK
LAN/WAN
Foreign Multinational
Domestic Multinational
%College
Bonus as a % of salary
% Increase salary on promotion
Leased Line Price (PPP 2006 USD)

Mean
960.142
252.664
0.252
0.076
1.892
0.641
0.483
0.363
0.024
0.355
0.427
0.350
0.287
16.007
0.112
0.215
4984.281

Median
350
155
0
0
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
0
0
5260

Notes: These are descriptive statistics from the sample in Table 3 (except for CAD/CAM which is Table 4)

40

Standard Deviation
3259.742
286.087
0.982
0.265
0.521
0.480
0.395
0.473
0.152
0.472
0.492
0.477
0.453
17.169
0.151
0.189
1439.319

Firms
943
911
948
935
874
948
937
948
687
948
948
948
948
867
862
610
948

TABLE 3 - PLANT MANAGER AUTONOMY
(1)

(2)

Dependent Variable
ERP

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.114**
(0.053)

0.116**
(0.054)

-0.123**
(0.053)

-0.110**
(0.053)

Plant Manager Autonomy
0.097*
(0.053)

0.104*
(0.054)
-0.107**
(0.053)

NETWORK
Ln(Percentage College)
ln(PC/Employee)

-0.098*
(0.052)

0.100***
(0.032)

0.097***
(0.032)

0.098***
(0.032)

-0.041
(0.031)

-0.020
(0.031)

-0.031
(0.031)

0.070*
(0.040)

0.063
(0.040)

0.073*
(0.040)

0.068*
(0.040)

0.073*
(0.040)

0.067*
(0.040)

Plant Employment

0.151***
(0.044)

0.148***
(0.045)

0.151***
(0.044)

0.151***
(0.045)

0.149***
(0.044)

0.147***
(0.045)

Foreign Multinational

0.177**
(0.080)

0.178**
(0.080)

0.202**
(0.079)

0.196**
(0.079)

0.193**
(0.080)

0.190**
(0.080)

Domestic Multinational

0.195**
(0.082)

0.184**
(0.083)

0.208**
(0.082)

0.193**
(0.083)

0.203**
(0.082)

0.190**
(0.083)

948

948

948

948

948

948

ln(Firm Employment)

Number of Firms

Notes: * = significant at the 10% level, **= significant at the 5% level, ***=significant at the 1% level. The dependent variable
is the z-score of plant manager autonomy (mean=0 and standard deviation=1) across four questions relating to plant manager’s
control over hiring, investment, product introduction and marketing (see text). All columns are estimated by OLS with
standard errors in parentheses (robust and clustered by firm). The sample includes firms based in France, Germany, Italy,
Portugal, Poland, Sweden, the UK and the US (country dummies included). All columns include a full set of three digit
industry dummies and “Noise controls” (analyst fixed effects, plant manager seniority and tenure in company, the day of the
week the interview was conducted, interview duration and reliability). “ERP” denotes Enterprise Resource Planning and
“NETWORK” denotes the firm has an internal network (leased lines or frame relays). All columns exclude firms where the
plant manager is the CEO and include a dummy equal to unity if the CEO is on site.

41

TABLE 4 – WORKERS’ AUTONOMY
(1)

(2)

Dependent Variable
CAD/CAM

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.586**
(0.268)
[0.072]

0.535*
(0.274)
[0.053]

-0.218
(0.172)
[-0.027]

-0.226
(0.180)
[-0.023]

Workers’ Autonomy
0.582**
(0.271)
[0.073]

0.540**
(0.275)
[0.055]
-0.214
(0.171)
[-0.027]

NETWORK

-0.229
(0.178)
[-0.023]

Ln(Percentage College)

0.467***
(0.111)
[0.047]

0.471***
(0.110)
[0.048]

0.468***
(0.110)
[0.047]

ln(PC/Employee)

-0.026
(0.099)
[-0.003]

0.003
(0.099)
[0]

-0.013
(0.100)
[-0.001]

ln(Firm Employment)

-0.036
(0.104)
[-0.005]

-0.039
(0.103)
[-0.004]

-0.028
(0.104)
[-0.003]

-0.027
(0.102)
[-0.003]

-0.032
(0.103)
[-0.004]

-0.033
(0.102)
[-0.003]

Plant Employment

-0.113
(0.128)
[-0.014]

-0.129
(0.132)
[-0.013]

-0.116
(0.128)
[-0.014]

-0.124
(0.131)
[-0.013]

-0.117
(0.128)
[-0.014]

-0.128
(0.132)
[-0.013]

Foreign Multinational

0.385*
(0.232)
[0.055]

0.336
(0.247)
[0.039]

0.432*
(0.233)
[0.062]

0.384
(0.249)
[0.045]

0.417*
(0.234)
[0.059]

0.368
(0.250)
[0.042]

Domestic Multinational

0.336
(0.226)
[0.046]

0.247
(0.231)
[0.027]

0.372*
(0.226)
[0.052]

0.293
(0.233)
[0.033]

0.368
(0.226)
[0.05]

0.283
(0.233)
[0.031]

687

687

687

687

687

687

Number of firms

Notes: * = significant at the 10% level, **= significant at the 5% level, ***=significant at the 1% level. The dependent variable
in all columns is a dummy equal to unity if the plant manager reports that tasks allocation and pace of work are determined
mostly by workers (instead of managers). All columns are estimated by probit ML with standard errors in parentheses (robust
and clustered by firm). Marginal effects (evaluated at the mean) reported in square brackets. All columns exclude firms where
the plant manager is the CEO and include a dummy equal to unity if the CEO is on site. The sample includes firms based in
France, Germany, Italy, Portugal, Poland, Sweden, the UK and the US (country dummies included). A full set of three digit
industry dummies and “Noise controls” (analyst fixed effects, plant manager seniority and tenure in company, the day of the
week the interview was conducted, interview duration and reliability). “CAD/CAM” denotes Computer Assisted Design/
Computer Assisted Manufacturing and “NETWORK” denotes the firm has an internal network (leased lines or frame relays).

42

TABLE 5 - PLANT MANAGER SPAN OF CONTROL
(1)

(2)

Dependent Variable
CAD/CAM

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.168**
(0.072)

0.155**
(0.076)

0.054
(0.043)

0.053
(0.043)

Plant Manager Span of Control
0.167**
(0.072)

0.153**
(0.076)
0.054
(0.043)

NETWORK

0.051
(0.043)

Ln(Percentage College)

0.059**
(0.023)

0.061***
(0.023)

0.059**
(0.023)

ln(PC/Employee)

0.010
(0.024)

0.008
(0.024)

0.006
(0.024)

ln(Firm Employment)

0.041
(0.027)

0.041
(0.026)

0.042
(0.027)

0.041
(0.026)

0.038
(0.027)

0.038
(0.026)

Plant Employment

0.024
(0.031)

0.032
(0.032)

0.028
(0.032)

0.035
(0.032)

0.025
(0.032)

0.031
(0.032)

Foreign Multinational

0.059
(0.058)

0.037
(0.056)

0.054
(0.058)

0.032
(0.056)

0.052
(0.058)

0.031
(0.056)

Domestic Multinational

0.129**
(0.060)

0.105*
(0.057)

0.124**
(0.060)

0.100*
(0.057)

0.125**
(0.059)

0.102*
(0.057)

859

859

859

859

859

859

Number of firms

Notes: * = significant at the 10% level, **= significant at the 5% level, ***=significant at the 1% level. The dependent variable
in all columns is the log of the number of employees reporting directly to the plant manager. All columns are estimated by
OLS with standard errors in parentheses (robust and clustered by firm). All columns exclude firms where the plant manager is
the CEO and include a dummy equal to unity if the CEO is on site. The sample includes firms based in France, Germany, Italy,
Portugal, Poland, Sweden, the UK and the US (country dummies included). All columns include a full set of three digit
industry dummies and “Noise controls” (analyst fixed effects, plant manager seniority and tenure in company, the day of the
week the interview was conducted, interview duration and reliability). “CAD/CAM” denotes Computer Assisted Design or
Manufacturing software and “NETWORK” denotes the firm has an internal network (leased lines or frame relays).

43

TABLE 6 –PLANT MANAGER AUTONOMY (USING EFFECTIVE NETWORK PRICES AS
EXOGENOUS SHIFTER OF NETWORK USAGE )
(1)
Dependent Variable

(3)

Plant Manager Autonomy

Regression

Firm-level NETWORK

(2)

Basic

Reduced Form

Reduced Form

4.791**
(2.189)

5.802**
(2.766)
1.443
(5.024)
1.541
(2.546)

1,020

1,020

-0.132*
(0.068)

(Industry-level NETWORK %)
*ln(NETWORK Price)
(Industry-level NETWORK %)* ln(Average
Years of Schooling)
(Industry-level NETWORK %)*ln(GDP Per
Capita)
1,020

Number of Firms

Notes: * = significant at the 10% level, **= significant at the 5% level, ***=significant at the 1% level. The dependent variable
is the z-score of plant manager autonomy. Standard errors are robust and clustered at the country by three digit industry pair in
all columns. All columns exclude firms where the plant manager is the CEO and include a dummy equal to unity if the CEO is
on site. The sample includes firms based in France, Germany, Italy, Portugal, Poland, Sweden, the UK and the US (country
dummies included). All columns include noise controls, firm controls and industry dummies as in previous tables. “Firm-level
NETWORK” represents access to an internal network (leased lines or frame relays). “Industry-level NETWORK” represents
the fraction of workers with access to an internal network (leased lines or frame relays) in the three digit industry across all
countries (see text). “NETWORK Price” is the cost of an annual subscription to a leased line contract at 2006 PPP USD (taken
from the OECD Telecommunication Handbook, 2007). The variables “Average Years of Schooling” and “GDP Per Capita
PPP” are taken from the World Development Indicators (2006).

44

TABLE 7 – EXTENDED THEORY PREDICTIONS

Reduction in communication costs (h)

Reduction in information acquisition
costs for non-production decisions (am)

Reduction in information acquisition
costs for production decisions (ap)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Plant Manager
Autonomy (xm)

Worker
Autonomy (zp)

Plant Manager
Span of Control
(sm)

CEO Span of
Control (sc)

Technology Indicator

NETWORK (h)

NETWORK (h)

NETWORK (h)

NETWORK (h)

Theoretical Prediction

-

-

?

?

Technology Indicator

ERP (am)

ERP (am)

ERP (am)

ERP (am)

Theoretical Prediction

+

-

-

+

Technology Indicator

CAD/CAM (ap)

CAD/CAM (ap)

CAD/CAM (ap)

CAD/CAM (ap)

Theoretical Prediction

0

+

+

0

Notes: ERP denotes Enterprise Resource Planning, CAD/CAM denotes Computer Assisted Design/Computer Assisted Manufacturing and NETWORK denotes the presence of
a network (leased line/frame relay). A “+” denotes an increase, a “-’’ a decrease a “0” denotes no effect and “?’’ denotes an ambiguous sign.

45

TABLE 8 – CROSS EFFECTS OF TECHNOLOGIES
(1)

(2)

(3)

Plant Manager
Autonomy

Workers'
Autonomy

Ln(PM Span)

NETWORK

-0.111**
(0.053)

-0.228
(0.180)
[-0.023]

0.020
(0.054)

CAD/CAM

0.091
(0.223)

0.532*
(0.275)
[0.053]

0.156**
(0.076)

ERP

0.116**
(0.054)

-0.290
(0.177)
[-0.029]

0.053
(0.043)

Firms

859

687

948

Dependent Variable

Notes: * = significant at the 10% level, **= significant at the 5% level, ***=significant at the 1% level. Rows correspond to
separate regressions based on final most general specifications in Tables 3 - 5. All equations estimated by OLS except Worker
autonomy equation which is estimated by probit ML with marginal effects (evaluated at the mean) in square brackets. Standard
errors are robust and clustered by firm. The sample includes firms based in France, Germany, Italy, Portugal, Poland, Sweden,
the UK and the US (country dummies included). ERP” denotes Enterprise Resource Planning, “NETWORK” denotes the firm
has an internal network (leased lines or frame relays) and “CAD/CAM” denotes Computer Assisted Design or Manufacturing
software.

46

TABLE 9 – CEO SPAN OF CONTROL
(1)
Dependent Variable

(2)

(3)

CEO Span of Control
0.235***
(0.086)
[0.082]

ERP

0.217**
(0.087)
[0.075]
0.256***
(0.090)
[0.089]

0.239***
(0.091)
[0.083]

0.103*
(0.055)
[0.036]

0.107*
(0.055)
[0.037]

0.108**
(0.055)
[0.037]

ln(PC/Employee)

-0.125**
(0.057)
[-0.044]

-0.130**
(0.058)
[-0.045]

-0.148**
(0.058)
[-0.051]

ln(Firm Employment)

0.288***
(0.073)
[0.100]

0.276***
(0.073)
[0.096]

0.278***
(0.073)
[0.097]

Plant Employment

-0.500***
(0.101)
[-0.174]

-0.492***
(0.101)
[-0.171]

-0.500***
(0.101)
[-0.174]

Number of Firms

1,069

1,069

1,069

NETWORK

Ln(Percentage College)

Notes: * = significant at the 10% level, **= significant at the 5% level, ***=significant at the 1% level. The dependent variable
in all columns is a dummy equal to one if the firm reports more than one production plant. All columns are estimated by probit
ML with standard errors in parentheses (robust and clustered by firm). Marginal effects (evaluated at the mean) reported in
square brackets. The sample includes firms based in France, Germany, Italy, Portugal, Poland, Sweden, the UK and the US
(country dummies included). All columns contain the same controls in Table 3-5 “ERP” denotes Enterprise Resource Planning
and “NETWORK” denotes the firm has an internal network system (leased lines or frame relays). The time period covered by
the ICT variables is 2001-2006 (year dummies included).

47

TABLE 10 - CONTROLLING FOR CONTINGENT PAY
(1)
Plant
Manager
Autonomy

(2)
Workers'
Autonomy

(3)
Ln(Plant
Manager
Span)

(4)
Plant
Manager
Autonomy

(5)
Workers'
Autonomy

(6)
Ln(Plant
Manager
Span)

0.556**
(0.274)
[0.053]
-0.227
(0.181)
[-0.021]

0.156**
(0.075)

-0.025
(0.220)

0.479
(0.597)
[0.045]

0.168
(0.131)

948

687

859

Dependent Variable
ERP

0.115**
(0.054)

CAD/CAM

NETWORK

-0.110**
(0.053)

Bonus as a % of Total Salary
For typical manager

0.478**
(0.235)

0.114**
(0.054)
0.555**
(0.265)
[0.056]
-0.221
(0.179)
[-0.022]
-0.260
(0.727)
[-0.026]

0.158**
(0.076)
0.053
(0.043)

948

687

0.048
(0.042)

0.086
(0.141)

% Salary Increase on Promotion
For a typical manager

Number of Firms

-0.109**
(0.053)

859

Notes: * = significant at the 10% level, **= significant at the 5% level, ***=significant at the 1% level. All columns estimated
by OLS except columns 2 and 5 which are estimated by probit ML with standard errors in parentheses and marginal effects
(evaluated at the mean) in square brackets. Standard errors are robust and clustered by firm in all columns. The sample
includes firms based in France, Germany, Italy, Portugal, Poland, Sweden, the UK and the US (country dummies included).
All columns include the same controls as Table 3 through 5. “ERP” denotes Enterprise Resource Planning, “NETWORK”
denotes the firm has an internal network (leased lines or frame relays) and “CAD/CAM” denotes Computer Assisted Design or
Manufacturing software.

48

TABLE 11 - ROBUSTNESS CHECKS
(1)
Baseline

(2)
Regional
dummies
and Lerner
index

(3)
Additional
firm level
controls

0.116**
(0.054)
-0.110**
(0.053)
948

0.096*
(0.052)
-0.127**
(0.052)
948

0.112**
(0.054)
-0.098*
(0.053)
948

0.535*
(0.274)
[0.053]
-0.226
(0.180)
[-0.023]
687

0.650**
(0.284)
[0.049]
-0.402*
(0.211)
[-0.03]
687

0.155**
(0.075)
0.035
(0.041)
859

0.208***
(0.075)
0.045
(0.042)
859

(4)
Alternative
NETWORK
(LAN/WAN)

(5)
Alternative
construction
of ICT
variables

(6)
Include
Management
quality as an
additional
control

(7)
Alternative
dependent
variable

(8)
Drop size
controls

0.118**
(0.053)
-0.125**
(0.051)
948

0.119**
(0.054)
-0.112**
(0.053)
948

0.133**
(0.059)
-0.099*
(0.056)
948

0.125**
(0.054)
-0.115**
(0.054)

Panel B: Workers' Autonomy
0.566**
0.641**
0.458
(0.285)
(0.268)
(0.280)
[0.054]
[0.061]
[0.065]
-0.236
-0.659***
-0.230
(0.190)
(0.249)
(0.174)
[-0.022]
[-0.063]
[-0.021]
687
687
687

0.492*
(0.275)
[0.049]
-0.263
(0.184)
[-0.026]
687

0.863**
(0.342)
[0.242]
-0.090
(0.217)
[-0.017]
687

0.534*
(0.277)
[0.054]
-0.227
(0.181)
[-0.023]
687

Panel A: Plant Manager Autonomy
ERP
NETWORK
Firms

CAD/CAM

NETWORK

Firms

CAD/CAM
NETWORK
Firms

0.114**
(0.053)
-0.134**
(0.063)
948

Panel C: Plant Manager Span of Control
0.157**
0.153**
0.156**
0.156**
(0.075)
(0.075)
(0.074)
(0.074)
0.030
0.069
0.048
0.035
(0.041)
(0.058)
(0.040)
(0.041)
859
859
859
859

948

0.167**
(0.074)
0.052
(0.042)
859

Notes: * = significant at the 10% level, **= significant at the 5% level, ***=significant at the 1% level. Panel A and C estimated by
OLS. Panel B is estimated by probit ML with standard errors in parentheses and marginal effects (evaluated at the mean) in square
brackets. Standard errors are clustered by firm in all columns and panels. The sample includes firms based in France, Germany, Italy,
Portugal, Poland, Sweden, the UK and the US (country dummies included). All columns exclude firms where the plant manager is the
CEO and include a dummy equal to unity if the CEO is on site. All columns include noise controls, firm controls and industry dummies
as in previous tables. “ERP” denotes Enterprise Resource Planning, “NETWORK” denotes the firm has an internal network (leased
lines or frame relays) and “CAD/CAM” denotes Computer Assisted Design or Manufacturing. In column (2) regional (NUTS2)
dummies and the inverse of the Lerner index are included as additional controls. In column (3) the ln(capital/employment ratio),
ln(sales/employment ratio), ln(average wages), ln(global ultimate owner employment), ln(firm age) and a dummy equal to unity if the
firm is publicly listed are included as additional controls. In column (4) the network variable denotes the presence of LAN/WAN
systems. In column (5) we construct the ICT variables as equal to unity if there is a positive value in any plant. In column (6) the
average management score (computed across the 18 management questions in Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007) is included as additional
controls. In column (7) the dependent variable is the principal factor component of the four different Plant Manager Autonomy
questions (Panel A) and a dummy equal to unity if the pace of work question takes values above three (Panel B). In column (8) we drop
firm and plant size from the regressions.

49

TABLE A1 - ERP SURVEY: THE IMPACT OF ERP IS MORE ON INFORMATION COSTS THAN ON COMMUNICATION COSTS
(1)
DIF1

(2)
DIF1

(3)
DIF2

(4)
DIF3

1.074***
(0.060)

1.068**
(0.512)

1.042**
(0.496)

0.102
(0.383)

Firms

431

431

431

431

Country controls
Industry controls
Employment controls

No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Dependent Variable
Constant

Notes: Countries are Germany and Poland (Kretschmer and Mahr, 2009). Estimation by OLS. Robust standard errors below coefficients. Industry controls are
three digit employment. Questions are on a 1 to 7 Lickert Scale from strongly disagree (1) to strongly agree (5).
Q21
Q24
Q23
Q26

“Our ERP system is used to endow top management with more and better information”
“Our ERP system is used to endow (middle) managers with more and better information”
“Our ERP system is used to faster communicate information and directives from top management to employees”
“Our ERP system is used to faster communicate information and directives from (middle) management to employees”

Definitions of dependent variable:

DIF1 = Q24 – Q23
DIF2 = Q24 – Q26
DIF3 = Q24 - Q21
So DIF1, for example is the absolute difference between “ERP endows middle management with better information” less “ERP is used to faster communicate

information and directives from top management to employees”. This is an index from -4 to 4 indicating the degree to which ERP reduces information costs
relative to communication costs. A positive value of this index indicates that managers are more likely to view ERP as improving information costs rather
than reducing communication costs.

50

TABLE A2: DETAILS OF THE DECENTRALIZATION SURVEY QUESTIONS
For Questions D1, D3 and D4 any score can be given, but the scoring guide is only provided for scores of 1, 3 and 5.
Question D1: “To hire a FULL-TIME PERMANENT SHOPFLOOR worker what agreement would your plant need from CHQ (Central Head Quarters)?”
Probe until you can accurately score the question – for example if they say “It is my decision, but I need sign-off from corporate HQ.” ask “How often would sign-off be given?”
Score 1
Score 3
Score 5
Complete authority – it is my decision entirely
Scoring grid:
No authority – even for replacement hires
Requires sign-off from CHQ based on the
business case. Typically agreed (i.e. about
80% or 90% of the time).
Question D2: “What is the largest CAPITAL INVESTMENT your plant could make without prior authorization from CHQ?”
Notes: (a) Ignore form-filling
(b) Please cross check any zero response by asking “What about buying a new computer – would that be possible?”, and then probe….
(c) Challenge any very large numbers (e.g. >$¼m in US) by asking “To confirm your plant could spend $X on a new piece of equipment without prior clearance from CHQ?”
(d) Use the national currency and do not omit zeros (i.e. for a US firm twenty thousand dollars would be 20000).
Question D3: “Where are decisions taken on new product introductions – at the plant, at the CHQ or both”?
Probe until you can accurately score the question – for example if they say “It is complex, we both play a role “ask “Could you talk me through the process for a recent product
innovation?”
Score 1
Score 3
Score 5
Scoring grid:
All new product introduction decisions are
New product introductions are jointly
All new product introduction decisions taken at the plant
taken at the CHQ
determined by the plant and CHQ
level
Question D4: “How much of sales and marketing is carried out at the plant level (rather than at the CHQ)”?
Probe until you can accurately score the question. Also take an average score for sales and marketing if they are taken at different levels.
Score 1
Score 3
Score 5
Scoring grid:
None – sales and marketing is all run by
Sales and marketing decisions are split
The plant runs all sales and marketing
CHQ
between the plant and CHQ
Question D5: “Is the CHQ on the site being interviewed”?
Question D6: “How much do managers decide how tasks are allocated across workers in their teams”
Interviewers are read out the following five options, with
Score 1
Score 2
Score 3
Score 4
Score 5
our scoring for these note above:
All managers
Mostly managers
About equal
Mostly workers
All workers
Question D7: “Who decides the pace of work on the shopfloor”
Interviewers are read out the following five options, with
Score 1
Score 2
Score 3
Score 4
Score 5
“customer demand” an additional not read-out option
All managers
Mostly managers
About equal
Mostly workers
All workers
Question D8: “How many people directly report to the PLANT MANAGER (i.e. the number of people the PLANT MANAGER manages directly in the hierarchy below
him)? Note: cross-check answers of X above 20 by asking “So you directly manage on a daily basis X people?”

Notes: The electronic survey, training materials and survey video footage are available on http://cep.lse.ac.uk/management/default.asp

51

