                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         WHEN ARE ANALYST RECOMMENDATION CHANGES INFLUENTIAL?

                                              Roger K. Loh
                                              René M. Stulz

                                          Working Paper 14971
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w14971


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2009




We thank Gilbert Ho for research assistance and the Office of Research at Singapore Management
University for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Roger K. Loh and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
When are Analyst Recommendation Changes Influential?
Roger K. Loh and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 14971
May 2009
JEL No. G14,G20,G24

                                             ABSTRACT

Not all stock recommendation changes are equal. In a sample constructed to minimize the impact of
confounding news, relatively few analyst recommendation changes are influential in the sense that
they impact investors’ beliefs about a firm in a way that could be noticed in that firm’s stock returns.
More than one-third of the stock-price reactions to analyst recommendation changes have the wrong
sign and only approximately 10% have significant stock-price reactions at the 5% level using an extended
market model. We find that the probability of an influential recommendation is higher for leader analysts,
star analysts, away-from-consensus revisions, revisions issued contemporaneously with earnings forecasts,
analysts with greater relative experience, and those with more accurate earnings estimates. Growth
firms, small firms, high institutional ownership firms, and high prior turnover firms are also more
likely to have influential stock recommendations. Strikingly, analyst recommendations are more likely
to be influential after Reg FD and the settlement. Finally, influential recommendations are associated
with increases in stock volatility and large absolute changes in consensus earnings forecasts.


Roger K. Loh
Singapore Management University
Lee Kong Chian School of Business
50 Stamford Rd, #04-01
Singapore 178899
Singapore
rogerloh@smu.edu.sg

René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz_1@cob.osu.edu
1.   Introduction

     Market observers at times attribute large stock price changes to analyst recommendation

changes. For instance, according to the Wall Street Journal’s description, Kenneth Bruce from

Merrill Lynch issued a recommendation downgrade on Countrywide Financial on August 15,

2007 questioning the giant mortgage lender's ability to cope with a worsening credit crunch. The

report sparked a sell-off in Countrywide’s shares, which fell 13% on that day. In another

example, when Meredith Whitney (CIBC World Markets) downgraded Citigroup on November 1,

2007, the stock price dropped 6.9%, the CEO quit two days later, and she apparently received

death threats. 4 Though the finance literature finds that significant average abnormal returns are

associated with recommendation changes, the typical estimate associated with a recommendation

change is too small to be considered a significant abnormal return for the stock of a firm when an

analyst recommendation change is made. Consequently, with the typical recommendation change,

investors following a firm could not distinguish the impact of the recommendation change from

noise. However, at times a recommendation change, such as the Bruce call on Countrywide, is

viewed by observers as having a large identifiable impact on the stock price. In this paper, we try

to understand better when and why analyst recommendation changes at times appear to have a

large stock price impact.

     The question we address is different from the question typically answered in the analyst

literature that tries to assess the impact of analyst recommendation changes. This literature

focuses on average effects in large samples and generally investigates whether some type of

analyst recommendation change has a significant average abnormal return. By averaging across a

large number of announcements, the researcher hopes to eliminate the influence of confounding

effects on the study and therefore to obtain an estimate of the “pure” recommendation change

effect. At the same time, however, such an approach is of little use to evaluate claims about the

4
 The above examples are from the following articles: “Countrywide's woes multiply” by James R. Hagerty
and Ruth Simon, The Wall Street Journal, August 17, 2007, and “CIBC analyst got death threats on
Citigroup”, by Jonathan Stempel, Reuters, November 4, 2007.


                                                1
ability of analysts to impact stock prices of individual firms significantly. To wit, in our sample,

the median abnormal return associated with a downgrade is roughly -1%. For the typical firm, a -

1% abnormal return is noise. However, an abnormal return of the magnitude associated with the

recommendation change of Bruce for Countrywide is a highly significant abnormal return for the

typical firm.

    The existing literature does not tell us whether analysts frequently make recommendation

changes whose impact can be identified at the firm level rather than in large-scale samples. We

identify recommendation changes that are impactful using a simple measure of significance at the

firm level, namely the standard deviation of market model residuals, and we call such

recommendation changes influential. To investigate whether recommendation changes are

influential, it is important to focus on recommendation changes that occur on days without firm-

specific news. Analysts often write reports on days of firm-specific news and recommendation

changes on such days are more likely to be favorable if the firm has positive news. Though the

traditional event study method reduces or even eliminates the impact of confounding news on the

average abnormal return, it does so only when news and the probability of occurrence of the

event are uncorrelated. In the case of analysts, there is no reason to believe that this condition

holds. It is therefore important to construct a sample of recommendation changes where the

impact of confounding firm-specific news is minimized. Eliminating firm-specific news days

reduces the stock-price reaction to analyst recommendation changes, but the average stock-price

reaction remains statistically significant. We find that roughly 10% of recommendation changes

in our sample (that minimizes the impact of firm-specific news) are significant at the firm level

and hence influential. However, one analyst in four never has an influential recommendation

change. Conditional on an analyst having an influential recommendation change, one in five of

the analyst’s recommendation changes are influential.

    Why is it that an analyst at times can make recommendations that are associated with a

significant firm-level abnormal return? We believe that at times analysts can change how a


                                               2
corporation is viewed and that such “paradigm shifts” are responsible for the large impact of

some recommendation changes. This perspective builds on Hong, Stein, and Yu (2007). Hong et

al. study the implications of learning in an environment in which the true model of the world is a

multivariate one, but agents update only over the class of simple univariate models. When

sufficient evidence accumulates against the incumbent simple model, agents switch to another

simple model, and prices in the underlying stock moves to reflect this paradigm shift. In this

paper, we investigate whether influential analyst recommendation changes precipitate such

paradigm shifts.

    Meredith Whitney’s Citigroup downgrade on Nov. 1, 2007 was associated with a drop in

Citigroup’s stock price of 6.1%. Yet, as a Wall Street Journal recently reported, other analysts in

the weeks before downgraded the stock with reports that had similar content. 5 Consequently, a

recommendation change is not influential simply because of its content—other factors must affect

whether the recommendation change is influential. We use a probit model to investigate the

factors that make it more likely that a recommendation change will be influential. In support of

our “paradigm shift” hypothesis, we find that recommendations away from the consensus are

more likely to be influential. The analysts who are likely to make influential recommendations

are highly ranked analysts who have a history of being ahead of the crowd. It is harder for an

analyst to have an influential recommendation when more analysts follow a firm and when the

firm is larger. However, greater diversity of opinion about a firm makes it more likely that a

recommendation change will be influential. This result is also consistent with the “paradigm

shift” view, in that it is harder to change a paradigm when it is well-established.

    When analyst recommendation changes are influential because they are associated with

paradigm shifts, we should see them lead to much analyst activity and trading in the stock as

investors adjust their holdings to the new paradigm. We find this is to be the case. Share turnover


5
 “When Meredith Whitney calls, should you listen?” by David Weidner, The Wall Street Journal, April 9,
2009.


                                                3
is much larger in the three months following an influential analyst change than in the three

months before. So is stock volatility. Analysts make more forecasts after an influential analyst

recommendation change than before. Finally, forecast revisions by analysts following such a

change are much larger than forecast revisions before such a change.

    We are not the first study to examine the differential impact of stock recommendation

changes. For instance, Stickel (1995) shows that recommendation changes of star analysts have

more impact and Fang and Yasuda (2008) show that they are more profitable. Irvine (2004)

provides evidence that the market reacts more strongly to initiations than to other

recommendations. Ivkovic and Jegadeesh (2004) show that the timing of recommendation

changes in relation to earnings announcements affects their impact. Asquith, Mikhail, and Au

(2005) provide evidence that the impact of recommendation changes is affected by the content of

analyst reports. Frankel, Kothari, and Weber (2006) examine whether firm characteristics affect

the impact of earnings forecast revisions but they do not consider analyst characteristics or stock

recommendations. Chen, Francis, and Schipper (2005) find that the average analyst

recommendation or earnings forecast produces a price impact that is no different from the average

stock price movement on non-recommendation days. Most recently, Altinkilic and Hansen (2008)

report evidence that the average recommendation revision does not produce a statistically

significant intra-day reaction after removing recommendations that piggyback on firm news such

as earnings announcements. Both Altinkilic and Hansen and Chen et al. provide evidence to the

effect that the average recommendation is not influential while our focus is to study which

recommendations are influential and what makes them influential.

    The rest of the study is organized as follows: Section 2 details the data and sample, Section 3

describes the average recommendation event abnormal return. Section 4 identifies which

recommendations are influential and their characteristics and consequences, Section 5

investigates predictive variables for influential recommendations, Section 6 considers alternative

definitions of influential, and Section 7 concludes.


                                               4
2.       Data and Sample

2.1. Recommendations data

         The stock recommendations sample is from Thomson Financial’s Institutional Brokers

Estimate (I/B/E/S) U.S. Detail File, which contains stock recommendation ratings issued by

individual analysts from 1993-2006. I/B/E/S reports ratings ranging from 1 (strong buy) to 5

(sell). To make the ratings more intuitive, we reverse the ratings (5 for strong buy and 1 for sell,

etc.) so that higher ratings correspond to more favorable recommendations. The focus is on

recommendation revisions and not levels since prior research confirms that recommendation

changes are more informative than mere levels (e.g., Boni and Womack (2006) and Jegadeesh

and Kim (2006)). The recommendation change RECCHG is computed as the current rating minus

the prior rating by the same analyst. By construction, RECCHG ∈ [−4,4] . We exclude the

recommendation if there is no outstanding prior rating from the same analyst (i.e., analyst

initiations are excluded). A rating is always assumed to be outstanding if it is less than one year

old and never if it is more than two years old; if the rating is between one and two years old, it is

treated as outstanding only if there is an analyst forecast from the analyst in the one year window

prior to the recommendation date (matching to the I/B/E/S Detail Earnings Forecast File). 6

         We also remove analysts coded as anonymous by I/B/E/S since it is not possible to track their

recommendation revisions. Ljungqvist, Malloy, and Marston (2008) report that matched records

in the I/B/E/S recommendations data were altered between downloads from 2000 to 2007. They

also document that Thomson Financial, in response to their paper, has recently reinstated the




     6
     The results are robust to using a stale criterion of one year. Most studies consider recommendations
stale if they are more than one year old. This criterion is too stringent because in I/B/E/S, the average time
it takes for an analyst to revise a recommendation is 274 days and 25% of the time it takes more than 360
days (Malmendier and Shanthikumar (2007) provide similar statistics). By refining the stale
recommendation criterion, we avoid excluding outstanding recommendations that would be considered
stale by other studies. The fact that the analyst issued a recent earnings forecast for the firm is consistent
with continuing active coverage.



                                                    5
missing analyst names in the recommendation history file as of February 12, 2007. The dataset

we use is dated March 15, 2007 and likely reflects these recent corrections by Thomson.

       A portion of the sample period is affected by the introduction of Rule 2711 by the National

Association of Securities Dealers (NASD). Part of the NASD 2711 rule required brokerages to

report the distribution of stock ratings across its coverage universe. This rule was approved on

May 8, 2002 with an implementation period ending September 9, 2002. Many brokers reissued

stock recommendations in the implementation period. As a result, 2002 contains the most number

of recommendations in I/B/E/S compared to any other sample year (see Barber, Lehavy,

McNichols, and Trueman (2006)). To account for this structural break, we remove

recommendation changes where the current recommendation is issued between May 8, 2002 and

September 9, 2002 (inclusive) and the prior recommendation was issued before May 8, 2002.

Such recommendation changes are likely to be motivated by adherence to the NASD 2711 rule

rather than by stock selection.

       Since we cannot determine the exact time of day of recommendation changes, we adopt a

three-day event window to make sure that we incorporate the daily return reflecting the

recommendation change. To compute the three-day (i.e., three trading days) cumulative buy-and-

hold abnormal return (CAR) for a recommendation change i, we define


                                                                 (   )
                                             1            1
                                  CARi = ∏ (Rit ) − ∏ RitDGTW .                                  (1)
                                           t = −1       t = −1


Rit is the raw return of the stock on day t and RitDGTW is the return on a benchmark portfolio with

the same size, book-to-market (B/M), and momentum characteristics as the stock (Daniel,

Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997), thereafter DGTW). 7 Day 0 is the I/B/E/S reported

recommendation date or the next trading day if the recommendation date is a non-trading day (for

example, a Saturday). The DGTW portfolios are computed as follows. Every July, firms are first


   7
     The results are similar when we use the sum of abnormal returns rather the buy-and-hold abnormal
returns.


                                                    6
sorted into quintiles based on their market cap on June 30 of each year using break-points

determined from NYSE stocks. Second, firms are then sorted within each size quintile into

quintiles based on their B/M ratios. B/M ratios are computed as in Fama and French (2006).

Third, firms within each size-B/M group are sorted into momentum quintiles every month based

on the buy-and-hold return over the prior 12 months skipping the most recent month. Therefore

the size and B/M rankings are updated every 12 months while the momentum rankings are

updated monthly. Finally, the stocks within each characteristic portfolio are equally-weighted at

the beginning of each month and the buy-and-hold average daily returns are computed.

2.2. Importance of removing recommendations made in response to firm news

    If a stock recommendation has an immediate impact on a firm’s stock price, it does so

because it reveals information about the firm. In determining whether the analyst produced any

material information, one should be careful to remove recommendations that merely repeat the

information contained in firm-specific news releases. As already discussed, Altinkilic and Hansen

(2008) go so far as to argue that once the impact of other news is removed, analyst

recommendation changes do not have an impact. Malmendier and Shanthikumar (2007) and Loh

(2007) report that 12-13% of stock recommendations occur in the three days around quarterly

earnings announcements. Since there are 252 trading days in a year, one would expect only 4.8%

of all recommendations to be issued around earnings announcements if the likelihood of a

recommendation is uniformly distributed throughout the year. Therefore, not removing such

earnings announcements recommendations falsely gives credit to the analyst recommendation for

producing the earnings announcement price impact (see also, Frankel et al. (2006)). To apply this

screen, we obtain quarterly earnings announcement dates from I/B/E/S.

    Another type of firm-specific news release is earnings guidance issued by firms. Chen et al.

(2005) suggest that such days should also be taken out when determining the price impact of

stock recommendations. We obtain earnings guidance dates from the First Call Guidelines

database. Finally, Bradley, Jordan, and Ritter (2007) contend that clustering in recommendation


                                             7
changes usually occur because of firm-specific news. Therefore we also identify days on which

multiple analysts issue recommendations for the firm as potential firm-specific news events.


3.   The average CAR of recommendations changes

     In this section, we estimate the average CAR of recommendation changes to provide a

benchmark for our later analysis and to show how minimizing the impact of firm-specific news

affects the estimate of the average CAR of recommendation changes.

3.1. Descriptive statistics of recommendation changes

     Our main sample contains 196,854 recommendation changes. Panel A of Table 1 shows the

transition probabilities of recommendation changes. We see that recommendation levels are

predominantly optimistic with sell and underperform ratings making up only a small percentage

of all recommendations. Looking at rating changes where the prior rating was a hold (third

column), we see that a hold is more likely to migrate to a buy recommendation (36% of the time).

For rating changes where the prior rating was a buy, a downgrade to hold is very likely (49% of

the time). Figure 1 plots the transition probabilities in Panel A of Table 1.

     Next, Panel B summarizes the number of recommendations according to the sign and

magnitude of the rating change. The two rating change groups that have the largest number of

recommendations are one-point upgrades (+1) and one-point downgrades (–1). The +1 group

contains 47,006 recommendations (23.9% of the sample) and the –1 group contains the 57,290

recommendations. Reiterations (rating change of 0) make up 21.7% of all recommendation

changes. Looking at the diagonal cells in Panel A of Table 1, we observe that hold

recommendations are the most likely to be reiterated, followed by buys and strong buys.

3.2. Histogram of recommendation CAR

     Figure 2 plots the histogram of three-day CARs of recommendation changes for one- and

two-point magnitude rating changes. The first two charts show the distribution of CARs for one-

and two point upgrades. The mean CAR for a one-point upgrade is 2.687% and that for a two-



                                                8
point upgrade is 2.783%. The medians are much lower at 1.530% and 1.694% respectively. This

reveals that the magnitude of the mean CARs are strongly influenced by outliers. Another piece

of suggestive evidence that only a minority of recommendations are influential is that a sizable

number of CARs fall into the zero bin. Note that each interval in the histogram is one percent so

that the zero bin represents CARs between -0.5% and 0.5%. The distributions also do not appear

to resemble a normal distribution given that there are more right tail observations than there are

left tail observations for positive recommendation changes, implying positive skewness in the

distribution. The opposite result holds for negative recommendation changes.

    The last two charts in Figure 2 show the one- and two-point rating changes for downgrades.

The charts here tell a similar story. The median CARs are much more attenuated compared to the

mean CAR and there is evidence that tail observations have a large influence so that the typical

downgrade CAR may be very different from the mean downgrade CAR.

3.3. Impact of firm news events and influential observations on mean CAR

    The next analysis reports how the average CAR of recommendation changes is affected when

recommendations issued together with firm news events are removed and when outlier

recommendations are removed.

    The nine panels of Table 2 show the distribution statistics of recommendation change

categories by subsamples sequentially from -4 to +4. We begin by examining downgrades and

focus on the fourth panel, the rating change of -1, which has the largest number of observations

among all downgrade categories. Sample 1 is the full set of -1 downgrades. The average CAR is

-3.786% with a trivially small associated p-value (reported as 0.000) based on standard errors

clustered by calendar day. Although the average CAR is large, we see evidence that it could be

driven by outliers because the median CAR is only -1.775% (p-value of 0.000 from a signed test).

As we saw in the histogram earlier, the distribution of CARs does not appear normal and this is

now confirmed with the negative skewness (many left tail outlier observations) and the large

positive kurtosis (tails fatter than predicted by a normal distribution). We also report the


                                              9
Kolmogorov-Smirnov D-statistic as a test of normality with the p-value in parentheses below the

D-statistics. The null hypothesis is normality and we see that normality is soundly rejected. 8

       Further evidence that the mean gives a misleading view of the typical CAR can be seen in the

mode of the various groups. Using 50 basis points (bps) intervals, we find that the modal CAR is

-1%, which means that the interval containing the most values of CAR is [-1.25%, -0.75%].

Another interesting statistic (third column) is the percentage of positive-signed CARs. A positive

CAR in this case shows that a -1 rating change was associated with a stock price movement in the

opposite direction from the rating change. 33.48% of -1 rating changes actually had CARs with

the wrong sign.

       Next, we examine the impact of removing recommendations that are contaminated by firm

news releases. First, we remove observations that fall in the three-day window around quarterly

earnings announcements dates reported by I/B/E/S. 9 The impact of this removal is to reduce the

average CAR to -3.246% (see sample 2). Next, we also remove from sample 2 the

recommendations that fall in the three day window around management earnings guidance days

and find that the average CAR drops dramatically to -2.030%. Finally, we remove days with

multiple recommendations since these days could correspond to firm news releases that led

multiple analysts to revise their ratings. The average CAR now becomes -1.623%. Although the

average CAR is still statistically significant in sample 4, we see that moving from sample 1 to

sample 4, the economic magnitude of the average CAR drops by more than half from -3.786% to

-1.623%. The median CAR also falls from -1.775% to -1.074%. These results stress that a large

fraction of the average recommendation CAR should be attributed to contemporaneous firm news




   8
      It could be that stock returns are not normal so that the recommendation CARs are also not normal.
However, all the results in Table 2 remain even when log abnormal returns (ln of 1+Eq. 1) are used in place
of regular CARs.
    9
      Quarterly earnings announcement dates can be obtained from either I/B/E/S or Compustat. DellaVigna
and Pollet (2009) show that after 1994, earnings announcement dates provided both databases are equally
accurate.


                                                 10
releases rather than to the recommendation itself and this is consistent with the findings in Chen

et al. (2005) and Altinkilic and Hansen (2008).

    Next, we consider the impact of removing outlier observations from this reduced sample of

38,515 recommendations. We consider two ways of removing outliers in sample 4. We note that

sample 4 still has fat tails and negative skewness. The first method is to trim 5% from both tails

of the sample distribution and we find that the average CAR reduces to -1.420% (see sample 5

row). The skewness and kurtosis drops significantly as a result of this filter. The second method

is to identify outliers in an objective manner by using least trimmed squares (LTS) method (see

for example, Knez and Ready (1997)). Specifically, we estimated a regression using LTS with the

recommendation change CAR against a constant. This regression allows us to identify the

observations that have the most influence on the coefficient estimate. We then compute the mean

CAR by excluding the LTS-identified outliers and report the descriptive statistics from this new

sample 6.    The average CAR is now -1.194% and the median is -0.977%. Although the

magnitudes are reduced dramatically from sample 1, we note that they are still statistically

different from zero.

    Other panels in Table 2 show similar patterns. First, the median CAR is roughly half of the

mean CAR in absolute value, showing that outlier recommendations have a large influence on the

mean. Second, removing all firm-news contaminated recommendations shaves off a sizable

proportion (sometimes more than half) of the absolute value mean and median CARs, evidence

that many recommendations do not add additional value but merely repeat information contained

in firm news releases. Third, removing outliers from both tails further reduces the magnitude of

the typical recommendation absolute value average CAR. Altogether, the results in this table

show that the distributions of CARs are not normal. The CAR distributions are usually skewed

and have fat tails, and outliers have an important impact on the mean CAR. Also, controlling for

firm-specific news sharply reduces the average impact that a stock recommendation has on a

firm’s stock price.


                                             11
     Table 3 shows the sensitivity of the magnitude and statistical significance of the mean

recommendation CAR when part of the influential tail is removed. The first row of the table

shows the size and significance (with one, two, and three asterisks representing 10%, 5% and 1%

statistical significance respectively) of the mean CAR when confounding firm-news events are

removed. This is essentially the sample 4 from the panels of Table 2. The second row of the table

“1%” reports the average CAR when 1% of the influential tail is removed. This means removing

1% of the left tail of a downgrade category or removing the 1% of the right tail of an upgrade

category. When the average CAR becomes statistically insignificant after the removal of x% of

the influential tail, the rows below are intentionally left blank. For example, rating changes of -4

have an average CAR of -1.803% but once we remove 3% of the left tail, the average CAR

becomes a statistically insignificant -0.385%. Therefore in this rating change group, we label 3%

of the observations of the left tail as influential and the other observations as non-influential.

     The rest of Table 3 shows us that all four downgrade categories, removing up to 10% of the

left tail removes the statistical significance of the mean CAR. The rating change group of -4 only

requires removal of 3% of the tail and the rating change group of -3 already has an insignificant

mean CAR without the removal of any tail observations. For the positive rating change groups,

more of the positive tail needs to be removed before the mean CARs become insignificant. For

the +2 group for example, 20% of the right tail needed to be removed before the mean CAR

became insignificant. This table illustrates the importance of influential observations in the

average price reaction to recommendations.


4.   Influential versus non-influential recommendation changes

4.1. Methods for classifying recommendation changes

     In this section, we identify recommendation changes that are influential and compare them

with non-influential recommendation changes. We report results for two definitions of influential.

We consider only rating changes in our analysis and exclude reiterations.



                                                12
    The first method classifies a recommendation change as an influential recommendation

change if the CAR is greater than 1.96 times the standard deviation of the firm’s prior three-

month idiosyncratic return. We focus most of our discussion on this method and use the second

method as a robustness test. This method is intuitive: it treats as influential recommendation

changes accompanied by an abnormal return that is significant using the market model.

Specifically, a recommendation change is influential if CAR > 1.96 × 3 × σ ε , where σ ε is the

standard deviation of firm residual returns in the prior three months ([-63,-2] days) from the

recommendation change. We multiply by        3 since the CAR is a three-day CAR while the σ ε is

the standard deviation of residuals from a daily time-series regression of firm returns against

market returns and the two Fama-French factors. This measure roughly captures recommendation

changes that observers would judge to be influential, namely those recommendation changes that

are associated with noticeable abnormal returns that may be attributable to the recommendation

changes.

    The second approach classifies a recommendation change as influential when its normalized

CAR is more than 1.96 standard deviations better than the mean prior 12-month normalized CAR

of the similar rating change category across all firms. A normalized CAR is simply the CAR

scaled by the firm’s prior idiosyncratic volatility. Recommendation changes are considered

influential using this second approach based on historical recommendation change CARs rather

than merely based on the prior idiosyncratic volatility of the firm. This second method identifies

as influential recommendation changes that have an unusual impact relative to other similar

recommendation changes. This definition may also capture what observers mean when they

notice specific recommendation changes in that it selects recommendation changes with possibly

large effects relative to typical recommendation changes. However, the stock-price reaction for

these recommendation changes need not be significant at the firm level. We also use other

definitions of influential (see Section 6) but our main tests focus on these two methods.



                                              13
    The first row of Table 4 reports the number of recommendations that are categorized into

each dimension of success. We see that 10.0% (3.2%) of all recommendation changes are defined

as influential using the first (second) definition.

4.2. Analyst and firm characteristics of influential recommendations changes

    We now compare the average characteristics of influential recommendation changes versus

non-influential changes for each rating change category. We examine the following analyst-

related characteristics:

    1) Forecast accuracy: Loh and Mian (2006) show that analysts who possess more accurate

        earnings forecasts issue more profitable contemporaneous stock recommendations. It is

        possible that such analysts have recommendations that also have a larger market impact

        since their recommendation changes are accompanied by more accurate concurrent

        earnings forecasts. We compute the forecast accuracy quintile of an analyst by sorting

        analysts within a firm year into quintiles using the last unrevised forecast of the analyst

        on the I/B/E/S Detail U.S. File. Only firms with at least five analysts are included. The

        forecast accuracy rank (1 being the most accurate) is assigned to the analyst for the

        recommendations that the analyst issues during the 12 month window that overlaps three

        months into the next fiscal year (following Loh and Mian). Overlapping the 12 month

        period into the next fiscal year allows the accuracy rank to be applied during the months

        when fiscal year’s actual earnings are announced. Note that this accuracy rank is a perfect

        foresight rank and is not known at the time of the recommendation since actual earnings

        have not yet been announced.

    2) Direction of recommendation relative to the consensus: Jegadeesh and Kim (2006)

        formulate a test for herding and contend that if analysts herd, recommendations that go

        toward the consensus would have a smaller price impact than those that go away from the

        consensus. Following their paper, we define recommendations that go away from the

        consensus as those where the absolute deviation of the new recommendation from the


                                                14
    consensus is larger than the absolute deviation of the prior recommendation from the

    consensus. The consensus recommendation is defined as the mean recommendation level

    that includes the most recent non-stale recommendation issued by all analysts covering

    the firm (see Section 2.1 for the definition of stale).

3) Star analyst: This is an indicator variable that equals one if the analyst is ranked as an

    All-American (first, second, third, or runner-up teams) in the annual polls in the

    Institutional Investor Magazine. Analyst names in I/B/E/S are matched to Institutional

    Investor polls (published in the October issue) and an analyst maintains the star status for

    12 months beginning the November after the polls. The star analyst indicator variable

    proxies for the reputation of the analyst and the market’s attentiveness to the stock

    recommendation (the market could pay more attention to calls from star analysts).

4) Analyst experience: Mikhail, Walther, and Willis (1997) show that analysts improve their

    earnings forecast accuracy with experience. Hence, it is possible that experience could be

    related to the market impact of stock recommendation changes. Analyst experience is

    measured as the number of quarters since the analyst issued the first earnings forecasts or

    stock recommendation on I/B/E/S. If an analyst appears in both the earnings forecasts and

    the recommendation file, the earlier of the two dates is used. Two measures of experience

    are computed. The first is the analyst’s overall experience, which is the number of

    quarters that he appeared on I/B/E/S. The second is the relative experience which is the

    number of quarters the analyst has covered that specific firm minus the average

    experience for all analysts covering the firm.

5) Concurrent earnings forecast: Michaely and Womack (2006) report that stock

    recommendations accompanied by forecast revisions are more profitable and have larger

    price reactions. Therefore, we include a concurrent earnings forecast indicator variable

    indicating whether the same analyst issued any type of earnings forecast in the three-day

    window around the recommendation change.


                                            15
    We compute the average of these analyst-specific variables for the different rating change

groups. Table 4 reports the averages for observations where these variables can be computed. The

first subsample analysis separates recommendation changes into influential and non-influential

using the ratio of the CAR to the firm’s prior idiosyncratic volatility. The average analyst forecast

accuracy quintile of influential recommendation changes is 2.802 versus 2.769 for non-influential

recommendations. The difference is statistically significant, but its economic importance seems

limited. 58.2% of influential recommendation changes move away from the consensus while only

52.5% of non-influential recommendation changes move away from the consensus—the

difference is significant. Also, a larger proportion of influential recommendation changes are

issued by star analysts and analysts with higher overall experience and relative firm-specific

experience. A larger proportion of influential recommendation changes have concurrent earnings

forecasts issued together with the recommendation change. These differences are as predicted

from the prior literature. Using the second definition of influential (based on prior distribution of

recommendation CARs) yields similar patterns of differences. Influential recommendation

changes are associated with higher analyst forecast accuracy, are issued away from the consensus,

from star analysts, and have concurrently issued earnings forecasts. The benefit of having more

relative firm-experience appears mixed across the two definitions of influential.

    Next, in Panel B, we also consider firm characteristics because firm characteristics could

create conditions that make it more likely that analysts could make significant recommendation

changes. For example, analysts may add more value when the value of the firm depends more on

growth options which are harder to value than assets-in-place. We examine the following firm

characteristics.

    1) Book-to-market ratio (B/M ratio) computed as in Fama and French (2006).

    2) Size of the firm (lagged month market cap).

    3) Institutional ownership (percent of shares owned by institutions as reported in Thomson

        13f in the most recent quarter end).


                                               16
    4) Dispersion is the standard deviation of the I/B/E/S Summary unadjusted file reported

        mean FY1 forecast divided by the absolute value of the mean forecast (following Diether,

        Malloy, and Scherbina (2002)).

    5) # of forecasts is the number of forecasts (all horizons) issued by all analysts for the firm

        in the last three months ([-63,-2]).

    6) Turnover is based on the last three-month average daily percentage of shares traded

        divided by total shares outstanding.

    7) Idiosyncratic volatility is the standard deviation of the residuals from a time-series

        regression of past three-months’ daily returns against the Fama-French three factors.

    8) Total volatility is the standard deviation of prior three-month daily returns.

    The results are reported in Panel B of Table 4. We first look at the first definition of

influential. Influential recommendation changes tend to be issued on firms that are smaller, have

higher institutional ownership, lower total and idiosyncratic volatility, lower turnover, and lower

number of prior earnings forecasts. The second definition of influential yields similar results.

These results are consistent with the paradigm change view of influential analyst recommendation

changes. Analysts can more easily affect investors’ beliefs about a firm when they are speaking in

a smaller crowd. However, institutional investors are the main consumers of analyst reports, so

that analysts are more likely to have a significant impact if a firm has more institutional

ownership.

4.3. The effect of influential recommendation changes

    Next, we consider changes in the firm environment. With the paradigm shift view, we would

expect influential recommendation changes to be associated with important changes in the firm’s

expected performance and trading. Hong et al. (2007) propose that a paradigm shift is followed

by increases in volatility. It is also possible that analyst activity and trading activity increase

following a paradigm shift. We investigate changes in some firm-specific variables around the

rating change event. The variables considered are:


                                               17
    1)      The leader-follower ratio (LFR) is computed following Cooper, Day, and Lewis

(2001) so as to gauge the extent to which the influential recommendation change leads other

analysts to change their recommendations. The gaps between the current recommendation

and the previous two recommendations from other brokers are computed and summed. The

same is done for the next two recommendations. The leader-follower ratio is the gap sum of

the prior two recommendations divided by the gap sum of the next two recommendations.

Ratios larger than one show that other brokers issue new ratings quickly in response to the

current analyst’s recommendation. The schematic below illustrates the LFR of

recommendation i: LFRi=(80+40)/(20+10)=4, which is greater than one and hence the analyst

associated with recommendation i is a leader analyst.

                                           Recommendation i

                                                     10 days




                                          40 days       20 days


                                80 days


    2)      Change in volatility from the prior three months ([-63,-2] days) to the next three

months ([2,63] days). The same horizon is used for the variables below.

    3)      Change in idiosyncratic volatility.

    4)      Change in analyst forecast dispersion.

    5)      Change in average daily turnover.

    6)      Change in number of earnings forecasts issued.

    7)      Change in the magnitude of monthly consensus FY1 and FY2 forecast revisions

scaled by price, and long-term growth percentage forecasts.




                                          18
    Panel C of Table 4 reports the change in the above characteristics for the influential versus

non-influential recommendation changes. The evidence strongly suggests a more significant

change in the firm’s information environment after influential recommendation changes. The

LFR of influential recommendation changes is larger than the LFR of non-influential

recommendation changes. Changes in idiosyncratic and total volatility are also larger for

influential recommendation changes compared to non-influential recommendation changes.

However, there is no difference in the change in dispersion. Finally, analyst and trading activity

increase   more    following    influential   recommendation     changes    than    non-influential

recommendation changes.

    An influential recommendation change would presumably change the way that investors view

the future cash flows of the firm and this could show up in analyst forecast revisions. The change

in the absolute value of FY1 and FY2 forecast revisions is significantly positive for influential

recommendation changes. For example, the change in magnitude of FY2 forecast revisions for

influential recommendation changes is 1.088% of price but only 0.075% of price for non-

influential recommendation changes (first definition of influential). The difference of 1.012% is

statistically significant. In contrast, there is little corroborating evidence for the magnitude of

change in LTG forecasts.

4.4. Do influential recommendation changes come from only a subset of analysts?

    Next, we investigate whether influential recommendation changes come only from a subset of

analysts. Figure 3 plots the histogram of the proportion of an analyst’s recommendation changes

that are influential. We limit this analysis to analysts who made at least five recommendation

changes in the sample period. If all analysts were equally capable of making influential

recommendation changes, we would expect the distribution to peak around the average

proportion of influential recommendation changes in the entire sample. The figure shows

otherwise. The first chart uses the first definition of influential. Although the unconditional

proportion of influential recommendation changes is 10% in the sample, about 25% of all


                                              19
analysts never issue a single influential recommendation change in their lifetimes. For the other

definition of influential (based on past recommendation CARs), about 56% of analysts never

issue an influential recommendation change. This skewed distribution indicates that only some

analysts are influential and that there is a sizable proportion of analysts whose recommendation

changes never have a noticeable stock-price impact.

     Table 5 compares the characteristics of analysts who issue at least one influential

recommendation change in the sample versus the other analysts. One would expect the “Ever

influential” group to dominate the “Never influential” group in terms of skill, experience, star

status, etc. Indeed this is the case. Analysts who issue at least one influential recommendation

change in the sample have better average analyst earnings forecast accuracy ranks. They are also

more likely to issue recommendations away from the consensus, have once been a star analyst,

and have greater absolute and relative experience compared to “Never influential” analysts.


5.   Predicting which recommendation changes will be influential

     Section 4 provides evidence that influential recommendation changes are associated with

specific analyst and firm attributes. Since many of these attributes are correlated, we use in this

section a probit regression to assess the impact of these attributes on the likelihood that a

recommendation will be influential. To make our approach predictive, we require the attributes to

be known at the time of the recommendation change. All the variables used in the previous

section are already based on past information except for forecast accuracy and the LFR. To make

these two variables rely on past information, the forecast accuracy quintile is now the average

quintile rank of the analyst for all the firms that he covers in the prior fiscal year and the LFR is

now the average of the analyst’s prior LFRs for the past 12 months. The definitions of the other

attributes are the same as before. The probit regression is estimated for observations where all the

required variables are available and the standard errors are clustered by analyst. We also add

controls for the level of the recommendation, the absolute value of the recommendation change,



                                              20
an upgrade indicator variable, and indicator variables for the sample period after Reg FD (equals

one from September 2000 onwards) and after the Global Analyst Settlement (equals one in 2003

and onwards). 10

    The dependent variable of the probit regression is equal to one if the recommendation change

is influential. We report both coefficient estimates and marginal effects. 11 The results confirm the

conclusions reached in the previous section. A recommendation change is more likely to be

influential if it represents a move away from the consensus, it is from a star analyst, 12 from an

analyst with more relative experience, has a contemporaneous earnings forecast, and from an

analyst with high prior LFR. Firms that are more likely to receive impactful recommendation

changes are growth firms, small firms, high institutional ownership firms, high prior turnover

firms, less volatile firms, and low prior number of earnings forecasts firms.

    The control variables also include indicator variables for Reg FD and the analyst settlement.

After Reg FD was passed in August 2000, analysts were no longer allowed to get access to

private information from firm executives. If such private information is one main source of

influential recommendation changes, we would expect influential recommendation changes to

abate after the passage of the law. For example, Gintschel and Markov (2004) show evidence that

selective disclosure was curtailed after Reg FD and the absolute price impact of analyst output

was reduced. We find, however, that the Reg FD dummy is significantly positive, implying that

influential recommendation changes are even more likely after Reg FD.




   10
       In order to allow structural breaks to be identified, we compute the second definition of influential in
a different manner compared to the earlier table. For the probit regression only, we compare the
recommendation CAR against the distribution of similar rating change category CARs for the entire sample
period instead of just using the prior 12 months.
    11
       The marginal effect of a continuous variable x is the partial derivative with respect to x of the
prediction function, evaluated at the mean value of y. If the independent variable is ln(x), the partial
derivative will be δy/δln(x), which is the partial derivative of y with respect to a 1% change in x. If x is a
dummy variable, the marginal effect is the discrete change in y as the dummy variable changes from 0 to 1.
    12
       The star analyst variable is a four point variable which we utilize their actual all American rank with
higher numbers signifying a superior rank. We assign star=1 for runner-up ranks, up to star=4 for first place
ranks.


                                                   21
     For the settlement, Kadan, Madureira, Wang, and Zach (2009) find that after the settlement

(their sample goes up to 2004 only), the overall informativeness of recommendations was

reduced. Boni (2006) also finds similar evidence. Although, the overall informativeness of

recommendations decreased, Kadan et al. also find that the falling number of optimistic

recommendations could have caused optimistic recommendations to be become more

informative. Our probit estimations find some evidence that a recommendation change is more

likely to be influential after the settlement, especially for the first definition of influential. When

we add an interaction variable upgrade×settlement to the estimations (unreported), we find that

this interaction term is significant for the second definition of influential)—meaning that

influential upgrades were more likely after the settlement. Altogether, our results suggest that

although the overall impact of Reg FD and the settlement could have reduced the mean price

impact of recommendations, the probability that a recommendation change is influential actually

increased.


6.   Alternative definitions of influential

     We also use other methods of classifying recommendation changes as influential with

generally similar results. One method is the one illustrated in Table 3 where influential tail

observations are identified as those observations which, when removed, render the average

recommendation change CAR insignificant. This method has a look-ahead bias since it relies on

all future CARs in the entire sample period. Another method we also consider is whether

recommendations returns beat twice the average CAR of same category rating changes that

occurred in the last 12 months. We find that about 29.5% of them do.

     Finally, we simply rely on the sign of the recommendation change CAR. One can view this as

the lowest hurdle for the definition of influential since it only requires that the CAR has a correct

sign. A correct recommendation change is one associated with a CAR that has the same sign as

the direction of the recommendation change. Considering the sign of the recommendation change



                                               22
CAR improves upon the methodology in some studies that evaluate recommendation changes

based on only the absolute unsigned reaction magnitudes (example, Chen et al. (2005) and

Frankel et al. (2006)).


7.   Conclusion

     Recommendation changes are sometimes associated with extremely large abnormal returns

and these changes are typically the ones that the press focuses on. Such changes are associated

with stock-price reactions that are quite different from the stock-price reaction of the typical

recommendation change. The existing literature on analyst recommendation changes focuses on

the average stock-price reaction. We show that the average stock-price reaction is small enough

when proper care is taken to account for confounding news that for an individual stock it would

not be identifiable with a firm-level event study. We call analyst recommendation changes with

an identifiable impact at the firm level influential recommendation changes.

     It is not surprising that some analyst recommendation changes will have a large impact. We

argue that some analyst recommendation changes lead to a paradigm shift in how a firm is

assessed by investors. We investigate the frequency of such recommendation changes, when a

recommendation change is likely to be influential, and how the firm’s information environment

changes around influential recommendation changes. Using as our criterion for influential

recommendation changes significance of the abnormal return in a firm-level event study, we find

that roughly 10% of the recommendation changes in I/B/E/S after eliminating changes associated

with confounding information are influential. Strikingly, a quarter of the analysts never have an

influential recommendation change. We find that influential recommendations are more likely to

be from analysts with larger leader-follower ratios, large brokers, away-from-consensus revisions,

issued contemporaneously with earnings forecasts, and more experienced analysts. Further,

growth firms, small firms, high institutional ownership firms, high prior turnover firms, and low

prior number of earnings forecasts firms are more likely to be associated with influential



                                             23
recommendations. We also find evidence consistent with a paradigm shift for firms that

experience influential recommendation changes: we find that if a firm has an influential

recommendation change, its stock’s turnover increases, its volatility increases, and analysts make

more and bigger forecast changes. Overall our evidence is supportive of the view that influential

analyst forecasts arise when analysts succeed in creating a paradigm shift, i.e., a significant

change in how investors perceive a firm. However, analysts are like writers. Sometimes they have

best-sellers, but the odds of writing a best-seller are low and whether a book is a best-seller

depends on many factors that are not under the control of the writer.




                                              24
References

Altinkilic, Oya and Robert S. Hansen, 2008, On the information role of stock recommendation
         revisions, Working paper, Tulane University.
Asquith, Paul, Michael B. Mikhail, and Andrea Au, 2005, Information content of equity analyst
         reports, Journal of Financial Economics 75, 245-282.
Barber, Brad M., Reuven Lehavy, Maureen McNichols, and Brett Trueman, 2006, Buys, holds,
         and sells: The distribution of investment banks’ stock ratings and the implications for the
         profitability of analysts’ recommendations, Journal of Accounting & Economics 41, 87-
         117.
Boni, Leslie, 2006, Analyzing the analysts after the Global Settlement, in Y. Fuchita, Litan, R. E.,
         ed.: Financial Gatekeepers: Can They Protect Investors? (Brookings Institution Press
         and the Nomura Institute of Capital Markets Research).
Boni, Leslie and Kent L. Womack, 2006, Analysts, industries, and price momentum, Journal of
         Financial & Quantitative Analysis 41, 85-109.
Bradley, Daniel J., Bradford D. Jordan, and Jay R. Ritter, 2007, Analyst behavior following IPOs:
         The 'bubble period' evidence, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Chen, Qi, Jennifer Francis, and Katherine Schipper, 2005, The applicability of the fraud on the
         market presumption to analysts’ forecasts, Working paper, Duke University.
Cooper, Rick A., Theodore E. Day, and Craig M. Lewis, 2001, Following the leader: A study of
         individual analysts' earnings forecasts, Journal of Financial Economics 61, 383-416.
Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997, Measuring mutual fund
         performance with characteristic-based benchmarks, Journal of Finance 52, 1035-1058.
DellaVigna, Stefano and Joshua Pollet, 2009, Investor inattention and Friday earnings
         announcements, Journal of Finance 64, 709-749.
Diether, Karl B., Christopher J. Malloy, and Anna Scherbina, 2002, Differences of opinion and
         the cross-section of stock returns, Journal of Finance 57, 2113-2141.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 2006, The value premium and the CAPM, Journal of
         Finance 61, 2163-2185.
Fang, Lily and Ayako Yasuda, 2008, Are stars' opinions worth more? The relation between
         analyst reputation and recommendation values, Working paper, University of
         Pennsylvania.
Frankel, Richard, S.P. Kothari, and Joseph Weber, 2006, Determinants of the informativeness of
         analyst research, Journal of Accounting and Economics 41, 29-54.
Gintschel, Andreas and Stanimir Markov, 2004, The effectiveness of Regulation FD, Journal of
         Accounting and Economics 37, 293-314.
Hong, Harrison, Jeremy C. Stein, and Jialin Yu, 2007, Simple Forecasts and Paradigm Shifts,
         Journal of Finance 62, 1207-1242.
Irvine, Paul J., 2004, Analysts' forecasts and brokerage-firm trading, Accounting Review 79, 125-
         149.
Ivkovic, Zoran and Narasimhan Jegadeesh, 2004, The timing and value of forecast and
         recommendation revisions, Journal of Financial Economics 73, 433-463.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan and Woojin Kim, 2006, Imitation or information-driven herding? An
         analysis of analysts’ recommendations and market reactions, Working paper, Emory
         University.
Kadan, Ohad, Leonardo Madureira, Rong Wang, and Tzachi Zach, 2009, Conflicts of interest and
         stock recommendations - The effects of the Global Settlement and related regulations,
         Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Knez, Peter J. and Mark J. Ready, 1997, On the robustness of size and book-to-market in cross-
         sectional regressions, Journal of Finance 52, 1355-1382.



                                              25
Ljungqvist, Alexander, Christopher J. Malloy, and Felicia C. Marston, 2008, Rewriting history,
        Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Loh, Roger K., 2007, Investor inattention and the underreaction to stock recommendations,
        Working paper, Ohio State University.
Loh, Roger K. and G. Mujtaba Mian, 2006, Do accurate earnings forecasts facilitate superior
        investment recommendations?, Journal of Financial Economics 80, 455-483.
Malmendier, Ulrike and Devin Shanthikumar, 2007, Are investors naïve about incentives?,
        Journal of Financial Economics 85, 457-489.
Michaely, Roni and Kent L. Womack, 2006, What are analysts really good at?, Working paper,
        Darthmouth College.
Mikhail, Michael B., Beverly R. Walther, and Richard H. Willis, 1997, Do security analysts
        improve their performance with experience?, Journal of Accounting Research 35, 131-
        157.
Stickel, Scott E., 1995, The anatomy of buy and sell recommendations, Financial Analysts
        Journal 51, 25-39.




                                           26
                                                Table 1
                        Descriptive statistics of recommendation changes
The sample of recommendation (rec) changes are from I/B/E/S Detail U.S. File 1993 to 2006. Each rec
change (or rating change) is an analyst’s current rating minus his prior rating. Analyst initiations are
excluded. Ratings are coded as 1 (sell) to strong buy (5), and rating changes lie between -4 and 4. Firms
with less than 3 analysts making up the consensus are excluded. Panel reports the transition probabilities of
rec changes. For example in column 1, when the prior rec is a sell, it has a 4.6% probability of transiting an
underperform. Panel B reports the frequencies of each rec change type.


Panel A: Transition probabilities of recommendation changes
             Current Rec           1             2               3        4             5
                                                                                                        Total
Prior Rec                         Sell     Underperform        Hold     Buy        Strong Buy
1 (Sell)                           336           193           3,026      305           333             4,193
                                  8.0%         4.6%           72.2%     7.3%           7.9%             100%
2 (Underperform)                   287         1,519           4,891      863           213             7,773
                                  3.7%        19.5%           62.9%    11.1%           2.7%             100%
3 (Hold)                         3,243         5,834          17,246   24,067        16,508            66,898
                                  4.8%         8.7%           25.8%    36.0%         24.7%              100%
4 (Buy)                            431         1,223          31,781   14,043        17,855            65,333
                                  0.7%         1.9%           48.6%    21.5%         27.3%              100%
5 (Strong Buy)                     572           427          22,609   19,388         9,661            52,657
                                  1.1%         0.8%           42.9%    36.8%         18.3%              100%
Total                            4,869         9,196          79,553   58,666        44,570           196,854



                              Panel B: Recommendation change categories
                              Rec Change           Frequency      Percentage
                              –4                         572             0.3%
                              –3                         858             0.4%
                              –2                      27,075           13.8%
                              –1                      57,290           29.1%
                              0                       42,805           21.7%
                              +1                      47,006           23.9%
                              +2                      20,397           10.4%
                              +3                         518             0.3%
                              +4                         333             0.2%
                              Total                 196,854             100%




                                                      27
                                                                                Table 2
                                             The impact of various filters on recommendation event percentage CAR
The sample of recommendation (rec) changes are from I/B/E/S Detail U.S. File. Each rec-change is an analyst’s current rating minus his prior rating. Analyst
initiations are excluded. Ratings are coded as 1 (sell) to strong buy (5), and rating changes lie between -4 and 4. Firms with less than 3 analysts making up the
consensus are excluded. Each panel reports summary statistics for the three-day buy-and-hold event CAR (in percent) of a rec-change group. P-values based on
standard errors clustered by calendar day are reported in parentheses below the mean. Daily abnormal return is the raw return less the return on a size-B/M-
momentum matched portfolio with CAR observations where the lagged price on day 0 is <$1 excluded. The mode column reports the midpoint of the 50bps
interval modal group. P-value of the median is computed from a signed test. Kurt is excess kurtosis so that a normal distribution would have Kurt=0. KS is the
Kolmogorov-Smirnov D statistic testing for the normality of the sample distribution where *, **, and *** represent that the null of normality is rejected at the
10%, 5%, and 1% levels respectively. No earnings annc refer to excluding rec-changes that occur in the three-day window around the firm’s I/B/E/S reported
quarterly earnings announcement dates. No mgt forecast refer to excluding rec-changes that occur in the three-day window around the firm’s management
earnings guidance dates provided by First Call Guidelines. No multiple rec days refer to excluding days where more than one analyst issues recs on the firm.
Least trimmed squares outliers (LTS) are identified by estimating a LTS regression of CAR against a constant.
                                                          Mode (50bps                                    KS normal                              Percentiles
Filtered Samples                              Mean                      % CAR +      Skew         Kurt                                                                                     # Obs
                                                          intervals)                                        test      100%       99%    75%      Median        25%         1%        0%
                                                                                  Recommendation Change = –4
1) Full sample                                -4.716***       -0.5        0.332     -1.101     7.708       0.214***   92.841   38.825   1.123   -1.844***     -6.673   -70.277   -79.662   572
                                              (0.000)                                                                                           (0.000)
2) No earnings annc days                      -4.336***       -0.5        0.342     -1.229     8.348       0.233***   92.841   38.825   1.157   -1.525***     -5.634   -70.277   -79.662   491
                                              (0.000)                                                                                           (0.000)
3) No earnings annc or mgt forecasts days     -2.643***       -0.5        0.366     -1.178    12.703       0.229***   92.841   38.825   1.441   -1.181***     -4.644   -70.277   -79.662   451
                                              (0.001)                                                                                           (0.000)
4) No earnings annc or mgt forecasts or       -1.747***       -0.5        0.371     -2.285    17.953       0.197***   51.830   18.981   1.247   -0.991***     -3.760   -46.832   -79.662   377
mutiple rec days                              (0.001)                                                                                           (0.000)
5) Remove 5% from both tails of (4).          -1.157***       -0.5        0.358     0.096      0.684       0.066***   10.736    9.694   0.923   -0.991***     -3.327   -11.128   -11.570   341
                                              (0.000)                                                                                           (0.000)
6) Remove LTS-identified outliers from (4)    -1.253***       -0.5        0.355     -0.023     0.745       0.067***   10.736    9.694   0.898   -1.016***     -3.429   -11.570   -12.885   344
                                              (0.000)                                                                                           (0.000)
                                                                                  Recommendation Change = –3
1) Full sample                                -3.312***        -1         0.382     -0.840   5.993 0.182***           71.759   32.750   1.734   -1.231***     -5.773   -50.156   -73.070   858
                                              (0.000)                                                                                           (0.000)
2) No earnings annc days                      -2.463***        -1         0.394     -0.840     7.482     0.191***     71.759   34.337   1.912   -1.047***     -5.011   -50.156   -73.070   748
                                              (0.000)                                                                                           (0.000)
3) No earnings annc or mgt forecasts days     -1.322***        -1         0.414     -0.783    10.530     0.187***     71.759   34.337   2.086   -0.802***     -4.104   -49.102   -73.070   701
                                              (0.006)                                                                                           (0.000)
4) No earnings annc or mgt forecasts or       -0.577           -1         0.415     0.056     11.002     0.169***     61.748   29.952   2.133   -0.718***     -3.672   -33.195   -63.861   629
mutiple rec days                              (0.146)                                                                                           (0.000)
5) Remove 5% from both tails of (4).          -0.646***        -1         0.406     0.268      1.052     0.061***     13.616   12.712   1.683   -0.718***     -3.136   -11.707   -13.755   567
                                              (0.001)                                                                                           (0.000)
6) Remove LTS-identified outliers from (4)    -0.842***        -1         0.397     -0.033     0.658     0.053***     11.647   10.406   1.446   -0.756***     -3.242   -11.707   -13.755   559
                                              (0.000)                                                                                           (0.000)




                                                                                             28
                                                                                  Table 2 (Cont’d)
                                                         Mode (50bps                               KS normal                                  Percentiles
Filtered Samples                             Mean                      % CAR +      Skew         Kurt                                                                                   # Obs
                                                         intervals)                                   test           100%      99%    75%      Median        25%         1%       0%
                                                                                 Recommendation Change = –2
1) Full sample                               -4.374***        -1         0.315     -0.993   9.265 0.171***         128.090   23.324   0.782   -2.003***     -6.841   -48.737   -82.120 27,075
                                             (0.000)                                                                                          (0.000)
2) No earnings annc days                     -3.642***        -1         0.333     -0.938    11.110     0.185***   128.090   24.435   0.910   -1.622***     -5.572   -47.753   -82.120 22,475
                                             (0.000)                                                                                          (0.000)
3) No earnings annc or mgt forecasts days    -2.176***        -1         0.356     -0.394    18.096     0.170***   128.090   25.371   1.111   -1.282***     -4.352   -38.346   -82.120 20,368
                                             (0.000)                                                                                          (0.000)
4) No earnings annc or mgt forecasts or      -1.706***        -1         0.357     0.470     28.308     0.145***   128.090   19.672   1.052   -1.190***     -3.921   -27.228   -82.120 17,676
mutiple rec days                             (0.000)                                                                                          (0.000)
5) Remove 5% from both tails of (4).         -1.554***        -1         0.341     -0.496     0.280     0.055***     6.746    5.956   0.787   -1.190***     -3.527   -11.347   -12.557 15,910
                                             (0.000)                                                                                          (0.000)
6) Remove LTS-identified outliers from (4)   -1.301***        -1         0.358     -0.140     0.562     0.048***    10.736    8.926   0.974   -1.095***     -3.442   -11.523   -12.817 16,377
                                             (0.000)                                                                                          (0.000)
                                                                                 Recommendation Change = –1
1) Full sample                               -3.786***        -1         0.335     -1.149 10.108 0.159***          156.225   19.616   1.015   -1.775***     -6.267   -43.349   -86.701 57,290
                                             (0.000)                                                                                          (0.000)
2) No earnings annc days                     -3.246***        -1         0.349     -1.269    11.816     0.170***   156.225   19.455   1.109   -1.481***     -5.318   -42.379   -86.701 47,724
                                             (0.000)                                                                                          (0.000)
3) No earnings annc or mgt forecasts days    -2.030***        -1         0.371     -0.767    19.422     0.150***   156.225   19.792   1.296   -1.168***     -4.301   -33.288   -86.701 43,643
                                             (0.000)                                                                                          (0.000)
4) No earnings annc or mgt forecasts or      -1.623***        -1         0.375     -0.151    25.088     0.127***   156.225   17.059   1.286   -1.074***     -3.933   -25.626   -86.701 38,515
mutiple rec days                             (0.000)                                                                                          (0.000)
5) Remove 5% from both tails of (4).         -1.420***        -1         0.361     -0.410     0.129     0.048***     7.099    6.350   0.987   -1.074***     -3.560   -11.239   -12.384 34,665
                                             (0.000)                                                                                          (0.000)
6) Remove LTS-identified outliers from (4)   -1.194***        -1         0.378     -0.127     0.513     0.045***    11.570    9.356   1.217   -0.977***     -3.534   -12.119   -13.384 36,058
                                             (0.000)                                                                                          (0.000)
                                                                                 Recommendation Change = 0
1) Full sample                               -0.076**         0          0.494     0.360  37.133 0.127***          196.327   18.864   2.299   -0.041**      -2.300   -21.156   -76.972 42,805
                                             (0.044)                                                                                          (0.023)
2) No earnings annc days                     -0.075**         0          0.492     0.543     46.935     0.123***   196.327   17.401   2.170   -0.065***     -2.197   -18.744   -70.902 38,038
                                             (0.041)                                                                                          (0.001)
3) No earnings annc or mgt forecasts days    0.074**          0          0.495     1.451     57.905     0.114***   196.327   17.094   2.165   -0.034*       -2.120   -15.643   -70.902 37,015
                                             (0.035)                                                                                          (0.055)
4) No earnings annc or mgt forecasts or      0.112***         0          0.495     2.156     70.290     0.111***   196.327   16.426   2.138   -0.034*       -2.083   -14.362   -69.226 33,861
mutiple rec days                             (0.001)                                                                                          (0.053)
5) Remove 5% from both tails of (4).         0.033            0          0.494     0.108     -0.143     0.021***     7.633    6.955   1.847   -0.034**      -1.821    -6.455    -7.048 30,475
                                             (0.122)                                                                                          (0.041)
6) Remove LTS-identified outliers from (4)   -0.016           0          0.491     0.040      0.457     0.034***    10.048    8.706   1.937   -0.062***     -1.970    -8.636   -10.145 32,062
                                             (0.521)                                                                                          (0.001)




                                                                                            29
                                                                                 Table 2 (Cont’d)
                                                        Mode (50bps                                   KS normal                              Percentiles
Filtered Samples                             Mean                     % CAR +      Skew        Kurt                                                                                     # Obs
                                                        intervals)                                       test       100%      99%    75%      Median        25%         1%        0%
                                                                                Recommendation Change = +1
1) Full sample                               2.687***        0.5        0.652     2.203    23.696     0.127***    154.432   30.831   5.275   1.530***      -1.095   -16.019   -71.010 47,006
                                             (0.000)                                                                                         (0.000)
2) No earnings annc days                     2.211***        0.5        0.638     2.511    31.949     0.130***    154.432   27.576   4.540   1.273***      -1.160   -15.013   -71.010 38,708
                                             (0.000)                                                                                         (0.000)
3) No earnings annc or mgt forecasts days    2.216***        0.5        0.638     2.877    36.071     0.131***    154.432   27.220   4.441   1.254***      -1.129   -13.266   -71.010 37,460
                                             (0.000)                                                                                         (0.000)
4) No earnings annc or mgt forecasts or      2.049***        0.5        0.636     2.436    27.115     0.123***    148.831   24.569   4.236   1.201***      -1.121   -12.357   -54.099 33,963
mutiple rec days                             (0.000)                                                                                         (0.000)
5) Remove 5% from both tails of (4).         1.689***        0.5        0.651     0.571     0.114     0.059***     12.705   11.702   3.811   1.201***      -0.858    -5.397    -5.981 30,567
                                             (0.000)                                                                                         (0.000)
6) Remove LTS-identified outliers from (4)   1.368***        0.5        0.627     0.198     0.460     0.048***     13.472   12.263   3.744   1.056***      -1.148    -9.157   -11.637 32,070
                                             (0.000)                                                                                         (0.000)
                                                                                Recommendation Change = +2
1) Full sample                               2.783***        0.5        0.668     2.839    36.939     0.131***    171.386   30.421   5.198   1.694***      -0.889   -15.435   -69.245 20,397
                                             (0.000)                                                                                         (0.000)
2) No earnings annc days                     2.330***        0          0.653     2.982    40.107     0.136***    154.432   27.869   4.520   1.405***      -0.959   -14.474   -69.245 16,740
                                             (0.000)                                                                                         (0.000)
3) No earnings annc or mgt forecasts days    2.320***        0          0.653     3.330    45.270     0.138***    154.432   27.126   4.390   1.377***      -0.943   -12.755   -69.245 16,191
                                             (0.000)                                                                                         (0.000)
4) No earnings annc or mgt forecasts or      2.111***        0          0.649     3.456    47.704     0.130***    152.010   23.884   4.133   1.291***      -0.945   -11.440   -49.089 14,682
mutiple rec days
                                             (0.000)                                                                                         (0.000)
5) Remove 5% from both tails of (4).         1.739***        0          0.666     0.571     0.055     0.053***     12.050   11.058   3.758   1.291***      -0.701    -4.719    -5.191 13,214
                                             (0.000)                                                                                         (0.000)
6) Remove LTS-identified outliers from (4)   1.445***        0          0.641     0.228     0.377     0.040***     12.681   11.636   3.685   1.134***      -0.963    -7.960   -10.684 13,837
                                             (0.000)                                                                                         (0.000)
                                                                                Recommendation Change = +3
1) Full sample                               1.267***        -1         0.542     1.046     7.426     0.125***     54.906   27.236   4.252   0.522*        -2.530   -22.427   -32.143   518
                                             (0.001)                                                                                         (0.059)
2) No earnings annc days                     1.182***        -1         0.536     1.217     8.506     0.131***     54.906   30.059   3.905   0.353         -2.519   -22.427   -32.143   463
                                             (0.004)                                                                                         (0.137)
3) No earnings annc or mgt forecasts days    1.341***        -1         0.537     1.396     9.180     0.137***     54.906   30.059   3.900   0.362         -2.404   -19.794   -32.143   456
                                             (0.001)                                                                                         (0.122)
4) No earnings annc or mgt forecasts or      1.057***        -1         0.525     0.693     4.033     0.126***     35.642   24.354   3.396   0.263         -2.425   -18.793   -26.115   415
mutiple rec days                             (0.003)                                                                                         (0.326)
5) Remove 5% from both tails of (4).         0.844***        -1         0.528     0.599     0.342     0.085***     13.035   12.570   3.005   0.263         -2.222    -7.967    -8.885   375
                                             (0.000)                                                                                         (0.302)
6) Remove LTS-identified outliers from (4)   0.583**         -1         0.515     0.303     0.500     0.078***     13.555   12.998   2.963   0.097         -2.357   -11.648   -12.969   388
                                             (0.021)                                                                                         (0.577)


                                                                                          30
                                                                                 Table 2 (Cont’d)


                                                        Mode (50bps                                   KS normal                             Percentiles
Filtered Samples                             Mean                     % CAR +      Skew        Kurt                                                                                    # Obs
                                                        intervals)                                       test     100%       99%    75%      Median        25%         1%        0%
                                                                                Recommendation Change = +4
1) Full sample                               1.919***        -1         0.613     1.080     9.072     0.124***    46.785   26.140   4.651   1.113***      -1.319   -14.121   -30.655   333
                                             (0.000)                                                                                        (0.000)
2) No earnings annc days                     1.649***        1          0.606     1.254    12.579     0.130***    46.785   26.140   4.204   1.082***      -1.302   -13.232   -30.655   287
                                             (0.000)                                                                                        (0.000)
3) No earnings annc or mgt forecasts days    1.906***        1          0.612     2.340    13.865     0.125***    46.785   26.140   4.341   1.084***      -1.260   -11.439   -12.303   276
                                             (0.000)                                                                                        (0.000)
4) No earnings annc or mgt forecasts or      1.678***        -1         0.602     2.764    19.026     0.128***    46.785   17.965   3.574   0.996***      -1.247   -10.383   -12.303   241
mutiple rec days                             (0.000)                                                                                        (0.002)
5) Remove 5% from both tails of (4).         1.354***        -1         0.613     0.555    -0.310     0.090***     9.997    8.878   3.062   0.996***      -1.101    -4.248    -4.625   217
                                             (0.000)                                                                                        (0.001)
6) Remove LTS-identified outliers from (4)   1.119***        -1         0.593     0.233     0.137      0.068**    10.451    9.380   3.049   0.932***      -1.247    -7.516    -9.700   226
                                             (0.000)                                                                                        (0.006)




                                                                                          31
                                         Table 3
     Removing influential tail to make recommendation event CAR insignificant
This table reports the average recommendation (rec) change event CAR (in percent) when x% of the
influential tail of sample 4 of Table 2 is removed. Sample 4 is the rec change sample where we remove recs
falling in the three-day window associated with earnings announcements and management forecasts, and
firm-days with recs from multiple analysts. When the average CAR becomes insignificant, subsequent rows
below are intentional left blank. The sample of rec changes are from I/B/E/S Detail U.S. File. Each rec
change is an analyst’s current rating minus his prior rating. Recs with no prior ratings (i.e., initiations) are
excluded. Ratings are coded as 1 (sell) to strong buy (5), and rating changes lie between -4 and 4. The mean
three-day event buy-and-hold CAR are reported with *, **, and *** indicating statistical significance
(based on standard errors clustered by calendar day) at the 10%, 5%, or 1% levels respectively. CAR is
daily buy-and-hold raw return less the buy-and-hold return on a size-B/M-momentum matched portfolio.


x% of influential                  Mean event CAR of recommendation change category
tail removed      -4        -3       -2         -1        1          2          3                   4
0%                -1.747*** -0.577   -1.706*** -1.623*** 2.049*** 2.111*** 1.057***                 1.678***
1%                -1.261***          -1.332*** -1.275*** 1.700*** 1.760*** 0.766**                  1.383***
2%                -0.796**           -1.111*** -1.063*** 1.498*** 1.568*** 0.553*                   1.251***
3%                -0.447             -0.936*** -0.894*** 1.332*** 1.413*** 0.360                    1.094***
4%                                   -0.786*** -0.749*** 1.189*** 1.278***                          0.998***
5%                                   -0.655*** -0.619*** 1.061*** 1.157***                          0.865***
6%                                   -0.535*** -0.501*** 0.943*** 1.047***                          0.787***
7%                                   -0.425*** -0.392*** 0.833*** 0.945***                          0.716***
8%                                   -0.322*** -0.290*** 0.730*** 0.850***                          0.611***
9%                                   -0.224*** -0.194*** 0.632*** 0.759***                          0.545**
10%                                  -0.131*** -0.102*** 0.539*** 0.673***                          0.450**
11%                                                       0.451*** 0.590***                         0.389*
12%                                                       0.365*** 0.511***                         0.331
13%                                                       0.283*** 0.435***
14%                                                       0.204*** 0.361***
15%                                                       0.126*** 0.289***
16%                                                       0.051*     0.219***
17%                                                       -0.022     0.151***
18%                                                                  0.084**
19%                                                                  0.018
Beginning #obs 377          629      17676      38515     33963      14682      415                 241




                                                    32
                                           Table 4
          Comparing analyst and firm characteristics of influential versus non-influential
                                  recommendation changes
Influential recommendations (recs) are compared with non-influential recs. There are two definitions of influential.
First, influential recs are those are when a correct-signed CAR is 1.96 standard deviations greater than expected
based on the firm’s prior three-month idiosyncratic volatility of daily returns. Second, influential recs are defined as
those whose normalized CARs are more than 1.96 standard deviations better than the mean prior 12-month
normalized CAR of the similar rating change category. A normalized CAR is simply the CAR scaled by the firm’s
prior idiosyncratic volatility. The sample is from I/B/E/S with earnings announcement days, management forecast
days, and multiple-rec days removed (sample 4 in Table 2). Reiterations (rec change=0) are also excluded. Panel A
reports the average analyst or rec characteristic by subsamples. Forecast accuracy quintile is the quintile rank (lower
rank=greater accuracy) of the analyst based on his last unrevised FY1 earnings forecast for that fiscal year according
to Loh and Mian (2006)). A rec moves away from the consensus (dummy variable) when the absolute deviation of
the new rec from the consensus is larger than the absolute deviation of the prior rec from the consensus (as in
Jegadeesh and Kim (2006)). Star analysts (dummy variable) are analysts who are ranked as All-Americans in the
most recent annual Institutional Investor polls. Analyst experience in quarters is the number of quarters since the
analyst issued his first earnings forecasts or stock rec on I/B/E/S. Concurrent earnings forecast is a dummy
indicating whether the analyst issued any type of earnings forecast in the three-day window around the rec (as in
Michaely and Womack (2006)). Panel B compares firm characteristics prior to the rec issue. B/M ratio is measured
as in Fama and French (2006), size is the prior month CRSP market cap, institutional ownership is the percent of the
firm owned by 13f institutions reported in the most recent quarter-end. Turnover is based on the last three-month
average daily percentage of shares traded divided by total shares outstanding. Idiosyncratic volatility is the standard
deviation of the residuals from a time-series regression of past three-months’ daily returns against the Fama-French
three factors and total volatility is the standard deviation of prior three-month daily returns. Dispersion is the
standard deviation of the I/B/E/S reported mean FY1 forecast divided by the absolute value of the mean forecast. #
of forecasts is the number of forecasts (all horizons) issued by all analysts for the firm in the last three months. Panel
C compares the changes in the firm environment around the rec. Leader-follower ratio is the gap sum of the prior
two recs divided by the gap sum of the next two recs. Ratios larger than one indicate a leader analyst whose recs are
quickly followed by other brokers’ rec issuances. We also compute the Δ in volatility of daily returns from the prior
3 months to the 3 months after the rec (excluding the three-day event window). We also computed in the same
manner, Δ idiosyncratic volatility of daily returns, and Δ average daily turnover. Δ Dispersion is the change one
month before to one month after the rec, where dispersion is the standard deviation of the I/B/E/S reported mean
FY1 forecast divided by the absolute value of the mean forecast. The reported values for total, idiosyncratic
volatility, dispersion, and turnover are multiplied by 100 (e.g. 1.0 represents 1.0%). Δ in # of EPS forecasts is the #
of EPS (all horizons) forecasts issued by all analysts for the firm three months after the rec minus three months
before. Δ |Forecast Revision| is computed for the FY1 and FY2 and long-term growth (LTG) consensus analyst
forecast revisions from three months before to three months after the rec. FY1 and FY2 consensus forecasts
revisions are scaled by price and LTG forecasts are in percent. Asterisks in the difference columns indicate
statistical significance using standard errors clustered by calendar day where *,**, and *** represent significance
levels of 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.




                                                         33
                                                     Influential based on firm's idio-volatility          Based on distribution of past rec CARs
Characteristics                                                                    Difference                                        Difference
                                                   Not Influ    Influential                            Not Influ Influential
                                                                              Influ – Not t-stat                               Influ – Not     t-stat
                                               Panel A: Analyst and recommendation characteristics
Number of recommendations                             98,575        10,972                               106,026       3,521
                                                                     10.0%                                             3.2%
Forecast accuracy quntile (1= most accurate)            2.801         2.770 -0.032**        (-2.13)        2.800       2.755    -0.045*         (-1.80)
Away from consensus                                     0.525         0.579 0.054***         (9.48)        0.528       0.603    0.075***         (8.33)
Star analyst                                            0.184         0.214 0.030***         (4.93)        0.186       0.226    0.040***         (4.59)
# Qtrs analyst in I/B/E/S                              28.593       29.107 0.514**           (2.10)       28.658      28.238    -0.420          (-1.13)
Relative firm-specific experience in qtrs               0.337         0.548 0.211**          (2.45)        0.361       0.291    -0.069          (-0.55)
Concurrent earnings forecast                            0.453         0.540 0.087*** (12.27)               0.459       0.564    0.105***       (10.61)
                                               Panel B: Firm characteristics prior to recommendation
B/M ratio                                               0.490        0.498    0.008       (1.31)           0.491       0.503    0.012         (1.40)
Size ($m)                                             8757.98      6743.43    -2014.6*** (-7.77)         8683.78     4714.72    -3969.1*** (-11.21)
Institutional ownership                                 0.599        0.616    0.017***    (5.37)           0.601       0.584    -0.016***    (-3.75)
Dispersion ×100                                        14.205       15.211    1.006       (1.06)          14.281      15.061    0.780         (0.55)
Idiosyncratic volatility ×100                           2.647        2.387    -0.260*** (-10.66)           2.627       2.451    -0.176***    (-5.72)
Total volatility ×100                                   2.916        2.642    -0.274*** (-9.79)            2.895       2.682    -0.213***    (-6.25)
Daily turnover                                          0.642        0.591    -0.050*** (-7.27)            0.640       0.536    -0.105*** (-11.06)
# of EPS forecasts                                     80.221       64.813    -15.408*** (-17.52)         79.575      51.649    -27.926*** (-26.66)
                                             Panel C: Change in firm environment around recommendation
Leader-follower ratio of rec                              2.032        3.143 1.111*** (11.63)              2.079       4.074    1.995***        (9.36)
Δ Volatility of daily ret ×100 (-3mth,+3mth)             -0.119        0.333 0.452*** (23.37)             -0.093       0.520    0.614***       (21.62)
Δ Idiosyncratic volatility ×100 (-3mth,+3mth)            -0.111        0.340 0.451*** (26.71)             -0.086       0.527    0.613***       (23.04)
Δ Dispersion ×100 (- 1mth,+1mth)                          1.074        0.637 -0.437         (-0.41)        0.958       3.192    2.234           (0.96)
Δ Daily turnover ×100 (-3mth,+3mth)                      -0.006        0.085 0.092*** (23.55)             -0.002       0.130    0.131***       (19.43)
Δ in # of EPS forecasts (-3mth,+3mth)                    -1.036        4.828 5.864*** (10.38)             -0.649       5.589    6.238***        (8.51)
Δ in FY1 |Forecast Revision|×100 (-3mth,+3mth)            0.141        0.926 0.785*          (1.65)        0.192       1.069    0.877           (0.85)
Δ in FY2 |Forecast Revision|×100(-3mth,+3mth)             0.075        1.088 1.012***        (2.58)        0.131       1.559    1.428*          (1.82)
Δ in LTG |Forecast Revision|×100 (-3mth,+3mth)           -0.010        0.004 0.014           (0.58)       -0.010       0.038    0.048           (1.33)




                                                                    34
                                                   Table 5
                    Analysts who had at least one influential recommendation change
Analysts who had at least 5 recommendations (recs) in the 1994-2006 period are compared according to whether
their recs have ever been influential. There are two definitions of influential. First, influential recs are those are
when a correct-signed CAR is 1.96 standard deviations greater than expected based on the firm’s prior three-month
idiosyncratic volatility of daily returns. Second, influential recs are defined as those whose normalized CARs are
more than 1.96 standard deviations better than the mean prior 12-month normalized CAR of the similar rating
change category. A normalized CAR is simply the CAR scaled by the firm’s prior idiosyncratic volatility. The
sample is from I/B/E/S with earnings announcement days, management forecast days, and multiple-recommendation
days removed (sample 4 in Table 2). Reiterations (rec change=0) are also excluded. Panel A reports the average
analyst or recommendation characteristic by analysts who were ever influential versus those who were never
influential. The percentage of analyst recs that are influential is the average proportion of an individual analyst’s
recs that are influential conditional on the analyst ever being influential in the whole sample. Forecast accuracy
quintile is the quintile rank of the analyst based on his last unrevised FY1 earnings forecast for that fiscal year
according to Loh and Mian (2006)). A recommendation moves away from the consensus (dummy variable) when
the absolute deviation of the new recommendation from the consensus is larger than the absolute deviation of the
prior recommendation from the consensus (as in Jegadeesh and Kim (2006)). Star analysts (dummy variable) are
analysts who are ranked as All-Americans in the most recent annual Institutional Investor polls. Analyst experience
in quarters is the number of quarters since the analyst issued his first earnings forecasts or stock recommendation on
I/B/E/S. Concurrent earnings forecast is a dummy indicating whether the analyst issued any type of earnings forecast
in the three-day window around the recommendation (as in Michaely and Womack (2006)). Asterisks in the
difference columns indicate statistical significance using standard errors clustered by calendar day where *,**, and
*** represent significance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.


                                             Influential based on firm's idio-volatility      Based on distribution of past rec CARs
Characteristics                                            Ever            Difference                   Ever            Difference
                                            Never                                            Never
                                                        Influential Ever–Never t-stat                Influential Ever–Never       t-stat


Number of Analysts                             1,010         3,055                             2,320        1,745
                                                            75.2%                                          42.9%
% of analyst's recs that are influential       0.0%         18.9%                               0.0%       10.9%
Forecast accuracy quntile                      2.913        2.809    -0.103***     (-4.50)     2.856       2.807    -0.049***      (-2.91)
Away from consensus                            0.525        0.536    0.011**        (2.02)     0.530       0.537    0.008**         (1.97)
Was once a Star analyst                        0.104        0.240    0.136***     (11.05)      0.151       0.280    0.129***        (9.90)
# Qtrs analyst in I/B/E/S                     16.869       23.729    6.860***     (11.86)     19.081      25.939    6.859***      (12.60)
Relative firm-specific experience in qtrs     -2.464       -0.781    1.683***     (11.23)     -2.062      -0.053    2.009***      (15.46)
Concurrent earnings forecast                   0.481        0.471    -0.009        (-1.06)     0.477       0.469    -0.008         (-1.15)




                                                               35
                                             Table 6
               Probit predicting when a recommendation change will be influential
The dependent variable is whether a recommendation (rec) is influential. There are two definitions of influential.
First, influential recs are those are when a correct-signed CAR is 1.96 standard deviations greater than expected
based on the firm’s prior three-month idiosyncratic volatility of daily returns. Second, influential recs are defined as
those whose normalized CARs are more than 1.96 standard deviations better than the mean normalized CAR of the
similar rating change category for the entire sample period. A normalized CAR is simply the CAR scaled by the
firm’s prior idiosyncratic volatility. The explanatory variables are as follows. The Rec Level is the rating level after
the rec change (1=sell to 5=strong buy). The absolute value of the rec change, upgrade dummy, and reg FD dummy
(=1 after Aug 2000) and Settlement dummy (=1 in 2003 and after) are also included. Past forecast accuracy quintile
is the average quintile rank of the analyst based on his last unrevised FY1 earnings forecast for all the firms he
covers in the previous fiscal year. Smaller ranks denote greater accuracy. Away from consensus=1 when the
absolute deviation of the new rec from the consensus is larger than the absolute deviation of the prior rec from the
consensus. Star analysts rank is the All-Americans rank in the most recent annual Institutional Investor polls. We
reverse ranks so that high numbers correspond to superior ranks, i.e., top rank=4, second=3, third=2, runner-up=4.
Absolute analyst experience based on the # of quarters since the first earnings forecasts or stock rec on I/B/E/S.
Relative firm-specific experience is based on the analyst’s firm-specific experience less the average experience of
other analysts covering the stock. Concurrent earnings forecast=1 when the same analyst issued any type of earnings
forecast in the three-day window around the rec. Leader-follower ratio (LFR) is computed as follows. The gaps
between the current rec and the previous two recs from other brokers are computed and summed. The same is done
for the next two recs. The LFR is the gap sum of the prior two recs divided by the gap sum of the next two recs. The
past ratio is the average of the analyst’s LFRs from the prior 12 months. B/M is the book-to-market ratio and size is
the end-June market cap, and momentum is the holding period return in the prior 12 calendar months skipping a
month, and institutional ownership is the percent of the firm owned by 13f institutions reported in the most recent
quarter-end. Turnover is based on the last three-month average daily percentage of shares traded divided by total
shares outstanding. Idiosyncratic volatility is the standard deviation of the residuals from a time-series regression of
past three-months’ daily returns against the Fama-French three factors. Dispersion is the standard deviation of the
I/B/E/S reported mean FY1 forecast divided by the absolute value of the mean forecast. # of forecasts is the number
of forecasts (all horizons) issued by all analysts for the firm in the last three months. *,**, and *** represent
significance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively, using standard errors clustered by analyst, with associated z
statistics in parentheses.




                                                        36
                                           Table 6 (Cont’d)
                                           Influential based on firm's prior   Influential based on distribution
Explantory Variable                                 idio. volatility                     of past CARs
                                           Coefficient      Marg. Eff          Coefficient       Marg. Eff
Rec level                                  -0.029***        -0.005***          -0.024            -0.001
                                           (-2.60)          (-2.60)            (-1.50)           (-1.50)
Absolute value of rec change               0.042***         0.007***           -0.014            -0.001
                                           (2.70)           (2.70)             (-0.61)           (-0.61)
Upgrade Dummy                              0.137***         0.023***           0.143***          0.008***
                                           (6.47)           (6.45)             (4.52)            (4.45)
Reg FD Dummy                               0.112***         0.018***           0.165***          0.009***
                                           (4.47)           (4.47)             (4.66)            (4.61)
Settlement Dummy                           0.091***         0.015***           -0.010            -0.000
                                           (3.46)           (3.37)             (-0.25)           (-0.25)
Past forecast accuracy quintile            -0.013**         -0.002**           0.000             0.000
                                           (-2.19)          (-2.19)            (0.01)            (0.01)
Rec away from consensus                    0.130***         0.021***           0.138***          0.007***
                                           (8.64)           (8.63)             (6.19)            (6.16)
Star analyst rank (rank: 0 to 4, 4 =top)   0.055***         0.009***           0.043***          0.002***
                                           (6.74)           (6.75)             (3.35)            (3.33)
# Qtrs analyst in I/B/E/S                  -0.000           -0.000             -0.001            -0.000
                                           (-0.42)          (-0.42)            (-1.19)           (-1.19)
Analyst's relative experience              0.003**          0.000**            0.003*            0.000*
                                           (2.28)           (2.28)             (1.84)            (1.84)
Concurrent earnings forecast               0.193***         0.032***           0.226***          0.012***
                                           (12.76)          (12.72)            (9.85)            (9.96)
Past Leader-Follower Ratio                 0.008***         0.001***           0.009***          0.000***
                                           (3.77)           (3.77)             (3.18)            (3.18)
Log(B/M)                                   -0.092***        -0.015***          -0.106***         -0.006***
                                           (-9.23)          (-9.24)            (-7.23)           (-7.24)
Log(Size)                                  -0.076***        -0.013***          -0.117***         -0.006***
                                           (-9.89)          (-9.99)            (-10.32)          (-10.70)
Price momentum                             -0.040**         -0.007**           -0.070***         -0.004***
                                           (-2.51)          (-2.51)            (-2.61)           (-2.61)
Log(Institutional ownership)               0.064***         0.010***           0.045             0.002
                                           (2.74)           (2.75)             (1.32)            (1.32)
Log(Turnover)                              0.067***         0.011***           0.097***          0.005***
                                           (4.57)           (4.58)             (4.59)            (4.58)
Log(Idiosyncratic volatility)              -0.312***        -0.051***          -0.353***         -0.018***
                                           (-13.79)         (-13.94)           (-10.12)          (-10.35)
Dispersion                                 0.019**          0.003**            0.013             0.001
                                           (2.28)           (2.27)             (1.41)            (1.42)
Log(# of forecasts)                        -0.135***        -0.022***          -0.180***         -0.009***
                                           (-11.80)         (-11.71)           (-11.17)          (-11.03)
Pseudo R-sq                                0.03719                             0.05550
# Observations                             62572                               62572
Chi-Sq test                                1138.93***                          686.39***




                                                 37
                                                Figure 1
                        Transition probabilities of recommendation changes
The sample of recommendation (rec) changes are from I/B/E/S Detail U.S. File 1993 to 2006. Each rec change (or
rating change) is an analyst’s current rating minus his prior rating. Analyst initiations are excluded. Ratings are
coded as 1 (sell) to strong buy (5), and rating changes lie between -4 and 4. Firms with less than 3 analysts making
up the consensus are excluded. The chart plots the transition probabilities of rec changes—the probability that a
prior rec transits to any of the five rating categories.




                   Prior to Current
                   Transition Prob.

                    80.0%

                    70.0%

                    60.0%

                     50.0%

                     40.0%

                     30.0%

                     20.0%
                                                                                           5 (Strong Buy)
                     10.0%                                                               4 (Buy)
                                                                                     3 (Hold)
                       0.0%                                                        2 (Underperform)
                                  1       2                                     1 (sell)
                                                   3        4         5                  Prior Rec
                                        Current Rec




                                                       38
                                                                       Figure 2
                                                           CAR of upgrades and downgrades
The sample of recommendation (rec) changes are from I/B/E/S Detail U.S. File 1993 to 2006. Each rec change (or rating change) is an analyst’s current rating
minus his prior rating. Analyst initiations are excluded. Ratings are coded as 1 (sell) to strong buy (5), and rating changes lie between -4 and 4. Firms with less
than 3 analysts making up the consensus are excluded. The charts plots the histogram of three-day event CARs of one-point upgrades, two-point upgrades, two-
point downgrades, and one-point downgrades respectively. CAR is the three-day buy-and-hold return around the rec less the corresponding return on a size-B/M-
momentum matched DGTW characteristic portfolio.

         12
               1-Point Upgrade
         10
    P
    e     8
    r
    c
          6
    e
    n
    t     4

          2

          0
         12

         10    2-Point Upgrade
    P
    e     8
    r
    c
          6
    e
    n
    t     4

          2

          0
              - 80 - 69 - 58 - 47 - 36 - 25 - 14 - 3        8    19 30      41    52   63 74      85    96 107 118 129 140 151 162
                                                                       car _per cent




                                                                             39
                                                Figure 2 (Cont’d)

    10
             2-Point Downgrade

    8
P

    6


    4


    2


    0
    10
             1-Point Downgrade

    8
P

    6


    4


    2


    0
         - 120 - 105 - 90 - 75 - 60 - 45 - 30 - 15   0    15   30    45   60   75   90   105 120 135 150
                                                     car _per cent




                                                     40
                                                                                      Figure 3
                                                   Histogram of proportion of an analyst’s influential recommendation changes
       We plot the histogram of the proportion of an analyst’s recommendation (rec) changes that are influential. We focus on analysts who made at least five recs in the
       1994 to 2006 period. The first definition of influential uses the firm’s past idiosyncratic volatility of daily returns to determine if a rec change is influential (1.96
       standard deviations away). The second uses the history of prior same magnitude rec change CARs to determine if a change is influential (1.96 standard deviations
       away).




  30                                                                                                                            60




  25                                                                                                                            50




  20                                                                                                                            40




P                                                                                                                             P
e                                                                                                                             e
r                                                                                                                             r
c 15                                                                                                                          c 30
e                                                                                                                             e
n                                                                                                                             n
t                                                                                                                             t




  10                                                                                                                            20




  5                                                                                                                             10




  0                                                                                                                             0
         0     0. 06   0. 12   0. 18       0. 24         0. 3        0. 36        0. 42        0. 48   0. 54   0. 6   0. 66          0   0. 04   0. 08   0. 12        0. 16         0. 2        0. 24        0. 28          0. 32   0. 36   0. 4
                                Pr opor t i on of an anal yst ' s r ecs t hat ar e i nf l uent i al                                                      Pr opor t i on of an anal yst s r ecs t hat ar e i nf l uenci al




                                                                                                                      41
