                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     WELFARE SPENDING AND MORTALITY RATES FOR THE ELDERLY BEFORE
                       THE SOCIAL SECURITY ERA

                                            Adrian Stoian
                                          Price V. Fishback

                                        Working Paper 14970
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14970


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2009




We thank Andrea Balan Cohen, Kei Hirano, Ron Oaxaca, Manuela Angelucci, Shawn Kantor, Michael
Haines, John Wallis, Rick Steckel, and two anonymous referees for their helpful comments. We have
also benefited from the comments of participants at seminars at the University of Chicago, the University
of Arizona, and at presentations at the Western Economic Association, the Eastern Economic Association,
 Southern Economic Association, and Economic History Association meetings. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Adrian Stoian and Price V. Fishback. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Welfare Spending and Mortality Rates for the Elderly Before the Social Security Era
Adrian Stoian and Price V. Fishback
NBER Working Paper No. 14970
May 2009
JEL No. H51,H75,I1,N32

                                              ABSTRACT

We analyze the impact of the original means-tested Old Age Assistance (OAA) programs on the health
of the elderly prior to the first Social Security pension payments. Before 1935 a number of states had
enacted their own OAA laws. After 1935 the federal government began offering matching grants and
thus stimulated the adoption of OAA programs by the states. A new panel data set of 75 cities for each
year between 1929 and 1938 combines mortality rates for older age groups with three measures of
the OAA programs, spending on non-age-specific relief and a rich set of correlates. The data are analyzed
using difference-in-difference-in-difference and instrumental variables methods. Our results suggest
that Old Age Assistance in the 1930s had little impact on the death rate of the elderly. Our sense is
that the OAA programs in the 1930s transferred the elderly from general relief programs without necessarily
increasing the resources available to them.


Adrian Stoian
Department of Economics
California State University, East Bay
Hayward, CA 94542
adrian.stoian@csueastbay.edu

Price V. Fishback
Department of Economics
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721
and NBER
pfishback@eller.arizona.edu
1. Introduction

        During the Great Depression, the Roosevelt Administration faced substantial pressure

to make special provisions to aid the elderly poor. The elderly tended to have the highest

poverty rates among age groups, and several advocates received extensive publicity and

support in opinion polls when they lobbied for expansive programs to help the elderly.2

When the Roosevelt administration turned to the issue in late 1934 and 1935 they faced a set

of choices. One was to help the states expand their old-age assistance programs that paid

benefits to the elderly poor. A second was to provide an old-age pension plan for all workers,

who would pay taxes into a fund while working and then receive benefits based on their

contributions after age 65. The Social Security Act of 1935 chose both, an Old Age Assistance

(OAA) matching grant program that aided the states in paying benefits to the needy elderly

and the national Old Age Security Income (OASI) old-age pension for the working

population.

        The problems with funding OASI pensions, widely known as Social Security, have led

to a variety of debates over restructuring the OASI tax and benefit structure to favor lower

income retirees. In the debates, few people mention that the U.S. currently has means-tested

old-age assistance programs under the Supplemental Security Income system, which is based

on the original state old-age assistance programs. The debates over the OASI program raise a

question about government action for old-age security. What would have happened had the

federal government never adopted the OASI old-age pension and the U.S. had just continued

forward with the state-based old-age assistance programs? In hindsight, it may seem odd to

2
 The most famous of these plans was the Townsend Plan, which called for $100 per month to be paid to the
elderly, who were then expected to spend the entire sum as a stimulus to the economy. This plan essentially
called for a transfer of 40 percent of annual GNP to the elderly for this purpose.



                                                    1
rely on the states, but it should be remembered that workers’ compensation, unemployment

insurance, aid to children, and aid to the blind still remain state-based programs.3

         Prior published work on OAA focused on labor force participation and living

arrangements. Parsons (1991) found that OAA benefits account for about half of the decline

in the elderly work force between 1930 and 1950, while Friedberg (1999) showed that labor

force participation would have risen slightly in the absence of OAA programs. Costa (1999)

found that the 27 percent increase in average OAA benefits between 1940 and 1950 explains

about 80 percent of the decrease in the proportion of older non-married women living with

family members. Further, states that disallowed benefits to women with family who could

care for them and states with lien requirements increased the share of women living with

relatives.

         We examine the impact of the Old Age Assistance state programs on elderly mortality

rates during the period from 1929 through 1938 before the first OASI payments were issued.4

The state programs made cash payments to the needy elderly to allow them to live on their own

rather than among the needy population in almshouses provided by local governments.5

Between the late 1920s and 1934 more than half the states adopted old-age assistance. After

the Social Security Act of 1935 offered matching grants, all of the states eventually began

paying old-age assistance benefits.




3
  There is no federal involvement in workers’ compensation, the federal government handles administrative costs
for unemployment insurance and offers matching grants for aid to children under the Temporary Assistance for
Needy Families and for aid to the blind.
4
  Balan-Cohen (2007) independently in an as yet unpublished paper has been addressing the same issue with a
different data set for states covering the period 1934-1955. We compare our results to hers later in the paper.
5Although the state programs have often been described as old-age pension programs, they in no way resembled

the modern OASI pensions because they were not based on payments of taxes in advance of old-age in return for
payments upon reaching age 65. The elderly needy with property did contribute some resources. In many states
OAA recipients who had property often had to sign over their property or allow the government a first lien on
the property to receive benefits.


                                                      2
         We take advantage of the timing of the implementation of old-age assistance programs

across states and the different benefits offered in the programs to assess their impact on the

mortality rates of the elderly.6 We create a new panel data set for 75 cities with annual data for

the years 1929 through 1938 that combines data on mortality rates for different age groups

and information on OAA benefits and other forms of government relief spending. To avoid

confounding effects, we stop the analysis before the national Social Security pension system

started to pay benefits. The relationship between Old Age Assistance and mortality is

estimated using three measures of the program, several specifications, and multiple procedures

ranging from difference-in-difference to difference-in-difference-in-difference analysis to

instrumental variables. The results suggest that other relief programs did not reduce elderly

mortality. After investigating several hypotheses about differences in the types of deaths

experienced, the findings lead us to believe that the introduction of OAA in the 1930s was

primarily an administrative shift that moved the elderly who most likely to be at risk of dying

from the general relief rolls to the OAA relief rolls without changing the access to resources

for the elderly poor.

2. Old Age Assistance Programs

         Local governments in the United States held the primary responsibility for providing

benefits to the poor through the first decade of the 20th century. The states became more

heavily involved with the introduction of mothers’ pensions, workers’ compensation, and aid

to the blind during the 1910s and 1920s.7 Specific legislation targeted at the elderly was first


6
  OAA is among several New Deal programs included in the 1930s relief programs examined by Fishback, Haines
and Kantor (2007) in their analysis of the demographic impact of relief spending for 114 cities in U.S. between
1929 and 1940. They find a negative relationship between relief spending per capita and infant mortality, suicide
rates, and several major causes of noninfant deaths.
7 The federal and state governments in the United States struggled with the issue of specific relief to the elderly

later than in many other western countries. In 1889 Germany was the first country to provide a general OASI-
style old-age pension plan through compulsory contributory insurance. Other European and Latin American
countries followed suit over the next thirty years. Most of the systems covered only employed workers and


                                                        3
passed in several Western and Midwestern states during the 1920s, as seen in Table 1 for the

states covered in our city sample. Details of the initial state laws are shown in Table 2. The

early laws gave the option to local governments to create county-financed programs

specifically targeted at the elderly. As the country sunk into Depression, studies in New York

in 1930 and Connecticut in 1932 found that nearly 50 percent of the populations aged 65 years

or older had less than an estimated subsistence income level of $25 per month. The share of

elderly individuals with less than $300 per year in income and property valued at less than

$5,000 exceeded 46 percent in Connecticut and 74.5 percent in New York City (Old Age

Security Staff Report 1935).

         Over half of the states responded to the problems of the elderly by passing old-age

assistance programs intended to “give aid to each applicant in his or her home or in some

other suitable home in preference to placing him or her in an institution (Florida 1935 Bill).”

Essentially, the elderly poor were to be moved from the existing poor law system into their

own categorical assistance programs. Over half of the states in Table 2 prevented the OAA

recipients from receiving any other form of state aid. The programs in most states gave the

eligible the choice of living on their own or inside almshouses, as most states in Table 2 would

not pay benefits to elderly with relatives who could care for them. Generally, OAA programs

were associated with a reduction in or a reduction of the growth in the number of elderly

living in almshouses.8


provided benefits for both invalidity and old age, although Switzerland and Latin American countries limited the
coverage to workers of different categories. Denmark in 1891 and several other countries opted instead for
OAA-style assistance targeted at the elderly people with insufficient means. Great Britain started in 1908 with a
system of non-contributory means tested benefits for the elderly but then switched to a compulsory contributory
OASI pension program in 1925 (Committee on Economic Security 1935, Tables A, B and C).
8Alabama, Colorado, Georgia, Minnesota, Tennessee and West Virginia all reported declines in the elderly

population in almshouses after introducing OAA (Social Security Bulletin, March 1938, 15 and 42). A study
reported in the Monthly Labor Review that resembles a rough difference-in-difference analysis shows that states
with old-age pension laws experienced roughly half the increase in populations in almshouses between 1930 and
1931/1932 as did states without old-age pension laws ((Anonymous, 1933, 1095),


                                                       4
       The minimum age of eligibility (Table 1) was 65 in most states, 70 in several states.

Most states in Table 2 required U.S citizenship. Minimum state residency requirements,

ranging from one to fifteen years in Table 2, meant that the elderly had virtually no

opportunity to gain higher OAA benefits in the short run by migrating across state lines.

Minimum county residency requirements were less stiff, primarily in states where the state

provided funds for the program.

       The benefits were structured to help the elderly poor reach a target level of income.

Benefit payments were based on the difference between the income of the applicant and an

established monthly budget. In 15 of the 29 states in our sample listed in Table 2, the state

law set a maximum monthly total income, the sum of old-age benefits and income from all

other sources, for OAA recipients. The maximums in those states typically were $30 per

month with a low of $15 per month in Indiana in 1934. Ten other states set maximums for

the old-age benefit payments, ranging from $15 in Oklahoma to $30 in several states.

Kentucky, New York, Massachusetts, and Louisiana set no maximums but there was an

implicit maximum in the monthly target budget that they created. Comparisons between the

maximums and the average benefits paid in 1934 in Table 2 show that old-age assistance

payments in the states with maximums for total income were well below the maximums.

Average payments in states with maximum benefits, like Utah and New Jersey, were in the

same range as in the maximum income states at $8.56 and $12.72. The average payments in

the states without maximums, Massachusetts $24.35 and New York at $22.16 were higher than

in the other states but well below the $30 maximums found in most states. This notion of a

target income is also supported by the broad dispersion of benefit levels paid to OAA

recipients in 1937-38 in so many states in Table 3.




                                                5
         Nearly all states also imposed some eligibility conditions related to the applicant’s

wealth, either in terms of annual income - in many cases no more than one dollar per day - or

in terms of the value of their property – between $1,000 and $5,000. Recipients with property

in most states essentially borrowed the benefit payments they received from the state. Many

states established a lien on the property that required repayment of the benefits upon transfer

of the property. Some required the recipient to transfer the property to the state.9

         Under the Social Security Act of 1935, the federal government began offering

matching grants to states for means-tested old-age assistance.10 States were required to pass

enabling legislation that either established OAA for the first time or modified existing OAA

programs to meet the following federal requirements. The new state/federal OAA programs

were mandatory for the entire state. A cap on monthly benefits subsidized by the federal

government was set at $30 per individual; therefore, the maximum federal contribution was

limited to $15 per individual. The state could maintain a higher cap if it wished but it was

responsible for the extra funding. State and local residency requirements could be no more

stringent than state residency for five years out of the last nine with a continuous residence of

one year before the application. Recipients still had to be U.S. citizens but no minimum time

was set. The minimum age was set at 65 years, although states with higher minimums could

still receive matching grants through January 1, 1940.11

         Average annual OAA benefits in 1940 ranged from $91 to $455 across states, while the

share of elderly receiving benefits in the states ranged from 8.1 percent, to 50.2 percent

(Friedberg 1999). Information from 1937-38 in Table 3 offers a snapshot that shows a broad

9 Additional conditions in some states included the following rules: the applicant had not deserted his wife in the
last 15 years, was not a beggar, was not imprisoned, was not in a charitable institution or he did not receive other
state aid.
10
   The Act also provided matching grants for aid to dependent children and aid to the blind to expand on existing
state mothers’ pension and aid-to-the-blind programs.
11 Pennsylvania decreased the minimum age effective January 1, 1940, Missouri effective July 1939, Indiana and

Oregon effective 1938.


                                                         6
range of benefits across states, although the distributions varied across time. Part of the

distribution was determined by differences in state maximums, which ranged from $15 in

Kentucky to a high of $45 in Colorado in the states in our city sample. The distributions of

benefits within states displayed quite different patterns. In some states it appears likely that

the variation was caused by differences in the gap between the individual’s resources and the

state’s estimates of the cost of necessities. Kansas and New Jersey displayed bell-curve type

distributions below their maximums of $40 and $30, respectively. Kentucky’s low maximum

meant that roughly half of recipients were paid between $10 and $15 and roughly half were

paid between $5 and $10. California and Louisiana illustrate two extremes. More than half of

the California recipients received the state maximum of $35. Louisiana passed a generous

maximum of $40 but paid more than 80 percent of their recipients less than $15.



3. Other Aid to the Elderly

        It is important to realize that Old-Age Assistance programs were enacted as an

alternative way to deal with poverty among the elderly. In the absence of old-age assistance,

the elderly were eligible for most forms of poor relief at the local level. When the New Deal

programs were enacted, the elderly were eligible for both direct and work relief under the

Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA) in 1933, which provided about 78 percent

of the relief funds distributed by state and local governments between June 1933 and June

1935. In October of 1933 roughly 8 percent of the population aged 65 and over received

relief from the FERA in the states in our estimation sample, despite the presence of old-age

assistance in many of the states. Correlations show that the share of elderly receiving FERA

funds in October 1933 was lower in states where OAA assistance was available. The

stringency of the state old-age assistance programs gave the elderly incentives to apply for



                                                 7
federal relief before seeking old-age assistance. Property owners had special incentives

because the FERA did not ask home owners to accept a lien or a transfer of their property as a

requirement for benefits.

         In July 1935 the federal Works Progress Administration (WPA) replaced the FERA

work relief programs, and responsibility for funding direct relief, which had no work

requirement, was returned to state and local governments. This shift in responsibility and the

expansion of old-age assistance programs to all states appears to have led a higher share of the

elderly to enroll in old-age assistance programs. Table 2 shows that the share of the age-

eligible elderly enrolled in old-age assistance programs in states with programs in 1934 average

less than 10 percent with a maximum of 16.9 percent in Indiana. At the end of 1936 in a

much improved economy about 14 percent of the population aged 65 and over received OAA

assistance under the Social Security Act, while another 6 percent received aid through some

other form of relief (Social Security Bulletin, March 1938, 6). By 1940 all states had

established OAA and the share of people aged 65 years of age or older receiving benefits had

risen to 21.8 percent even as per capita incomes had reached their 1929 level again (Friedberg

1999).

         A significant minority of the elderly who signed up for OAA under the new SSA

matching-grant rules had received some form of public assistance before moving to OAA. A

study by the Social Security Board (1938) summarized in Table 4 suggests that roughly 40

percent of the elderly who signed up for the SSA matching-grant version of OAA in 1937 and

1938 had received some form of public assistance within the past two years. Three-fourths of

that group had received some form of public aid within the 30 days prior to their acceptance

in the OAA program. It is likely that some portion of the new recipients had been eligible for




                                                8
aid for a period before signing up. Others might have newly reached the eligible age or had a

recent change in their economic circumstances.



4. Anticipated Effects of Old-Age Assistance Programs.

        The state Old Age Assistance programs changed the nature of means-tested public

relief for the elderly. In one sense the new programs just replaced the existing systems

provided to all age groups with a set of benefits targeted specifically to the elderly. If the new

systems led to no changes in the access to benefits received by the elderly, then we would not

expect to see a reduction in elderly mortality rates.

        OAA programs did lead to some changes in the mechanism through which relief was

offered to the elderly. A key statement typically found in many OAA laws was that Old Age

Assistance was designed to pay the elderly enough that they could live on their own and thus

not rely on other forms of public support. Since many states required that an OAA recipient

or couple could not have relatives who could care for them, this meant that the choice of

OAA benefits was allowing them to avoid living with non-relatives or in almshouses. If this

shift in living arrangements was the key change wrought by OAA programs, then several

opposing effects on mortality rates might be expected.

        First, OAA benefits might lower the mortality rate by allowing the elderly person or

couple to avoid exposure to communicable diseases among other poor living in almshouses or

alternative arrangements.

        Second, OAA would lower mortality rates to the extent that the program provided

more economic resources to the elderly. To the extent that there were economies of scale in

household production in the multiple person living arrangement, the extra costs of living alone

might have eaten into the extra income and thus the net benefit might have been small.



                                                 9
        Third, OAA assistance might have contributed to higher mortality even though the

elderly person saw it as a net benefit. There may have been greater isolation from others from

living alone. Modern studies suggest that individuals who retire into socially isolated settings

tend to have higher mortality rates (Snyder and Evans 2006). Further, by living alone the

elderly may have lost easy access to health care provided in almshouses. A BLS report on

almshouses in 1925 found that payments to nurses and matrons accounted for approximately

10 percent of the payroll costs at almshouses. Descriptions of the quality of medical care,

food, and living conditions from state reports suggested that it ranged from good to very poor.

Generally, the quality of conditions was better in the large almshouses most often found in

cities than in smaller ones (Stewart 1925, 19-37).



5. Empirical Strategy and Data

        We examine the impact of old-age assistance programs on mortality rates for the older

age groups of the United States. Mortality rates are important measures of the health of the

elderly population as well as socio-economic well-being because mortality is influenced by

both income and psychological factors. Lower mortality rates are likely to strongly improve the

psychological health of the living elderly by reducing the loss of close friends. A part of the

mortality rise associated with isolation and loss of friends may have manifested itself in the

suicides studied by Balan Cohen (2007) or in other forms of stress that contributed to death.

        In contrast to other studies that looked at the impact of Old Age Assistance programs,

we have accumulated data about spending not only for Old Age Assistance, but also for all but

a small share of the other public and private programs for assistance to the needy for 114

city/county observations in each year from 1929 through 1938 (Baird, 1992; Fishback, Haines,

and Kantor, 2007). These 114 large areas represent 66 percent of the total population of U.S.



                                               10
The data on public assistance of other kinds allows us to control for expenditures from all of

the other public relief programs that provided benefits to all age groups, including seniors

living with others in low-income households.12 We match the relief data with information on

mortality for persons aged 55 to 64, 65 to 74 and 75 and up for the 75 cities reporting age-

specific mortality in the annual Mortality Statistics volumes for the years 1929 through 1938

published by the U. S. Bureau of the Census. The 75 cities account for roughly 48 percent of

the total population of U.S.

         The key to our analysis is the sharp changes that occurred in access to OAA benefits

during the period we study. We measure access in three ways: access to benefits, total

benefits paid per person of eligible age, and the monthly maximums set by the states. Baird

(1942) reports payments under old-age-assistance programs in all of the cities. Among cities in

the sample only one reported the payment of OAA benefits specific to the elderly in 1929 in

the financial statistics reported by cities. Between 20 and 30 cities reported benefits in 1931

through 1933. The number jumped over 50, more than two-thirds of the sample by 1934.

After the passage of the SSA matching grant law, the number jumped again to 67. All cities in

our sample were paying OAA by 1938. Total benefits paid per person of eligible age also

varied substantially. Meanwhile, the maximum benefits in Tables 1 and 2, which in many

states served as a target income for recipients, varied both across cities and across time.

         The aggregate mortality patterns in these large cities for people aged above 55 seem

inconsistent with the usual expectations about the impact of the Great Depression. The

12Our measure of other direct relief available to the elderly includes city and state relief spending, federal direct

relief under the Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA), work relief from the Civil Works Administration,
the FERA, and the Works Progress Administration, private relief and aid to the blind. We exclude mothers’
pensions and aid to dependent children because those were targeted at widows and children. The data for OAA
and the other relief programs are relatively accurate measures of the net aid received by households since they do
not include the salaries of administrative personnel of diverse agencies which distributed them. For a more
detailed description of the relief spending data, see Fishback, Haines, and Kantor (2007) and Price Fishback’s
website at the University of Arizona (http://econ.arizona.edu/faculty/Fishback.aspx) under “Datasets from
Published Research Projects.”


                                                        11
histograms in Figures 1a through 1c show the year by year evolution of mortality rates for

three age groups over aged 55 for the 58 cities reporting mortality in all of the years between

1922 and 1938. Linear trend lines based on the trends in mortality from 1922 through 1928

show a flat or rising trend as the economy entered the Great Depression. However, mortality

among the elderly fell relative to each of these trends as the Depression deepened through

1933, rose slightly during the halting recovery from 1934 through 1937 and then fell again in

1938. This is consistent with patterns for overall mortality found by Ruhm (2000) for the

modern era and by Fishback, Haines, and Kantor (2007) for the 1930s.13

         Figure 2 shows a graphical comparison designed to illustrate the relationship between

payment of OAA and the relative mortality of the people eligible for OAA. We first selected

groups of cities from two types of states: states that paid OAA in every year from 1931

through 1935 and states that paid no benefits during that period. For each group of cities we

then calculated for each year the difference between the death rate for people aged 65 and

over and the death rate for people aged 55-64 (ineligible for OAA). This difference works to

eliminate the impact of trends in mortality experienced by all age groups in the city. Figure 2

shows this over-65-minus-55-64 mortality rate difference for the cities in states that paid OAA

and those that did not. The comparison reveals that the over-65-minus-55-64 mortality

difference was higher in the cities paying OAA than in the cities without OAA. The absence

of a beneficial mortality effect of OAA might simply reflect endogeneity in which areas with

higher death rates were more likely to adopt OAA earlier. Below, we examine the relationship


13 Other studies in the same category include Ruhm (2003) and Granados (2005). It might be the case that
economic cycles are reflected in mortality rates with a lag of several years, a long term effect which would
complicate the type of analysis required to identify the effectiveness of the program. However, previous literature
explains the pro cyclical character of trend in mortality rates as a short run effect rather than a long run one.
Ruhm suggests that the decline in mortality rates during recessions are related to reductions in smoking, height-
adjusted weight, driving, and an increase in physical leisure-time activity associated with declines in disposable
income.



                                                       12
between OAA and elderly mortality while including covariates to reduce omitted variable bias

and using instrumental variable analysis to correct for endogeneity.

         We estimate the effect of OAA on mortality rates using several methods, including a

difference-in-difference analysis, a difference-in-difference-in-difference analysis, and

ultimately an instrumental variables analysis combined with the difference-in-difference-in-

difference analysis. We focus on the group aged 75 and over for the analysis to avoid

measurement error related to different age eligibility standards in the states. The mortality

information is reported only for age categories 65-74 and 75 and over, while the minimum

eligibility age (see Table 1) in several states was 70. Since we cannot calculate a mortality rate

for ages 70 and over, we can avoid this type of measurement error by restricting the analysis to

the older age group. We have also estimated the model for ages 65 and over both with and

without an extra dummy variable for states with an eligibility age of 70. The qualitative

findings are the same for this age group as for the 75 and over age group. The results are

reported in Appendix 3 for robustness tests.

         The next step creates a difference-in-difference-in-difference analysis by performing a

similar sequence of estimations using city and year fixed effects where the dependent variables

are the differences in mortality rates between the 75 and older and the 55-64 age groups. Since

persons aged 55-64 were not eligible for assistance, they are treated as a control group that is

closest to the older age group without being eligible for benefits.14

         The data on deaths are reported by age group but contain no information on the

number of deaths among people who received OAA and the number of deaths of the elderly


14The population aged 55 to 64 may not be a perfect control group if some of the people aged 75 and over are
married to spouses aged 55 to 64. In these cases income from old-age assistance for the older spouse may
influence mortality for the younger spouse. Nationwide, during fiscal year 1937-38, the percent of married
recipients among those who specified their marital status was 41.2 percent Source: Social Security Bulletin,
February 1939.


                                                     13
non-recipients. Therefore, we cannot estimate directly the relationship between the death

rates of OAA recipients and the payments received by OAA recipients. Instead, the dependent

variable in the analysis is the number of deaths in the 75 and over age group per 100 people in

that age group. This leads to the following econometric specification for the difference-in-

difference analysis:



Mit75 = β1 OAAit + β2 Rit + β3 Xjt + β4 Ci + β5 Yt + εit.                                        1)



Mit75 is the mortality rate in the 75 and over age group for city i in year t.15 OAAit is a measure

describing the OAA program in city i in year t. Rit is a per capita relief spending in all of the

other programs (including direct relief, work relief and work programs, private programs and

programs for blind persons) that provided financial resources for the entire population,

including the elderly. Xjt is a vector of economic activity, income distribution, cost of living,

and demographic measures that potentially influence mortality rates for all age groups. Ci is a

vector of city effects, Yt is a vector of year effects, and εit is a stochastic error term containing

unobservables.16

         OAAit, the old-age assistance policy, is measured in three ways: OAA expenditures

(net of administrative expenses) in 1967$ dollars per person aged 65 and over, a dummy for

the presence of OAA payments in the city and the OAA maximum benefit in $1967.17 The

OAA coefficient (β1) in all cases can be interpreted as the relationship between the death rate

15The   denominator was calculated as a linear interpolation of the size of the age group between the 1920, 1930,
and 1940 censuses. A detailed description of the construction of the mortality rate variable can be found in
appendix.
16
   Prior to 1937, mortality was reported by place of occurrence. After 1936, mortality was reported by place of
residence. The year fixed effects in the analysis control for this change in national reporting. We have also
estimated the series of specifications for the period 1929 through 1936, and there is no substantial change in the
results. We have also estimated the model using Weighted Least Squares and the basic results are unchanged.
17 Where benefits were reported for the city we used estimates of the city population, where reported for the

county in which the city was located, we used the county population.


                                                       14
for all people 75 and over and the OAA policy measure. Prior studies of the impact of OAA

on mortality by Balan Cohen (2007) and of all relief on mortality and fertility by Fishback,

Haines, and Kantor (2007) have also faced the same problem of lack of information on the

specific death rates of relief recipients and non-recipients. As a result, they also followed the

same conservative approach of interpreting the policy coefficient as the impact on the death

rate of the combined population of recipients and non-recipients.

        This is still a useful estimate on its own terms. Even in the modern era, there are many

low-income households who do not apply for welfare benefits. In essence, we are testing

whether the presence of a program has an effect on mortality in situations where the effect

might have been weakened by low take-up rates as well as the size of benefits when they were

received. It is also important to look at the broader population for another reason. The

availability of old-age assistance likely affects the behavior of others of eligible age and the

extent of support they receive from others closest to them. The availability of old-age benefits

might have contributed to reductions in the support provided by friends or by relatives in the

states where benefits were paid to elderly who had family who could take care of them.

        The coefficient for the OAA expenditures per person measure in equation 1 can be

interpreted more aggressively as an unbiased measure of the influence of total OAA expenditures

on the number of deaths of OAA recipients under the following assumptions: 1) OAA expenditures

do not influence the total size of the elderly population in the denominator of the death rate

and 2) OAA expenditures do not influence the death rates of non-recipients. The coefficient

will be biased toward being too negative if OAA expenditures do not influence the total size

of the elderly population and the death rates of non-recipients are lowered by more OAA

spending. This might happen if OAA expenditures help prevent the development of

contagious diseases among the relief recipients with consequent reductions in deaths among



                                                 15
the non-recipient population.    For those interested in the relationship between the OAA

recipient death rate and expenditures per OAA recipient, the OAA coefficient is an unbiased estimate

when expenditures per recipient do not influence the recipient share of the elderly population

and expenditures per recipient do not influence the death rates of elderly non-recipients. We

derive the biases and assess whether the assumptions are reasonable in Appendix 2.

        The alternative measures are a dummy variable for the presence of an OAA system

that was making payments in the city and the OAA maximum benefit in $1967 for recipients

as stipulated by the state law. The two measures get at a different issue than the OAA

spending measure. The coefficient of the OAA dummy measures whether the shift in

administration of welfare to the elderly from treating them as part of the general relief

population to offering specific benefits influenced the overall death rate of the elderly.

        The coefficient on the OAA monthly maximum addresses the issue of whether setting

a target minimum for all elderly living in their own household influenced the death rate of all

the elderly.   The OAA benefits were designed to make up the difference between the

recipient’s income and a target budget. The patterns of payments show that most states set a

maximum monthly benefit and then paid the difference between the OAA recipient’s monthly

income flow and the maximum benefit. Someone with no income from other sources could

receive the maximum, while someone with income equal to half of the maximum would

receive up to half of the maximum in OAA benefits. Thus, the maximum benefit effectively

became the state’s target level of subsistence. This target monthly income in some ways is a

better measure to use than per capita payments or payments per recipient because health and

mortality do not respond specifically to the cash payments paid by the state. Instead, the

mortality is influenced more by the total income the person has available, whether the source

is the state’s OAA payment or the person’s private income. Because of the difference in the



                                                 16
interpretation of the OAA dummy and the OAA maximum benefit variables, for reasons we

discuss in Appendix 2, their coefficients cannot be used as easily as the coefficient of OAA

spending as a measure of the impact of OAA on the death rates of OAA recipients. Therefore, we

will focus our discussion on their impact on all elderly death rates.

         The Xjt vector of covariates includes a series of socio-economic variables that might

have affected mortality rates for all of the elderly. The variables are all averages for the entire

population. Since we do not have specific information on these variables for the elderly, the

population averages serve as proxies that work well to the extent that they are correlated with

the averages for the elderly. Retail sales per capita is included as a measure of average

consumption in the way it was used in Fishback, Haines, and Kantor (2007). The share of

people who filed federal income taxes is a measure of the share of the population in the upper

tier of the entire country’s income distribution. It captures the share of individuals with more

than $2,000 in income and families with more than $5,000 at a time when earnings per full-

time equivalent worker in industry were less than $1,300 and many workers were working less

than full time or were unemployed.18 Health care availability is measured by the number of

hospital beds per capita; whereas city-specific shocks in prices are accounted for by using a

city-specific cost of living index. We also control for city level trends between census years in

demographic measures with straight-line interpolations between Census information in 1930

and 1940 of total population, and the percentages of population who were illiterate, black or

foreign born. Ci is a vector of city effects designed to control for time-invariant differences

across cities that includes the basic sanitation infrastructure, and Yt is a vector of year effects

that control for economy-wide shocks. For more details about the construction of the data

see the Data Appendix.

18Full-timeequivalent industry earnings are from Robert Margo’s estimates using methods similar to those of
Stanley Lebergott’s (series Ba4419 in Carter, et. al., 2006, volume 2, p. 283).


                                                    17
6. Results

               During the 1930s, New Deal administrators produced a series of studies with

simple comparisons of data to show the success of their policies. An Old Age Assistance

administrator who looked at the simple OLS results with mortality rates of the elderly as a

function of only the OAA measures would likely have declared success. The mortality rate of

people aged 75 and over was statistically significantly lower in cities where OAA programs

were in place and where the OAA monthly maximum benefits were higher. Using the dummy

variable measure in the first specification in Table 5, the presence of OAA in the state was

associated with mortality rates that were -0.2979 deaths per hundred lower for people aged 75

and over. This change represents 0.21 standard deviations in the mortality rate and about a 2.2

percent drop relative to the average death rate of 13.4 deaths per hundred people aged 75 and

over. If we assume that OAA expenditures do not influence the total size of the elderly

population in the denominator of the death rate and OAA expenditures do not influence the

death rates of non-recipients, then the marginal effect for elderly recipients of OAA assistance

will be -0.2979 divided by the share of people receiving OAA benefits. If 10 percent of the

elderly population received benefits, then the introduction of OAA payments was associated

with a reduction of 3 deaths per 100 recipients of OAA assistance over the age of 75. Using

the OAA maximum benefit specification, a rise in the OAA maximum monthly benefit of one

dollar (in 1967$) was associated with a reduction of 0.0055 deaths per 100 people aged 75 and

over. This implies that a one-standard deviation increase in maximum OAA benefits per

month was associated with a 0.004 standard deviation reduction in death rates. The

specification using OAA benefits per person suggests that a dollar per person increase (in 1967

$) was associated with a reduction of 0.0007 deaths per 100 persons aged 75 and over, but we

cannot reject the hypothesis of no effect. The coefficient implies that a one-standard



                                               18
deviation increase in OAA benefits per capita was associated with death rates that were 0.0568

lower.

         The OAA administrator might have taken heart that the negative relationship between

OAA and mortality rates remains when the remaining correlates are added. However, it is

clear that the negative effects in the simplest specifications above were driven by omitted

variable bias. Once the other correlates are included, each of the OAA coefficients is less

negative and the only relationship that remains statistically significant is the one between death

rates and the OAA maximum monthly benefit.19 The first two specifications still leave several

other important features that might have influenced death rates uncontrolled. Some are not

easily measured but were largely time-invariant while varying across cities during the 1930s.

They include the basic quality of water treatment and sanitation facilities for the city, public

health practices, private customs related to hand-washing and other personal sanitation

activities, typical diets, and regional variations in the practice of medicine. In addition, there

were national shocks to the economy that were common across cities. New drugs that

successfully treated infections and other illnesses tended to diffuse rapidly across the country

in a short period of time. The key change in drugs during the 1930s was the development of

sulfa drugs, which Thomasson and Treber (2008) find contributed to a reduction in maternal

mortality.

         Once we move to the equivalent of a difference-in-difference analysis by incorporating

city and year fixed effects, the coefficient falls sharply to -0.0017 for the OAA monthly

maximum and it turns positive for the OAA payments dummy and OAA expenditures per

elderly person.20


19
  The full results with the added correlates are shown in Appendix Table 1.
20
  We have also estimated the model by adding a predicted time trend for the 1920s to the analysis. When we add
the trend, the number of observations is reduced from 734 to 590 since a number of states had not yet joined the


                                                      19
         It is also important to examine the effects of the remaining welfare programs on

elderly mortality because the elderly during the 1930s also received benefits from the broader

welfare programs. The results show little sign that the broader welfare programs were

associated with reduced elderly mortality. The coefficients for spending per capita on other

relief programs in the left half of Table 5 are negative when only the correlates are included,

but positive when the fixed effects are added. They are all statistically insignificant.

         An additional step can be taken to further control for unmeasured factors that might

have varied both across cities and across time but were common determinants of death rates

for people aged 55 and over within the same city and year. Such factors might include

epidemics and changes in access to sanitation and treated water. In this case we use as the

dependent variable the difference between the mortality rates of the elderly ages 75 and over

and the mortality rates of the group aged 55 to 64. The remaining correlates and the year and

city effects are kept to control for differences in the impact of these factors on different age

groups. The results for the three measures of the OAA program are presented in the right

half of Table 5. The key coefficients to look at are in the difference-in-difference-in-difference

specifications in the far-right column. An additional dollar added to the monthly maximum

benefit is associated with a reduction of -0.0021 in deaths per 100 elderly persons. A one-

standard-deviation increase in the monthly maximum was associated with a relatively small

0.062 standard deviation reduction in the difference in the death rates. The other two

coefficients are positive. The introduction of OAA payments was associated with a 0.05

standard deviation increase in the death rate difference, while a one-standard-deviation

increase in OAA spending per person was associated with a 0.14 standard deviation increase.



death registration area and begun reporting mortality data consistently during the 1920s. The results are similar to
those reported here and are available from the authors.


                                                        20
However, all three coefficients are statistically insignificant and we cannot reject the hypothesis

of no effect.



6.1 Instrumental Variable Analysis

         Although we have controlled for a significant range of factors with the techniques so

far, there still remain the possibility of endogeneity bias in the coefficients on the OAA

measures. Such bias will arise to the extent that legislators and relief administrators

responded to a rise in the relative mortality of the elderly by adopting OAA earlier or raised the

benefits and spending on OAA when it was already in place. One key omitted variable that we

may be missing is the poverty status of the 75 and over group relative to the rest of the population.

Changes in poverty over time within a city for the 75 and older group relative to the 55-64 age

group were likely to lead to a larger positive gap in mortality rates between the two age groups.

Similarly, increases in relative poverty for the 65 and older group across time within a city

would likely lead to enhancements in the availability and level of OAA. The combination of

these two positive correlations would cause the OAA coefficients in the difference-in-

difference-in-difference analysis to be more positive than the true causal effect. We work to

eliminate this potential bias using an instrumental variable approach. An instrument for the

OAA measure needs to address the potential problem that the states established the OAA

policy parameters in response to the unmeasured factors influencing the relative mortality rates

of the elderly. The states set the benefit structure and also determined the timing of OAA

introduction.21


21
  Balan-Cohen (2007) treats these state parameters as exogenous, arguing that adoption of the OAA programs
and the benefits chosen were determined largely by political factors and administrative tinkering with the law.
Given the absence of annual information on the incomes of the different age groups during the 1930s, we are not
sanguine that we have fully controlled for the relative poverty of the age groups in the analysis, which is why we
instrument for the state parameters. State control over most features continued even after the Social Security Act


                                                       21
         The identifying instrument for the OAA measures is based on the long-term

propensities of states to adopt new policy innovations with similar timing during different time

periods. The wave of adoption of Old Age Assistance laws toward the end of the 1920s and

during the 1930s followed on earlier waves of legislation at the state level. These included the

initial establishment of state bureaus of labor statistics in the 1870s and 1880s, the

introduction of factory inspectors in the 1880s-1890s, and the broad range of Progressive Era

regulations, including workers’ compensation and mothers’ pensions, of the 1910s. As each

new wave of proposals arose, some states showed a consistent pattern of adopting laws early,

while others tended to be followers.22

         We use the patterns of workers’ compensation benefits across states and time from

twenty years earlier as an instrument for the OAA measures. Workers' compensation was a

major social insurance reform of the 1910s, just as OAA was a major social insurance reform

of the 1930s. The specific instrument is the ratio of the state’s expected workers’

compensation benefits per capita based on the national average wage relative to the national

average wage 20 years before the year in the sample. Fishback and Kantor (2000) constructed

this expected benefits ratio to identify the differences across states and time in workers’

compensation benefits that were driven by the parameters of the state laws.23 Higher workers’

compensation benefit ratios are expected to be correlated positively with each OAA measure.

The instrument isolates the features of the timing and cross-sectional variation in OAA

benefits that are associated with the long-term propensity of states to try new legislation of all

of 1935. The federal government offered the matching grant opportunity to all states and set some basic
administrative and residency requirements. Each state then enacted their own enabling legislation; therefore, the
states set the benefits and determined the timing of the changes.
22
   For examples of these long waves, see Walker (1969), Gray (1973); Holmes (2005); Holmes, Fishback, and
Kantor (2007), and Fishback, Holmes, and Allen (2008); Welch and Thompson (1980).
23
   The variable was created by Fishback and Kantor (2000). Details on the construction of the variable are
discussed there in Appendix B. The data as well as details on the construction of the data are available in the
“Datasets for Published Studies” section of Price Fishback’s website at the Department of Economics at the
University of Arizona, http://economics.eller.arizona.edu/faculty/Fishback.aspx.


                                                       22
kinds earlier rather than later. Given the long time lag between the 1930s and the 1910s, it is

highly unlikely that the instrument would be correlated with the unobserved time-varying error

in the final stage mortality difference equation. Potential correlation with the unobserved

error is also unlikely because workers’ compensation benefits were focused on workplace

accidents in jobs that were rarely held by the elderly.24

         Table 6 reports the key results and diagnostics for instrumental variable analysis with

the difference between mortality rates for those aged 75 and over and the mortality rates for

the group aged 55-64 as the dependent variable and all correlates and city and year fixed

effects included on the right-hand side of the equation. As shown in Table 6, the coefficients

of the workers’ compensation instrument for each OAA measures have the expected positive

sign and are statistically significant at the one-percent level in the first-stage OAA equation.

Comparisons of the Kleibergen-Paap (2006, 2007) Wald F-statistic with the critical values for

tests of weak instrument bias developed by Stock and Yogo (2002a, 2002b) reject the

hypothesis of weak instrument bias if we are willing to accept a maximal weak instrument bias

of 10 percent in the estimation for OAA spending per elderly person and for the maximum

monthly benefit and a bias of up to 15 percent for the OAA payments dummy.25

         The second-stage results for the three OAA measures are similar to the results from

the difference-in-difference and difference-in-difference-in difference analysis in that none of

the coefficients are both negative and statistically significant.              The coefficient of the OAA

24
  We explored developing an instrument for the other relief programs variable. Given that the other relief
programs targeted the entire population, it seems unlikely that the relative death rate of those 75 and older would
have been a driving factor in the choice of other relief. We have estimated the model where we developed an
instrument for other relief spending per capita based on an interaction between trends in relief spending per
capita outside the region where the city was located and a measure of long run swing voting activity. When we
instrumented for both OAA assistance and other relief per capita, the diagnostics suggested that our instruments
were not as strong as they are in the reported analysis in Table 6.
25
   We have explored using several other instruments that have been used in other settings, by Fleck (1999) and
Fishback, Haines, and Kantor (2007). The inclusion of other instruments typically reduced the strength of the
first-stage equation a great deal.



                                                       23
payment dummy implies a rise in the difference between the death rates of those aged 75 and

over and those aged 55-64 of 0.32 standard deviations. A one-standard-deviation rise in OAA

spending per capita and the maximum monthly benefit was associated with 0.18 and 0.11

standard deviation increases in the death rate difference, respectively. We cannot reject the

hypothesis of no effect for any of these coefficients.



7. Placing the Results in Context

        The results in Tables 5 and 6 show very little sign that old-age-assistance programs

contributed to a reduction in mortality among the elderly. The results we find here differ in

some ways from those found by a concurrent and independent unpublished analysis

performed by Andreea Balan Cohen (2007) for the period 1934 to 1955 using state-level

aggregates. For the period 1934 to 1955 her OLS results suggest that OAA benefits reduced

elderly mortality by about 3 percent, and her IV results suggest that OAA benefits reduced it

by a statistically significant 22 percent.

        There are some obvious differences between Balan Cohen’s analysis and our analysis.

In contrast with Balan Cohen, our goal is to examine how the presence of means-tested

program would have helped reduce elderly mortality by itself during a period when no OASI-

style federal pensions were being paid. The payments from the nationwide program likely

influenced long-term savings and decisions by relatives and friends about supporting the

elderly that are not easily measured. To avoid these confounding effects, we focus on the

period prior to 1940 when no one was receiving OASI pension payments. We are also

interested in the effectiveness of the state run systems operated in the early 1930s before the

federal matching grants were initiated. As a result our focus is on the period 1929 through




                                               24
1938, while most of Balan Cohen’s analysis focuses on the period from 1935 into the 1950s

after the federal matching grants were in place.

        There is still overlap between the time periods in our analysis and in Balan Cohen’s

analysis; therefore, we examined several potential reasons for the differences in findings. Our

data set centers on large cities; whereas Balan Cohen (2007) uses state level data that combines

information for large cities, smaller towns, and rural areas. In the absence of Old Age

Assistance, it is possible that access to public assistance might have been greater in large cities

than in other areas. The BLS Survey of Almshouses in 1925 showed that the larger alms

houses provided better housing and medical care in the cities than the typically smaller

almshouses in rural areas (Stewart 1925). As a result, OAA laws in the 1930s that made OAA

mandatory might have had stronger effects on mortality rates in areas outside the cities we

studied. We estimated the difference-in-difference-in-difference analyses for the specification

with the presence of the OAA payments using state level mortality data and also using

mortality rates for the portions of each state outside the cities that we studied. Table 7 shows

the results of these analyses using our city data, the state aggregates, and the state aggregates

outside our cities. The coefficient for the cities is positive and 0.09, while the coefficients for

the state aggregates and the states outside the cities are around -0.09. The magnitudes are

roughly 1 percent of the mean value for the difference in mortality between people ages 75

and older and those ages 55-64, and are about 0.11 to 0.13 standard deviations. As a result,

the coefficients suggest a more negative effect of OAA in rural areas than in our cities, but the

standard errors are large enough that we cannot reject the hypothesis that OAA had no effect

in the rural areas.

        Our sense is that the differences arise because of changes in the nature of the OAA

programs and medical care between the 1930s and the later years. The negative effect that



                                                25
Balan Cohen (2007, Tables 2 and 3) finds for the overall mortality regressions for the period

1934-1955 comes from combining two periods that may have had different structures. We

consider two possible factors that might account for the greater success of OAA in reducing

mortality after 1938 than before that year: changes in the nature of medical care and a rise in

generosity of the programs combined with a nonlinear effect of OAA.

        The impact of better quality of medical care might well have been a significant factor.

Even as late as the 1930s medical care in hospitals was rudimentary relative to the advances

that followed. Melissa Thomasson and Jaret Treber (2008), for example, find that maternal

mortality was actually slightly higher in areas with hospitals until sulfa drugs were introduced in

the mid-1930s. Differences in medical care also fit Balan Cohen’s (2007, Table 7) findings

when she examines the effects of OAA on infectious disease mortality rates before and after

the development of antibiotics. The coefficients for OAA are all positive and statistically

insignificant for the period 1934-1943. For the period 1944 to 1955 the coefficients are all

negative and statistically significant and larger in magnitude than in her examination of overall

mortality for the period 1934 to 1955. Thus, means-tested aid to the elderly might well have

had relatively little impact on elderly mortality until after the development of penicillin, other

antibiotics, and additional medical techniques.

        A second possible difference might arise if OAA did not have much of an effect on

death rates until it raised an elderly person’s income beyond a threshold level. We examined

this issue in two ways. First, we compared the OAA monthly maximums in 1934, 1938 and

1949 after adjusting for inflation with the CPI (1967=1).      We focus on monthly maximum

payments because they appeared to be a target level of monthly income that states sought to

help the elderly try to reach. By 1949 several states, including Colorado, Connecticut, and

Oklahoma no longer had maximum payments and they were making average payments per



                                                  26
recipient ranging from $73 to $94 in 1967 dollars.                  California had the highest binding

maximum at $105. That inflation-adjusted maximum was not too much different from those

in 1938 and 1934 in our sample of cities. Colorado’s maximum in 1938 in 1967 dollars was

$106.6 and Massachusetts, New York, Kansas, and Louisiana had maximums of $95. In 1935

New York and Massachusetts had maximums of around $97.                               The difference in the

distribution of inflation-adjusted OAA maximums comes more in the bottom tail, as the

lowest payments in OAA states are much lower in the 1930s than in the 1940s.26

         As a second check of the threshold effect, we have re-estimated the analysis by

replacing the dummy for the presence of OAA payments with a dummy variable that takes a

value of one when the monthly maximum was $40 or above or there was no maximum; the

value is zero when the maximum was below $40 in contemporary dollars. If there were a

threshold effect, we would expect a much stronger effect with the new dummy variable. The

results are conflicting because the difference-in-difference-in-difference coefficient is negative

at -0.41 and statistically significant, while the IV difference-in-difference-in-difference

coefficient is a positive 0.35 and statistically insignificant.           Based on the similarities in the

upper portion of the distributions of benefits and these regression results, we cannot say

definitively that the difference in results between our work here and Balan Cohen’s findings

for the 1940s and 1950s are being driven by nonlinear threshold effects. Our sense is that the

differences are being driven by improved quality of medical care that could be purchased with

the OAA benefits when the elderly were living on their own.



8. Were There Offsetting Effects for Different Causes of Death?



26The values were calculated from information in Berman (1947, 1949), Berman and Haskell (1945), and the
information from the data set. The deflator is from U.S. Bureau of the Census (1975, series E-135, pp. 210-11.


                                                      27
       The absence of a statistically significant reduction in mortality associated with OAA

may hide several conflicting interactions created by the new programs. Absence of a formal

program for means-tested OAA in a state in the 1930s did not imply that the impoverished

elderly received no support at that time.   Instead, the elderly were just one of many groups

receiving benefits from the existing public assistance programs. The shift to OAA programs

might not have led to much of a change in per capita welfare benefits available for the elderly.

It is not clear that any more elderly were eligible under the new program who had not been

eligible for the various forms of aid under the old program. In fact, the elderly might have

preferred the types of direct relief offered under the Federal Emergency Relief Administration

from 1933 through 1935 as the states were very careful in the way they defined eligibility for

OAA. Many states required that the recipients of benefits had no family members available to

support them. Further, the elderly with low incomes who owned houses were required by

most states to sign over ownership of the home or sign a lien on the home to become eligible

for benefits. In essence, the OAA served as a loan from the government against the value of

the home when the recipient died. The programs benefited the elderly in that they were

receiving a government subsidized loan that might not have been available in private credit

markets. Moreover, the positive benefits might have been spread out to other age categories

whose financial burden of taking care of the elderly was diminished.

       The legislative acts typically claimed that a primary purpose of the law was to allow the

elderly freedom to live on their own and not be lumped in with the rest of the poor in the

almshouse programs. Mortality for the elderly was likely to fall if the elderly were able to

move away from almshouses with low quality sanitary conditions and where the spread of

disease was more likely. On the other hand, when OAA freed the elderly poor to live alone,

they may have lost a feeling of connectedness to others in the community. Snyder and Evans



                                              28
(2006) found social isolation to be an important factor adversely affecting the mortality rates

for the elderly in the modern era. Further, the move away from almshouses might have

reduced access to medical care. If they lived in a poorer district, their access to sanitation and

water treatment facilities might not have been as good, which might have led to an offsetting

increase in the death rate.

        To test for a rise in deaths related to depression and a reduction of deaths from

contagious diseases, we estimated the models for suicide rates and for death rates from

diseases that potentially were contagious—infectious diseases like typhoid and paratyphoid

fever, measles, scarlet fever, whooping cough, diphtheria, meningitis, some forms of

tuberculosis and syphilis; another grouping of pneumonia and influenza; and another grouping

of diarrhea and entiritis. The coefficients in Table 9 for the OAA variables in nearly all of the

suicide specifications are negative although not statistically significant, which is inconsistent

with the hypothesis that the move by the poor elderly from almshouses to living alone was

leading to greater depression and higher suicide rates. The estimates for specific death causes

related to contagious diseases are also inconsistent with the hypothesis that the move away

from almshouses reduced death rates due to contagious diseases. The difference-in-difference

and the difference-in-difference-in-difference coefficients are all negative, but none are

statistically significant. Meanwhile, the IV difference-in-difference-in-difference coefficients

are all positive. We also see no consistent pattern of negative and statistically significant

coefficients in the estimates for influenza and pneumonia or for diarrhea and enteritis. When

comparing all of the results for specific causes of death, it does NOT appear that the OAA

movement to allow the elderly to live on their own outside of almshouses led to a rise in

deaths due to depression that was offset by a decline in deaths from contagious diseases.




                                                 29
9. Conclusion

          Simple correlations suggest that the means-tested OAA programs introduced by the

states in the 1920s and 1930s were associated with lower mortality rates for the elderly. Given

the emphasis on reporting the equivalent of simple correlations by public agencies at the time,

OAA assistance could easily have been portrayed as a success in its early years. Unfortunately,

the heart-warming story is not supported by more rigorous examination of the data for cities

during the period 1929 through 1938. The results from difference-in-difference, difference-in-

difference-in-difference and IV difference-in-difference-in-difference analysis show no

statistically significant negative relationship between OAA and elderly mortality.

          We had speculated that the OAA program goal of allowing the elderly to live on their

own rather than in almshouses had led to offsetting changes in death rates from specific

causes.    By moving out of almshouses the elderly might have experienced less exposure to

contagious diseases but by living alone they might have become isolated and more depressed

with less access to medical care. Estimations with suicide rates were inconsistent with the

view that deaths due to depression had risen, while estimations with deaths from contagious

diseases were inconsistent with the view that deaths from contagious diseases had fallen. Our

sense is that the move to OAA was largely an administrative move that did not do much to

increase the resources for the elderly poor relative to the resources they received as

participants in relief programs targeted at the entire population.

          There may have been important ties between the poverty program for the elderly and

access to new medical technologies that prolonged life. We use similar analytical techniques to

those used by Finkelstein and McKnight (2005) for Medicare in the 1960s and Balan Cohen

(2007) for OAA in the 1940s and 1950s. When the stream of work is considered in total, it

suggests the following time path for the impact of old-age programs. We find statistically



                                                30
insignificant effects of OAA on mortality in the 1930s, possibly because OAA in the 1930s

was really more an administrative change than a true change in access to relief benefits for the

elderly poor. This was also a period when medical care was relatively rudimentary. Balan

Cohen (2007) finds that OAA benefits reduce mortality in the 1940s and 1950s when OAA

payments could be used to make use of more effective medical techniques than those available

in the 1930s.         Although medical practice continued to improve in quality in the 1960s,

Finkelstein and McKnight find no effect of the introduction of Medicare coverage of

hospitalization and availability of subsidized health insurance for other procedures.27 The lack

of a Medicare effect on mortality may be a result of differences in the targeting of benefits.

Medicare is a universal insurance program for the entire elderly population, while OAA is a

means tested program focused on the poor elderly. Even if mortality did not fall with the

introduction of Medicare, there were other benefits to the elderly population. Finkelstein and

McKnight (2005) find that people in the upper fourth of the medical spending distribution

experienced a decline of forty percent in their out-of-pocket costs.

            One question remains. We suggest that OAA programs had little effect on elderly

mortality in the 1930s because the OAA programs were an administrative shift that did not

necessary increase the amount of benefits available to the elderly at risk of dying. If it was just

an administrative shift, why do scholars like Friedberg (1999), Costa (1999), and Parsons

(1991) find that higher OAA benefits in the 1940s allowed more women to live separately and

men to reduce their labor participation.                 The OAA administrative shift was specifically

designed to allow the poor elderly to live alone more readily than they could under the prior

regime or through the New Deal relief programs in the 1930s. Once the extra costs of living

alone are accounted for, the disposable income available to the poor elderly women receiving


27   For a literature review on the impact of Medicare, see Levy, Meltzer (2001).


                                                          31
OAA might have been no different than if they were receiving smaller benefits while living in

an almshouse or with a relative. Meanwhile, OAA gave elderly men who owned their own

homes a new opportunity to live at home without working. OAA allowed the men to

essentially take out a “loan” against the value of their home. They could obtain OAA benefits

in return for giving the state a lien against (or ownership of) their home. They could stop

working and their heirs would then receive the residual value of the home left over after the

value of the stream of OAA benefits was repaid to the state. Since the elderly men who chose

not to work even though they were able would be the group least likely to be at risk of

mortality, the administrative shift could lead to a reduction of labor supply without a decline in

mortality.




                                               32
                                         Appendix I

                                Construction of the Data

          The sample consists of 75 cities for which annual data were available on all forms of
relief spending from 1929 to 1938 and age-specific mortality information from 1922 to 1938.
Data for relief spending of all types comes from Baird (1942) and it was reported either at the
city level or at the county level. The information on the timing of passage of Old Age
Assistance and the features of the laws come from Fishback and Thomasson (2006, p. 2-709),
from copies of the original laws made from each state’s legislative statutes, and from
information provided by Dora Costa for 1940. The mortality rates were constructed from
annual information on the number of deaths in each age group published by the U.S. Bureau
of the Census (1925; 1926; 1927 a,b; 1929 a,b; 1930; 1932; 1934; 1935 a,b; 1936 a,b; 1937;
1938; 1939; 1940). The mortality rates were calculated at the city level based on the following
formulas:
Ma,i,t = (Da,i,t / Pa,i,t )*100
where:
Ma,i,t = estimated mortality rate for population of age a, in city i, year t
Da,i,t = deaths of people of age a, in city i, year t
Pa,i,t = estimated population of age a, in city i, year t
Estimated population was determined using the following formula:
Pa,i,t = %Ca,i,t * Pi,t
where:
%Ca,i,t = percentage of city i’s population of age a, in year t
Pi,t= city total population in year t
%Ca,i,t was determined through linear interpolation using data at the city level collected by
Haines from the 1920 and 1930 population census and at the county level by Gardner and
Cohen for 1940 from the population census. Since we did not have information about the age
distribution for cities in 1940 we used the age distribution from the counties in which the cities
were located to obtain an estimate of the age group’s share of the population.
          For 16 cities in 1920 we needed to estimate a more detailed age distribution (55-64, 65
years old and older and over 75 years old) than the age distribution reported in the original
source (population 45-64 years old and over 65 years old). For this, we interpolated the shares
of the respective age groups as they were in those cities in 1930. For example, if age 75 and
older represented 60 percent of the people age 65 and over in 1930, we applied that share to
the population 65 and older in 1920 to determine the population age 75 and older in 1920 in
that particular city.
          We constructed mortality rates at the state level in the same way that we constructed
the city mortality rates and from the same sources. We also followed the same procedures
when we calculated the mortality rates for the areas of the states not included as part of our 75
cities.
          In some specifications we incorporated city-specific time trends from the 1920s. We
based these on linear regressions of the age-specific mortality rate on time over the earlier
period for each city. The mortality rates for the 1920s were also constructed using the same
procedure as above.
          We also collected data on other correlates from a variety of sources. Information on
the city population, the percentage illiterate, the percentage foreign born, and the percentage


                                               33
black from the U.S. Bureau of the Census Population Censuses of 1920, 1930, and 1940
comes from the ICPSR file number 0003 as amended and corrected by Michael Haines in
ICPSR file number 2896. The values for non-census years are linear interpolations between
1920, 1930 and 1940. The census reported illiteracy for people aged 10 and above in 1930 and
then reported the number of years of school completed for people aged 25 and up in 1940.
For 1930 we used the illiteracy rate for people aged 10 and above. We then estimated illiteracy
rates for 1940 for people aged 25 and over. We used 1947 information from the U.S. Bureau
of the Census (1948, 7) to find the number of people over 24 years old with no schooling and
those with 1 to 4 years of schooling. The illiteracy rate in 1947 for persons with no schooling
was 78.2 percent for male and 80.72 percent for females. The illiteracy rate for 1-4 years of
schooling was 22.5 percent for males and 16.68 percent for females. We assumed those with
more than 5 years of schooling were all literate. U.S. Bureau of the Census, “Illiteracy in the
United States, October 1947,” Current Population Reports: Population Characteristics,
September 22, 1948. Series P-20 no. 20.
         The retail sales information for 1929 and 1939 used to construct the economic activity
measure retail sales per capita for the counties in which the cities were located came from
ICPSR file number 0003, as amended and corrected by Michael Haines in ICPSR 2896 . Retail
sales in 1933 and 1935 are from U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Foreign and
Domestic Commerce (1936, 1939). The county population estimates used to create the per
capita measure was based on straight-line interpolations between 1920, 1930, and 1940 data
from the amended ICPSR file 0003. We interpolated values of per capita retail sales in the
intervening years using estimates of state personal income from the U.S. Bureau of Economic
Analysis (1989). For each year between 1930 and 1940, we divided state personal income by
an estimate of state population. Then to interpolate per capita retail sales between the
benchmark years of 1929, 1933, 1935, and 1939, we used a formula like the one below for
1931:
         R31 = S31 * (0.5 * R29 / S29 + 0.5 * R33/S33),
where Rt is per capita retail sales in year t for the county in which the city was located and St is
per capita state personal income in year t. Both the per capita state income and per capita
retail sales are adjusted for inflation using the CPI where 1967=100. For more specifics see
below.
         Information on the number of federal individual income tax returns filed in county for
1929 is from U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce
(1932); 1930, 1933, 1937, and 1938 from US Bureau of Internal Revenue (1932, 1935, 1939,
and 1940, respectively); 1931, 1932, 1935, and 1936 from Rand McNally (1934, 1935, 1938,
and 1939, respectively); 1934 from U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Foreign and
Domestic Commerce (1939).
         Information on the number of hospital beds in the city was made available to us by
Melissa Thomasson and Jaret Treber from their annual sample of hospitals in the United
States that they used in their 2008 paper. This information was compiled by the American
Medical Association (various years between 1930 and 1943).
         Price Fishback created an urban cost-of-living index that can be used to make cross-
sectional and time series comparisons in the cost of purchasing the same broad basket of
goods each year over the period from 1914 through 1939 for up to 64 cities. The basic index
starts with the Works Progress Administrations’s comparison of the costs of “a uniform level
of living” in 59 cities across the United States “at a given time and how its cost compared
from one city to another.” The WPA program constructed quantity budgets at two standards
of living for a 4-person manual worker’s household: “basic maintenance” and “emergency”.


                                                34
The study constructed an identical budget across the cities with certain adjustments for fuel,
ice and transportation based on climate and other local conditions. The budget was divided
into food, housing, fuel and light, clothing, furniture, and miscellaneous items. The Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS) than helped WPA workers to obtain the prices used to compare the
budgets across cities. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 1940, p. 11; Works Progress
Administration (1937, pp. ix-xxvi.) The actual numbers are found in Works Progress
Administration (1937, pp. 158-175). For 32 cities, the values of spending from the WPA were
adjusted to earlier and later years by using the Urban-CPI for each city. The U.S. Bureau of
Labor Statistics consistently reported these figures for all 32 cities in the 1910s, 1920s, and
1930s using the CPIS for five categories of spending--food, housing, fuel and light, clothing,
furniture, and miscellaneous items—that matched well with the five categories reported by the
WPA for March 1935 and then summing to get a total. For a number of the other cities in the
sample, the BLS reported a food CPI prices and we assumed that the time paths followed for
other portions of the budget were similar to those for similar cities. A detailed description is
available from Price Fishback.
        Information on workers’ compensation was collected from Fishback and Kantor
(2000) and is available at Price Fishback’s website at the University of Arizona
(http://econ.arizona.edu/faculty/Fishback.aspx) under “Datasets from Published Research
Projects.” See the section on workers’ compensation. Once this paper is accepted for
publication, the data set used in the study will also be made available at the website.




                                              35
                                          Appendix II.

 Intepreting the Coefficients as Measures of the Impact of OAA on the Death Rates of
                                 the Recipients of OAA.

        The analysis and interpretations in the text focus on the impact of the OAA programs
on the death rate of all of the elderly, recipients and non-recipients. Under certain
assumptions the coefficient results can be used to say more about the impact of the OAA
programs on the deaths of the recipients. The central data problem for evaluating the impact
of the OAA policy on the people receiving OAA benefits is the lack of information on the
number of deaths of people who received OAA benefits. We only know the total number of
deaths of the people in the age group (including recipients and non recipients). Therefore, we
have a problem with aggregation bias in the dependent variable and we estimate the
relationship between the death rate for all elderly and total OAA payments per elderly person.
In other words, we estimate

(DR + DN)/(R+N) = c + β1 B/(R+N) + e                                            1)

Where
DR = deaths among the elderly population who receive OAA benefits.
DN = deaths of the non-recipient elderly population.
R = the number of elderly who receive OAA benefits.
N = the number of elderly nonrecipients.
R + N =the total elderly population.
B = total OAA benefits paid to the elderly, which equals total benefits paid to the recipients
of OAA.
c = a constant term
 e = a stochastic error term.

Throughout the discussion, we suppress the state and time subscripts to reduce clutter. To
make the process simpler, we multiply through Equation 1) by (R+N) to obtain

(DR + DN) = c (R+N) + β1 B + e (R+N).                                            2)

This is equivalent to estimating the number of elderly deaths as a function of total OAA
benefits paid, holding constant the size of the elderly population. We can learn what the
coefficient (β1) on total OAA benefits (B) means by taking the derivative of equation 2) with
respect to B.

dDR/dB + dDN/dB = c (dR/dB+dN/dB) + β1+ e (dR/dB+dN/dB)                               3).

Within the city population, if a total benefit increase would be associated with a rise in
recipients that is exactly offset by a decline in the number of nonrecipients, then

(dR/dB+dN/dB) =0.

Changes in OAA spending would not have influenced the overall size of the elderly
population in the denominator if a rise (fall) in the recipient elderly population was exactly


                                                36
offset by a fall (rise) in the nonrecipient elderly population. A rise in OAA spending at the
margin likely would not have led to an in-migration of recipients because the rigorous rules for
time as a resident would have blocked movement across state lines and within the state the
benefit rates and eligibility standards were determined by the same state laws. OAA spending
was such a small share of the tax burden that we do not believe that a change at the margin
would have generated out-migration by elderly nonrecipients.28 The overall population
potentially could rise if an additional OAA dollar reduced the number of deaths in the
recipient population over the course of the year. One way to eliminate the impact of the
population size is to use the population at the start of the time period as the denominator. We
have estimated the models using either an interpolated measure of the population between the
census years or the 1930 population as the denominator. The qualitative results show little
sign of OAA being associated with a reduction in elderly death rates.

If (dR/dB+dN/dB) =0.

Then

dDR/dB + dDN/dB = β1 .                                                                                4)

If changes in benefits had no effect on the deaths of nonrecipients, dDN/dB=0,
the coefficient of the regression is an estimate of the impact of a change in total OAA benefits
on the number of deaths of recipients.

dDR/dB = β1 .                                                                                        5)

To the extent that a rise in total benefits lowered the deaths in the nonrecipient population,
say by reducing infectious diseases, dDN/dB < 0, and the coefficient we estimate will be more
negative than the effect of the death benefits on the recipients.


Can the Estimated Coefficient Be Interpreted As the Effect of Benefits per OAA
Recipient on Death Rates of Recipients?

Another question that could be asked is: What was the effect of an increase in the typical
benefit paid per recipient on the death rates of recipients of OAA? If we actually did have
information about the number of recipients and the number of deaths among recipients, we
would estimate the death rate of the recipient elderly as a function of the Benefits per eligible
elderly person.

dR = a + γ b + u,                                                                                          6)
         28
             The tax burden of OAA on the elderly would have been very light because the tax burden was spread
across all ages. Persons over 65 accounted for 5 percent of the population in 1930. Of that group assume a high
figure of 20 percent on relief, so 1 percent of the population would have been elderly on relief. The typical OAA
payment amounted to about $300 per year but a significant share of that would eventually come back from liens
on houses, leaving $100 per recipient per year to come from taxes. This comes to $1 per taxpayer per year. A
one dollar change in average benefits per year would have raised the cost to the typical elderly taxpayer by 1 cent,
which seems well below the costs of shifting states to avoid the burden.



                                                        37
where

dR = DR/R = death rate of recipients.
b = B/R = OAA benefits per recipient.

Take the derivative of DR with respect to B.

ddR/db = γ.                                                                           7)

In actuality, we estimate β1 as described in equation 1)

(DR + DN)/(R+N) = c + β1 b R/(R+N) + e                                                 8)

Now we manipulate the equation to put it into death rates for recipients and nonrecipients
After rearranging on the left side

DR /(R+N) + DN/(R+N) = c + β1 b R/(R+N) + e                                    9)

Multiply some of the terms by 1 = R/R = N/N

(DR/R)*R/(R+N) + DN/N*N/(R+N) = c + β1 bR/(R+N) + e                                  10)

Let dR = DR/R and dN= DN/N be the death rates for recipients and nonrecipients.

dR*R/(R+N) + dN*N/(R+N) = c + β1 b R/(R+N) + e.
11)

let sR = R/(R+N) = number of recipients as share of elderly.

dR* sR + dN (1- sR) = c + β1 b sR + e.                                               12)

Differentiate with respect to b, the OAA payments per recipient,

ddR/db sR + dsR/db dR + ddN/db - ddN/db sR - dsR/db dN = β1 sR + β1 b dsR/db 20).

Rearrange terms,

ddR/db sR + dsR/db (dR - dN) +d dN/db (1- sR) = β1 sR + β1 b dsR/db                  13)

Substitute from equation 7), so that we can see the relationship between γ and β1.

sR γ + (dsR/db) (dR - dN) +(ddN/db) (1- sR) = β1 (sR + b dsR/db)                      14)

Divide through by (sR + b dsR/db) and rearrange terms

β1 = γ sR/(sR + b dsR/db) + [(dsR/db) (dR - dN) +(ddN/db) (1- sR)]/ (sR + b dsR/db)        15)



                                               38
If the number of recipients as a share of the elderly population is not influenced by the average
payment, then dsR/db=0, and

β1 = γ + [(ddN/db) (1- sR)]/ (sR )                                            16)

If non recipients experience no impact on death rates from the benefits, then ddN/db = 0.

β1 = γ                                                                                  17)

Therefore, the coefficient in the equation that we estimated will be the same as the effect of
the benefit payments per recipient on the death rates of the recipients if the average benefit
payments do not affect the death rates of the non-recipients and the average benefit payment
has no causal effect on the number of recipients as a share of the elderly population.

         There are two potential conflicting effects of OAA payments per recipient on the
recipient share. During the Depression relief budgets were tight enough that administrators
sometimes cut relief payments per person when the number of applicants rose so that they
could help more households. On the other hand, the recipient share might have risen in
response to a rise in benefits per recipient to the extent that some elderly reduced their
attempts to earn income to obtain the more lucrative benefits. The OAA administrations tried
to restrict this type of “moral hazard” in several ways. Of the 29 states in the sample listed in
Table 2, 23 required that the elderly could only receive benefits if they did not have relatives
available to care for them. For the home-owning elderly, 21 of the 29 states expected to be
able to either apply a lien against the value of the home or might require a transfer of the
property to cover the cost of the benefits, making OAA essentially a loan against the value of
the home.
         To the extent that the states stood firm on these rules, the perverse anti-work
incentives would have been confined to the share of the elderly population that was renting
with a spouse absent and not living with relatives. For this group the maximum OAA benefits
per month in 1939 would have been $30 per month in 17 of the 29 states in Table 1, lower in
five, higher in three. There were no maximums in four. We used the IPUMS data for 1940 to
get a sense of the annual wage and salary incomes and typical rents paid by men and women
aged 60-64 who were living without spouses as household heads and renting in cities. We
chose ages 60-64 to get a sense of income for people who were nearing eligibility but whose
decisions were not yet affected by OAA. The average annual wage and salary earnings for
men and women in this group working 40 or more weeks per year was $1181 and $909,
respectively. The average monthly rents paid by these men and women were in the
neighborhood of $25 to $33, or roughly $300 to $400 per year. For the elderly able to work
full time, the move to OAA would have lowered their income in most states from $900-$1200
to $360, of which a large share would have been consumed by rents. The larger share
consumed by rents would have been true even if they paid rents of only $15 to $20 per month.
         OAA was more attractive to the people in the group working less than 40 weeks per
year and struggling to make ends meet. Men and women aged 60-64, living with no spouse
present, renting in cities, and working less than 40 weeks per year in regular employment
earned an average of $480 and $374, respectively. Men and women in the same category but
working less than 40 hours per week on WPA projects earned an average of $360 and $326,
respectively. These groups were more likely to reduce time worked to pick up marginal OAA
dollars because the loss of a dollar of work income would have been offset by an extra dollar


                                               39
of OAA payments once the person was below the OAA maximum benefit. Given the
maximum monthly benefit of $30 in most states, the key annual cutoff was an income of $360
for the year. Using the IPUMS sample weights, we estimate that there were about 2200
women and 1800 men in cities renting without spouses present who were earning between
$360 and $450 per year in 1940. This would account for about 0.3 percent of the population
aged 60-64 or about 3 percent of the likely population on OAA relief once they hit age 65.
This likely overestimates the extent of true moral hazard in this setting because these people
were among the potential targets of OAA spending as they were struggling to reach the $360
income level and could easily fall below due to relatively small mishaps.

Interpreting the OAA Presence of Payments and Maximum Benefit Coefficients as
Measures of Their Effect on the Death Rate of OAA Recipients.

As we discuss in the text, the maximum benefit really serves more as a minimum target level of
income for people living on their own. In a state with a maximum benefit of $30, the
recipients who have $15 a month in income would receive $15 in OAA benefits. Someone
with no income would receive $30 in monthly OAA benefits.

Given the absence of information about deaths among the recipients of OAA, we can estimate
the death rate for all elderly as a function of the maximum monthly benefit.

(DR + DN)/(R+N) = c + β1 MB + e                                                    18)

Where MB is the Maximum Monthly benefit

There is no easy conversion of β1 into a measure of the impact of the maximum monthly
benefit on the death rate of the recipients of OAA.

As we did in equations 9-14, we can rearrange terms to convert equation 18 to

dR sR + dN (1-sR) = c + β1 MB + e                                                  19)

where dR is recipient deaths per recipient and sR is the share of recipients among the elderly.
After differentiating equation 19) with respect to MB, the equation becomes

ddR/dMB sR + (dR – dN) dsR/dMB + ddN/dMB (1-sR) = β1                               20)

If the nonrecipient death rate is unaffected by the maximum benefit (ddN/dMB= 0) and the
number of recipients as a share of the elderly is unaffected by the maximum benefit
(dsR/dMB=0), then

β1 = ddR/dMB sR or β1/sR = ddR/dMB.                                                21)

Therefore, the β1 coefficient as an estimate of the effect of the maximum benefit on the death
rate of elderly recipients varies with the recipient share sR, which varies a great deal itself across
time and place.




                                                 40
The same issue arises if we use the OAA dummy variable for the presence of an OAA
program. Therefore, the cleanest estimation for interpretive purposes is to estimate the
relationship between the death rate of the elderly as a function of the OAA payments per
elderly person.




                                             41
Figure 1.
         Evolution of mortality rates for people 55-64 years old with trend
 3.3

 3.2
                                                                              Mortality
 3.1                                                                          rates for
                                                                              people 55-64
   3                                                                          years old

 2.9
                                                                              Trend based
 2.8                                                                          on same
                                                                              mortality
 2.7                                                                          rates in
                                                                              period 1922-
 2.6                                                                          1928
 2.5
      22

      23

      24

      25

      26

      27

      28

      29

      30

      31

      32

      33

      34

      35

      36

      37

      38
   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19
       Evolution of mortality rates for people 65 years old and older with trend

 8.8
 8.6                                                                               Mortality
                                                                                   rates for
 8.4
                                                                                   people 65
 8.2                                                                               years old and
   8                                                                               older
 7.8
 7.6                                                                               Trend based
 7.4                                                                               on same
 7.2                                                                               mortality
                                                                                   rates in
   7
                                                                                   period 1922-
                                                                                   1928
      22

      23

      24

      25

      26

      27

      28

      29

      30

      31

      32

      33

      34

      35

      36

      37

      38
   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19




            Evolution of mortality rates for people 75 years old and older with trend
  16

  15                                                                                     Mortality
                                                                                         rates for
  14                                                                                     people 75
                                                                                         years old
  13                                                                                     and older

  12                                                                                     Trend based
                                                                                         on same
  11                                                                                     mortality
                                                                                         rates in
  10                                                                                     period 1922-
                                                                                         1928
     22

     23

     24

     25

     26

     27

     28

     29

     30

     31

     32

     33

     34

     35

     36

     37

     38
  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19

  19




Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census (1925, 1926, 1927a, 1927b,
1929a, 1929b, 1930, 1932, 1934, 1935a, 1935b, 1936a, 1936b, 1937, 1938, 1939, 1940).
Mortality rates are deaths per 100 people in the age group.
Note: 17 cities from the sample were not taken into account because we did not have mortality
data for each year in the period 1922-1938. Trend is based on 1922-1928 period.



                                                      42
Figure 2.

                     Difference between average mortality rates
            for people 65 years old and older and people 55-64 years old
                          in cities with and without OAA law

  5.1
    5
  4.9
  4.8
                                                                                without OAA
  4.7
                                                                                with OAA
  4.6
  4.5
  4.4
  4.3
            1931        1932          1933         1934         1935


Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census (1935a, 1935b, 1936a, 1936b, 1937)




                                             43
Table 1. Timeline of Adoptions and Amendments for OAA Laws in States Where Cities in Our Sample Are Located

 State              1929       1930        1931       1932       1933       1934        1935            1936           1937           1938            1939-40
 Alabama            No Law                                                                              A, 65, $30, F
 California         No Law A, 70, $30                                                                   65, F          $35
 Colorado           A(1927), 70, $30                  65                                                F              $45
 Connecticut        No Law                                                              A, 65, $30      F                                             $39
 Delaware           No Law                 A, 65, $25                                                   F
 Florida            No Law                                                              A, 65, $30                     F
 Georgia            No Law                                                                                             A, 65, $30     F
 Iowa               No Law                                                  A, 65, $25                  F
 Illinois           No Law                                                                              A, 65, $30     F
 Indiana            No Law                                                  A, 70, $15                  $30, F                                        65
 Kansas             No Law                                                                                             A, 65, $No Max, F
 Kentucky           A(1926), 70, $21                                                                                   65, $15, F
 Louisiana          No Law                                                                              A, 65, No Max, F
 Massachusetts No Law                      A, 70, No Max                                                65, F
 Michigan           No Law                                                  A, 70, $30                  65, F
 Minnesota          A, 70, $30                                                                          65, F
 Missouri           No Law                                                              A, 70, $30      F                                             65
 Nebraska           No Law                                       A, 65, $20                             F
 New Jersey         No Law                            A, 70, $30                                        65, F                                         $40
 New York           No Law                 A, 70, No Max                                                F              65
 Ohio               No Law                                                  A, 65, $25                  $30, F
 Oklahoma           No Law                                                                              A, 65, $30, F
 Oregon             No Law                                                  A, 70, $30                  F                             65
 Pennsylvania       No Law                                                  A, 70, $30                                 F                              65
 Rhode Island       No Law                                                              A, 65, $30      F
 Tennessee          No Law                                                                                             A, 65, $25     F
 Utah               A, 65, $25                                                                          F                             $30
 Virginia           No Law                                                                                                            A, 65, $20      F
 Washington         No Law                                       A, 65, $30                             F
 Wisconsin          A(1925), 70, $30                                                                    65, F
Source: statutes and Social Security Yearbook 1939. Information on timing of adoption in the remaining states is in Appendix Table 1.
Note: “A” means the OAA law was adopted and is in effect; “A(1927)” means that the law is in effect since 1927; “70” or “65” denotes the minimum age
required to be eligible for OAA payments; “$35” signifies the maximum monthly benefit (No max means no maximum monthly benefit was specified); “F”
means that the state started to get subsidies from the federal government. If a change in legislation took effect before the mid of the year, we considered the
law changed during that year, otherwise the change was assigned for the next year.

                                                                               44
                                                                             Table 2.
                                                    Details about OAA Legislation in Year States First Passed Law




                                          Must
                                        Have No                    May
         Min.      Min.       Min.      Relatives                Require    Can Not     Wealth or      Annual                             Avg.
        Years      Years      Years     Available                Transfer   Receive      Property      Income                   Max.     Monthly                 State
         U.S.      State     County      to Care      Lien on       of        Other     Eligibility   Eligibility    Max.       Total    Pension,               Suppo    Share of Elderly
State   Citizen   Resident   Resident   For Them      Property   Property   State Aid      Cap           Cap        Benefit   Income4)    1934      Mandatory      rt    Enrolled 19345
AL      UorC         1          1         Yes           Yes        Yes         No           no           360          30        ---        na         Yes        Yes           na
CA        15        15          1         Yes           No         Yes         No         3000            no          ---       30        21.16       Yes        No            9.2
CO        15        15         15         Yes           No         Yes        Yes         3000            no          ---       30        8.59         No        No           14.1
DE        15         5          0         Yes           No         No         Yes           no            no          ---       25        9.79        Yes        Yes           9.7
 FL     UorC        10          1          No           No         No         Yes          400            no          30        ---        na         Yes        Yes           na
GA        0          1          0          No           Yes        No          No           no            no          ---       30         na         Yes        Yes           na
 IA       15        10          2         Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes           no           365          ---       25        13.5        Yes        Yes           1.6
 IL     UorC        10          1          No           Yes        No          No         5000           260          30        ---        na         Yes        Yes           na
 IN       15        15         15         Yes           Yes        Yes         No         1000            no          ---       15        6.13        Yes        Yes          16.9
                                                                                                              3)
KS        0          1          0          No           Yes        No         Yes           no           no           no        no         na         Yes        Yes           na
KY        15        10         10         Yes           Yes        No          No         2500           400          21        ---        na          No        No           none
LA        0          5        UorC        Yes           No         Yes        Yes           no           no3)         no        no         na         Yes        Yes           na
MA        20        20          0          No           No         No          No           no            no          no        no        24.35       Yes        Yes          12.8
MI        15        10          0         Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes         3000           365          ---       30        9.59        Yes        Yes           1.8
MN        15        15         15         Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes         3000            no          ---       30        13.2         No        No            2.8
                                                                                                              3)
MO      UorC         1          0         Yes           No         No         Yes         1500           no           ---       30         na         Yes        Yes           na
NE        15        15          0         Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes           no           300          20        ---        na         Yes        Yes           na
 NJ     UorC        15          1         Yes           No         Yes        Yes         3000            no          30        ---        na         Yes        Yes           9.4
NY      UorC        10          1         Yes           No         No          No           no            no          no        no        22.16       Yes        Yes          13.7
OH        15        15          1         Yes           No         Yes         No         3000           300          ---       25        13.99       Yes        Yes           5.8
OK      UorC        15          0          No           No         No          No         2000           350          15        ---        na         Yes        Yes           na
OR        15        15          2         Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes         3000            no          ---       35         na         Yes        No            na
PA        15        15          0         Yes           No         No         Yes           no            no          30        ---        na         Yes        Yes           na


                                                                                         45
RI      UorC          5       UorC      Yes        Yes       No        No       5000        no         ---     30        na        Yes       Yes              na
                                                                                                 3)
TN       0            1           0      No        Yes       No        No        no         no         ---     25        na        Yes       Yes              na
UT       15          15           5     Yes        Yes       No       Yes        no         300       25        ---     8.56       Yes       No               4.1
VA       0            1           0     Yes        Yes       No        Yes       no         no         ---     20        na        Yes       Yes              na
WA       15          15           5     Yes        Yes       Yes      Yes        no         360       30        ---      na        Yes       No               2.2
WI       15          15           15    Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes      3000        no         ---     30      16.75       No        No               1.8



             Source: State statutes in year of first passage. Average benefits in 1934 and Share of Elderly Enrolled are from Old Age Security Staff Report
             (1935, Exhibit B).



     Notes for Table 2:
        1. In columns “Minimum Years U.S. Citizen”, “Minimum Years State Resident” and “Minimum Years County Resident” 0 means no
            requirements, UorC means the applicant needed to be a US citizen and/or a county resident at the date of the application.
        2. “Yes” in column “Lien on Property” means that a lien was established for the property of the applicant and that after she died, the
            benefits granted were deducted from the value of the real estate, in many cases with an interest rate of 3-6 percent. However, the estate
            of the deceased was not settled until the surviving spouse died or ceased to occupy the estate. For states where column “May Require
            Transfer of Property” indicates “Yes”, the commission in charge with determining and approving OAA benefits had the choice of
            requiring absolute conveyance of all or part of the property of the applicant. “Yes” in column “Can Not Receive Other State Aid” means
            that persons receiving OAA benefits were not entitled to receive other assistance from the state, except for medical reasons. “No” in all
            the cases means that there was no specification in the law regarding the particular issue.
        3. Not a clear stated maximum income
        4. The recipients’ total income, the amount of aid plus all other income shall not exceed this maximum.
        5. Share of population above the age of eligibility enrolled for benefits.




                                                                                46
                                                 Table 3.
       Percentage Distribution of OAA Monthly Grants Initially Approved for Recipients During the
                               Fiscal Year 1937-38 in States in Our Sample

               less                                                             $35.00
               than     $5.00-   $10.00- $15.00- $20.00- $25.00- $30.00-          or
 State         $5.00    9.99     14.99    $19.99 24.99    29.99    34.99         more
 All states         0.8     10.7     23.3    21.8    18.4     10.7      8.4         5.9
 Alabama            2.3     28.5     33.3    16.5      10      4.3      5.1           0
 California         0.4      2.8      3.2      5.9    9.5     11.8     10.2        56.2
 Colorado             0      0.4      1.1      2.8    5.7      7.7       15        67.3
 Connecticut          0      2.4      2.2    13.3    17.4     24.9     39.8           0
 Delaware             0     33.4     42.9    19.7       2        2        0           0
 Florida              0     11.4     40.8    30.4    12.3        4      1.1           0
 Georgia            4.8     58.7     24.8      7.2    2.6      0.9        1           0
 Illinois             0      4.4     20.9    28.9    21.7     17.4      6.7           0
 Indiana            0.6      8.8     36.3    31.3    16.1        5      1.9           0
 Iowa               2.1        7     13.5    24.6    47.3      5.5        0           0
 Kansas             0.5     12.8     27.5      25    16.4     10.1        6         1.7
 Kentucky             0     47.3     48.3      4.4      0        0        0           0
 Louisiana          5.8     46.4       34      8.4    3.7      0.9      0.7         0.1
 Massachusetts        0      0.5      2.7      6.7   19.5       19     47.9         3.7
 Michigan           0.5      3.4     23.8    32.3      24     10.4      5.6           0
 Minnesota          0.2      4.3     12.9    34.3    28.1     15.5      4.7           0
 Missouri           0.1      8.5     37.2    33.5    14.4      4.9      1.4           0
 Nebraska             0     10.5     40.6    31.3    12.8      3.9      0.9           0
 New Jersey           0      2.4     22.1    33.5    31.4      8.9      1.7           0
 New York           0.1      1.4     17.6    22.2    23.1     17.8     10.7         7.1
 Ohio               0.1      1.4      7.2    32.3    33.7     19.8      5.5           0
 Oklahoma           0.9     10.2     43.9    18.7    15.9      6.4        4           0
 Oregon               0      2.3     18.7    25.4    24.6     14.7     14.3           0
 Pennsylvania       0.9      1.6     23.1    18.5      26     18.5     11.4           0
 Rhode Island         0      4.7       28    23.3    23.8     13.9      6.3           0
 Tennessee            0     15.4     51.8    22.5     6.8      3.5        0           0
 Utah               0.1        2      5.1    18.8    23.2       16     34.4         0.4
 Washington           0      0.1      9.9      14    28.8     17.7     29.5           0
 Wisconsin          0.2      3.9     20.4    29.5    20.1     13.5     12.4           0

Source: Social Security Bulletin, November 1938, p.13.




                                                     47
                                                       Table 4.

          Old Age Assistance: Relief Status Prior to Entering OAA Programs, 1937-1938

                    No assistance within two years:                        57.7%
                    Some assistance within two years:                      39.3%
                        - within 30 days:                                  30.1%
                                            -general relief:               22.2%
                                            -other public assistance:      3.2%
                                            -Works Program earnings:       2.7%
                                            -care in public institution:   1.3%
                                             -private assistance:          1.2%
                        - none within 30 days:                             9.2%
                    Unknown within two years, none within 30 days:         3.0%


Source: Social Security Bulletin, December 1938, pp. 3. The survey shows the relief status within 30 days and
within 2 years prior to investigation of recipients accepted during the fiscal year 1937-38 in all states
with plans approved by the Social Security Board.




                                                       48
                                             Table 5.
  Estimation Results for Mortality Rate Equations, Fixed Effects and Difference-in-Difference-in-
                                     Difference Specifications

                          Dependent Variable: Mortality Rate Dependent Variable: Mortality Rate
                                 Ages 75 and Over            Ages 75 and Over Minus Mortality
                                                                    Rate Ages 55 to 64
                             1)         2)              3)            4)           5)             6)
                             No      Correlates     Correlates        No        Correlates    Correlates
                          Correlates Included       Plus Fixed     Correlates   Included      Plus Fixed
                                                     Effects                                   Effects

                  Specifications Using OAA Payments Made (dummy)
OAA Payments Made      -0.2979*     -0.0850   0.0912   -0.0546                      0.0551       0.0710
(dummy)

                              0.1621       0.1947        0.1473        0.1546        0.1794       0.1361
Other Relief per Capita                  -0.0005         0.0016                 -0.000014        0.0016
(1967$)
                                           0.0017        0.0019                      0.0017       0.0018
             Specifications Using OAA Payments per Person Ages 65 and Over
OAA Payments per          -0.0007   -0.0005    0.0025*     0.0003     0.0007                    0.0019*
Person Ages 65 and
Over(1967$)
                              0.0006       0.0009         0.0007       0.0006        0.0009       0.0007
Other Relief per Capita                  -0.0011         0.0003                    -0.0004       0.0005
(1967$)
                                           0.0015        0.0018                      0.0014       0.0018
                 Specifications Using OAA Maximum Monthly Benefit (1967$)
OAA Maximum                -0.0055*    -0.0044  -0.0017   -0.0025     -0.0023                   -0.0021
Monthly Benefit
                              0.0021     0.0024   0.0020    0.0021      0.0023                    0.0019
(1967$)
Other Relief per Capita                -0.0006   0.0019                0.0009                    0.0019
(1967$)
                                           0.0018        0.0020                      0.0019       0.0018


Sources: See Data appendix. Full specification for the OAA payments estimations is reported in Appendix
Table 1.
* Statistically significant at 10 percent in two-tailed t-test.
Notes. White-corrected robust standard errors with observations clustered at the city level are
reported in italics below the coefficient. The mortality rate is deaths per 100 people of that age. The
Correlates include retail sales per capita (thousands of 1967$) and number of income tax returns as
a percentage of population, number of beds in hospital per capita, a city cost of living index, and
trends between census years in total population, percentage of population black, percentage of
population illiterate, percentage of population foreign born. There are 734 observations.




                                                    49
                                             Table 6.
   Key Diagnostics for Instrumental Variable Estimation, Dependent Variable Equal to Difference
           Between Mortality Rate Ages 75 and Older and Mortality Rate for Ages 55-64

                                                       OAA            OAA           OAA
                                                     Payments       Payments      Maximum
                                                       Made         per Person     Benefit
                                                                   Ages 65 and    where OAA
                 Specification With:                                   Over          Paid

                                Second Stage Coefficients and Standard Errors
                                                      0.4181        0.0021             0.0037
                 OAA                                      0.8001         0.0040         0.0076


                  First-Stage Coefficients and Standard Errors for Identifying Instrument
                 Workers’ Compensation                . 201*         39.45*          22.56*
                 Benefit Ratio 20 Years Before          0.063      9.12                 4.04


                               Summary Statistics From First-Stage Equations
                 Kleibergen Paap Wald F-                  10.20          18.73          22.02
                 statistic

                 Exceeds Stock-Yogo Critical         15 percent      10 percent    10 percent
                 Value for Maximal IV Size of


Sources: See Data Appendix.
* Statistically significant at one percent level in two-tailed t-test.

Notes. The Kliebergen Paap Wald F-statistic is a version of the Cragg-Donald statistic when the standard
errors are estimated robustly. The correlates in both the first- and second-stage regressions include per
capita relief spending on other programs (1967$), retail sales per capita (1967$) and number of income
tax returns as a percentage of population, number of beds in hospital per capita, a city cost of living index,
and trends between census years in total population, percentage of population black, percentage of
population illiterate, percentage of population foreign born, and year and city fixed effects.




                                                        50
                                        Table 7.
              Comparison of Results Between State and City Level Analysis
               for the Specification With the Presence of OAA Payments

                                                       Mortality Rate
                                                      Age 75 and Over
                             Fixed Effects                 Minus
                                                       Mortality Rate
                                                        Age 55-64
                                                           .0948
                               City data
                                                          (.1116)
                                                           -.0931
                            State-cities data
                                                          (.0959)
                                                           -.0970
                               State data
                                                          (.0852)

Sources: See Data appendix.
*** Statistically significant at 1 percent in two-tailed t-test.
** Statistically significant at 5 percent in two-tailed t-test.
* Statistically significant at 10 percent in two-tailed t-test.
Notes: The right hand-side measures were the presence of OAA payments (dummy) and
state and city effects. The analysis in all cases is done for the 1930-1938 sample. Standard
errors are reported in parenthesis (for the city level analysis standard errors are robust and
clustered at the city level; for the state they are clustered at the state level.). For the state and
state-cities level analysis the number of observations is 270 whereas for the cities level analysis
there are 675 observations.
.




                                                 51
                                             Table 8.
 Re-estimation of the Specification With Maximum Monthly Benefit as a Measure of OAA Program

                                       DEPENDENT VARIABLE:
                             Mortality Rate Ages 75 and Over Minus Mortality
                                             Rate Ages 55-64
                                                         Correlates IV with
                                                            Plus    Correlates
                                                           Fixed    and Fixed
                                                          Effects    Effects
                           Maximum Monthly Benefit           -0.4064*       0.3499
                           is High or Does Not Exist            0.2137       0.6758


                           Other Relief per Capita             0.0020       0.0014
                           (1967$)                              0.0019       0.0015

Sources: See Data appendix.
       * Statistically significant at 10 percent in two-tailed t-test.
       Notes. The maximum monthly benefit is a dummy variable with value equal to 1 if the
       maximum monthly benefit is $40 or there is no maximum and 0 if it is below that level. The
       remaining variables in the analysis are the same as those used for the results in Tables 5 and 6
       and Appendix Table 1. White-corrected robust standard errors clustered at the city level are in
       italics below the coefficient..




                                                      52
                                             Table 9.
Coefficients and Standard Errors for OAA Measures and Other Relief Per Capita in Estimations for
Mortality Rates by Cause for Ages 75 and Over and the Difference in Mortality Rates Between Ages
                                     75 and over and 55 to 64.

                                       Suicide Infectious Pneumonia,        Diarrhea and
                                                Diseases    Influenza           Enteritis

             Dependent Variable: Deaths Per Thousand People Ages 75 and Over
                    Specifications Using OAA Payments Made (dummy)
         OAA Payments Made           -0.0564    -0.021      -0.123         0.0349
         (dummy)                        0.054    0.0544       0.383         0.0581
         Other Relief per Capita       0.0015   -0.0004       0.0033         -0.0009
         (1967$)                        0.0009    0.0009       0.0055           0.001
                Specifications Using OAA Payments per Person Ages 65 and Over
         OAA Payments per Person      -0.00008          0.0002    0.0011          .0007*
         Ages 65 and Over(1967$)         0.0005          0.0004    0.0037          0.0004
         Other Relief per Capita        0.0014  -0.0005    0.0024          -0.0011
         (1967$)                          0.001    0.001    0.0062            0.002
                  Specifications Using OAA Maximum Monthly Benefit (1967$)
         OAA Maximum Monthly            -.0006          -0.0008   -7E-05          0.0005
         Benefit (1967$)                 0.0008          0.0009    0.0053          0.0007
         Other Relief per Capita       0.0015           -0.0003    0.003         -0.0008
         (1967$)                         0.0009          0.0009    0.0055           0.001
         Dependent Variable: Mortality Rate Ages 75 and Over Minus Mortality Rate
                                        Aged 55-64
                    Specifications Using OAA Payments Made (dummy)
         OAA Payments Made              -0.011           -0.024   -0.255           0.018
         (dummy)                          0.053           0.061     0.348           0.056
         Other Relief per Capita        .002*   -0.0005        0.007          -0.001
         (1967$)                        0.0011     0.001        0.005           0.001
                Specifications Using OAA Payments per Person Ages 65 and Over
         OAA Payments per Person       0.0001           -8.00E-   0.0007          0.0005
         Ages 65 and Over (1967$)                            07
                                         0.0004          0.0005    0.0036          0.0004
         Other Relief per Capita       .0023**  -0.0005    0.0062          -0.0013
         (1967$)                         0.0011    0.001    0.0057            0.001
                  Specifications Using OAA Maximum Monthly Benefit (1967$)
         OAA Maximum Monthly          -0.00063         -0.00084   -7E-05        0.00047
         Benefit (1967$)                0.00078         0.00086     0.005         0.00072
         Other Relief per Capita       .0015*          -0.00031    0.003        -0.00085
         (1967$)                         0.0009         0.00092    0.0055         0.00103




                                                  53
             Dependent Variable: Mortality Rate Ages 75 and Over Minus Mortality Rate
                                            Ages 55-64
                                                IV Estimation
           Presence of OAA payments           -0.4866          0.931        2.452           -0.0054
           (dummy)                              0.4932          0.498        3.116            0.3633
           OAA Payments per Person            -0.0019         0.0037      0.0097           -0.00002
           Ages 65 and Over (1967$)
                                                0.0019         0.0016      0.0112            0.00143
           Other Relief per Capita            -0.0041         0.0079      0.0207          -0.000046
           (1967$)                              0.0040         0.0037      0.0252           0.003066

Sources: See Data appendix.
* Statistically significant at 10 percent in two-tailed t-test.
Notes. The mortality rates for each cause are per thousand people in the age group. Robust standard errors
are reported in parentheses with observations clustered at the city level. Each regression included the
following correlates: retail sales per capita (1967$) and number of income tax returns as a percentage of
population, number of beds in hospital per capita, a city cost of living index, total population, percentage of
population black, percentage of population illiterate, percentage of population foreign born. The identifying
instrumental variable in the IV results is the workers’ compensation benefits index from 20 years before used
in Table 6. There are 584 observations from 1929 through 1936. Infectious diseases include typhoid and
paratyphoid fever, measles, scarlet fever, whooping cough, diphtheria, epidemic cerebrospinal meningitis,
other forms of tuberculosis and syphilis (last one not included in the 1929 data). The influenza category
includes bronchitis and bronchopneumonia too.




                                                         54
                                        Appendix III
                               Tables for Robustness Testing

         This appendix includes a series of Tables showing the results of several types of robustness
testing. Appendix Table 1 shows the full results for the difference-in-difference specifications for the
death rate for people aged 75 and over.
         Some commentators have thought that it might be useful to interact the old-age assistance
variables with time and measures of economic activity. The interaction with a time counter is
designed to see if OAA had stronger effects the longer the program was in place. The interaction with
retail sales per capita is meant to measure whether the OAA program had a stronger effect in cities
where the economy had turned down more on the grounds that OAA was more effective in areas with
more poor elderly. Appendix Table 2 shows the results of the inclusion of these interaction terms.
The results show the same qualitative findings as in the text, as there are no negative and statistically
significant effects of the OAA programs.
         In the text we focused on the death rates of people aged 75 and over because a number of
states chose a minimum age of 70 for OAA assistance. We show the same sequence of results for
elderly aged 65 and over in Appendix Tables 3 through 5.




                                               55
                                            Appendix Table 1
Coefficients and Standard Errors for Equations with “Mortality rate ages 75 and Over” as A Function
of the Presence of OAA Payments in the City, with Means and Standard Deviations for All Correlates,
                             OAA Measures, and Dependent Variables


|                                OAA          OAA       OAA     Mean       Std.
                               Payments     Payment Maximum                Dev.
                                 Made      per Person Monthly
                                            Ages 65    Benefit
                                            and Over   ($1967)
                                             (1967$)
Constant                        10.5794         9.7780  10.0586
                                  3.5205       3.5593     3.5059
OAA Payments Made                0.0912                             0.56     0.50
                                  0.1473
OAA Payment per Person                        0.0025               79.85 115.84
Ages 65 and Over (1967$)
                                               0.0007
OAA Maximum Monthly                                      -0.0017   45.65    39.19
Benefit ($1967)
                                                          0.0020
All Other Relief Spending        0.0016       0.0003     0.0019    69.23    56.89
per Capita (1967$)
                                  0.0019       0.0019     0.0019
Retail Sales per Capita         -0.4584      -0.6415     -0.3884    1.94     0.43
(1967$)
                                  0.4365       0.4091     0.4391
Tax Returns per Capita           0.0644       0.0458     0.0686     5.11     1.89
                                  0.0829       0.0865     0.0841
Hospital Beds per 100 people     0.0336       0.0514     0.0479     5.38     1.90
                                  0.0642       0.0654     0.0649
City Cost of Living Index       -0.6358      -1.2589     -0.5880    0.95     0.10
                                  2.1194       2.0932     2.0930
Population Trend(000)            0.0004       0.0000     0.0002 447.73 920.43
                                  0.0016       0.0011     0.0015
Percent Black Trend             -0.3715      -0.3633     -0.3580    7.30     9.79
                                  0.2135       0.1993     0.2131
Percent Illiterate Trend         0.1300       0.2161     0.1370     3.30     1.76
                                  0.3671       0.3447     0.3563
Percent Foreign Born Trend       0.1819       0.2507     0.1884    13.48     8.27
                                  0.0959       0.0976     0.0966
Year 1930                       -0.8689      -0.9042     -0.8380
                                  0.2202       0.2087     0.2213
Year 1931                       -1.4235      -1.5097     -1.3330


                                                56
                                        0.4453        0.4291        0.4432
 Year 1932                            -1.5277       -1.6910       -1.4189
                                        0.6123        0.5926        0.6106
 Year 1933                            -2.0804       -2.2060       -1.9727
                                        0.5877        0.5763        0.5865
 Year 1934                            -1.5975       -1.5994       -1.4542
                                        0.5574        0.5477        0.5530
 Year 1935                            -1.7320       -1.7515       -1.5905
                                        0.5821        0.5860        0.5789
 Year 1936                            -0.6704       -0.6959       -0.5281
                                        0.6313        0.6409        0.6220
 Year 1937                            -1.0797       -1.2961       -0.9193
                                        0.6283        0.6574        0.6207
 Year 1938                            -1.8332       -2.1749       -1.6695
                                        0.6707        0.6919        0.6627
 Deaths Per 100 People. Ages                                                 13.373 1.4235
 75-over
 Difference in Deaths Per 100                                                10.515 1.3204
 People. Ages 75-over minus
 Ages 55-64
Sources and Notes. See Table 5. There are 734 observations. The errors are White-corrected robust standard errors
clustered at the city level. The mortality rate is the number of deaths per 100 in the age group.




                                                        57
                                       Appendix Table 2
Coefficients of OAA Measure and Interaction Terms in Fixed Effect and Difference-in-Difference-in-
                                      Difference Analyses

                         Mortality Rate Ages 75 and Over  Mortality Rate Ages 75 and Over Minus
                                                                Mortality Rate Ages 55-64
                         OAA             OAA       OAA      OAA          OAA         OAA Max
                       Payments      Payment per   Max    Payments Payment per        Monthly
                        Dummy        Person Ages Monthly Dummy Person Ages            Benefit
                                     65 and Over  Benefit            65 and Over
OAA Measure               0.0749        0.0033081  0.0037  0.05578         0.0019       0.00018
                           0.4148            0.0028      0.0049      0.3817           0.0027         0.00462
OAA Measure *             0.0032        -0.000095     -0.0004      0.00303        0.000007         -0.00048
Time                       0.0718            0.0003      0.0009      0.0649           0.0003         0.00080



OAA Measure               0.2627            0.0031     0.0053        0.072           0.0015          0.0028
                            0.555            0.0022      0.0067      0.5305           0.0022              0.0064
OAA                      -0.0942          -0.00028    -0.0039     -0.00054           0.0002         -0.0027
Measure*Retail             0.2782           0.00078      0.0034      0.2682           0.0008              0.0032
Sales Per Capita

Notes. White-corrected robust standard errors with observations clustered at the city level are
reported in italics below the coefficient. The mortality rate is deaths per 100 people of that age. The
Correlates include retail sales per capita (1967$) and number of income tax returns as a percentage
of population, number of beds in hospital per capita, a city cost of living index, and trends between
census years in total population, percentage of population black, percentage of population illiterate,
percentage of population foreign born. There are 734 observations.




                                                       58
                                         Appendix Table 3
    Estimation Results for Mortality Rate for Ages 65 and Over, Fixed Effects and Difference-in-
                             Difference-in-Difference Specifications

                          Dependent Variable: Deaths per        Dependent Variable: Mortality
                           100 People Ages 65 and Over          Rate Ages 65 and Over Minus
                                                                 Mortality Rate Ages 55 to 64
                           1)         2)         3)      4)     No            5)           6)
                           No      Correlates Correlates Correlates        Correlates   Correlates
                        Correlates Included Plus Fixed                     Included       Plus
                                               Effects                                   Fixed
                                                                                         Effects
                Specifications Using OAA Payments Made (dummy)
OAA Payments Made    -0.1458     -0.0984    0.139*  0.09755    0.0417                       0.119
(dummy)

                              .0961      0.1109         0.071     0.0715       0.0898        0.059
Other Relief per                       0.00006      0.0016*                  0.00057       0.0015
Capita (1967$)
                                         0.0010        0.0010                  0.0008       0.0008
             Specifications Using OAA Payments per Person Ages 65 and Over
OAA Payments per         -0.00047 -0.0009*    0.0015* 0.00058*       0.00027              0.0010*
Person Ages 65 and
Over (1967$)
                            0.00035     0.00047        0.0003    0.00028       0.0004       0.0003
Other Relief per                       -0.0004         0.001                  0.0005      0.0011*
Capita (1967$)
                                         0.0009        0.0009                  0.0007       0.0007
                 Specifications Using OAA Maximum Monthly Benefit (1967$)
OAA Maximum
                            -0.0023    -0.0025  0.0008    0.0007      -0.0004              0.0003
Monthly Benefit
(1967$)                       0.0013     0.0014  0.0010    0.0010       0.0012              0.0008
Other Relief per
Capita (1967$)                          0.0004  0.0017                 0.0009             0.0017*
                                         0.0010        0.0010                  0.0009       0.0008

Sources: See Data appendix. Full specification for the OAA payments made (dummy) estimations is reported
in Appendix Table 1.
* Statistically significant at 10 percent in two-tailed t-test.
Notes. White-corrected robust standard errors with observations clustered at the city level are
reported in italics below the coefficient. The mortality rate is deaths per 100 people of that age. The
Correlates include retail sales per capita (1967$) and number of income tax returns as a percentage
of population, number of beds in hospital per capita, a city cost of living index, and trends between
census years in total population, percentage of population black, percentage of population illiterate,
percentage of population foreign born. There are 734 observations.



                                                  59
                                        Appendix Table 4
   Key Diagnostics for Instrumental Variable Estimation, Dependent Variable Equal to Difference
     Between Deaths Per 100 People Ages 65 and Older and Deaths per 100 People Ages 55-64


                               OAA            OAA              OAA
                             Payments       Payments         Maximum
                               Made         per Person        Benefit
                                           Ages 65 and       where OAA
                                               Over             Paid
 Specification with:

            Second Stage Coefficients and Standard Errors
                                  0.528          0.0027           0.0047
 OAA                               0.359          0.0018           0.0032


             First-Stage Coefficients and Standard Errors

 Workers’                        . 201*          39.45*           22.55*
 Compensation Benefit              0.063       9.12                  4.69
 Ratio 20 Years Before


           Summary Statistics From First-Stage Equations
 Kleibergen Paap Wald             10.20           18.78            22.02
 F-statistic

 Exceeds Stock-Yogo         15 percent       10 percent       10 percent
 Critical Value for
 Maximal IV Size of

Sources: See Data Appendix.
* Statistically significant at one percent level in two-tailed t-test.

Notes. The Kliebergen Paap Wald F-statistic is a version of the Cragg-Donald statistic when the standard
errors are estimated robustly. The correlates in both the first- and second-stage regressions include per
capita relief spending on other programs (1967$), retail sales per capita (1967$) and number of income
tax returns as a percentage of population, number of beds in hospital per capita, a city cost of living index,
total population, percentage of population black, percentage of population illiterate, percentage of
population foreign born, and year and city fixed effects.




                                                        60
                                        Appendix Table 5
Coefficients and Standard Errors for OAA Measures and Other Relief Per Capita in Estimations for
Mortality Rates by Cause for Ages 65 and Over and the Difference in Mortality Rates Between Ages
                                     65 and over and 55 to 64.

                              Suicide    Infectious Pneumonia,          Diarrhea and
                                          Diseases    Influenza             Enteritis

       Dependent Variable: Deaths from Cause per 1000 people Ages 65 and Over
               Specifications Using OAA Payments Made (dummy)
Presence of OAA                -0.002     0.005    0.2446                        0.012
payments (dummy)
                                -0.033       -0.032        -0.179                 -0.022
Other Relief per Capita        .0012*     -0.00005      -0.0004               0.00008
(1967$)
                               -0.0005      -0.0005       -0.0028                -0.0003
         Specifications Using OAA Payments per Person Ages 65 and Over
OAA Payments per               0.0002      0.00025       0.0016               0.00025
Person Ages 65 and Over
(1967$)
                               -0.0003     -0.00027       -0.0018               -0.00016
Other Relief per Capita        0.0011     -0.00017      -0.0007              -0.00002
(1967$)
                               -0.0005      -0.0005       -0.0029                -0.0003
           Specifications Using OAA Maximum Monthly Benefit (1967$)
OAA Maximum Monthly           -0.0007      -0.0005      -0.0015                 0.0004
Benefit (1967$)
                               -0.0008      -0.0009       -0.0056                -0.0008
Other Relief per Capita        .0017*      -0.0004        0.003                 -0.001
(1967$)
                               -0.0009       -0.001       -0.0058                 -0.001

 Dependent Variable: Mortality Rate Ages 65 and Over Minus Mortality Rate Aged 55-64
                Specifications Using OAA Payments Made (dummy)
Presence of OAA
payments (dummy)
                              0.0435       0.0014        0.1137               -0.0051
                               0.0376       -0.0381      -0.1391                -0.0224
Other Relief per Capita
(1967$)
                               0.002       -0.0002       0.0034              -0.0002
                               0.0007       -0.0006      -0.0023                -0.0003



                                                 61
        Specifications Using OAA Payments per Person Ages 65 and Over
OAA Payments per
Person Ages65 and
Over(1967$)                  0.0004  -0.00001       0.0012            0.0001
                                    0.0003       0.00033         0.0016                  0.0002
Other Relief per Capita
(1967$)
                                   0.0019      -0.00015         0.0031                 -0.0002
                                    0.0008       0.00061         0.0025                  0.0003
             Specifications Using OAA Maximum Monthly Benefit (1967$)
OAA Maximum Monthly
Benefit (1967$)
                                   0.0003       -0.0003         0.0017                 0.00001
                                    0.0006        0.0006         0.0019                 0.00035
Other Relief per Capita
(1967$)
                                    0.002       -0.0001         0.0034                -0.00016
                                    0.0007        0.0006         0.0023                 0.00034

  Dependent Variable: Mortality Rate Ages 65 and Over Minus Mortality Rate Ages 55-64
                                        IV Estimation
Presence of OAA                  -0.17070       0.08451        0.15184                -0.00473
payments (dummy)
                                   0.29329       0.25267        0.13492                 0.14349
OAA payments per                 -0.00067       0.00033        0.00599                -0.00002
person aged 65 (1967$)
                                   0.00113       0.00101        0.00471                 0.00057
Other Relief per Capita          -0.00144       0.00071        0.01281                -0.00004
(1967$)
                                   0.00243       0.00214        0.01076                 0.00121



Sources: See Data appendix.
* Statistically significant at 10 percent in two-tailed t-test.
Notes. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses with observations clustered at the city level. Each
specification included the following correlates: retail sales per capita (1967$) and number of income tax
returns as a percentage of population, number of beds in hospital per capita, a city cost of living index,and
trends between census years in total population, percentage of population black, percentage of population
illiterate, percentage of population foreign born. The identifying instrumental variable in the IV results is the
workers’ compensation benefits index from 20 years before used in Table 6. There are 584 observations from
1929 through 1936. Infectious diseases include typhoid and paratyphoid fever, measles, scarlet fever,
whooping cough, diphtheria, epidemic cerebrospinal meningitis, other forms of tuberculosis and syphilis (last
one not included in the 1929 data). The influenza category includes bronchitis and bronchopneumonia too.




                                                       62
References
American Medical Association. Hospitals Registered by the American Medical Association. Various years.
Anderson, Gary M., Robert D. Tollison, “Congressional Influence and Patterns of New Deal Spending, 1933-
      1939,” Journal of Law and Economics, 34 (1991), 161-175.
Anonymous. “Effect of Public Old-age Pensions on Almshouse Populations.” Monthly Labor Review 37
      (November 1933): 1095-6.
Baird, Enid, Public and Private Aid in 116 Urban Areas, 1929-38, with Supplement for 1939 and 1940, U.S. Federal
        Security Agency, Social Security Board, Public Assistance Report No. 3 (Washington, D.C.:
        Government Printing Office, 1942).
Balan Cohen, Andreea, “Healthy, Wealthy and Wise? The Impact of the Old Age Assistance Program on
       Elderly Mortality in the United States, 1931-1955”, Tufts University. December 2007.
Berman, Jules. H. “Legislative Changes in Public Assistance, 1947.” Social Security Bulletin (November 1947):
      7-15.
Berman, Jules. H. “State Public Assistance Legislation, 1949.” Social Security Bulletin, December 1949): 3-10
Berman, Jules. H. and Haskell Jacobs. “Legislative Changes in Public Assistance, 1945.” Social Security Bulletin,
      December 1945): 8-15.
Bond, F.A., R.E Baber, J.A. Vieg, L.B. Perry, A.H. Scaff, and L.J. Lee Jr, Our Needy Aged: A California Study of a
       National Problem, 1954.
Bureau of Public Assistance. “Legislative Changes in Public Assistance, 1941.” Social Security Bulletin
       (November 1941): 12-18.Committee on Economic Security, “Old Age Security Staff Report”, mimeo,
       1935.
Congressional Quarterly Inc., Guide to U.S. Elections, third edition. (Washington, D.C.: Congressional Quarterly
       Inc., 1995).
Costa, Dora L., “A House of Her Own: Old Age Assistance and the Living Arrangements of Older
       Nonmarried Women”, Journal of Public Economics, 72(1999), 39-59.
Carter, Susan, Scott Sigmund Gartner, Michael Haines, Alan Olmstead, Richard Sutch, and Gavin Wright,
        editors. Historical Statistics of the United States: Earliest Times to the Present, Millennial Edition, Five
        Volumes, New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006.
Committee on Economic Security. “Old Age Security Staff Report.” Volume 2. January 1935. Report
     originally unpublished but now online at Social Security website. Accessed on August 29, 2008 at
     http://www.ssa.gov/history/reports/ces/ces2armstaff.html
Federal Emergency Relief Administration, Unemployment Relief Census, October 1933, Report Number Two
        (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1934).
Finkelstein, Amy, and Robin McKnight, “What Did Medicare Do? (And Was It Worth It?)”, National Bureau
        of Economic Research Working Paper Series 11609 (2005).
Fishback, Price, Rebecca Holmes and Samuel Allen. “Lifting the Curse of Dimensionality: Measures of the
       Labor Legislation Climate in the States During the Progressive Era.” National Bureau of Economic
       Research Working Paper No. 14167, 2008. Forthcoming, Labor History.




                                                           63
Fishback, Price and Shawn Kantor, A Prelude to the Welfare State: The Origins of Workers’ Compensation. Chicago:
       University of Chicago Press, 2000.
Fishback, Price V., Michael R. Haines, and Shawn Kantor, “Births, Deaths and New Deal Relief during the
       Great Depression”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(2007), 1-14.
Fishback, Price V., Shawn Kantor, and John Joseph Wallis, “Can the New Deal’s Three R’s Be Reahibilitated?
       A Program-by-Program, County-by-County Analysis”, Explorations in Economic History, 40(2003), 278-
       307.
Fishback, Price and Melissa Thomasson, “Social Welfare: 1929 to the Present” In Carter, Susan, et. al editors.
       Historical Statistics of the United States: Earliest Times to the Present, (Millennial Edition, Five Volumes, New
       York: Cambridge University Press, 2006).
Fisher, J., “Aged beneficiares, assistance recipients, and the age in the general population”, Social Security
        Bulletin 9(6), 1946, 11-16.
Fleck, Robert K., “The Marginal Effect of New Deal Relief Work on County-Level Unemployment
        Statistics”, Journal of Economic History, 59 (1999), 659-87.
Fleck, Robert. “Voter Influence and Big Policy Change: The Positive Political Economy of the New Deal.”
        Journal of Political Economy 116 (February 2008): 1-37.

Fleck, Robert K., “The Marginal Effect of New Deal Relief Work on County-Level Unemployment
        Statistics,” Journal of Economic History 59 (Sept. 1999a), 659-87.
_____, “The Value of the Vote: A Model and Test of the Effects of Turnout on Distributive Policy.”
        Economic Inquiry 37 (Oct. 1999b), 609-23.
_____, “Population, Land, Economic Conditions, and the Allocation of New Deal Spending,” Explorations
        in Economic History 38 (April 2001), 296-304.

Friedberg, Leora, “The Effect of Old Age Assistance on Retirement”, Journal of Public Economics, 71(1999), 213-
       232
Gardner, John, and William Cohen, Demographic Characteristics of the Population of the United States, 1930-1950:
      County Level, Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research, file number 0020, 1992.
Granados, Jose A Tapia, “Increasing Mortality During the Expansions of the US Economy, 1900-1996”,
      International Journal of Epidemiology, 34 (2005), 1194-1202.
Gray, V., “Innovation in the States: A Diffusion Study”, American Political Science Review, 67 (1973), 1174–85.
Haines, Michael. “ The Urban Mortality Transition in the United States, 1800-1940.” National Bureau of
       Economic Research Historical Working Paper No. 134. Cambridge, MA, July 2001.
Holmes, Rebecca. “The Impact of State Labor Regulations on Manufacturing Input Demand During the
       Progressive Era, Dissertation Summary.” Journal of Economic History 65 (June 2005); 531-532.
Holmes, Rebecca, Fishback, Price, and Allen, Samuel. (2008). “Measuring the Intensity of State Labor
       Regulation During the Progressive Era” in Quantitative Economic History: The Good of Counting,
       edited by Joshua Rosenbloom. New York: Routledge, pp. 119-145.
Horrace, William C. and Ronald L. Oaxaca. “Results on the Bias and Inconstistency of Ordinary Least
       Squares for the Linear Probability Model.” Economics Letters 90 (2006): 321-327.
Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research, Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data:
       The United States, 1790-1970, file number 0003. The version has additions and corrections by Michael
       Haines, Department of Economics, Colgate University, Hamilton, NY.



                                                          64
Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research, United States Historical Election Returns, 1824-
       1968, file number 0001.
Kleibergen, F. “Generalizing weak instrument robust IV statistics towards multiple parameters, unrestricted
       covariance matrices and identification statistics.” Journal of Econometrics, 139 (2007), 181-216.
Kleibergen, F., and R. Paap. “Generalized reduced rank tests using the
  singular value decomposition.” Journal of Econometrics 133 (2006): 97-126.
Kousser, J. Morgan, The Shaping of Southern Politics: Suffrage Restriction and the Establishment of the One-Party South,
      1880-1910, (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1974).
Levitt, Steven D., “Using Electoral Cycles in Police Hiring to Estimate the Effect of Police on Crime”,
         American Economic Review, 87 (1997), 270-90.
Levy, Helen, and David Meltzer, “What Do We Really Know About Whether Health Insurance Affects
       Health?”, Economic Research Initiative on the Uninsured Working Paper Series 6 (2001).
Lijphart, Arend, “Unequal Participation: Democracy’s Unresolved Dilemma”, American Political Science Review,
        91 (1997), 1-14.
Parsons, Donald O., “Male Retirement Behavior in the United States, 1930-1950”, The Journal of Economic
       History, 51(1991), 657-674.
Perkins, Ellen J. “Old-Age Assistance and Aid to Dependent Children, 1940-50.” Social Security Bulletin
        (November 1951): 11-18.
Rand McNally, Commercial Atlas and Marketing Guide, (1934, 1935, 1938, 1939).
Ruhm, Christopher, “Are Recessions Good for Your Health?”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(2000), 617-
      650.
Ruhm, Cristopher, “Healthy Living in Hard Times”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
      Series 9468 (2003).
Social Security Board, Social Security Bulletins, various issues, 1938-1939.
Social Security Board, Social Security Yearbook, 1939.
Snyder, Stephen E., and William N. Evans, “The Effect of Income on Mortality: Evidence from the Social
        Security Notch”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(2006), 482-495
Stewart, Estelle. “The Cost of American Almshouses.” U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics Bulletin No. 386.
        Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1925.

Stock, James and MotohiroYogo. “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression.” National Bureau
        of Economic Research Technical Working Paper No. 284. Cambridge, Massachusetts: National
        Bureau of Research, October 2002a.

Stock, James, Jonathan Wright, and Motohiro Yogo. “A Survey of Weak Instruments and Weak
        Identification in Generalized Methods of Moments.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 20
        (October 2002b): 518-529.

Thomasson, Melissa A. and Jaret S. Treber, “From Home to Hospital: The Evolution of Childbirth in the
      United States, 1927-1940”, Explorations in Economic History 45 (January 2008): 76-99.
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970, Part I, 1975.



                                                           65
U.S. Bureau of the Census, “Illiteracy in the United States, October 1947,” Current Population Reports: Population
       Characteristics, September 22, 1948. Series P-20 no. 20.
U. S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, State Personal Income: 1929-1987 (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing
        Office, 1989).
U.S. Bureau of Internal Revenue, Statistics of Income for 1930, (1932).
U.S. Bureau of Internal Revenue, “Number of Individual Income Tax Returns for 1935 by States, Counties,
       Cities, and Towns”, mimeo, 1935.
U.S. Bureau of Internal Revenue, “Number of Individual Income Tax Returns for 1937 by States, Counties,
       Cities, and Towns”, mimeo, 1939.
U.S. Bureau of Internal Revenue, “Number of Individual Income Tax Returns for 1938 by States, Counties,
       Cities, and Towns”, mimeo, 1940.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Changes in Cost of Living, December 15, 1937 (Washington, D.C.: Government
       Printing Office, 1938).
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Changes in Cost of Living, December 15, 1938. Serial No. R. 885 (Washington,
       D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1939).
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Changes in Cost of Living, December 15, 1939 and the Year 1939. Serial No. R.
       1084 (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1940).
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Cost of Living in the United States. Bureau of Labor Statistics Bulletin No. 357,
       May 1924 (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1924).
U.S. Congress, Official Congressional Directory. Various issues for the 73rd through the 76th Congress
       (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1933 - 1938).
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Mortality Statistics, 1922, Twenty-Third Annual Report
       (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1925).
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Mortality Statistics, 1923, Twenty-Fourth Annual Report
       (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1926).
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Mortality Statistics, 1924, Twenty-Fifth Annual Report
       (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1927a).
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Mortality Statistics, 1925, Part I, Twenty-Sixth Annual
       Report (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1927b).
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Mortality Statistics, 1926, Part I, Twenty-Seventh
       Annual Report (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1929a).
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Mortality Statistics, 1927, Part I, Twenty-Eighth Annual
       Report (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1929b).
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Mortality Statistics, 1928, Twenty-Ninth Annual Report
       (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1930).
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Mortality Statistics, 1929, Thirtieth Annual Report
       (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1932).
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Mortality Statistics, 1930, Thirty-First Annual Report
       (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1934).
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Mortality Statistics, 1931, Thirty-Second Annual Report
       (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1935a).


                                                         66
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Mortality Statistics, 1932, Thirty-Third Annual Report
       (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1935b).
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Mortality Statistics, 1933, Thirty-Fourth Annual Report
       (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1936a).
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Mortality Statistics, 1934, Thirty-Fifth Annual Report
       (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1936b).
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Mortality Statistics, 1935, Thirty-Sixth Annual Report
       (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1937).
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Mortality Statistics, 1936, Thirty-Seventh Annual Report
       (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1938).
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Vital Statistics of the United States, 1937, Part I
       (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1939).
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Vital Statistics of the United States, 1938, Part I
       (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1940).
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce, “General Consumer Market
       Statistics”, Supplement 1 to the Market Data Handbook of the United States (Washington, D.C.:
       Government Printing Office, 1932).
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce, Consumer Market Data
       Handbook, 1936 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1936).
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce, Consumer Market Data
       Handbook, 1939 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1939).
U.S. Office of Government Reports, Statistical Section, Report No. 10, Volume 1, “County reports of
       estimated federal expenditures, March 4, 1933 - June 30, 1939”, mimeo, 1940.
Walker, Jack L., “The diffusion of innovations among the American states”, American Political Science Review,
       63(3) (1969), 880 – 899.
Wallis, John Joseph. “The Political Economy of New Deal Spending Revisited, Again: With and Without
         Nevada.” Explorations in Economic History 35 (April 1998): 140-70.
_____. “The Political Economy of New Deal Spending, Yet Again: A Reply to Fleck.” Explorations in
         Economic History 38 (April 2001): 305-14.
Welch, Susan and Kay Thompson, “The Impact of Federal Incentives on State Policy Innovation”, American
         Journal of Political Science, 24(4) (1980), 715 - 729.
Works Progress Administration, Division of Social Research, Intercity Differences in Costs of Living, March 1935,
      59 Cities, by Margaret Loomis Stecker, (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1937),
      Government Call No. Y3.W89/2:17/12.




                                                        67
