                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE OPTIMAL TAXATION OF HEIGHT:
              A CASE STUDY OF UTILITARIAN INCOME REDISTRIBUTION

                                        N. Gregory Mankiw
                                        Matthew Weinzierl

                                       Working Paper 14976
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14976


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2009




We are grateful to Ruchir Agarwal for excellent research assistance and to Alan Auerbach, Robert
Barro, Raj Chetty, Emmanuel Farhi, Ed Glaeser, Louis Kaplow, Andrew Postlewaite, David Romer,
Julio Rotemberg, Alex Tabarrok, Aleh Tsyvinski, Ivan Werning,and two anonymous referees for helpful
comments and discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by N. Gregory Mankiw and Matthew Weinzierl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Optimal Taxation of Height: A Case Study of Utilitarian Income Redistribution
N. Gregory Mankiw and Matthew Weinzierl
NBER Working Paper No. 14976
May 2009
JEL No. H2,H12

                                             ABSTRACT

Should the income tax include a credit for short taxpayers and a surcharge for tall ones? The standard
Utilitarian framework for tax analysis answers this question in the affirmative. Moreover, a plausible
parameterization using data on height and wages implies a substantial height tax: a tall person earning
$50,000 should pay $4,500 more in tax than a short person. One interpretation is that personal attributes
correlated with wages should be considered more widely for determining taxes. Alternatively, if policies
such as a height tax are rejected, then the standard Utilitarian framework must fail to capture intuitive
notions of distributive justice.


N. Gregory Mankiw
Department of Economics
Littauer 223
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ngmankiw@fas.harvard.edu

Matthew Weinzierl
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 262
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
mweinzierl@hbs.edu
                              The Optimal Taxation of Height:
              A Case Study of Utilitarian Income Redistribution
                               N. Gregory Mankiw                   Matthew Weinzierl
                               Harvard University                  Harvard University




                                                        Abstract

          Should the income tax include a credit for short taxpayers and a surcharge for tall ones? The standard
      Utilitarian framework for tax analysis answers this question in the a¢ rmative. Moreover, a plausible
      parameterization using data on height and wages implies a substantial height tax: a tall person earning
      $50,000 should pay $4,500 more in tax than a short person. One interpretation is that personal attributes
      correlated with wages should be considered more widely for determining taxes. Alternatively, if policies
      such as a height tax are rejected, then the standard Utilitarian framework must fail to capture intuitive
      notions of distributive justice.

    This paper can be interpreted in one of two ways. Some readers can take it as a small, quirky contribution
aimed to clarify the literature on optimal income taxation. Others can take it as a broader e¤ort to challenge
that entire literature. In particular, our results can be seen as raising a fundamental question about the
framework for optimal taxation for which William Vickrey and James Mirrlees won the Nobel Prize and
which remains a centerpiece of modern public …nance.
    More than a century ago, Francis Y. Edgeworth (1897) pointed out that a Utilitarian social planner
with full information will be completely egalitarian. More speci…cally, the planner will equalize the marginal
utility of all members of society; if everyone has the same separable preferences, equalizing marginal utility
requires equalizing after-tax incomes as well. Those endowed with greater than average productivity are
fully taxed on the excess, and those endowed with lower than average productivity get subsides to bring
them up to average.
    William S. Vickrey (1945) and James A. Mirrlees (1971) emphasized a key practical di¢ culty with
Edgeworth’s solution: The government does not observe innate productivity. Instead, it observes income,
which is a function of productivity and e¤ort. The social planner with such imperfect information has to
limit his Utilitarian desire for the egalitarian outcome, recognizing that too much redistribution will blunt
incentives to supply e¤ort. The Vickrey-Mirrlees approach to optimal nonlinear taxation is now standard.
For a prominent recent example of its application, see Emmanuel Saez (2001). For extensions of the static
framework to dynamic settings, see Mikhail Golosov, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Aleh Tsyvinski (2003),
    Corresponding author: Matthew Weinzierl, 262 Morgan, Harvard Business School, Boston MA 02163; mweinzierl@hbs.edu.
N. Gregory Mankiw, Littauer 223, Harvard Economics Department, Cambridge MA 02138; ngmankiw@harvard.edu. We are
grateful to Ruchir Agarwal for excellent research assistance and to Alan Auerbach, Robert Barro, Raj Chetty, Emmanuel Farhi,
Ed Glaeser, Louis Kaplow, Andrew Postlewaite, David Romer, Julio Rotemberg, Alex Tabarrok, Aleh Tsyvinski, Ivan Werning,
and two anonymous referees for helpful comments and discussions.



                                                             1
Stefania Albanesi and Christopher Sleet (2006), Kocherlakota (2006), and Golosov, Tsyvinski, and Ivan
Werning (2006).
    Vickrey and Mirrlees assumed that income was the only piece of data the government could observe about
an individual. That assumption, however, is far from true. In practice, a person’s income tax liability is
a function of many variables beyond income, such as mortgage interest payments, charitable contributions,
health expenditures, number of children, and so on. Following George A. Akerlof (1978), these variables
might be considered "tags" that identify individuals whom society deems worthy of special support. This
support is usually called a "categorical transfer" in the substantial literature on optimal tagging (e.g., Mirrlees
1986, Ravi Kanbur et al. 1994, Ritva Immonen et al. 1998, Alan Viard 2001a, 2001b, Louis Kaplow 2007).
In this paper, we use the Vickrey-Mirrlees framework to explore the potential role of another variable: the
taxpayer’s height.
    The inquiry is supported by two legs— one theoretical and one empirical. The theoretical leg is that,
according to the theory of optimal taxation, any exogenous variable correlated with productivity should be
a useful indicator for the government to use in determining the optimal tax liability (e.g., Saez 2001, Kaplow
2007).1 The empirical leg is that a person’s height is strongly correlated with his or her income. Judge and
Cable (2004) report that “an individual who is 72 in. tall could be expected to earn $5,525 [in 2002 dollars]
more per year than someone who is 65 in. tall, even after controlling for gender, weight, and age.” Nicola
Persico, Andrew Postlewaite, and Dan Silverman (2004) …nd similar results and report that "among adult
white men in the United States, every additional inch of height as an adult is associated with a 1.8 percent
increase in wages." Anne Case and Christina Paxson (2008) write that "For both men and women...an
additional inch of height [is] associated with a one to two percent increase in earnings." This fact, together
with the canonical approach to optimal taxation, suggests that a person’s tax liability should be a function
of his height. That is, a tall person of a given income should pay more in taxes than a short person of
the same income. The policy simulation presented below con…rms this implication and establishes that the
optimal tax on height is substantial.
    Many readers will …nd the idea of a height tax absurd, whereas some will …nd it merely highly unconven-
tional. We encourage all readers to consider why the idea of taxing height elicits such a response even though
it follows ineluctably from a well-documented empirical regularity and the dominant modern approach to
optimal income taxation. If the policy is viewed as absurd, defenders of this approach are bound to o¤er
an explanation that leaves their framework intact. Otherwise, economists ought to reconsider whether this
standard approach to policy design adequately captures people’s intuitive notions of redistributive justice.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section I we review the Vickrey-Mirrlees approach to
optimal income taxation and focus it on the issue at hand— optimal taxation when earnings vary by height.
In Section II we examine the empirical relationship between height and earnings, and we combine theory
and data to reach a …rst-pass judgment about what an optimal height tax would look like for white males
in the United States. We also discuss whether a height tax can be Pareto-improving. In Section III we
conclude by considering some of the reasons that economists might be squeamish about advocating such a
tax.
   1 Such a correlation is su¢ cient but not necessary: even if the average level of productivity is not a¤ected by the variable,

e¤ects on the distribution of productivity can in‡uence the optimal tax schedule for each tagged subgroup.




                                                               2
I     The Model
We begin by introducing a general theoretical framework, keeping in mind that our goal is to implement the
framework using empirical wage distributions.


A     A General Framework
We divide the population into H height groups indexed by h, with population proportions ph . Individuals
within each group are di¤erentiated by their exogenous wages, which in all height groups can take one of I
                                                                                       I          P
possible values. The distribution of wages in each height group is given by h = f h;i gi=1 , where i h;i = 1
for all h, so that the proportion h;i of each height group h has wage wi . Individual income yh;i is the
product of the wage and labor e¤ort lh;i :
                                                 yh;i = wi lh;i :

An individual’s wage and labor e¤ort are both private information; only income and height are observable
by the government.
   Individual utility is a function of consumption ch;i and labor e¤ort:

                                                       Uh;i = u (ch;i ; lh;i ) ;

and utility is assumed to be increasing and concave in consumption and decreasing and convex in labor
e¤ort. Consumption is equal to after-tax income, where taxes can be a function of income and height. Note
that we are assuming preferences are not a function of height.
    The social planner’s objective is to choose consumption and income bundles to maximize a Utilitarian2
social welfare function which is uniform and linear in individual utilities. The planner is constrained in its
maximization by feasibility–taxes are purely redistributive3 –and by the unobservability of wages and labor
e¤ort. Following the standard approach, the unobservability of wages and e¤ort leads to an application
of the Revelation Principle, by which the planner’s optimal policy will be to design the set of bundles that
induce each individual to reveal his true wage and e¤ort level when choosing his optimal bundle. This
requirement can be incorporated into the formal problem with incentive compatibility constraints.
    The formal statement of the planner’s problem is:

                                                   H
                                                   X         I
                                                             X                       yh;i
                                            max         ph          h;i u   ch;i ;               ;                         (1)
                                             c;y
                                                              i
                                                                                     wi
                                                   h


subject to the feasibility constraint that total tax revenue is non-negative:

                                             H
                                             X          I
                                                        X
                                                   ph         h;i   (yh;i    ch;i )         0;                             (2)
                                              h          i

    2 Throughout the paper, we focus our discussion on the Utilitarian social welfare function because of its prominence in

the optimal tax literature. The Vickrey-Mirrlees framework allows one to consider any Pareto-e¢ cient policy, but nearly all
implementations of this framework have used Utilitarian or more egalitarian social welfare weights. See Ivan Werning (2007) for
an exception. Our analysis would easily generalize to any social welfare function that is concave in individual utilities. That
is, a height tax would naturally arise as optimal with a broader class of "welfarist" social welfare functions.
    3 We have performed simulations in which taxes also fund an exogenous level of government expenditure. The welfare gain

from conditioning taxes on height increases.




                                                                    3
and individuals’incentive compatibility constraints:

                                                    yh;i                          yh;j
                                       u ch;i ;                        u ch;j ;                            (3)
                                                    wi                             wi

for all j for each individual of height h with wage wi , where ch;j and yh;j are the allocations the planner
intends to be chosen by an individual of height h with wage wj .
    As shown by Immonen et al. (1998), Viard (2001a, 2001b), and others, we can decompose the planner’s
problem in (1) through (3) into two separate problems: setting optimal taxes within height groups and
setting optimal aggregate transfers between height groups. Denote the transfer paid by each group h with
      H
fRh gh=1 . Then, we can restate the planner’s problem as:

                                                H
                                                X         I
                                                          X                            yh;i
                                      max           ph             h;i u      ch;i ;          ;            (4)
                                     fc;y;Rg
                                                              i
                                                                                       wi
                                                h


subject to H height-speci…c feasibility constraints:

                                          I
                                          X
                                                    h;i   (yh;i        ch;i )     Rh ;                     (5)
                                            i


an aggregate budget constraint that the sum of transfers is non-negative:

                                                      H
                                                      X
                                                                  Rh     0;                                (6)
                                                          h


and a full set of incentive compatibility constraints from (3). Let the multipliers on the H conditions in (5)
        H
be f h gh=1 .
   One feature of using this two-part approach is that, when we take …rst-order conditions with respect to
the transfers Rh we obtain
                                                     h = h0

for all height groups h; h0 . This condition states that the marginal social cost of increased tax revenue
(i.e., income less consumption) is equated across types. Note that this equalization is possible only because
height is observable to the planner.
    Throughout the paper, we will also consider a "benchmark" model for comparison with this optimal
model. In the benchmark model, the planner fails to use the information on height in designing taxes.
Formally, this can be captured by rewriting the set of incentive constraints in (3) to be

                                                     yh;i                         yg;j
                                       u ch;i ;                        u cg;j ;                            (7)
                                                     wi                            wi

for all g and all j for each individual of height h with wage wi . Constraints (7) require that each individual
prefer his intended bundle to not merely the bundles of other individuals in his height group but to the
bundles of all other individuals in the population. Given that (7) is a more restrictive condition than
(3), the planner solving the optimal problem could always choose the tax policy chosen by the benchmark
planner, but it may also improve on the benchmark solution. To measure the gains from taking height into
account, we will use a standard technique in the literature and calculate the windfall that the benchmark


                                                                   4
planner would have to receive in order to be able to achieve the same aggregate welfare as the optimal
planner.
   The models outlined above yield results on the optimal allocations of consumption and income from
the planner’s perspective, and these allocations may di¤er from what individuals would choose in a private
equilibrium. After deriving the optimal allocations, we next consider how a social planner could implement
these allocations. That is, following standard practice in the optimal taxation literature, we use these
results to infer the tax system that would distort individuals’private choices so as to make them coincide
with the planner’s choice. When we refer to "marginal taxes" or "average taxes" below, we are describing
that inferred tax system.


B          Analytical Results for a Simple Example
To provide some intuitive analytical results, we consider a version of the model above in which utility is
additively separable between consumption and labor, exhibits constant relative risk aversion in consumption,
and is isoelastic in labor:
                                                        1
                                         yh;i    (ch;i )  1        yh;i
                                u(ch;i ;      )=                          :
                                         wi          1             wi
The parameter determines the concavity of utility from consumption,4 sets the relative weight of con-
sumption and leisure in the utility function, and determines the elasticity of labor supply. In particular,
the compensated (constant-consumption) labor supply elasticity is 1 1 .
   The planner’s problem, using the two-part approach from above, can be written:

                                               H          I
                                                                     "                                              #
                                               X          X              (ch;i )
                                                                                 1
                                                                                                1          yh;i
                                      max            ph        h;i                                                       ;        (8)
                                     fc;y;Rg
                                                          i
                                                                             1                             wi
                                               h=1


subject to H feasibility constraints
                                                          I
                                                          X
                                                               h;i   (yh;i         ch;i )           Rh ;                          (9)
                                                          i

an aggregate budget constraint that the sum of transfers is zero:

                                                                 H
                                                                 X
                                                                          Rh = 0;                                                (10)
                                                                 h=1


and incentive constraints for each individual:
                                       1                                                    1
                                 (ch;i )        1             yh;i               (ch;j )               1          yh;j
                                                                                                                             :   (11)
                                     1                        wi                     1                             wi

We can learn a few key characteristics of an optimal height tax from this simpli…ed example.
   First, the …rst-order conditions for consumption and income imply that the classic result from Mirrlees
(1971) of no marginal taxation on the top earner holds for the top earners in all height groups. Speci…cally,
the optimal allocations satisfy:
                                                                  1
                                                          yh;I
                                          (ch;I ) =                                                     (12)
                                                    wI wI
for the highest wage earner I in each height group h.
    4 If    = 1, this utility function is logarithmic in consumption.


                                                                             5
    Condition (12) states that the optimal allocations equate the marginal utility of consumption to the
marginal disutility of producing income for all highest-skilled individuals, regardless of height. Individuals’
private choices would also satisfy (12), so optimal taxes do not distort the choices of the highest-skilled. As
we will see below, the highest-skilled individuals of di¤erent heights will earn di¤erent incomes under optimal
policy. Nonetheless, they all will face zero marginal tax rates. This extension of the classic "no marginal
tax at the top" result is due to the observability of height, which prevents individuals from being able to
claim allocations meant for shorter height groups. Therefore, the planner need not manipulate incentives by
distorting shorter highest-skilled individuals’private decisions, as it would if it were not allowed to condition
allocations on height.5
    Second, the average cost of increasing social welfare is equalized across height groups:

                                             I
                                             X                       I
                                                                     X
                                                   h;i   (ch;i ) =       g;i   (cg;i )                                      (13)
                                               i                     i


for all height groups g; h. The term (ch;i ) is the cost, in units of consumption, of a marginal increase in
the utility of individual h,i. The planner’s allocations satisfy condition (13) because, if the average cost of
increasing welfare were not equal across height groups, the planner could raise social welfare by transferring
resources to the height group for which this cost was relatively low. Note that in the special case of
logarithmic utility, where = 1, condition (13) implies that average consumption is equalized across height
groups.6
    In the next section, we continue this example with numerical simulations to learn more about the optimal
tax policy taking height into account.


II       Calculations Based on the Empirical Distribution
In this section, we use wage data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth and the methods described
above to calculate the optimal tax schedule for the United States, taking height into account. The data are
the same as that used in Persico, Postlewaite, and Silverman (2004), and we thank those authors for making
their data available for our use.7


A      The Data
The main empirical task is to construct wage distributions by height group. For simplicity, we focus only on
adult white males. This allows us to abstract from potential interactions between height and race or gender
in determining wages. Though interesting, such interactions are not the focus of this paper. We also limit
the sample to men between the ages of 32 and 39 in 1996. This limits the extent to which, if height were
trending over time, height might be acting as an indicator of age. The latest date for which we have height
    5 Thisresult does not depend on the highest wage wI being the same across groups.
    6 Readersfamiliar with recent research in dynamic optimal taxation (e.g., Golosov, Kocherlakota, and Tsyvinski, 2003) may
recognize that (13) is a static analogue to that literature’s so-called Inverse Euler Equation, a condition originally derived by
William Rogerson (1985) in his study of repeated moral hazard. Height groups play a role in our static setting similar to that
played by time periods in the dynamic setting.
   7 The use of wage data raises a couple of conceptual questions. First, are wages the same as ability? In principle, wages are

in‡uenced by a variety of other factors, such as compensating for work conditions. Although these factors could be correlated
with height, we have no reason to believe that is the case. Second, if wages are observable, why not tax them directly? One
possible answer to this question is that wages are harder for a tax authority to observe than earnings because reported hours
are easily manipulable.



                                                                6
is 1985, when the individuals were between 21 and 28 years of age. After these screens, we are left with
1,738 observations.8
    Table 1 shows the distribution by height of our sample of white males in the United States. Median
height is 71 inches, and there is a clear concentration of heights around the median. We split the population
into three groups: "short" for less than 70 inches, "medium" for between 70 and 72 inches, and "tall" for
more than 72 inches. In principle, one could divide the population into any number of distinct height groups,
but a small number makes the analysis more intuitive and simpler to calculate and summarize. Moreover,
to obtain reliable estimates with a …ner division would require more observations.
    We calculate wages9 by dividing reported 1996 wage and salary income by reported work hours for 1996.10
We consider only full-time workers, which we de…ne (following Persico, Postlewaite, and Silverman, 2004) as
those working at least 1,000 hours. We group wages into 18 wage bins, as shown in the …rst three columns
of Table 2, and use the average wage across all workers within a wage bin as the wage for all individuals who
fall within that bin’s wage range.
    The distribution of wages for tall people yields a higher mean wage than does the distribution for short
people. This can be seen in the …nal three columns of Table 2, which shows the distribution of wages by
height group. Figure 1 plots the data shown in Table 2. As the …gure illustrates, the distributions are
similar around the most common wages but are noticeably di¤erent toward the tails. Many more tall white
males have wages toward the top of the distribution and many fewer have wages toward the bottom than
short white males. This causes the mean wage for the tall to be $17.28 compared to $16.74 for the medium
and $14.84 for the short. The tall therefore have an average wage 16 percent higher than the short in our
data. Given that the mean height among the tall is 74 inches compared with 67 inches among the short,
this suggests that each inch of height adds just over two percent to wages (if the e¤ect is linear)–quite close
to Persico et al.’s estimate of 1.8 percent.


B     What Explains the Height Premium?
We have just seen that each inch of height adds about two percent to a young man’s income in the United
States, on average. Two recent papers have provided quite di¤erent explanations for this fact.
    Persico, Postlewaite, and Silverman (2004) attribute the height premium to the e¤ect of adolescent height
on individuals’development of characteristics later rewarded by the labor market, such as self-esteem. They
write: "We can think of this characteristic as a form of human capital, a set of skills that is accumulated
at earlier stages of development." By exploiting the same data used in this paper, they …nd that "the
preponderance of the disadvantage experienced by shorter adults in the labor market can be explained by
the fact that, on average, these adults were also shorter at age 16." They control for family socioeconomic
characteristics and height at younger ages and …nd that the e¤ect of adolescent height remains strong.
Finally, using evidence on adolescents’ height and participation in activities, they conclude that "social
e¤ects during adolescence, rather than contemporaneous labor market discrimination or correlation with
     8 It is unclear whether a broader sample would increase or decrease the gains from the height tax.     For example, adding
women to the sample is likely to increase the value of a height tax, as men are systematically taller than women and, as the
large literature on the gender pay gap documents, earn more on average. In this case, a height tax would serve as a proxy
for gender-based taxes (see Alberto Alesina, Andrea Ichino, and Loukas Karabarbounis, 2008). Our use of a limited sample
focuses attention on height itself as a key variable.
     9 Note that since we observe hours, we can calculate wages even though the social planner cannot. An alternative approach

is to use the distribution of income and the existing tax system to infer a wage distribution, as in Saez (2001).
   1 0 There is top-coding of income in the NLSY for con…dentiality protection. This should have little e¤ect on our results, as

most of these workers are in our top wage bin and thus are already assigned the average wage among their wage group.




                                                               7
productive attributes, may be at the root of the disparity in wages across heights."
   In direct contrast, Case and Paxson (2008) argue that the evidence points to a "correlation with pro-
ductive attributes," namely cognitive ability, as the explanation for the adult height premium. They show
that height as early as three years old is correlated with measures of cognitive ability, and that once these
measures are included in wage regressions the height premium substantially declines. Moreover, adolescent
heights are no more predictive of their wages than adult heights, contradicting Persico et al.’s proposed ex-
planation. Case and Paxson argue that both height and cognitive ability are a¤ected by prenatal, in utero,
and early childhood nutrition and care, and that the resulting positive correlation between the two explains
the height premium among adults.
   Thus, the two most recent, careful econometric studies of the adult height premium reach very di¤erent
conclusions about its source. How would a resolution to this debate a¤ect the conclusions of this paper? Is
the optimal height tax dependent upon the root cause of the height premium?
   Fortunately, we can be largely agnostic as to the source of the height premium when discussing optimal
height taxes. What matters for optimal height taxation is the consistent statistical relationship between
exogenous height and income, not the reason for that relationship.11 Of course, if taxes could be targeted at
the source of the height premium, then a height tax would be redundant, no matter the source. Depending
on the true explanation for the height premium, taxing the source of it may be appropriate: for example,
Case and Paxson’s analysis would suggest early childhood investment by the state in order to o¤set poor
conditions for some children. To the extent that these policies reduced the height premium, the optimal
height tax would be reduced as well. However, so long as a height premium exists, the case for an optimal
height tax remains.


C     Baseline Results
To simulate the optimal tax schedule, we need to specify functional forms and parameters. We will use the
same utility function that we analyzed in Section 1.2:
                                                                 1
                                                           (ch;i )       1     yh;i
                                       u(ch;i ; lh;i ) =                                ;
                                                               1               wi

where determines the curvature of the utility from consumption, is a taste parameter, and makes the
compensated (constant-consumption) elasticity of labor supply equal to 1 1 . Our baseline values for these
parameters are = 1:5, = 2:55, and = 3: We vary and below to explore their e¤ects on the optimal
policy, while an appropriate value for is calibrated from the data. We determined the baseline choices of
  and as follows.
    Economists di¤er widely in their preferred value for the elasticity of labor supply. A survey by Victor
R. Fuchs, Alan B. Krueger, and James M. Poterba (1998) found that the median labor economist believes
the traditional compensated elasticity of labor supply is 0.18 for men and 0.43 for women. By contrast,
macroeconomists working in the real business cycle literature often choose parameterizations that imply
larger values: for example, Edward C. Prescott (2004) estimates a (constant-consumption) compensated
elasticity of labor supply around 3. Miles Kimball and Matthew Shapiro (2008) give an extensive discussion
of labor supply elasticities, and they show that the constant-consumption elasticity is generally larger than
  1 1 In principle, individuals would have an incentive to grow less in the presence of a height tax. For example, to the extent

that parents would intentionally provide a less healthy environment for their children in response to a height tax, that could
in‡uence the optimal design of a height tax. We ignore this possibility below.



                                                                     8
the traditional compensated elasticity. Taking all of this into account, we use 1 1 = 0:5 in our baseline
estimates to be conservative. In the sensitivity results shown below, we see that the size of the optimal
height tax is positively related to the elasticity of labor supply.
    In our sample, the mean hours worked in 1996 was 2,435.5 hours per full-time worker. This is approx-
imately 42 percent of total feasible work hours, where we assume eight hours per day of sleeping, eating,
etc., and …ve days of illness per year. We choose so that the population-weighted average of work hours
divided by feasible hours in the benchmark (no height tax) allocation is approximately 42 percent: this yields
  = 2:55. The results on the optimal height tax are not sensitive to the choice of .
    With the wage distributions from Table 2 and the speci…cation of the model just described, we can solve
the planner’s problem to obtain the optimal tax policy. For comparison, we also calculate optimal taxes
under the benchmark model in which the planner ignores height when setting taxes. Figure 2 plots the
average tax rate schedules for short, medium, and tall individuals in the optimal model as well as the average
tax rate schedule in the benchmark model (the two lowest wage groups are not shown because their average
tax rates are large and negative, making the rest of the graph hard to see). Figure 3 plots the marginal tax
rate schedules. We calculate marginal rates as the implicit wedge that the optimal allocation inserts into
the individual’s private equilibrium consumption-leisure tradeo¤. Using our assumed functional forms, the
…rst order conditions for consumption and leisure imply that the marginal tax rate can be calculated as:
                                                                                          1
                                                               yh;i             yh;i
                                                   uy ch;i ;    wi               wi
                           T 0 (yh;i ; h) = 1 +                         =1
                                                                 yh;i        wi (ch;i )
                                                  wi uc ch;i ;    wi


where T 0 (yh;i ; h) is the height-speci…c marginal tax rate at the income level yh;i . Table 3 lists the cor-
responding income, consumption, labor, and utility levels as well as tax payments, average tax rates, and
marginal tax rates at each wage level for the height groups in the optimal model. Table 4 shows these same
variables for the benchmark model (with no height tax).
    The graphical tax schedules provide several useful insights about the optimal solution. First, notice
the relative positions of the average tax schedules in Figure 2. The average tax rate for tall individuals is
always above that for short individuals, and usually above that for the medium group, with the gap due to
the lump-sum transfers between groups. The benchmark model’s average tax schedule lies in between the
optimal tall and short schedules and near the optimal medium schedule. Other than their levels, however,
the tax schedules are quite similar and …t with the conclusions of previous simulations (see Saez, 2001 and
Matti Tuomala, 1990) that optimal average tax rates rise quickly at low income levels and then level o¤ as
income gets large. Finally, in Figure 3, we can see an approximately ‡at marginal tax rate for most incomes
and then a sharp drop to zero marginal rates for the highest wage earners in each group. The drop at the
top of the income distribution re‡ects the extension of the classic zero top marginal rate result to a model
with observable height.
    Turning to the data in Tables 3, 4 and 5, we can learn more detail about the optimal policy. Table 3
shows that the average tax on the tall is about 7.1 percent of the average tall income, while the average tax
on the medium is about 3.8 percent of average medium income. These taxes pay for an average transfer
to the short of more than 13 percent of average short income. In a sense, this policy looks like a disability
insurance system under which the "disabled" shorter population receives a subsidy from the "abled" taller
population. But it is not the case that all "abled" workers face the same tax system. Those taller than
average pay notably higher tax rates than those of average height.


                                                           9
    Table 4 shows that the planner also transfers resources to the short population in the benchmark Mirrlees
model. Importantly, this is not an explicit transfer. Rather, it re‡ects the di¤erences in the distributions of
the height groups across wages. Due to the progressive taxes of the benchmark model, the tall and medium
end up paying more tax on average than the short even when taxes are not conditioned on height. The
resulting implicit transfers are in the same direction as the average transfers in Table 3, though substantially
smaller.
    Table 3 also shows that the optimal tax policy usually gives lower utility to taller individuals of a given
wage than to shorter individuals of the same wage. This translates into lower expected utility for the tall
population as a whole than for shorter populations, as shown at the bottom of Table 3. As Mirrlees (1971)
noted, these results are typical for optimal tax models when ability is observable. Intuitively, the planner
wants to equalize the marginal utility of consumption and the marginal disutility of producing income across
all individuals, not their levels of utility. To see why this results in lower expected utility for the tall,
suppose that wages were perfectly correlated with height, so that the planner had complete information.
Then, the planner would equalize consumption across height groups, but it would not equalize labor e¤ort
across height groups. Starting from equal levels of labor e¤ort, the marginal disutility of producing income
will be lower for taller populations because they are higher-skilled. Thus, the planner will require more labor
e¤ort from taller individuals, lowering their utility. Another way to think of this is that a lump-sum tax on
taller individuals doesn’t a¤ect their optimal consumption-labor tradeo¤ but lowers their consumption for a
given level of labor e¤ort. Thus, they work more to satisfy their optimal tradeo¤ and obtain a lower level
of utility.
    We make the optimal tax policy more concrete by using the results from Table 3 to generate a tax
schedule that resembles those used by U.S. taxpayers each year–this schedule is shown as Table 5. Whereas
a typical U.S. tax schedule has the taxpayer look across the columns to …nd his or her family status (single,
married, etc.), our optimal schedule has height groups across the columns. As the numbers show, taller
individuals pay substantially more taxes than shorter individuals for most income levels. For example, a
tall person with income of $50,000 pays about $4,500 more in taxes than a short person of the same income.
    Finally, we can use the results of the benchmark model to calculate a money-metric welfare gain from
the height tax by …nding the windfall revenue that would allow the benchmark planner to reach the same
level of social welfare as the planner that uses a height tax. Table 4 shows that the windfall required is
about 0.19 percent of aggregate income in our baseline parameter case. In 2008, when the national income
of the U.S. economy was about $12.5 trillion, a height tax would yield an annual welfare gain worth about
$24 billion.


D    Sensitivity to Parameters
Here, we explore the e¤ects on optimal taxes of varying our assumed parameters. In particular, we consider
a range of values for risk aversion and the elasticity of labor supply. To summarize the e¤ects of each
parameter, we focus on two statistics: the average transfer to the short as a percent of average short income
and the windfall required by the benchmark planner to achieve the aggregate welfare obtained by the optimal
planner. Table 6 shows these two statistics when we vary the risk aversion parameter , and Table 7 shows
them when we vary the elasticity of labor supply 1 1 . In both cases, when either or is changed, the
parameter must also be adjusted so as retain an empirically plausible level of hours worked. We adjust
to match the empirical evidence as in the baseline analysis.
   Increased risk aversion (higher ) increases the average transfer to the short and the gain to aggregate


                                                      10
welfare obtained by conditioning taxes on height. For example, raising from 1.50 to 3.50 increases the
average transfer to the short from 13.38 percent to 13.97 percent of average short income and increases the
windfall equivalent to the welfare gain from 0.19 percent of aggregate income to 0.28 percent. Intuitively,
more concave utility makes the Utilitarian planner more eager to redistribute income and smooth consump-
tion across types. The transfer across height groups is a blunt redistributive tool, as it taxes some low-skilled
tall to give to some high-skilled short, but it is on balance a redistributive tool because the tall have higher
incomes than the short on average. Thus, as risk aversion rises, the average transfer to the short increases
in size and in its power to increase aggregate welfare.
    Increased elasticity of labor supply (lower ) also increases the optimal height tax. For example, raising
the constant-consumption elasticity of labor supply from 0.5 to 3.0 increases the average transfer to the
short from 13.38 percent to 31.73 percent of average short income and increases the windfall equivalent
to the welfare gain from 0.19 percent of aggregate income to 0.49 percent. Intuitively, a higher elasticity
of labor supply makes redistributing within height groups more distortionary, so the planner relies on the
nondistortionary transfer across height groups for more of its redistribution toward the short, low-skilled.
As with increased risk aversion, increased elasticity of labor supply makes the average taxes and transfers
across height groups larger and gives the height tax more power to increase welfare.


E     Can Height Taxes Be Pareto-Improving?
Some readers have asked whether this paper’s analysis is a critique of Pareto e¢ ciency. The answer depends
on how one chooses to apply the Pareto criterion.
     One approach is to consider the set of tax policies that place the economy on the Pareto frontier–that is,
the frontier on which it is impossible to increase the welfare of one person without decreasing the welfare of
another. This set of policies can be derived within the Mirrless approach by changing the weights attached
to the di¤erent individuals in the economy.12 (By contrast, throughout the paper, we use a Utilitarian
social welfare function with equal weight on each person’s utility.) Nearly every speci…cation of these social
welfare weights, except perhaps a knife-edge case, has taxes conditioned on height. Thus, most Pareto
e¢ cient allocations include height-dependent taxes.
     A related, but slightly di¤erent, question is whether height-dependent taxes are a Pareto improvement
starting from a position without such taxes. In principle, they can be. Consider the extreme case in which
height is perfectly correlated with ability. Then, income taxes could be replaced with lump-sum height taxes
speci…c to each individual’s height. By removing marginal distortions without raising tax burdens, the lump-
sum taxes make all individuals better o¤.13 In general, the tighter the connection between height and wages
and the greater the distortionary e¤ects of marginal income taxes, the larger is the Pareto improvement
provided by a height tax.
     In practice, however, such Pareto improvements are so small as to be uninteresting. We have calculated
the height tax that provides a Pareto improvement to the height-independent benchmark tax system derived
above. We solve an augmented planner’s problem that adds to the set of equations (1) through (3) new
constraints guaranteeing that no individual’s utility falls below what it received in the benchmark allocation,
i.e., the solution to the problem described by equations (1), (2), and (7). Given the data and our benchmark
parameter assumptions described above, it turns out that only an extremely small Pareto-improving height
  1 2 Werning (2007) uses this approach to study the conditions under which taxes are Pareto e¢ cient, including in the context

of observable traits.
  1 3 Louis Kaplow suggested this example.




                                                              11
tax is available to the planner. The planner seeking a Pareto-improving height tax levies a very small
(approximately $4.15 annual) average tax on the middle height group to fund subsidies to the short ($2.90)
and tall ($2.37) groups. Not surprisingly, in light of how small the Pareto-improving height tax is, the
changes in utility from the policy are trivial in size.
    Nevertheless, if a nontrivial Pareto-improving height tax were possible, and if people both understood and
were convinced of that possibility, it is our sense that most people would be comfortable with such a policy.
In contrast, we believe most people would be uncomfortable with the Utilitarian-optimal height tax that we
derived above. The di¤erence is that the Utilitarian-optimal height tax implies substantial costs to some
and gains for others relative to a height-independent policy designed according to the same welfare weights.
Therefore, this paper highlights the intuitive discomfort people feel toward height taxes that sacri…ce the
utility of the tall for the short, not Pareto improvements that come through unconventional means such as
a tax on height.


III     Conclusion
The problem addressed in this paper is a classic one: the optimal redistribution of income. A Utilitarian
social planner would like to transfer resources from high-ability individuals to low-ability individuals, but
he is constrained by the fact that he cannot directly observe ability. In conventional analysis, the planner
observes only income, which depends on ability and e¤ort, and is deterred from the fully egalitarian outcome
because taxing income discourages e¤ort. If the planner’s problem is made more realistic by allowing him to
observe other variables correlated with ability, such as height, he should use those other variables in addition
to income for setting optimal policy. Our calculations show that a Utilitarian social planner should levy a
sizeable tax on height. A tall person making $50,000 should pay about $4,500 more in taxes than a short
person making the same income.
    Height is, of course, only one of many possible personal characteristics that are correlated with a person’s
opportunities to produce income. In this paper, we have avoided these other variables, such as race and
gender, because they are intertwined with a long history of discrimination. In light of this history, any
discussion of using these variables in tax policy would raise various political and philosophical issues that
go beyond the scope of this paper. But if a height tax is deemed acceptable, tax analysts should entertain
the possibility of using other such “tags” as well. As scienti…c knowledge advances, having the right genes
could potentially become the ideal tag.
    Many readers, however, will not so quickly embrace the idea of levying higher taxes on tall taxpayers.
Indeed, when …rst hearing the proposal, most people either recoil from it or are amused by it. And
that reaction is precisely what makes the policy so intriguing. A tax on height follows inexorably from a
well-established empirical regularity and the standard approach to the optimal design of tax policy. If the
conclusion is rejected, the assumptions must be reconsidered.
    One possibility is that the canonical Utilitarian model omits some constraints from political economy that
are crucial for guiding tax policy. For example, some might fear that a height tax would potentially become
a “gateway” tax for the government, making taxes based on demographic chartacteristics more natural and
dangerously expanding the scope for government information collection and policy personalization. Yet
modern tax systems already condition on much personal information, such as number of children, marital
status, and personal disabilities. A height tax is qualitatively similar, so it is hard to see why it would trigger
a sudden descent down a slippery slope.


                                                        12
    A second possibility is that the Utilitarian model fails to incorporate any role for horizontal equity. As
Alan J. Auerbach and Kevin A. Hassett (1999) note, "...there is virtual unanimity that horizontal equity –
the extent to which equals are treated equally – is a worthy goal of any tax system." It may, for instance,
be hard to explain to a tall person that he has to pay more in taxes than a short person with the same
earnings capacity because, as a tall person, he had a better chance of earning more. Yet horizontal equity has
no independent role in Utilitarian theory. When ability is unobservable, as in the Vickrey-Mirrlees model,
respecting horizontal equity means neglecting information about exogenous personal characteristics related to
ability. This information can make redistribution more e¢ cient, as we have seen. In other words, as Kaplow
(2001) emphasizes, horizontal equity gives priority to a dimension of heterogeneity across individuals–ability–
and focuses on equal treatment within the groups de…ned by that characteristic. He argues that it is di¢ cult
to think of a reason why that approach, rather than one which aims to maximize the well-being of individuals
across all groups, is an appealing one. Why would society sacri…ce potentially large gains for its average
member to preserve equal treatment of individuals within an arbitrarily-de…ned group?
    A third possibility is that the Utilitarian model needs to be supplanted with another normative framework.
Libertarians, for example, emphasize individual liberty and rights as the sole determinants of whether a policy
is justi…ed (see, e.g., David M. Hasen, 2007). From their perspective, any transfer of resources by policies
that infringe upon individuals’ rights is deemed unjust. Daniel M. Hausman and Michael S. McPherson
(1996) discuss the views of Robert Nozick, a prominent Libertarian philosopher, by writing: "According
to Nozick’s entitlement theory of justice, an outcome is just if it arises from just acquisition of what was
unowned or by voluntary transfer of what was justly owned...Only remedying or preventing injustices justi…es
redistribution..." Similarly, the prominent Libertarian economist Milton Friedman (1962) writes: "I …nd it
hard, as a liberal, to see any justi…cation for graduated taxation solely to redistribute income. This seems a
clear case of using coercion to take from some in order to give to others..." How to reconstitute the theory
of optimal taxation from a strictly Libertarian perspective is, however, far from clear.
    Our results, therefore, leave readers with a menu of conclusions. You must either advocate a tax on
height, or you must reject, or at least signi…cantly amend, the conventional Utilitarian approach to optimal
taxation. The choice is yours, but the choice cannot be avoided.


References
 [1] Akerlof, George, (1978). "The Economics of ’Tagging’as Applied to the Optimal Income Tax, Welfare
     Programs, and Manpower Planning," American Economic Review, 68(1), March, pp. 8-19.

 [2] Albanesi, Stefania and Christopher Sleet, (2006). "Dynamic Optimal Taxation with Private Informa-
     tion," Review of Economic Studies 73, pp. 1-30.

 [3] Alesina, Alberto, Andrea Ichino, and Loukas Karabarbounis (2008). "Gender-based Taxation and the
     Division of Family Chores," Working Paper, November.

 [4] Auerbach, Alan J. and Kevin A. Hassett, (2002). "A New Measure Of Horizontal Equity," American
     Economic Review 92(4), pp. 1116-1125, September.

 [5] Case, Anne and Christina Paxson (2008). "Stature and Status: Height, Ability, and Labor Market
     Outcomes," Journal of Political Economy, 116(3).




                                                      13
 [6] Edgeworth, F.Y., (1897). "The Pure Theory of Taxation," Economic Journal 7, pp. 46-70, 226-238,
     and 550-571 (in three parts).

 [7] Friedman, Milton (1962). Capitalism and Freedom. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

 [8] Fuchs, Victor R., Alan B. Krueger, and James M. Poterba. (1998). "Economists’ Views about Para-
     meters, Values, and Policies: Survey Results in Labor and Public Economics," Journal of Economic
     Literature, 36(3), (September), 1387-1425.

 [9] Golosov, Mikhail, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Aleh Tsyvinski (2003). "Optimal Indirect and Capital
     Taxation," Review of Economic Studies 70, pp. 569-587.

[10] Golosov, Mikhail, Aleh Tsyvinski, and Ivan Werning (2006). "New Dynamic Public Finance: A User’s
     Guide," NBER Macroannual 2006.

[11] Hasen, David M. (2007). "Liberalism and Ability Taxation," Texas Law Review 85(5), April.

[12] Hausman, Daniel M. and Michael S. McPherson (1996). Economic Analysis and Moral Philosophy, New
     York, NY: Cambridge University Press.

[13] Immonen, Ritva, Ravi Kanbur, Michael Keen, and Matti Tuomala (1998). "Tagging and Taxing,"
     Economica 65, pp. 179-192.

[14] Judge, Timothy A., and Daniel M. Cable, (2004). “The E¤ect of Physical Height on Workplace Success
     and Income: Preliminary Test of a Theoretical Model,” Journal of Applied Psychology, vol 89, no 1,
     428-441.

[15] Kanbur, Ravi, Michael Keen, and Matti Tuomala (1994). "Optimal Non-Linear Taxation for the Alle-
     viation of Income-Poverty," European Economic Review 38, pp. 1613-1632.

[16] Kaplow, Louis, (2001). "Horizontal Equity: New Measures, Unclear Principles," in Hassett, Kevin A.
     and R. Glenn Hubbard (eds.), Inequality and Tax Policy. Washington, D.C.: AEI Press

[17] Kaplow, Louis, (2007). "Optimal Income Transfers," International Tax and Public Finance 14, pp.
     295-325.

[18] Kimball, Miles and Shapiro, Matthew. (2008). "Labor Supply: Are the Income and Substitution E¤ects
     Both Large or Both Small?" NBER Working Paper 14208, July.

[19] Kocherlakota, Narayana (2006). "Zero Expected Wealth Taxes: A Mirrlees Approach to Dynamic
     Optimal Taxation," Econometrica 73(5), September.

[20] Mirrlees, J.A., (1971). "An Exploration in the Theory of Optimal Income Taxation," Review of Eco-
     nomic Studies 38, 175-208.

[21] Mirrlees, J.A., (1986). "The Theory of Optimal Taxation”, in Handbook of Mathematical Economics,
     edited by K.J. Arrow and M.D. Intrilligator, vol. III, ch. 24, 1198-1249.

[22] Persico, Nicola, Andrew Postlewaite, and Dan Silverman, (2004). "The E¤ect of Adolescent Experience
     on Labor Market Outcomes: The Case of Height," Journal of Political Economy, 112(5).



                                                  14
[23] Prescott, Edward C. (2004). "Why Do Americans Work So Much More Than Europeans?," FRB Min-
     neapolis - Quarterly Review, v28(1), pp. 2-14, July.

[24] Rogerson, William, (1985). “Repeated Moral Hazard," Econometrica 53, pp. 69–76.

[25] Saez, Emmanuel, (2001). "Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income tax Rates," Review of Economic
     Studies 68, pp. 205-229.

[26] Tuomala, Matti (1990). Optimal Income Tax and Redistribution. New York: Oxford University Press.

[27] Viard, Alan, (2001a). "Optimal Categorical Transfer Payments: The Welfare Economics of Limited
     Lump-Sum Redistribution," Journal of Public Economic Theory 3(4), pp. 483-500.

[28] Viard, Alan, (2001b). "Some Results on the Comparative Statics of Optimal Categorical Transfer
     Payments," Public Finance Review 29(2), pp. 148-180, March.

[29] Vickrey, W., (1945). "Measuring Marginal Utility by Reactions to Risk," Econometrica 13, 319-333.

[30] Werning, Ivan (2007). "Pareto E¢ cient Income Taxation," MIT Working Paper, April.




                                                  15
Table 1: Height distribution of adult white male
full-time workers in the U.S.
                                     Cumulative
                    Percent of
Height in inches                     percent of
                    population
                                     population
              60            0.1%              0.1%
              61            0.1%              0.2%
              62            0.3%              0.6%
              63            0.5%              1.1%
              64            1.0%              2.1%
              65            2.0%              4.1%
              66            3.2%              7.2%
              67            4.8%             12.1%
              68            8.5%             20.5%
              69           10.1%             30.7%
              70           14.8%             45.5%
              71           12.9%             58.4%
              72           17.0%             75.4%
              73            9.8%             85.3%
              74            8.3%             93.6%
              75            3.0%             96.5%
              76            2.6%             99.1%
              77            0.5%             99.6%
              78            0.2%             99.8%
              79            0.1%             99.9%
              80            0.1%            100.0%

Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth,
Authors' calculations
Table 2: Wage distribution of adult white male full-time workers in the U.S. by height


             Min wage    Max wage    Average       Number of observations       Proportion of each height group in
  Bin
              in bin      in bin    wage in bin     in each height group                each wage range

                                     Pop. Avg       Short Medium       Tall      Short       Medium        Tall
         1        -          4.50          2.88        23     29          13      0.043        0.037        0.030
         2       4.50        6.25          5.51        40     33          22      0.075        0.042        0.052
         3       6.25        8.25          7.24        57     63          29      0.107        0.081        0.068
         4       8.25       10.00          9.17        58     67          39      0.109        0.086        0.091
         5          10         12         10.91        67     94          48      0.126        0.121        0.112
         6          12         14         12.98        60    102          53      0.113        0.131        0.124
         7          14         16         14.98        56     68          44      0.105        0.087        0.103
         8          16         18         16.91        38     57          33      0.071        0.073        0.077
         9          18         20         18.95        32     54          28      0.060        0.069        0.066
        10          20         22         20.91        24     46          25      0.045        0.059        0.059
        11          22         24         22.83        22     38          21      0.041        0.049        0.049
        12          24         27         25.26        15     50          15      0.028        0.064        0.035
        13          27         33         29.55        14     24          25      0.026        0.031        0.059
        14          33         43         37.18          9    19          12      0.017        0.024        0.028
        15          43         54         47.19          9    19            7     0.017        0.024        0.016
        16          54         60         54.55          5     7            7     0.009        0.009        0.016
        17          60         73         63.53          4     6            4     0.008        0.008        0.009
        18          73        n/a         81.52          0     2            2        -         0.003        0.005

                                                      Total observations         Average wage by height group,
                                                       533     778       427       using average wage in bin
                                                                                   14.84       16.74       17.28
Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, Authors' calculations
Table 3: Optimal Allocations in the Baseline Case
                                             Optimal Model
Panel A: Income and Consumption
Wage bin     Wage            Annual income                   Annual consumption
             Pop.
             Avg      Short       Med        Tall      Short       Med       Tall
         1     2.88     4,086       4,104      4,107    27,434      25,332    24,913
         2     5.51    10,588      10,181     10,629    29,306      26,784    26,548
         3     7.24    15,174      15,386     15,004    31,178      28,624    28,064
         4     9.17    20,652      20,924     21,309    33,528      30,771    30,459
         5    10.91    25,730      26,616     26,442    35,926      33,273    32,686
         6    12.98    31,852      33,492     33,415    38,887      36,541    35,886
         7    14.98    38,305      37,846     39,042    42,292      38,657    38,672
         8    16.91    42,444      42,890     43,350    44,512      41,035    40,778
         9    18.95    48,882      50,102     49,636    47,962      44,607    43,834
        10    20.91    54,136      56,189     56,068    50,909      47,896    47,189
        11    22.83    59,266      60,036     59,702    53,832      49,975    49,091
        12    25.26    60,068      68,522     59,702    54,223      54,547    49,091
        13    29.55    70,412      70,338     79,398    58,229      55,315    57,056
        14    37.18    88,591      93,054     94,415    64,200      62,789    62,752
        15    47.19   134,292     138,770    127,681    83,286      83,042    75,221
        16    54.55   154,128     151,130    157,447    95,184      90,211    90,875
        17    63.53   188,292     182,230    179,611   119,168     108,755   103,984
        18    81.52               237,496    240,765               144,014   141,369

Expected Values         36,693     43,032     44,489     41,603     41,407    41,319
Table 3, Panel B: Time spent working and Utility
Wage bin      Wage         Fraction of time working                     Utility
              Pop.
              Avg        Short        Med          Tall       Short     Med       Tall
          1     2.88         0.25        0.25          0.25      1.07     1.03       1.03
          2     5.51         0.33        0.32          0.33      1.08     1.04       1.04
          3     7.24         0.36        0.37          0.36      1.10     1.06       1.05
          4     9.17         0.39        0.40          0.40      1.12     1.08       1.07
          5    10.91         0.41        0.42          0.42      1.14     1.10       1.10
          6    12.98         0.43        0.45          0.45      1.16     1.13       1.12
          7    14.98         0.44        0.44          0.45      1.19     1.16       1.15
          8    16.91         0.44        0.44          0.45      1.21     1.18       1.17
          9    18.95         0.45        0.46          0.45      1.23     1.20       1.20
         10    20.91         0.45        0.47          0.47      1.25     1.22       1.22
         11    22.83         0.45        0.46          0.45      1.27     1.24       1.24
         12    25.26         0.41        0.47          0.41      1.29     1.26       1.26
         13    29.55         0.41        0.41          0.47      1.31     1.29       1.28
         14    37.18         0.41        0.43          0.44      1.34     1.32       1.32
         15    47.19         0.49        0.51          0.47      1.37     1.36       1.36
         16    54.55         0.49        0.48          0.50      1.41     1.40       1.39
         17    63.53         0.51        0.50          0.49      1.44     1.43       1.43
         18    81.52                     0.51          0.51               1.49       1.48

Expected Values              0.41        0.42         0.43     1.175      1.161    1.158
Table 3, Panel C: Average and Marginal tax rates
Wage bin      Wage              Average Tax Rate                         Marginal Tax Rate
              Pop.
              Avg         Short       Med           Tall          Short        Med           Tall
          1     2.88         -5.71      -5.17         -5.07          0.44        0.50           0.51
          2     5.51         -1.77      -1.63         -1.50          0.41        0.52           0.49
          3     7.24         -1.05      -0.86         -0.87          0.41        0.47           0.51
          4     9.17         -0.62      -0.47         -0.43          0.40        0.46           0.45
          5    10.91         -0.40      -0.25         -0.24          0.39        0.42           0.44
          6    12.98         -0.22      -0.09         -0.07          0.37        0.37           0.39
          7    14.98         -0.10      -0.02           0.01         0.33        0.43           0.39
          8    16.91         -0.05       0.04           0.06         0.38        0.44           0.44
          9    18.95          0.02       0.11           0.12         0.35        0.39           0.42
         10    20.91          0.06       0.15           0.16         0.35        0.36           0.38
         11    22.83          0.09       0.17           0.18         0.35        0.40           0.43
         12    25.26          0.10       0.20           0.18         0.50        0.35           0.58
         13    29.55          0.17       0.21           0.28         0.53        0.56           0.41
         14    37.18          0.28       0.33           0.34         0.56        0.53           0.52
         15    47.19          0.38       0.40           0.41         0.27        0.23           0.44
         16    54.55          0.38       0.40           0.42         0.24        0.33           0.26
         17    63.53          0.37       0.40           0.42         0.00        0.18           0.26
         18    81.52                     0.39           0.41                     0.00           0.00

Expected Values              -0.62        -0.34       -0.28             0.39      0.42         0.43

Notes to Table 3:
Alpha=     2.55        Average transfer paid(+) or                Short        Med           Tall
Sigma=       3         received(-) as percent of per capita       -13.38%       3.78%         7.13%
Gamma= 1.5             income:
                       Maximum work hours per year:                    5,760

Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, Authors' calculations
Table 4: Benchmark Case
                                                                   Benchmark Model
                         Annual         Annual           Fraction of                    Annual tax     Average Tax    Marginal
Wage bin     Wage                                                        Utility
                         income       consumption      time working                     (inc.-cons.)      Rate        Tax Rate
         1      2.88         4,106          25,799               0.25            1.04          -21,693        -5.28        0.49
         2      5.51        10,479          27,443               0.33            1.05          -16,964        -1.62        0.48
         3      7.24        15,251          29,206               0.37            1.07          -13,955        -0.91        0.46

         4      9.17        20,926           31,461             0.40            1.09          -10,535         -0.50        0.44

         5     10.91        26,281           33,850             0.42            1.11          -7,569          -0.29        0.42
         6     12.98        32,962           37,004             0.44            1.14          -4,041          -0.12        0.38
         7     14.98        38,327           39,686             0.44            1.16          -1,359          -0.04        0.39
         8     16.91        42,837           41,913             0.44            1.19             924           0.02        0.43
         9     18.95        49,585           45,305             0.45            1.21           4,280           0.09        0.39
        10     20.91        55,518           48,507             0.46            1.23           7,012           0.13        0.37
        11     22.83        59,718           50,787             0.45            1.25           8,931           0.15        0.40
        12     25.26        64,720           53,296             0.44            1.27          11,424           0.18        0.44
        13     29.55        73,290           56,895             0.43            1.30          16,394           0.22        0.50
        14     37.18        92,058           63,385             0.43            1.33          28,673           0.31        0.54
        15     47.19       135,042           81,508             0.50            1.36          53,535           0.40        0.29
        16     54.55       153,574           92,198             0.49            1.40          61,376           0.40        0.28
        17     63.53       182,763          110,400             0.50            1.44          72,363           0.40        0.16
        18     81.52       236,347          145,040             0.50            1.49          91,307           0.39        0.00

Expected Values              41,345           41,345             0.42         1.164                 0         -0.40        0.42

Notes to Table 4:
Alpha=     2.55        Average transfer paid(+) or received(-) as         Short          Medium           Tall
Sigma=     3           percent of per capita income:                        -5.71%            1.59%         3.23%
Gamma= 1.5
                       Maximum work hours per year:                          5,760
                       Windfall for benchmark to obtain optimal, as pct of aggregate income:                 0.19%

Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, Authors' calculations
Table 5: Example Tax Table
If your taxable                                                        If your taxable
income is closest                                                      income is
to…               And you are --                                       closest to…         And you are --
                         Short         Medium           Tall                                   Short          Medium           Tall
                     69 inches or                   73 inches or                            69 inches or                   73 inches or
                                     70-72 inches                                                           70-72 inches
                         less                           more                                    less                           more

                    Your tax is --                                                         Your tax is --
      5,000                -22,697        -20,546        -20,137            105,000               33,947          36,919         38,280
     10,000                -19,136        -16,741        -16,391            110,000               36,859          39,704         41,406
     15,000                -16,107        -13,488        -13,062            115,000               39,771          42,488         44,532
     20,000                -13,248        -10,413         -9,962            120,000               42,682          45,273         47,658
     25,000                -10,581         -7,563         -7,061            125,000               45,594          48,058         50,784
     30,000                 -7,992         -4,882         -4,319            130,000               48,506          50,843         53,559
     35,000                 -5,549         -2,274         -1,671            135,000               51,289          53,628         55,930
     40,000                 -3,201            327            860            140,000               53,290          56,244         58,300
     45,000                   -882          2,920          3,420            145,000               55,291          58,344         60,671
     50,000                  1,411          5,444          5,976            150,000               57,292          60,444         63,041
     55,000                  3,599          7,746          8,368            155,000               59,204          62,481         65,412
     60,000                  5,810         10,044         10,788            160,000               60,694          64,500         67,615
     65,000                  8,867         12,350         13,766            165,000               62,184          66,519         69,658
     70,000                 11,931         14,828         16,744            170,000               63,674          68,538         71,701
     75,000                 15,264         18,151         19,722            175,000               65,163          70,556         73,743
     80,000                 18,622         21,506         22,715            180,000               66,653          72,575         75,778
     85,000                 21,979         24,861         25,819            185,000               68,143          74,594         77,722
     90,000                 25,211         28,216         28,922            190,000                   n/a         76,613         79,665
     95,000                 28,123         31,349         32,028            195,000                   n/a         78,632         81,609
     100,000                31,035         34,134         35,154            200,000                   n/a         80,651         83,552

Note: Taxes calculated by interpolating between the 18 optimal tax levels calculated for each height group.
Table 6: Varying risk aversion
                                                         Risk aversion parameter gamma (γ)
                                                              1.00:
                                                 0.75      u(c)=ln(c)     1.50      2.50          3.50
Average transfer to short group, as
                                              12.81%          13.05%     13.38%   13.75%     13.97%
percent of per capita short income:

Windfall needed for benchmark planner to
obtain optimal planner's social welfare, as   0.119%          0.146%     0.187%   0.242%     0.275%
percent of aggregate income
Gamma=1.50 is the baseline level assumed throughout paper
Note: Maintains σ=3.00 as in the baseline; adjusts α to approx. match evidence on hours worked:
                                          α      12.50            7.50     2.55      0.30         0.04
                                        α/σ       4.17            2.50     0.85      0.10         0.01
Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, Authors' calculations

Table 7: Varying labor supply elasticity
                                               Constant-consumption elasticity of labor supply
                                                 0.20            0.30     0.50      1.00          3.00
Value for parameter sigma (σ)                    6.00            4.33     3.00      2.00          1.33
Average transfer to short group, as
                                              11.21%          11.93%     13.38%   17.06%     31.73%
percent of per capita short income:

Windfall needed for benchmark planner to
obtain optimal planner's social welfare, as   0.097%          0.134%     0.187%   0.274%     0.493%
percent of aggregate income

Sigma=3.00 is the baseline level assumed throughout paper
Note: Maintains γ=1.50 as in the baseline; adjusts α to approx. match evidence on hours worked:
                                          α      30.00            8.00     2.55      1.15         0.65
                                        α/σ       5.00            1.85     0.85      0.58         0.49
Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, Authors' calculations
Figure 1: Wage distribution of adult white males in the U.S. by height


                                                         0.14



                                                         0.12
    Probability of height group being in each wage bin




                                                         0.10
                                                                                                                      Short        Medium        Tall

                                                         0.08



                                                         0.06



                                                         0.04



                                                         0.02



                                                           -
                                                                3   6   7   9   11   13   15   17   19    21    23    25      30     37     47     55   64   82
                                                                                               Mean hourly wage ($)
Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth and authors' calculations
Figure 2: Average Tax Rates

                     0.60


                     0.40


                     0.20


                     0.00
  Average Tax Rate




                     -0.20


                     -0.40


                     -0.60                                                                                   Tall

                                                                                                             Med
                     -0.80
                                                                                                             Short
                                 Note: the two lowest income groups are not shown
                     -1.00       because their average tax rates are large and                               Bmk
                                 negative, mak ing the rest of the graph hard to see.

                     -1.20
                             0             50,000                         100,000               150,000   200,000    250,000
                                                                                    Annual Income
Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth and authors' calculations
Figure 3: Marginal Tax Rates

                      0.70



                      0.60



                      0.50
  Marginal Tax Rate




                      0.40



                      0.30


                                 Tall
                      0.20
                                 Med

                                 Short
                      0.10
                                 Bmk


                      0.00
                             0            50,000                          100,000               150,000   200,000   250,000
                                                                                    Annual Income
Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth and authors' calculations
