                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          TOXIC EXPOSURE IN AMERICA:
                 ESTIMATING FETAL AND INFANT HEALTH OUTCOMES

                                         Nikhil Agarwal
                                      Chanont Banternghansa
                                           Linda Bui

                                        Working Paper 14977
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14977


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2009




The authors would like to thank NCHS for providing the birth, death, and linked data files, and the
National Air Data Group of the EPA for the criteria air pollution data that was used in this paper. The
authors gratefully acknowledge funding from the Norman Grant, Brandeis University, and would like
to thank Erich Muehlegger and T. S. Sims for helpful comments. All errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Nikhil Agarwal, Chanont Banternghansa, and Linda Bui. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Toxic Exposure in America: Estimating Fetal and Infant Health Outcomes
Nikhil Agarwal, Chanont Banternghansa, and Linda Bui
NBER Working Paper No. 14977
May 2009
JEL No. I12,Q51

                                              ABSTRACT

We examine the effect of exposure to toxic releases that are tracked by the Toxic Release Inventory
(TRI) on county-level infant and fetal mortality rates in the United States between 1989-2002. We
find significant adverse effects of TRI concentrations on infant mortality rates, but not on fetal mortality
rates. In particular, we estimate that the average county-level decrease in aggregate TRI concentrations
saved in excess of 25,000 infant lives from 1989-2002. Using a value of life of $1.8M - $8.7M, the
savings in lives would be valued at $45B - $217.5B. We also find that the effect of toxic exposure
on health outcomes varies across pollution media: air pollution has a larger impact on health outcomes
than either water or land. And, within air pollution, releases of carcinogens are particularly problematic
for infant health outcomes. We do not, however, find any significant effect on health outcomes from
exposure to two criteria air pollutants – PM10 and ozone.


Nikhil Agarwal                                       Linda Bui
Dept of Economics                                    Dept. of Economics
Harvard University                                   Brandeis University
Littauer Center                                      Mail Stop 021
1805 Cambridge Street                                P.O. Box 9110
Cambridge, MA 02138                                  Waltham, MA 02454
agarwal3@fas.harvard.edu                             ltbui@brandeis.edu

Chanont Banternghansa
Federal Reserve Bank, St. Loius
411 Locust Street
St. Louis, MO 63102
c.banternghansa@gmail.com
                                   TOXIC EXPOSURE IN AMERICA :
                          ESTIMATING FETAL AND INFANT HEALTH OUTCOMES
                                 FROM 14 YEARS OF TRI REPORTING


I.      INTRODUCTION

        Over 75,000 different chemical substances, used or manufactured in the United States, are

currently registered with the EPA under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA). The majority

of those substances are relatively new, having been developed since World War II, and for many,

little is known about their effects on health. Since 1988, the Toxic Release Inventory (TRI) has

tracked environmental releases by manufacturing plants in the U.S. of 300 to 600 of these

substances, all of which are either known to be, or suspected of being, hazardous to human health.

It is estimated that, in 2000, more than 100 million pounds of carcinogens, 188 million pounds of

developmental or reproductive toxins, 1 billion pounds of suspected neurological toxins, and 1.7

billion pounds of suspected respiratory toxins were released into the nation’s air, water, and land by

the manufacturing sector alone.1

        Toxic substances face cradle-to-grave regulation in the U.S.: Their storage, handling,

transportation, and disposal are all strictly regulated. Yet, for most of these substances, there is no

formal regulation of their releases into the environment. In part, this may be due to a belief that at

low levels of perceived exposure there are no significant health effects.2 And, to a large extent, there

was little public concern over toxic releases until the discovery in 1978 of toxic wastes buried


        1
            See U.S. PIRG Report, executive summary (January 22, 2003).
        2
            No comprehensive data set exists for ambient toxic pollutants. Data on ambient toxic concentrations
for only a small number of toxic pollutants have been recorded for a select number of states in 1996, and only
periodically since that time.

                                                       -1-
beneath a neighborhood in Love Canal, N.Y., and then of a strong correlation between residential

proximity to Love Canal and significantly elevated rates of cancer, neurological disorders, birth

defects, and still births.

        Love Canal spurred a number of epidemiological studies into the health effects of toxic

exposure. The bulk of that research consists of cross-sectional studies, usually on adults, and

provides mixed results on the relationship between toxic pollution exposure and health outcomes.

That is similar to what has been observed in the literature on (non-toxic) air pollution and health.

As pointed out by Greenstone and Chay (2003a), the lack of a consensus on the effects of air

pollution on health may be explained by identification problems due to omitted variable bias that

often arise in cross-sectional studies. A second problem is that studies of adult health outcomes may

be flawed by the inability to measure accurately life-time exposure to pollutants. Even abstracting

from mobility issues, using current levels of pollution to proxy for life-time exposure will be

inaccurate if pollution concentration levels have changed dramatically over time, as is true of toxic

pollutants (Needham et al. (2005)).

        A third problem is the absence of data on toxic pollution concentrations. At best, toxic

releases are available at the facility level in the manufacturing sector for facilities that are required

to report to the TRI. No data exists, however, for TRI non-reporters within the manufacturing sector

or toxic polluters not required to report to the TRI (including mobile sources). Because the

contributions of pollution from these sources are unobserved and change over time, they cannot be

accounted for in cross-sectional studies. Studies thus far, have not controlled for these time-varying

omitted variables, potentially leading to estimation bias.

        In this study, we investigate the health effects of toxic pollution exposure on two particularly


                                                  -2-
vulnerable groups: fetuses surviving at least 20 weeks in utero and infants under one year of age.

By doing so, we mostly avoid the problems associated with trying to proxy for life-time exposure

levels. Empirical studies show that mobility rates for pregnant women are low, so that fetal exposure

can reasonably be approximated by pollution concentrations in the mother’s county of residence.

       We construct a panel in which we make use of facility level annual toxic release data that we

aggregate to the county-year level and link to files of all births and deaths in the U.S. between 1989

and 2002. We include a large set of covariates to control for potentially confounding effects and

explicitly include proxy variables to control for toxic pollution from both mobile sources and from

facilities in the manufacturing sector that do not report to the TRI – two potentially important

variables which have systematically been omitted from other studies. Our central identification

strategy is based on using exogenous changes in toxic pollution concentrations within state-years to

estimate the causal effect of toxic pollution exposure on infant and fetal health outcomes.

       Our findings show that there are significant health consequences to infants from exposure

to toxic releases. We do not, however, find similar outcomes for fetal health, although this may be

due to “harvesting” that occurs during the first 20 weeks of gestation so that fetuses that would

normally survive at least 20 weeks in utero survive less than 20 weeks due to toxic pollution

exposure. We cannot test this hypothesis directly, however, due to poor data quality for fetal deaths

that occur during the first 20 weeks of gestation.

       We do find that toxic air releases are significantly more harmful to infant health than other

forms of releases (e.g. water or land) and that carcinogenic air releases have the largest effect on

infant mortality. We estimate that the average county-level decline in toxic air concentrations of

9.5% per year in the manufacturing sector alone led to a total decline in infant mortality of


                                                 -3-
approximately 4% in 14 years. The over all reductions by TRI reporters in the manufacturing sector

in various categories of TRI concentrations (by chemical category and by media) during our sample

led to a savings of over 13,800 infant lives. Using a value of a statistical life measure of between

$1.8M and $8.7M, we estimate that the value of the saved lives ranges between $25B and $121B.

Our findings, however, may significantly under estimate the actual effects of toxic releases on infant

mortality, as they do not include the adverse health consequences of releases by TRI non-reporters.

We find evidence to suggest that toxic releases by non-reporting facilities may add significantly to

the impact on infant health outcomes. In contrast to other studies, we do not find any measurable

health effects on infants or fetuses from exposure to ambient concentrations of criteria air pollutants,

specifically, particulate matter (PM10), or ozone (O3).

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II we provide a brief summary of

the literature, focusing in particular on epidemiological studies that relate fetal and infant health

outcomes to toxic pollution exposure. We discuss data sources that are used in our study in section

III; descriptive statistics are given in Section IV. Section V describes our methodology, and Section

VI discusses data issues. In Section VII, we present our results. In Section VIII we describe tests

for robustness, and in Section IX we discuss policy implications and provide concluding remarks.

II.    BACKGROUND

       It is generally believed that both fetuses and infants are particularly vulnerable to exposure

to toxic pollutants, although the biological mechanisms through which that occurs are not yet well

understood. The National Research Council described four ways in which these two groups may be

especially vulnerable to environmental toxins (Landrigan et al. (2004)). First, children have

disproportionately heavy exposures to many environmental agents because of their size. Relative


                                                  -4-
to their body weight, they consume significantly more food and water than adults. Toxins that are

present in the food system or in the water supply may therefore be more harmful to them than to

adults. Second, because the central nervous system is not fully developed until at least 6 months post

birth (Choi (2006)), the blood-brain barrier may be breached by some environmental toxins in a

manner that is less likely later in life. Third, developmental processes are more easily disrupted

during periods of rapid growth and development before and after birth, making exposure to

environmental toxins during these stages particularly harmful. Fourth, because children have longer

life-spans, exposure to environmental toxins at an earlier age, or even in utero, may lead to a higher

probability of developing a chronic disease than if exposure were to occur later in life. Finally, it

should be noted that for infants, both pre- and post-natal exposure to toxic pollution may be

important determinants of their health outcome.

       Before addressing the question of fetal or infant health outcomes from exposure to

environmental toxins, it is important to address directly the question of how to measure toxic

exposure. Fetal exposure is a direct consequence of maternal exposure. Most studies assume that

the relevant level of exposure may be captured by the mother’s place of residence at the time of

delivery. That will be true, however, only if the mobility rate of pregnant women is low. Published

studies have estimated residential mobility during pregnancy to range between 12% and 32%, with

one study estimating that, of those that moved, only 5% changed municipality and 4% changed

county during pregnancy. (See Fel et al. (2004), Khoury et al. (1988), Shaw et al. (1992), and Zender

et al. (2001).) In combination, those studies would suggest that, at most, 1.2% of pregnant women

would not have been in residence within their child’s birth-designated county during pregnancy and

at most 1.6% would not have been in residence within their child’s birth-designated municipality.


                                                 -5-
Fel et al. (2004) also report that mobility was not correlated with exposure to chemicals or pesticides

in the workplace or at home. They did find, however, that both younger (age < 25) and older (age

>35) women were more mobile, as were unemployed women and those from lower income groups.

       The finding of low mobility rates amongst pregnant women also is important as it bounds

the potential confounding effects stemming from pregnant women moving to counties (or

municipalities) with different pollution characteristics based on a Tiebout-type sorting mechanism

(see Banzhaf and Walsh (2008)). This could lead to sample selection bias if, for example, high-risk

pregnant women were sorting into high pollution counties based on some set of personal

characteristics which then might lead to high infant or fetal mortality rates being falsely attributed

to high pollution concentrations.

       Several epidemiological studies look at health outcomes for prenatal exposure to toxic

pollutants. A number find a correlation between prenatal exposure and spontaneous abortion,

malformation, and low birth weight (Bove et al. (1995), Carpenter (1994), Landrigan et al. (1999)).

Others, however, find no such correlation (Baker et al. (1988), Croen et al. (1997), Fielder et al.

(2000), Kharrazi (1997), Sonsiak (1994)). More recent work suggests that the health effects may be

tied only to particular categories of toxic pollutants. For example, Meuller et al. (2007) look at the

relationship between fetal deaths and maternal proximity to hazardous waste sites, but finds

statistically significant results only for proximity to waste sites associated with pesticides.

       Infant health outcomes may be affected both by exposure that occurs in utero and after birth.

It is well documented that infants are at particular risk for exposure to heavy metals, such as lead and

methyl mercury (Landrigan et al. (2004 )). Choi et al. (2004) find that there is a higher risk of

childhood brain cancer when mothers live close to a TRI emitting facility. Making use of TRI data,


                                                  -6-
Marshall et. al. (1997) find a slight increase in certain birth defects due to exposure to toxic releases.

        Because of similarities in terms both of econometric issues and issues of causality, it is useful

to look also at the literature on (non-toxic) air pollution and health. Greenstone and Chay (2003a),

for example, examine the effects of total suspended particulates (TSPs) on infant mortality rates.

They use the changes in TSP pollution concentrations generated by the 1981-82 recession as a

“quasi-experiment” to identify changes in infant mortality at the county level in the U.S. Their

underlying assumption is that the recession-induced variation in county-level TSP concentrations

is exogenous to infant mortality rates. They compare cross-sectional results for each year between

1978 and 1984 to a panel-data, fixed-effects model (in first-differences) and show that the traditional

cross-sectional approach can produce misleading results due to unobserved, omitted confounders.

Using an approach that mitigates many of these identification problems, Greenstone and Chay find

that a 1 :g/m3 reduction in TSP concentration results in approximately 4to 8 fewer infant deaths per

100,000 live births at the county level. Over the 1980-82 recession, they estimate that the reduction

in TSPs led to approximately 2,500 fewer infant deaths.

        Currie and Neidell (2005) also examine the relationship between ambient air pollution

concentrations and infant and fetal mortality. They focus on California during the 1990s and

examine 3 different criteria air pollutants: carbon monoxide, particulate matter, and ozone. Unlike

most other air pollution studies, Currie and Neidell allow for correlations across pollutants in their

effect on infant mortality. Taking individual data that they aggregate up to the zip code--month

level, they estimate an approximate linear hazard model and find a significant effect of carbon

monoxide on infant mortality (although not on fetal mortality) and estimate that the significant

reduction in carbon monoxide concentrations in California saved approximately 1,000 infant lives


                                                   -7-
over the 1990s.

       Taking a cue from both Greenstone and Chay (2003a, 2003b) and Currie and Neidell (2005),

we make use of the reduction in TRI releases across location and time to identify the effects of toxic

pollution on health. Our maintained assumption is that both the reductions in toxic releases and the

distribution and characteristics of industries across counties over time are exogenous to determinants

of infant and fetal health outcomes. We base our assumptions on the following evidence: (1) Large

polluting companies of TRI “priority” substances were contacted in early 1991and 1992 and were

invited to participate in a “voluntary” abatement program called the TRI 33/50. Participants of this

program agreed to reduce their releases by 33% from their 1988 baselines by 1992 and 50% by 1995.

In total, over 1000 companies (and their facilities) participated in this program and all target

reductions were met. (2) The deadlines to meet the requirements set out under the Montreal

Protocol, an international agreement that required the phase-out of several ozone-depleting chemicals

that are listed substances under the TRI occurred in 1994 and 1996 (and later in 2003, and 2005).

These phase-out deadlines were also met. (3) Over 26 states adopted Toxic Use Reduction

Programs to encourage the reduction of toxic substance use in the production process. These

programs primarily provided educational outreach to polluters to help them abate, although some

states instituted (numeric) state-wide reduction goals (some with target compliance dates, as well

as penalties associated with non-compliance). (4) Nationwide recessions occurred in 1990-1991 and

in 2001. The contraction of manufacturing during this time period also led to a reduction in TRI

releases across the country. For many industries, for example the electronic industry, the recession

in 2001 was exacerbated by a build up in inventory during the 1990 boom years, which further

suppressed production. And (5) because reductions in toxic releases are “voluntary” in nature, only


                                                 -8-
facilities and industries that can abate at low cost will do so. We observe large variations across

industry in their reported abatement activities. For example, during our sample period, petroleum

refineries reduced their releases by 74% whereas the food industry increased their releases by more

than 174%. We also observe that larger facilities report larger reductions in abatement than smaller

facilities.   Taking these five points together, we believe that there is ample evidence that the

majority of the toxic reductions may be taken as exogenous to factors that determine infant and fetal

health outcomes.

        To control for other potential confounding effects, we include a rich vector of parental

characteristics, prenatal care information, and medicaid and other income transfers. We also allow

for the possibility that other types of pollution exposure may affect health outcomes. In particular,

we include measures for particulate matter and ozone concentration. Those two criteria air pollutants

are also used as a proxy for toxic air pollution concentrations that are derived from mobile sources

of pollution, as they are highly correlated with fuel combustion. And, unlike other studies that have

made use of TRI data, we construct two unique proxy variables that allow us to control for the effects

of time-varying toxic releases from non-reporting TRI facilities.

III.    DATA

        We combine data from various sources to construct a comprehensive set of measures at the

county level for the period 1989 to 2002. (We restrict ourselves to these years because of changes

in the data format for our primary variables post 2002 that could lead to inconsistencies in the

measurement of our variables.) Data on pregnancy outcomes are from the National Center for

Health Statistics (NCHS). Data on toxic emissions are from the Toxic Release Inventory,

maintained by the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Those two data sets are


                                                 -9-
supplemented by county-level data on income, job composition, transfer payments from health and

unemployment benefit programs, and population, all from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis.

Data on land and water area are taken from the U.S. Census 2000 Gazetteer Files. In this section we

provide a detailed description of the primary data used in this study.

        Infant and Fetal Health Outcomes Data

        Our dependent variables and many important control variables are taken from infant3 birth

and death records and fetal death records provided by NCHS. These records are constructed from

a census of death and birth certificates, as required by law in all states. The NCHS, in cooperation

with the states and territories of the U.S., has promulgated a uniform instrument with which to

collect information on each fetal death. (Our estimate of pregnancies comes from adding live births

and reported fetal deaths in a given year; as such it does not include terminated pregnancies.)

                  Infant Data: Birth certificates contain information about parentage, in addition to

limited details about the medical history of the mother and the specific pregnancy. The variables that

we use as controls include the reported age, education, marital status, and race of the parents;

reported tobacco and alcohol consumption; and the level of pre-natal care as indicated by the number

of prenatal visits to a doctor.

        We use death certificates to identify the cause of death as coded using the International

Classification of Diseases. We remove infant deaths caused by external factors (such as physical

injury) from our measures, as they are not related to the exposure of toxic releases. We refer to the

retained observations as “internal” infant deaths.

                  Fetal Data: Information in the fetal death files includes some of the same information


        3
            An infant is defined as being an individual under one year of age.

                                                    -10-
that is available in birth certificates, such as the reported age, education, marital status, and race of

the parents; tobacco and alcohol consumption; and the level of prenatal care. The period of gestation

is also included. Deaths of fetuses at less than 20 weeks are not well reported in the data set. Birth

certificates and fetal death records also report the county of the mother’s residence coded using the

Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS).

        Using the individual-level data described above, we compute county-level statistics based

on the county of residence of the mother, for infant death rates due to internal causes and death rates

for fetuses with a period of gestation of more than 20 weeks. Our control variables are likewise

aggregated to the county level, by computing averages of measures such as maternal and paternal

age, maternal years of education, and the number of prenatal visits. We also compute for each

county and year the fraction of pregnant mothers in each of the following categories: white, African-

American, mothers that smoke tobacco, mothers that consume alcohol, and mothers that are married.

The health data set, thus aggregated to the county-year level by the residence of the mother, is then

merged with data on toxic releases.

        Toxic Release Data

        Data on toxic releases are taken from the Toxic Release Inventory. The TRI was introduced

in 1986 under the Emergency Planning, Community Right To Know Act (EPCRA) and requires that

all manufacturing plants with ten or more full-time employees that either use or manufacture more

than a threshold level of a listed substance report their toxic releases to a publicly maintained

database. The first year of reporting was 1987. At that time, there were approximately 300 TRI listed

substances. In 1995, this list was expanded to include 286 new substances. Today (2008), the TRI

covers 581 individually listed chemicals, 27 chemical categories, and 3 delimited categories


                                                  -11-
containing another 58 chemicals. Reporting thresholds have remained at 10,000 lbs (annually) for

most chemicals, with the exception of 4 persistent, bio-accumulative, toxic chemical (PBT)

categories, containing 16 PBT chemicals. (See www.epa.gov/tri/lawsandregs/pbt/pbtrule.htm.)

Because of changing thresholds and both the addition and deletion of reporting chemicals over time,

we restrict our analysis to the stable base set of 1988 chemicals that are not affected by subsequent

changes in reporting thresholds.4

        TRI data are reported at the facility level. Separate reports are filed for each TRI substance

for which the facility meets the reporting requirements. Information is provided as to whether the

toxic pollutant is released on-site or transferred off-site. We restrict our reported analysis to on-site

releases, although all results are robust to the inclusion of off-site releases. Data are broken down

by medium (air, water, land, etc.), and information is provided as to whether the substance is a

known carcinogen. Using TRI-provided information on chemical CAS number, we further classify

TRI chemicals as a developmental or reproductive toxin if it is listed as such in the State of

California Safe Drinking Water and Toxic Enforcement Act. The TRI data set also provides

information on whether a chemical is simultaneously regulated under the Clean Air Act.

        With these data we construct, for each county-year observation, the total pounds of TRI

releases net of any Clean Air Act releases by air, water, and “land” (where land is the residual

category = aggregate releases - air releases - water releases); broken down by carcinogenic, and




        4
            We calculate the correlations between the balanced panel of 1988 chemicals and the newer
chemicals that were added to TRI reporting requirements and find that they are low – below 23%. This
suggests that bias from not including those chemicals in our analysis should be reasonably small.

                                                  -12-
developmental and/or reproductive toxic emissions.5 (We exclude CAA chemicals from our

measures of TRI concentrations to avoid any possibility of “double counting” because we include

measures of criteria air pollution concentrations in our models of health outcomes.) Using geo-

graphic data from the Census 2000 Gazetteer Files, we construct a crude measure of “concentration”

by dividing total pounds of releases by land area.

       Criteria Air Pollution Data

       When examining the relationship between TRI releases and health, it is important to control

for the effect that other pollutants may have on health outcomes. We therefore supplement the TRI

pollution data with data on concentrations of criteria air pollutants, as provided by EPA’s National

Air Data Group. Those data were extracted from recordings taken from pollution monitors located

in various counties across the nation. The data set provides means, variances, medians, and higher

percentiles of concentrations observed by monitoring stations in a given day of a year. Of these

values, we make use of the daily average concentration and the 95th percentile concentration. In

some counties, there are multiple monitoring stations. In those cases, we use the simple average

across all monitoring stations for the daily average concentration and for the 95th percentile

concentration.     Most counties, however, do not have any monitoring stations that measure all

categories of criteria air pollution concentrations. We choose to concentrate on particulate matter

(PM10) and ozone (O3) because these pollutants had the least number of missing county-level

observations and because a number of studies have shown a potential link between their ambient

concentration levels and adverse health outcomes for both infants and the unborn. An additional

benefit of including PM10 and O3 in our study is that they are thought to be highly correlated with


       5
           Some chemicals are classified as both carcinogenic and developmental and/or reproductive toxins.

                                                   -13-
mobile source emissions of pollution and are therefore used as controls for toxic pollution

concentrations from mobile sources of pollution.

       Other Data Sources

       Several county-level controls are also used in our study. Data on per capita income,

Medicaid transfers, food stamp participation, and other government supplemental income transfers

are taken from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). The fraction of the labor force employed

in the manufacturing sector as well as county-level unemployment rates also come from the BEA.

The number of facilities by 2-digit SIC code are taken from the County-level Business Patterns data

collected by the U.S. Census Bureau.

IV.    BIRTHS, DEATHS, AND TOXIC RELEASES: 1989-2002

       The TRI-internal infant death and fetal death data set consists of 43,124 county-year

observations; when linked with County Business Pattern data collected by the U.S. Census Bureau,

we have 42,617 county-year observations; and when we further include county-level demographic

data, we have 41,908 county-year observations. The last of these data sets is referred to as the “full”

sample, which we describe, below.

       Between 1989 and 2002, there were over 54.3 million live births in the United States, with

410,615 internal infant deaths and 381,988 fetal deaths (post 20 weeks) recorded. More than 34.2

billion lbs of toxic pollutants were released into the environment by TRI reporters from the

manufacturing sector, 28.8 billion lbs of which were released on-site. Of the on-site releases, 3.12

billion pounds were carcinogens (2.68 billion lbs in the form of air releases) and 3.27 billion lbs of

which were developmental or reproductive toxins (3.24 billion lbs in the form of air releases).

       Of the 41,908 county-year observations for which we have TRI, birth and infant/fetal death


                                                 -14-
information, and county-level demographic information, only 10.8%, or 4,524 county-years, also

have air monitoring stations that collect PM10 and ozone concentrations. Over the period of study,

this sample covers 53% of the country’s over-all population, 57.6% of live births, 41.5% of

aggregate TRI releases, and 39.6% of TRI on-site releases, and is the basis for our regression

analysis. Select summary statistics for this data set (the “restricted” sample) are presented in Tables

1 through 3, and described below. The restricted sample consists of an un-balanced panel with

between 273 and 376 counties, ranging in population from 2,294 to 9,800,000.

       In real terms, per capita income is increasing in our restricted sample, although not

monotonically. Medicaid transfers (as well as other income transfers) are also increasing over our

sample period. Not surprisingly, the percentage of jobs in the manufacturing sector steadily

declined, from 16.48% to 9.51%. That may be important for our study, as TRI releases come

predominantly from manufacturing, and workers in that sector may experience additional exposure

to toxic chemicals in their workplace, which in turn may affect infant and fetal health outcomes.

       With respect to parental characteristics of possible relevance to health outcomes, we note that

average maternal age at birth increased slightly over time. If that is due to a reduction in teenage

pregnancy, known to be associated with poorer health outcomes for both the fetuses and infants, this

might lead to lower infant and fetal mortality rates. If, on the other hand, it is due to women bearing

children later in life, it might be detrimental to fetal and infant mortality. Maternal behavioral

characteristics, however, clearly point to potential improvements in fetal and infant health. The

consumption of tobacco during pregnancy fell dramatically over the 14 years covered by our study,

from a high of 17.55% to a low of 8.11%. The consumption of alcohol during pregnancy likewise

fell between 1990 and 1999, but rose dramatically thereafter. One possible explanation for that


                                                 -15-
reversal is the appearance of studies suggesting that there were positive (or no) health effects, for

mother or fetus, from small amounts of alcohol consumption during pregnancy.6

       Nationwide, mean county-level infant deaths from internal causes declined almost

monotonically between 1989 and 2002 from 948.9 to 660.9 deaths per 100,000 live births, or by

nearly 30%. A smaller decline (9%) was observed for fetal deaths (post 20 weeks gestation). In the

restricted sample, we observe a similar decline for infant deaths from internal causes (approximately

29%), but a much larger decline in fetal deaths (20%) than the national trend. We note also that

internal infant mortality rates vary significantly across TRI concentrations (net of Clean Air Act

chemicals) by quartile, being significantly higher for the dirtiest TRI counties. The same pattern

holds for fetal mortality rates. (See Figures 1 through 3.)

       In 1989, average county-level on-site toxic concentrations (weighted by live-births) were

approximately 3,159 lbs/sq. mile; toxic air releases (net of CAA chemicals) made up over 63% and

toxic water releases some 5.7% of all on-site releases. By 2002, average county-level on-site toxic

concentrations had declined 47% to 1,680 lbs/sq. mile and the contribution to releases by air and

water fell to 44% and 2%, respectively.         During this same period, both carcinogenic and

developmental/reproductive toxin concentrations fell, suggesting that the most toxic of the TRI

releases participated in the observed over-all decline. It should be noted, however, that the declines

in releases (and subsequently, concentrations) have been far from monotonic. Although the annual

average change in toxic concentrations over the sample period is almost -4%, the standard deviation



       6
           See, for example, the meta-analysis done by Fade, Vivian B, Graubard, Barry; “Alcohol
Consumption during Pregnancy and Infant Birth-Weight,” Annals of Epidemiology. 4,4 (July 1994):
279-284.

                                                -16-
is over 13% with changes in county-level, average annual TRI concentrations ranging between -31%

and +15%. (See Figures 4 through 6.)

        In contrast to TRI concentrations, ambient air concentrations for ozone and particulate matter

are reasonably stable throughout our sample. Average county-level ozone concentrations (ppm) rose

from 0.0256 to 0.0282, whereas PM10 concentrations (:g/m3) fell from 36.55 to 25.48. The variance

in concentrations is small, across time, across county, and within county.

V.      METHODOLOGY

        The approach widely used to estimate the effects of non-toxic pollution on health outcomes

(infant and fetal mortality) assumes that the effects of the covariates on health is linear and additive.7

There is evidence, however, that suggests significant non-linearities in the effects of toxic pollution

on infant health, possibly due to threshold effects. Because mis-specification of the functional form

can lead to biased estimates, we have a more flexible specification to allow for a non-linear dose-

response function by including quadratic terms of the toxic pollution covariates in our model.8

        We assume, then, that the true relationship between infant mortality and toxic pollution can

be modeled as

(1)


(2)


where i indexes county and t indexes year. Xit is our independent variable of interest, the

concentrations of toxic releases; Zit are a set of covariates that capture aggregate parental


        7
            See, for example, Greenstone and Chay (2003a).
        8
            In Section VII we discuss the validity of the quadratic toxic pollution concentration term.

                                                    -17-
characteristics; and Wit are controls for other county-level characteristics.

       Because geographic information in our infant birth/death data is at the county level, we

aggregate all data to the county-year level. An ordinary least squares estimator would equally weight

large and small counties. To more accurately measure the effect of pollution on infant mortality, we

use an estimation strategy that weights each county-observation by the number of live births in that

county-year. For weighted least squares (weighted by live births) to consistently estimate $1 and $2,

,it must be orthogonal to Xit. If there are county-fixed unobservables "i, time-fixed unobservables

(t, and county-time varying unobservables 8it that are correlated with Xit (and Yit), ,it will no longer

be orthogonal to Xit. Including county-time interaction terms would be one method that would

correct all such possible biases if the data structure allowed for it. That approach is foreclosed,

however, by a constraint on the available degrees of freedom because the covariates in our model

are aggregated to the county-year level.

       While it is therefore not possible to correct for all sources of bias from county-time varying

unobservables, it is straightforward to correct for biases stemming from only county-fixed or time-

fixed unobservables. One approach would be to use a model with county-demeaned variables to

remove the county-level unobserved fixed effects, and to include dummy variables to correct for bias

from the time-fixed unobservables. To do so, we take the difference between county-level

observations at period t and mean county-level observation across all years to obtain

(3)


(4)




                                                 -18-
where                  etc.

        For consistent estimation of (3) by WLS after including time-fixed effects to control for

(       ), we need to assume that (          ) is orthogonal to (          ) conditional on time fixed-


effects. This implies that the annual deviation in levels of pollution concentration by manufacturing

plants in a particular county is not correlated with annual deviations in other (uncontrolled) factors

that are correlated with infant health in that county. Since we control for county-fixed and time-

fixed unobservables, these factors are exclusively those with significant variation across time within

each county. Presumably, many of those factors are constant across all counties within a single state-

year. For example, changes in policy within a state in a given year may affect both infant health and

toxic pollution. So, to control for effects that are neither fixed within a county or across time, but

are fixed within state-time groups, we include state-time variables in our demeaned model.

        If the size of the residual county-time varying unobservables that are correlated with toxic

pollution is not large and the within state-time variation is large enough, we can consistently estimate

$1 and $2 using WLS. Table 2 presents the within state-time variation of the key variables in the

model. The within state-time standard deviation of the demeaned variable of our county-level and

parental demographic characteristics is less than a fifth of the overall standard deviation in most

cases. We conclude that a model that accounts for county-fixed and state-time interaction effects

will adequately control for unobservables that may induce bias in the WLS estimator. While the

within state-time variation is not high for county characteristics, the within state-time standard

deviation of each of our measures (in terms of county-demeaned variables) of toxic pollution

concentration and the infant health statistic is at least a third of the overall standard deviation. This



                                                  -19-
gives us confidence that correcting for state-time interaction effects, in addition to county-fixed and

time-fixed effects, has not purged our model of the variation that would be necessary for

identification. As described more fully in Section II, we believe that the source of within state-time

variation in the demeaned toxic pollution concentration stems from the distribution of manufacturing

industries in the counties of a state.9 Over time within a county, there is variation in the level of

pollution abatement by different industries, induced by TRI reporting and other factors exogenous

to health outcomes. This variation can be used to identify the effect of the concentration of toxic

pollution of infant and fetal health.         We therefore estimate the following model in which

observations are weighted by live births:

(5)


where s indexes the state of county i. >st are state-time indicators and <it is an orthogonal error term.

        For consistent estimation of (5), we assume that                           and                         .


Intuitively, this says that the time demeaned distribution of toxic pollution from the manufacturing

sector across counties within a given state is exogenous to variations in county characteristics that

may affect infant (fetal) mortality rates that are not captured in >st, Zit, or Wit. Since we control for

state-time interaction effects, we need only assume that the location choice of different types of

manufacturing industries (heavy polluters or otherwise) within a state is random with respect to other

factors that might affect pre-natal or peri-natal health. This assumption will also be reasonable as

        9
            We also test this directly by examining whether industry level dummies have any explanatory
power to predict variations in toxic releases at the county-level (where state-year fixed effects are included).
The resulting F-statistic is sufficiently large to allow for rejection of the null hypothesis at the 1%
significance level.

                                                     -20-
long as the variation in (        ) within a state is low for each year in our sample. By controlling


for state-time interaction effects, we believe we have eliminated most sources of potential bias in our

model.

         An examination of the correlation between the TRI release statistics and covariates, Zit and

Wit indicate that the correlation between the levels of TRI pollution and most parental and county

characteristics is low, as well as with the criteria air pollution concentrations (see Table 3, panel II).

Only for Medicaid benefits and mother’s race (black) do we observe a correlation greater than 15%

with pollution concentrations. (For the sample of large counties > 250,000 in population, post 1996,

we also find high correlations between pollution measures and demographic characteristics like

racial composition and percentage of children born in wedlock. This, in and of itself, may be

important for issues relating to environmental justice and public policy.) In any event, the

correlation measures for those variables that we can explicitly control for suggests that bias due to

8it should not be large. A Hausman test for exogeneity also may be used to test this hypothesis

directly (this is discussed in Section VII).

         Finally, we are concerned that errors both across time within a county and across counties

within a state might not be independent. If TRI releases are serially correlated within a county or

state-wide effects cause dependence in releases between two counties within a state, assuming that

<it are distributed i.i.d. might yield inconsistent standard errors and invalidate any statistical

inference. To avoid these problems, we cluster our standard errors within state-groups so that when

computing standard errors, if i and j are two counties in the same state, we allow for Corr(<it, <jt) 0.

This error specification may also help to correct for spacial correlation that exists due to spillover

effects across county borders within states, but not across states.

                                                  -21-
VI:     DATA ISSUES

        Toxic Pollution Concentrations

        The estimating model described in (5) assumes that measurements of toxic pollution

concentrations are available at the county-level. Virtually no data exist, however, on toxic pollution

concentrations. So, in contrast with studies on criteria air pollutants where monitoring stations can

provide concentration data, we must estimate toxic pollution concentrations.

        It is widely believed that the two principle sources of toxic pollution are manufacturing

activities, and mobile sources. That is our maintained assumption.10 Even with that assumption,

however, we can observe toxic releases only from TRI reporting facilities within the manufacturing

sector and not from non-reporting TRI facilities or from mobile sources of toxic pollution. Not

accounting for such factors obviously leads to a serious risk of omitted variable bias in our model.

The problem, therefore, is how to control for these unobserved contributors to toxic releases.

        Toxic releases from mobile sources of pollution are generated predominantly by internal

combustion and therefore are correlated with non-toxic pollutants that are simultaneously generated

in the same process. Here, then, we proxy for their releases through observed concentrations of

PM10 and ozone, of which internal combustion is know to be a major source.

        Controlling for toxic releases from non-TRI reporting sources is more complicated. Our



        10
             TRI reporting requirements after 1998 were expanded to include a small number of non-
manufacturing industries, including electric utilities and mining. We do not include these industries in our
analysis; however, for the years in which we have TRI data for them, we calculate the correlations between
releases from the “new” industries and releases from the “original” industries. The correlation between the
new and original industries is under 14% for all TRI release types (by media and category), so we do not
expect a significant bias from omitting these industries.

                                                   -22-
strategy is to construct two proxy variables for each county-year. Our first proxy variable captures

the percentage of non-reporting TRI facilities in the manufacturing sector. The second takes into

account both the number of non-reporting facilities by 2-digit SIC code in manufacturing and the

relative dirtiness of those industries based on national annual TRI releases by reporting facilities.

The construction of these variables is described more fully below.

        Toxic Concentrations from TRI Reporting Facilities:              County-level toxic pollution

concentrations that originate from the manufacturing sector are measured as pounds of toxic releases

per square mile.11 Toxic release data are available for facilities in a specified range of manufacturing

SIC codes that have at least ten full-time employees and that either use or manufacture more than

a threshold level of a specified toxic pollutant under the TRI. For our analysis, we restrict ourselves

to the 1988 balanced panel of both toxic pollutants and industries covered by the TRI.

        As noted in the data section, the TRI provides information on whether the toxic releases are

released “on-site” or are transported “off-site.” Aggregate releases are defined as being the sum of

both on-site and off-site releases that are produced at the facility. For this paper, we report the

results only for on-site releases, although our results are robust to using aggregate releases as well.

        Toxic Concentration Proxies for Non-TRI Reporters: A facility in a “designated” SIC code

may be a non-reporter for several reasons: they may not have had 10 or more full-time employees,



        11
             An alternative approach might be to look at the exact distance between a mother’s residence
(address) and a toxic plant to obtain a possibly better measure of exposure. This approach has been taken
by some epidemiologists (see, for example, Choi (2004)) and is currently being explored by Janet Currie in
preliminary, unpublished work that focuses on infant health, environmental justice, and toxic pollution
exposure in New Jersey, Florida, Pennsylvania, and Texas (IHEA Conference, Summer 2007, Copenhagen).
The nature of our data precludes us from taking this approach.

                                                  -23-
they may have fallen below the reporting threshold, or they may simply have failed to report.

Although it is generally thought that non-reporters are small polluters, there is little evidence as to

what over-all contribution they make to toxic pollution releases within a county or to what extent

they may be correlated with reported releases. To address the issue of potential omitted variable bias

in our estimation, we make use of the County Business Pattern data collected from the U.S. Census

Bureau to construct two separate variables that we use to control for non-reporter toxic release

concentrations.12

        For the first variable, we determine the total number of facilities in operation by county in

the manufacturing sector (SIC 20-39). From the TRI data we calculate the number of TRI reporting

facilities by county and 2-digit SIC code. From these we construct a variable that is the percentage

of non-reporting facilities within a county. Within the regression sample of 4524 county-year

observations, 204 county-years had no reporting facilities, and 22 county-years had no non-reporting

facilities. Over all, the average percentage of non-reporters within a county year is 92.8%, with a

standard deviation of 8.1%. Counties with higher percentages of non-reporting facilities (above the

mean value) tend to be counties with much lower TRI concentrations, lower percentages of

employment in the manufacturing sector, and higher per capita income levels. These counties also

have lower rates of fetal (> 20 weeks gestation) and infant mortality – both internal and external.

        Because releases vary greatly both across industries and over time, and not just by the number

of facilities, we construct a second variable that controls for the relative “dirtiness” of non-reporting

facilities, depending on the distribution of non-reporters within a county over time. That is done by


        12
             We thank Wayne Gray for suggesting the use of this data set, which allowed us to construct these
proxy variables.

                                                     -24-
constructing an annual national index based on aggregating TRI data by 2-digit SIC codes and

calculating average facility-level TRI releases. For each county and year, we then take the number

of non-reporting facilities in each 2-digit SIC code and multiply it by a “dirtiness” index – namely

the national “dirtiness” rank of that 2-digit SIC code. That value is summed over all industries in

the county in each year to construct our second control variable. This variable assumes that the rank

distribution of TRI releases by non-reporting facilities across industries and time is the same as for

reporting facilities. To obtain a “pseudo-concentration” value, we divide the control variable by land

area. This variable will be largest for counties with many non-reporting facilities in the dirtiest

industries and smallest for counties with few non-reporting facilities in the cleanest industries.

        As a check on the validity of our two variables to proxy for the contribution of toxic releases

from non-reporting facilities, we construct the same two variables for reporting facilities. We then

regress aggregate, actual county-level TRI concentrations on the newly constructed control variables

and all other exogenous variables in our health-outcome model (the first-stage regression). Given

the very large F-statistic from the first-stage regression, we conclude that they are strong instruments.

This suggests that our proxy variables may be sound controls for toxic pollution contributions from

unobserved non-reporters.

        Measurement Error

        There are two types of measurement error to consider. The first is classical measurement

error that arises because we do not have “true” toxic pollution exposure or concentration measures.

Instead, we make use of toxic pollution releases that we modify into a “concentration” measure by

normalizing pounds of releases by county land area. This leads to attenuation bias in our estimates.

        The second type of measurement error is non-classical measurement error that arises from


                                                  -25-
using survey data. Evidence in the labor literature shows that errors in survey data may be

substantial and problematic when used for estimation purposes, and the direction of any bias may

be difficult to predict. Although this type of measurement error almost surely exists in TRI data, we

assume that TRI survey respondents are providing TRI release estimations that are based on their

best available information and, more importantly, are making those estimations independent of

county-level infant (or fetal) mortality rates. Under these conditions, the non-classical measurement

error in TRI releases may be described as “optimal prediction errors” in the regressor, and no

additional bias should be introduced into the estimators from this source of measurement error (see

Hyslop and Imbens (2000)).

VII.    ESTIMATION RESULTS

         Tables 4 to 6 summarize the effects of TRI concentrations on infant mortality and fetal

mortality (> 20 weeks) rates per 100,000 live births or 100,000 unterminated pregnancies from

estimating the county-level fixed-effects model described in (5). Infant mortality regressions are

weighted by total number of live births in each county and year, whereas fetal mortality regressions

are weighted by the total number of unterminated pregnancies. We report standard errors that are

robust to correlation between observations from within-state groups.

        The primary regression model which is estimated using the restricted sample includes TRI

concentrations and TRI concentrations squared,13 as well as controls for parental characteristics, real

per capita income and medicaid transfers. As described above, air pollution concentrations for PM10

and ozone are included to control for mobile sources of toxic pollution, allowing as well for the


        13
             Tests of significance on the level and quadratic term for the TRI concentration variables show
joint significance in all models.

                                                    -26-
possibility of health effects caused directly by those pollutants; our control for the percentage of non-

reporting facilities and our proxy for TRI pollution releases (per sq. mile) from non-reporters are

included to account for aggregate toxic pollution concentrations attributable to non-reporters.

Hausman tests were used to test the exogeneity assumption required for (5) to yield consistent

estimators for the preferred regression; in each specification described below, the null hypothesis of

exogeneity for the TRI concentration variables of interest could not be rejected at a 5% level of

significance.14

        Aggregate TRI Releases

        We present the results from our estimation of the health effects of aggregate TRI

concentrations in Table 4. Column 1 is the primary model based on (5) and contains all of the

covariates described above and is estimated using the restricted sample. Column 2 re-estimates the

primary model but excludes county-level demographic variables and parental characteristics.

Column 3 is based on the full sample and excludes county-level demographic variables, parental

characteristics, PM10, and ozone. Column 4 presents the results for the model given in Column 3

further excluding TRI non-reporter controls. Column 5 summarizes the results for fetal health

outcomes using the restricted sample.

        From column 1, our estimates suggest that aggregate TRI concentrations from reporting

facilities in the manufacturing sector, although positive, do not have a statistically significant effect

on infant or fetal health outcomes. These results are robust to the exclusion of parental character-

istics and county-level income variables in the restricted sample (column 2), and parental


        14
             The Hausman test consists of running the regression including leads on all variables of interest
and conducting a Wald test on their joint significance.

                                                     -27-
characteristics, county-level income, non-reporting toxic concentration proxies, and criteria air

pollution concentrations (column 3 and 4) in the full sample. Note that the coefficient estimates are

remarkably stable in magnitude across all specifications and samples.

        Although we do not report the estimates here, we do not find statistically significant effects

on infant mortality rates for PM10 or ozone concentrations, which is consistent with the California

results in Currie and Neidell (2005) but not with Greenstone and Chay (2003a). It should be noted,

however, that there is very little variation in the concentrations of PM10 and ozone both across county

and over time in our sample. This could make their effects on infant and fetal health outcomes

difficult to identify. And, as found in earlier health-pollution studies, per capita income levels and

income transfers also do not appear to have a measurable effect on infant and fetal health outcomes.

We do find positive and (sometimes) statistically significant results for our two TRI non-reporter

controls, which suggests that as both the percentage of non-reporters and the number of non-reporters

in dirtier industries increases within a county, infant mortality rates rise.15

        One possible explanation for why we do not find any health effects from aggregate TRI

concentrations is that this measure obscures important heterogeneity in health effects either across

pollution media, toxic chemical categories, or both. We turn now to these possibilities.

        TRI by Land, Sea, and Air

        The first question of interest is whether different pollution media have differential effects on

health. For example, infants undergo direct exposure to air pollution and their less-developed

        15
             There is multicollinearity between one of the proxy variables and some of the county-level
demographic characteristics which sometimes lowers the significance level, however, joint tests of
significance between the proxy variables and the county demographic variables show statistical significance.
These findings are consistent throughout our results.

                                                   -28-
pulmonary capacity may adversely affect their ability to deal with inhaled airborne toxins. They may

thus be more susceptible to air than water pollution. Fetuses, on the other hand, are exposed to both

air and water pollution only through maternal exposure. The mechanisms through which maternal

exposure lead to fetal exposure almost surely differ across pollution media.

        We preface the discussion of our results here with a cautionary word: although we believe

that our measure for toxic air pollution concentrations (pounds of toxic pollution divided by county-

square miles) is reasonable, we are less certain about the accuracy of this measure for either water

or land pollution. It is highly likely that the relevant area around a polluting source for the

determination of exposure is much smaller for water and land pollution than for air pollution. We

therefore expect that the degree of measurement error associated with our water and land pollution

variables would lead to greater attenuation bias and more imprecise estimators.

        In Table 5, we report estimates based on TRI concentrations partitioned by air, water, and

“land,” where land simply denotes the residual releases once air and water releases have been

accounted for. We include quadratic terms for all TRI concentration variables. What we observe

now is that both TRI air and water concentrations have strong, statistically significant effects on

infant, but not fetal, mortality rates. Toxic releases into the land do not appear to affect either infant

or fetal mortality.

        Focusing on air releases, we observe that TRI air concentrations have strong, statistically

significant effects on infant, but not fetal, mortality rates. From the estimates in column 1 of Table

5, we calculate the implied county-level, annual toxic air concentration elasticity (or, more precisely,

the toxic air concentration from TRI reported on-site releases elasticity on infant mortality),

measured at the mean, as 0.03. With an annual average decline in toxic air concentrations of


                                                  -29-
approximately 9.47% per year (measured over our 14 year sample), this suggests that the decline in

toxic air concentrations between 1989 and 2002 saved over 9,979 infant lives. Using a value of a

statistical life of between $1.8M and $8.7M, the cost savings would be approximately $18B to

$86.8B. Similarly for water concentrations, we estimate an implied county-level, annual toxic water

concentration elasticity, measured at the mean, of 0.004. Given an annual average decline of 12.4%

in toxic water concentrations, we estimate that the decline in toxic water concentrations during our

sample period led to a savings of approximately 1,716 infant lives. Taken together, approximately

11,694 infant lives were saved. Using a value of a statistical life of between $1.8M and $8.7M, the

cost savings would be approximately $21.05B to $101.7B. (See Table 7.)

       In the medium-based partitioned regression, we continue to find no statistically significant

effects of criteria air pollution concentrations, per capita income, or transfers. And, consistent with

our findings using aggregate TRI concentrations, the coefficients on our two controls for non-TRI

reporter concentrations are positive and statistically significant here, as well.

       We find our estimators for toxic air concentrations to be robust across various model

specifications, although somewhat less so for toxic water concentrations once criteria air pollution

concentrations are no longer included in the model. This might suggest correlation across these

variables or sample selection bias associated with county-level characteristics associated with having

air monitoring stations for both PM10 and ozone. A more likely explanation, however, is that toxic

water and land concentrations are not as well measured as toxic air concentrations using our

methodology and the attenuation bias more pronounced for these estimators.

       TRI Carcinogens, Developmental, and Reproductive Toxins

       Exposures to carcinogens and to developmental/reproductive toxins are thought to be


                                                 -30-
particularly hazardous to human health. Here, then, we look to see whether toxic releases that are

either known or suspected carcinogens or developmental/reproductive toxins have a measurable

effect on infant and fetal mortality rates.

        Because our earlier findings show that different pollution media have differential effects on

health, we now parse aggregate TRI releases by both media (air, water, and land) and chemical

category (carcinogenic, developmental/reproductive, “other”), including a separate variable for each

of the 9 different categories. In doing so, however, we recognize that we may not obtain statistically

significant results, as we lose a great deal of variation in these more narrowly defined chemical

categories by media. Regression results are summarized in Table 6.

        Of toxic air releases, carcinogenic air concentrations have the largest adverse effect on infant

mortality, whereas developmental/reproductive toxins do not appear to have any measurable effect.

With a coefficient estimate of 0.29 on the linear term and -0.0032 on the quadratic term, the implied

elasticity for carcinogenic air concentrations is 0.0027.         The average annual reduction in

carcinogenic air concentrations during our sample period was 23.6%. Accumulated over 14 years,

this suggests a reduction in infant lives lost of 2,179, or a valuation of between $3.9B and $19B.

(See Table 7.)

        Air toxins that are neither carcinogens nor developmental/reproductive toxins also have a

significant effect on infant mortality. This result is robust over all of our estimated specifications,

with coefficient estimates on the toxic air concentration variables remaining quite stable. We

estimate that given an annual county-level decline of 9.3% over 14 years, the reduction in non-

carcinogenic/developmental/reproductive toxins saved approximately 9,860 infant lives. Taken

together with the lives saved from the reduction in carcinogenic air concentrations, we estimate an


                                                 -31-
aggregate reduction in lives lost from the reduction in toxic air concentrations of approximately

12,039, valued at between $21.7B and $104.7B.

        We also find that concentrations of non-carcinogenic, non-developmental/reproductive toxins

in water may also have an adverse effect on infant mortality, although the robustness of this result

disappears if criteria air pollutant concentrations are not included in our model. This is similar to

the pattern that we observed when we had TRI concentrations broken down only by pollution

medium, and may suggest some important correlations across the toxic water variables and the

criteria air pollution concentration variables, sample selection issues, or attenuation bias.

        If we include criteria air pollution concentrations in our model, we find that toxic water

pollution concentrations that are not carcinogenic or developmental/reproductive toxins also affect

infant mortality. The coefficient estimates here are similar to those found for non-carcinogenic, non-

developmental/reproductive air releases. Over the 14-year sample period, we estimate that over

1,774 infant lives were saved from the approximately 12.2% average annual county-level decline in

toxic water concentrations.

VIII.   ADDITIONA L CHECKS FOR ROBUSTNESS

        Because of the complicated nature of our data, it is important to ensure that our findings are

not driven by sample selection, spurious correlation, or outliers. We discuss these issues, below.

        Timing: A potential concern that we must address is the timing of births and deaths. In our

analysis, year t mortality is regressed on year t pollution concentrations; however, if mortality occurs

at the beginning of the year, then year t-1 pollution concentrations might be more relevant to the

health outcome than year t’s. Without being able to match up calendar-year births and deaths

accurately, it is not possible to test the potential problem of "timing" directly, without introducing


                                                 -32-
other methodological problems such as sample selection bias.            With this understanding, we

construct a data set that limits the set of births and deaths that we study to one that satisfies the

following conditions for infants: if a death occurs, the death must occur before the end of December

in a given calendar year, and the infant must have been conceived during the same calendar year.

If the infant were carried to full term, this would mean that the infant must have been born no earlier

than September of that same year. By constructing the data in this way, all pre- and post-natal

exposure will occur in the same year as the death; hence there is no “timing” issue. Caution should

be used in interpreting the coefficient estimates from this “September-cohort” data as there may be

sample selection bias inherent in the construction of the sample. As a second check, we also re-run

our original model including leads and lags for all toxic pollution variables. A priori, we would

expect that if timing is not an issue, neither leads nor lags will be statistically significant. Results

for these robustness tests are summarized in Table 8.

       Note that for simplicity, we focus only on the model specification that breaks TRI

concentrations down by media. Columns 1 and 2 use the September-cohort and estimates the effects

of TRI concentrations on infant mortality. Column 1 contains all covariates except for PM10 and

ozone concentrations to allow for the maximum number of county-years to be included in the

sample; column 2 only contains the TRI concentration variables. In both cases, the coefficient

estimators on TRI air are statistically significant and are very similar in magnitude to the coefficient

estimators reported in Table 5. So, even when restricting ourselves to a September-cohort where

timing issues do not exist, our coefficient estimators remain approximately the same. In columns

3 through 5, we re-estimate the models presented in Table 5 including leads and lags. In all but one

specification do we find a statistically significant coefficient on a lead or lag variable. We believe


                                                 -33-
that given these results, timing issues are not problematic in our estimates.

        Spurious Correlation: We must be concerned also about the possibility of spurious

correlation driving our results. To ensure that this is not the case, we follow Greenstone and Chay’s

(2003a) methodology and re-estimate our model using external infant deaths as our dependent

variable. External infant deaths include those from automobile accidents, murder, and trauma –

deaths that should not be related to toxic pollution concentrations. Our TRI concentration variables

should not be statistically significant in a regression with external infant mortality rates as the

dependent variable if our results are not driven by spurious correlation. Regression results are

provided in Tables 4 through 6, column 7. Note that these regressions are run on the restricted

sample as they include controls for PM10 and ozone, although the results do not change if the

unrestricted sample is used for the estimation. In only one case do we find a statistically significant

coefficient on any of our TRI variables. This is in the specification which breaks TRI releases by

medium and pollution category and is for the coefficient on the squared term of the residual water

concentration (non-carcinogenic, non developmental or reproductive toxin). The coefficient is

significant only at the 10% level, so we conclude that overall, our results are not driven by spurious

correlation.

        Outliers: Finally, we exclude a small number (4) of outliers from our regression analysis.

These observations lie approximately 3 standard deviations away above the mean value of aggregate

TRI releases, and appear to be due to data entry errors that had not been corrected as of 2005. To

ensure robustness over our sample, however, we checked the stability of our results over different

outlier criteria; results are robust over all specifications.

IX.     CONCLUSION


                                                   -34-
       Although the release of toxic chemicals is not directly regulated, the potential health effects

could be significant. Our objective has been to study those health effects on two of the most

vulnerable groups in society – infants and the unborn. The primary question of concern is whether

at the current levels of toxic releases and their corresponding levels of toxic concentrations there are

measurable adverse health consequences. Our analysis of the data suggests that there are potentially

large, statistically significant effects on infant mortality rates at the county-level with increases in

toxic concentrations, which would be obscured by looking only at aggregate TRI releases because

of heterogeneity in health effects across media and chemical categories. Between 1989 and 2002,

we estimate that the decline in county-level TRI concentrations in the manufacturing sector saved

over 12,000 infant lives, at an estimated value of between $22B and $104B. It is important to note,

however, that the above number of lives saved may be significantly underestimated. By constructing

proxy variables to control for toxic releases from non-TRI reporting sources, we find statistical

evidence that their contribution to toxic concentrations may also have an adverse effect on health

outcomes.

       From a policy perspective, our findings suggests if government programs were to be

developed to encourage reductions in toxic releases, the biggest health benefits for infants would

come from policies aimed at reducing toxic air releases, in general, and carcinogens, in particular.

Our findings also suggest that much more information should be collected from current non-

reporting facilities. Even if each non-reporting facility released a very small amount of toxic

pollution into the environment, given the sheer number of non-reporters in the manufacturing sector,

their aggregate contribution would be significant. Current TRI policy is contemplating the reduction

of reporting requirements by TRI facilities, which would include allowing fewer facilities to report


                                                 -35-
their toxic releases to the public. Such a policy clearly would be detrimental to improving our

understanding of how toxic releases affect health outcomes.

       Our results are based on crude measures of concentration and exposure and more precise

measures could help to refine our findings. Further study also is needed to determine whether there

are specific chemicals that are driving the results, or, whether it is the general mix of chemicals that

are released into the environment that is doing the harm. Spatial analysis may be important to

determine whether proximity to a TRI-producing facility or an “off-site” treatment facility may lead

to higher levels of adverse health outcomes, as well as to whether there are “cross-border” spill-overs

– whether the border is at the zip-code, county, or state level. We suspect that with more refined

geographic information on the residence of the pregnant woman that we could obtain more

statistically reliable results on the effects of toxic water and land pollution exposure on fetal and

infant health.

       The lack of general regulatory oversight on toxic emissions is almost surely because of the

belief that low levels of toxic pollution concentrations are not harmful to human health. Our results,

however, strongly suggest that the effects of exposure, even at the current levels of concentrations,

are far from benign, at least for infants under 1 year of age.




                                                 -36-
                                      SELECT REFERENCES

Ashenfelter, Orley, Greenstone, Michael. (2004) “Using Mandated Speed Limits to Measure the
      Value of a Statistical Life.” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 112(1) pp. S226-67.

Baker, D. B, Greenland, S, J. Mendlein, Harmon, P. (1988). “A Health Study of Two Communities
       Near the Stringfellow Waste Disposal Site. Archives of Environmental Health. Vol.
       43:325-334.

Banzhaf, Spencer, Walsh, Randall Phillip. (2008). “Do People Vote with their Feet? An Empirical
      Test of Tiebout.” American Economic Review. 98:3 pp.843-863.

Bove, Frank J, Fulcomer, Mark C, Klotz, Judith B, Esmart, Jorge, Dufficy, Ellen M., Savrin,
      Jonathan E. (1995). “Public Drinking Water Contamination and Birth Outcomes.”
      American Journal of Epidemiology. Vol. 141, No. 9.

Carpenter, D.O. (1994). “How Hazardous Wastes Affect Human Health.” Central European
      Journal of Public Health. 2(supplement):6-9.

Choi, Hannah, Shim, Youn K., Kaye, Wendy E, Ryan, P. Barry. (2006). “Potential Residential
       Exposure to Toxic Release Inventory Chemicals during Pregnancy and Childhood Brain
       Cancer.” Environmental Health Perspectives Vol.114(7):1113-1118.

Croen, L.A., Shaw, G.M, Sanbonmatsu, L, Selvin, S, Buffler, P. (1997). “Maternal Residential
       Proximity to Hazardous Waste Sites and Risk for Selected Congenital Malformations.”
       Epidemiology. Vol. 8:347-354.

Currie, Janet, Gruber, Jonathon. (1996) “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent
       Expansions of Medicaid Eligibility for Pregnant Women.” The Journal of Political
       Economy. December.

Currie, Janet, Neidell, Matthew. (2005). “Air Pollution and Infant Health: What Can We Learn
        from California’s Recent Experience?” Quarterly Journal of Economics. Vol. 120(3):1003-
        30.

Fel, Deshayne, Dodds, Linda, King, Will. (2004). "Residential Mobility During Pregnancy."
       Pediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology. Vol. 18:408-414.

Fielder, H.M., Poon-King, C.M, Palmer, S.R, Moss, N, Coleman, G. (2000). “Assessment of
        Impact on Health of Residents Living Near the Nant-y-Gwyddon Landfill Site: Retrospective
        Analysis.” British Medical Journal. Vol. 320:19-22.

Grandjean, P, Landrigan, P.J. (2006). “Developmental Neurotoxicity of Industrial Chemicals.”


                                              -37-
       The Lancet. Vol. 368.

Greenstone, Michael, Chay, Kenneth. (2003a) “The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality:
       Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession.”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics. Vol. 118(3), 1121-67.

Greenstone, Michael, Chay, Kenneth. (2003b) “Air Quality, Infant Mortality, and the Clean Air Act
       of 1970.” National Bureau of Economics Working Paper #9844.

Hyslop, Dean R, Imbens, Guido W. (2000) “Bias from Classical and Other Forms of Measurement
      Error,” NBER Technical Working Paper Series WP 0257.

Kahn, Matthew. (2004) “Domestic Pollution Havens: Evidence from Cancer Deaths in Border
      Counties.” Journal of Urban Economics, July 2004, Vol. 56(1):51-69.

Kharrazi, M, Von, B.J., Smith, M., Lomas, T., Armstrong, M., Broadwin, R. (1997). “A
       Community-Based Study of Adverse Pregnancy Outcomes Near A Large Hazardous Waste
       Landfill in California.” Toxicology and Industrial Health. Vol. 13:299-310.

Khoury, M.J, Stewart, W, Weinstein, A, Panny, S, Lindsay, P, Eisenberg, M. (1988). "Residential
      Mobility During Pregnancy: Implications for Environmental Teratogenesis." Journal of
      Clinical Epidemiology. Vol. 41:15-20.

Landrigan, P, Kimmel, C, Correa, A, Eskenazi, B. (2004). “Children’s Health and the
       Environment: Public Health Issues and Challenges for Risk Assessment.” Environmental
       Health Perspectives. Vol. 112(2): 257-265.

Landrigan, P, Suk, W, Amler, R. (1999). “Chemical Wastes, Children’s Health, and the Superfund
       Basic Research Program.” Environmental Health Perspectives. Vol. 107:423-427.

Lave, Lester, Seskin, Eugene. (1977). Air Pollution and Human Health. Resources for the Future,
       Washington, D.C.

Marshall, E.G, Gensburg, L.J, Deres, D.A, Geary, N.S, Cayo, M.R.. (1997). “Maternal Residential
      Exposure to Hazardous Wastes and Risk of Central Nervous System and Musculoskeletal
      Birth Defects.” Archives of Environmental Health. Vol. 52:416-425.

Mueller, B, Kuehn, C, Shapiro-Mendoza, C.K, Tomashek, K.M. (2007). “Fetal Deaths and
       Proximity to Hazardous Waste Sites in Washington.” Environmental Health Perspectives.
       Vol. 115, #5.

Needham, L, Barr, Dana, Caudill, S.P, Pirkle, J.L, Turner, W.E, Osterloh, J, Jones, R.L, Sampson,
      E.J. (2005). “Concentrations of Environmental Chemicals Associated with Neuro-


                                              -38-
       developmental Effects in U.S. Population.” Neurotoxicology. 26(4):531-45.

Neumann, C.M, Foreman, D.L, Rothlein, J.E.. (1998). “Hazard Screening of Chemical Releases
     and Environmental Equity Analysis of Populations Proximate to Toxic Release Inventory
     Facilities in Oregon.” Environmental Health Perspectives. Vol. 106:217-216.

Nickerson, Krista. (2006). “Environmental Contaminants in Breast Milk.” Journal of Midwifery
       and Women’s Health. Vol. 51, No. 1, January/February.

Shaw, G.M, Malcoe, L.H. (1992). "Residential Mobility During Pregnancy for Mothers of Infants
      With or Without Congenital Cardiac Anomalies: a reprint." Archives of Environmental
      Health. Vol. 47:236-238.

Sosniak, W.A, Kaye, W.E, Gomez, T.M.. (1994). “Data Linkage to Explore the Risk of Low Birth
       Weight Associated with Maternal Proximity to Hazardous Waste Sites from the National
       Priorities List.” Archives of Environmental Health. Vol 49:251-255.

Zender, R, Bachand, A.M, Reif, J.S.. (2001). "Exposure to Tap Water During Pregnancy." Journal
       of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epidemiology. Vol. 11:224-230.




                                            -39-
TABLE 1:     DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS



  Year                                              1989              1990        1991       1992       1993       1994       1995

  Nu mber of C ou nties in F ull Sa mple               3138            3137       3137        3136      3139       3140       3140
     Total unterminated pregnancies                    4,106,988   4,227,266  4,178,607 4,140,357 4,075,704 4,023,016 3,966,182
     Total live births                                 4,045,693   4,162,917  4,115,342 4,069,428 4,004,523 3,956,925 3,903,012
     Infant deaths (external) per 100,000 live births  33.74           33.49      30.64       30.72     32.66      30.10      29.13
     Infant deaths (internal) per 100,000 live births  948.89         886.81     856.55     819.23     794.73     765.17     725.31
     Fetal deaths per 100,000 unterminated pregnancies 1492.46       1522.24    1514.02    1713.11   1746.47    1642.82    1592.72
  Nu mber of C ou nties in R estricted Sam ple         273               302        312        329        355        365        363
     Total unterminated pregnancies                    2,300,939   2,507,635  2,402,515 2,411,194 2,471,157 2,456,792 2,413,694
     Total live births                                 2,273,005   2,473,685  2,373,036 2,377,723 2,432,488 2,420,710 2,379,440
     Infant deaths (external) per 100,000 live births  32.86           31.17      27.69       29.15     30.38      29.41      26.14
     Infant deaths (internal) per 100,000 live births  978.88         902.06     866.02     828.61     800.09     778.57     730.59
     Fetal deaths per 100,000 unterminated pregnancies 1214.03       1353.87    1227.01    1388.15   1564.81    1468.66    1419.15
  Mean County-Level Characteristics (Restricted Sample)
     Per Capita Income (2000)                          25,696.62   25,662.07  24,997.65 25,270.46 24,992.35 25,295.11 25,477.19
     Medicaid Transfers (2000)                         192,823.79 211,094.36 225,444.07 256,249.89 274,178.07 282,771.91 295,287.03
     % of Jobs in Manufacturing Sector                 16.48%        16.36%     15.78%     15.63%     15.30%     15.18%     14.88%
     Land Area (sq. miles)                             1344            1261       1267        1242      1241       1195       1200
     W ater Area (sq. miles)                           114               107        101        103        108        102         99
     Population                                        480795        463987     442367     433320     421427     420131     426843
  Mean Parental and Dem ographic Characteristics (Restricted Sample, Weighted by Live Births)
     Years of Mother’s Education                       12.44           12.42      12.41       12.45     12.49      12.54      12.61
     Mother’s Age                                      26.58           26.70      26.71       26.84     26.94      27.03      27.14
     Father’s Age                                      29.91           29.90      29.92       30.02     30.12      30.20      30.27
     % of W hite Mothers                               75.11%        75.77%     76.43%     76.08%     75.68%     75.56%     76.14%
     % of Black Mothers                                19.65%        19.00%     18.34%     18.56%     18.84%     18.78%     18.03%
     % Mother’s Consum ption of Alcohol                4.61%          3.77%      3.81%      2.77%      3.97%      3.44%      2.98%
     % Mother’s Consum ption of Tobacco                17.55%        16.56%     15.96%     15.38%     14.29%     13.42%     12.23%
     Num ber o f Pre nata l Visits                     10.72           10.79      10.93       11.09     11.13      11.28      11.39
     Percentage Married                                69.85%        69.12%     67.92%     67.38%     66.34%     64.83%     65.73%



                                                              -40-
Mean Infant Health Endowm ent (Restricted Sample, Weighted by Live Births)
  Birth W eight (gms)                               3326.51       3331.92     3327.62     3330.07    3321.48    3319.50    3318.56
  Gestation Period (weeks)                          39.10           39.07        39.03       39.03     38.95      38.93       38.92
Mean Fetal Health Endowm ent (Restricted Sample, Weighted by Live Births)
  Birth W eight (gms)                               1466.12       1415.62     1403.82     1411.81    1347.41    1338.48    1340.23
  Gestation Period (weeks)                          28.40           27.77        27.97       27.78     27.12      26.92       26.82
Mean Concentration Level for Pollution (Restricted Sample, Weighted by Live Births)
  Ozone - 8 hr (ppm)                                0.0256         0.0247      0.0259      0.0244     0.0250     0.0260     0.0269
  PM10 24-hr ( :g/m3)                               36.55           32.94        33.30       29.25     28.76      28.87       27.68
Mean Concentration Level for TRI Releases by Manufacturing Industries (lbs/sq. miles) (Restricted Sample, Weighted by Live Births)
  Total Onsite releases                             3158.573    2757.896     2488.981 2880.275 1986.141 1897.177 1635.504
  Air Releases                                      2009.079    1597.872     1371.826 1225.091 1017.201 1013.555           866.445
  W ater Releases                                   178.965       193.387     191.788     169.109    107.978     85.582     46.736
  Carcinogenic Air Releases                         25.610         12.577        7.915       6.998     7.757      6.729       5.659
  Carcinogenic W ater Releases                      9.763           8.728        6.788       5.369     5.483      4.199       2.964
  Developmental/Reproductive Air Releases           28.419         26.799      13.720      13.408      9.456      3.822       4.234
  Developmental/Reproductive W ater Releases        1.681           1.403        2.883       0.801     0.980      0.659       0.334




                                                             -41-
TABLE 1:     DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS CONT ’D



  Year                                                    1996       1997       1998       1999       2000        2001        2002
  Nu mber of C ou nties in F ull Sa mple                    3139       3140       3140       3139       3140       3141       3139
     Total unterminated pregnancies                     3,960,037 3,948,331 4,008,630 4,027,340 4,126,955      4,085,973  4,082,657
     Total live births                                  3,894,874 3,884,329 3,945,192 3,963,465 4,063,823      4,031,531  4,027,376
     Infant deaths (external) per 100,000 live births       30.73      29.84      28.49      34.24      33.22      33.39      33.69
     Infant deaths (internal) per 100,000 live births      698.69     692.27     689.80     670.27     660.46     648.76     660.90
     Fetal deaths per 100,000 unterminated pregnancies    1645.52   1620.99    1582.54    1586.03    1529.75     1332.41    1354.05
  Nu mber of C ou nties in R estricted Sam ple                376        374        341        289        281        283        277
     Total unterminated pregnancies                     2,403,439 2,320,646 2,277,093 2,064,808 1,890,658      1,910,580  1,895,966
     Total live births                                  2,367,951 2,290,749 2,247,445 2,040,164 1,867,408      1,890,269  1,877,578
     Infant deaths (external) per 100,000 live births       28.17      27.63      27.72      32.15      32.29      34.39      33.82
     Infant deaths (internal) per 100,000 live births      705.25     700.43     686.91     687.05     678.43     681.91     696.48
     Fetal deaths per 100,000 unterminated pregnancies    1476.55   1288.31    1302.01    1193.53    1229.73     1063.08     969.85
  Mean County-Level Characteristics (Restricted Sample)
     Per Capita Income (2000)                           25,615.16 26,163.54 27,548.15 27,726.69 28,432.88      28,260.60  27,882.85
     Medicaid Transfers (2000)                         293,128.75 275,592.01 303,439.31 335,439.64 327,910.65 375,998.55 394,886.84
     % of Jobs in Manufacturing Sector                    14.98%     14.53%     13.75%     12.73%     13.35%     10.29%      9.51%
     Land Area (sq. miles)                                  1253       1203       1261       1402       1092       1187       1281
     W ater Area (sq. miles)                                   98        100        103        105         94         92         91
     Population                                           416124     413366     444356     471508     443266     454518     464706
  Mean Parental and Dem ographic Characteristics (Restricted Sample, Weighted by Live Births)
     Years of Mother’s Education                            12.62      12.69      12.74      12.68      12.79      12.78      12.78
     Mother’s Age                                           27.17      27.24      27.32      27.19      27.25      27.30      27.37
     Father’s Age                                           30.31      30.37      30.45      30.35      30.42      30.47      30.52
     % of W hite Mothers                                  76.27%     76.31%     76.48%     75.21%     74.90%     74.57%     75.60%
     % of Black Mothers                                   17.81%     17.72%     17.45%     18.30%     19.13%     19.53%     18.23%
     % Mother’s Consum ption of Alcohol                    2.46%      2.67%      1.82%      1.37%      6.46%      4.48%      6.11%
     % Mother’s Consum ption of Tobacco                   11.89%     11.75%     11.97%     10.74%      9.95%     10.27%      8.11%
     Num ber o f Pre nata l Visits                          11.43      11.53      11.51      11.58      11.47      11.45      11.49
     Percentage Married                                   65.56%     65.67%     65.36%     64.19%     64.13%     63.44%     63.21%


                                                              -42-
Mean Infant Health Endowm ent (Restricted Sample, Weighted by Live Births)
  Birth W eight (gms)                                 3316.79    3312.47    3313.25     3306.02     3300.48    3289.02     3283.78
  Gestation Period (weeks)                              38.92      38.83       38.79      38.75       38.74      38.68        38.65
Mean Fetal Health Endowm ent (Restricted Sample, Weighted by Live Births)
  Birth W eight (gms)                                 1345.95    1321.22    1309.65     1278.44     1263.89    1271.86     1237.69
  Gestation Period (weeks)                              26.85      27.09       26.93      27.35       26.98      27.24        27.22
Mean Concentration Level for Pollution (Restricted Sample, Weighted by Live Births)
  Ozone - 8 hr (ppm)                                   0.0265     0.0267     0.0280      0.0280      0.0266     0.0273      0.0282
  PM10 24-hr ( :g/m3)                                   26.64      26.80       26.54      27.72       26.04      25.57        25.48
Mean Concentration Level for TRI Releases by Manufacturing Industries (lbs/sq. miles) (Restricted Sample, Weighted by Live Births)
  Total Onsite releases                              1634.223 1888.138 1905.801 1975.801 2154.782             1747.925    1680.158
  Air Releases                                        822.450    825.871    812.137     820.395     784.857    756.025     736.299
  W ater Releases                                      34.725     43.519     44.344      40.260      32.640     40.489      32.594
  Carcinogenic Air Releases                             6.382      3.609       2.893      2.764       3.034      3.244        3.525
  Carcinogenic W ater Releases                          3.198      1.692       1.533      1.488       1.195      1.220        1.473
  Developmental/Reproductive Air Releases               2.143      2.088       2.201      1.379       0.952      1.041        0.911
  Developmental/Reproductive W ater Releases            0.181      0.206       0.266      0.238       0.542      1.363        0.218




                                                             -43-
TABLE 2.    WITHIN STATE-TIME VARIATION FOR SELECT VARIABLES (RESTRICTED SAMPLE )

                   Variable                 Mean (Weighted     Ov erall     W ithin State-time     Within State-time
                                            By Live Births)   Stan dard    Standard Deviation     Standard Deviation
                                                              Deviation                          of D em ean ed Variable
   Health Statistics
     Infant d eath s pe r 100 ,000 live births:   770.79        251.62           171.26                  104.51
       internal causes
     Infant d eath s pe r 100 ,000 live births:    30.05        26.61            22.81                   20.10
     external causes
     Fetal Death per 100,000 unterminated         695.60        217.71           152.15                  95.98
     pregnancies
   County-Level Characteristics
     Per Income C apital (2000 dollars)          28563.72      7042.91          6207.70                 1177.03
     Medicaid Transfer (2000 dollars)           1243989.10    1960629.00       1496427.00              389867.70
     % Em ployed in Manufacturing Industry        13.22%        5.76%            4.29%                   1.55%
   Parental and Dem ographic Characteristics
     % of W hite Mothers                          75.76%       16.08%            11.30%                  1.11%
     % of Black Mothers                           18.51%       16.25%            10.45%                  0.97%
     % of Mothers consuming Alcohol               3.56%        7.96%             5.21%                   4.83%
     % of Mothers consuming Tobacco               13.05%       8.28%             6.60%                   5.43%
     % Married                                    66.04%       10.60%            8.63%                   1.66%
   Concentration Level of TRI Releases (lbs/sq.mile)
     Tota l Onsite                               2141.81       6136.72          5187.64                 2703.26
       Air                                       1063.27       1876.20          1540.26                 579.76
       W ater                                      92.16       427.61           376.21                  252.00
       Carcinogenic Air                            7.26         31.75            23.23                   20.38
       Carcinogenic W ater                         4.10         27.61            24.27                   16.86
       Developm ental/Reproduc tive Air            8.33        123.23           118.71                   90.02
       Developm ental/Reproduc tive W ater         0.86         11.27            10.14                   8.84




                                                                -44-
TABLE 3. CORRELAT IONS BETWEEN TOXIC CONCENTRATIONS, PARENT DEMOGRAPHICS, AND COUNTY-LEVEL CONTROLS
      (RESTRICTED SAMPLE )

PANEL I: VARIABLES IN LEVELS

                                       Mean PM10        Mean ozone          Moth er’s   Mother’s Age Father’s Age Mother’s Race:
                                                                            Education                                 W hite
   Air                                   13.60%          -11.45%             -7.66%      -15.02%       -8.31%       -31.70%
   W ater                                7.49%            -6.39%             -2.86%       -9.33%       -8.50%        -9.28%
   Land                                  4.91%            0.64%              -3.77%       -9.79%       -7.75%        -5.09%
   Tota l                                13.01%           -4.43%             -4.19%      -11.78%       -6.69%       -15.84%
   Carcinoge nic Air                     10.30%           -5.97%             -2.93%       -4.37%       -1.57%        -8.21%
   Carcinoge nic W ater                  2.18%            -3.47%             1.25%        -1.42%        0.04%        -2.56%
   Developm ental/Reproduc tive Air      0.72%            -4.43%             3.06%         3.68%        2.36%        -1.47%
   Developmental/Reproductive W ater     1.93%            -1.28%             -0.09%       -2.47%       -2.60%         0.09%


                                       Mother’s Race:    %Alcohol           % Tobacco     Prenatal     Married      Per Ca pita    Medicaid
                                           Black                                           Visits                    Income
   Air                                    35.51%          0.89%              -0.59%       -5.35%       -24.50%       -0.86%        10.43%
   W ater                                 12.03%          -0.76%             5.48%        -3.60%        -8.26%       -3.93%        -0.21%
   Land                                    6.98%          -0.85%             -1.39%        0.10%        -3.38%       -5.50%        -2.14%
   Tota l                                 19.62%          -0.69%             3.64%        -2.32%       -14.65%       -5.07%        7.06%
   Carcinoge nic Air                       9.92%          3.10%              4.11%        -7.38%        -7.17%       -1.61%        5.21%
   Carcinoge nic W ater                    4.39%          1.40%              1.93%        -1.82%        -0.88%       -0.29%        0.69%
   Developm ental/Reproduc tive Air        1.86%          1.07%              0.18%        -3.75%        1.58%         2.89%        0.35%
   Developm ental/Reproduc tive W ater     0.91%          -0.82%             1.61%        -1.00%        3.15%         0.00%        -0.85%




                                                                     -45-
PANEL II: DE -MEANED VARIABLES (DE -MEANED FOR STATE-TIME AND COUNTY FIXED EFFECTS)

                                         Mean PM10   Mean ozone          Moth er’s   Moth er’s Age Father’s Age Moth er’s Race:
                                                                         Education                                   W hite
   Air                                     2.21%       2.42%              -2.19%       -7.72%        -10.62%       -11.67%
   W ater                                  2.12%       -0.04%             -2.40%        0.58%         -1.84%        -3.94%
   Land                                    1.98%       1.01%              -3.36%       -3.36%         -2.10%        1.40%
   Tota l                                  2.63%       1.52%              -4.01%       -4.92%         -4.52%        -1.48%
   Carcinoge nic Air                       3.06%       1.55%              1.85%         5.30%         -1.62%        -3.69%
   Carcinoge nic W ater                    -0.17%      0.25%              0.92%         1.88%         1.68%         0.85%
   Developm ental/R eproductive Air        -0.72%      -7.36%             -3.25%       -7.56%         -6.75%        7.20%
   Developm ental/Reproduc tive W ater     -0.97%      -1.92%             1.02%        -2.04%         -4.88%        1.20%




                                        Moth er’s     %Alcohol           % Tobacco     Prenatal      Married     Per Ca pita   Medicaid
                                       Race: Black                                      Visits                    Income
   Air                                   20.20%        0.84%              5.45%        -8.03%        -6.87%       -4.59%          -17.92%
   W ater                                5.59%         -0.18%             1.26%        -3.85%        -0.04%        2.36%           -2.91%
   Land                                  -1.92%        0.04%              -1.15%       -2.55%        0.12%        -0.30%           1.08%
   Tota l                                2.95%         0.20%              0.15%        -4.60%        -1.35%       -1.06%           -3.05%
   Carcinoge nic Air                     4.81%         -0.38%             1.71%        -1.95%        -0.12%        4.75%           -7.58%
   Carcinoge nic W ater                  0.11%         1.31%              1.33%         5.37%        1.38%         6.19%           -0.49%
   Developm ental/Reproduc tive Air      -6.03%        0.03%              -0.48%        4.23%        -2.20%       -2.96%           -0.20%
   Developm ental/Reproduc tive W ater   -0.93%        -0.53%             0.19%         2.74%        3.32%         1.45%           1.59%




                                                                  -46-
TABLE 4.          ESTIMATED EFFECTS OF AGGREGATE TRI CONCENTRATIONS


                                                               Internal Infant Deaths                              Fetal          External
                Variable                                                                                          Deaths          Deaths
                                               Re stricted Sam ple                     Fu ll Sam ple
                                                (with PM 10, ozone)              (without PM 10, ozon e)
 Aggregate TRI (lbs/sq.mile)                  0.0006           0.0018              0.0023          0.0023          -0.0013       -5.50e-7
                                              (0.002)         (0.0028)             (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)       (0.0005)
 (Aggreg ate T RI) 2                         -6.99e-9         -1.80e-8            -2.24e-8        -2.23e-8         5.59e-9       -2.53e-9
                                             (2.06e-8)        (2.42e-8)           (1.69e-8)      (1.69e-8)        (1.89e-8)      (4.33e-9)
 Non-Reporter Co ntrols                          Y                Y                   Y               N               Y              Y
 Mean PM 10 ( :g/m 3)                            Y                Y                   N               N               Y              Y
 M ean O zone (ppm )                             Y                Y                   N               N               Y              Y
 County In com e C ontrols                       Y                N                   N               N               Y              Y
 Parental Characteristics                        Y                N                   N               N               Y              Y
 State -Year Indicators                          Y                Y                   Y               Y               Y              Y
 Co unty Fixed Effe cts                          Y                 Y                  Y                Y              Y               Y
 Observations                                  4520              4698              42617            43124           4520            4520
 Adjusted R-squared                           0.7908            0.7858             0.4118           0.4149         0.7549          0.2498

 State-level clustered standard errors in parentheses
 * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Note: Internal mortality rates are per 100,000 births and fetal mortality rates are per 100,000 pregnancies. Internal infant mortality regressions are weighted by
total num ber o f births in each co unty and year. Fetal mortality regression is for gestational period > 20 weeks and is weighted by to tal number o f pregn ancies in
each county and year.




                                                                                  -47-
TABLE 5.            ESTIMATED EFFECTS OF TRI CONCEN TRAT IONS BY POLLUTION MEDIUM


                   Variable                                    Internal Infant Deaths                              Fetal           External
                                                                                                                  Deaths           Deaths
                                                 Re stricted Sam ple                  Fu ll Sam ple
                                             (includes PM 10, ozone)            (without PM 10, ozone)
 TRI Air (lbs/sq.mile)                        0.0250**        0.0309**         0.0214**        0.0213***           -0.0032          0.00047
                                               (0.0111)        (0.0131)        (0.0072)         (0.0072)          (0.0085)          (0.0016)
 (TR I Air)2                                  -1.11e-6*       -1.17e-6*       -5.77e-7**       -5.75e-7**          1.56e-7         -9.79e-10
                                              (6.01e-7)       (5.98e-7)        (2.52e-7)        (2.52e-7)         (4.25e-7)        (1.31e-7)
 TRI W ater (lbs/sq.mile)                     0.0353**        0.0516**           0.0111          0.0110            0.0078           -0.0046
                                               (0.1056)        (0.0240)        (0.0113)         (0.0112)          (0.0201)          (0.0033)
 (TR I W ater) 2                             -4.65e-6**      -6.87e-6**        -1.48e-7         -1.46e-7          -1.98e-6          6.51e-7
                                              (1.99e-6)       (3.13e-6)        (1.67e-7)        (1.67e-7)         (2.51e-6)        (4.21e-7)
 TRI Land (lbs/sq.mile)                        -0.0022         -0.0023          -0.0017          -0.0017           -0.0009          0.00002
                                               (0.0023)        (0.0024)        (0.0013)         (0.0014)           (0.002)          (0.0005)
 (TRI Land)2                                   1.92e-9         2.08e-8          1.69e-8          1.68e-8           1.62e-9          -2.91e-9
                                              (1.973-8)       (2.09e-8)        (1.22e-8)        (1.22e-8)         (2.00e-8)        (4.96e-9)
 Non-Reporter Co ntrols                            Y               Y                Y               N                 Y                 Y
 Mean PM 10 ( :g/m 3)                              Y               Y                N               N                 Y                 Y
 M ean O zone (ppm )                               Y               Y                N               N                 Y                 Y
 County In com e C ontrols                         Y               N                N               N                 Y                 Y
 Parental Characteristics                          Y               N                N               N                 Y                 Y
 State -Year Indicators                            Y               Y                Y               Y                 Y                 Y
 Co unty Fixed Effe cts                            Y               Y                Y               Y                 Y                 Y
 Observations                                   4520             4698           42617            43124              4520              4520
 Adjusted R-squared                            0.7924           0.7888          0.4127           0.4158            0.7547            0.2496

 State-level clustered standard errors in parentheses
 * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Note: Internal mortality rates are per 100,000 births and fetal mortality rates are per 100,000 pregnancies. Internal infant mortality regressions are weighted by
total num ber o f births in each co unty and year. Fetal mortality regression is for gestational period > 20 weeks and is weighted by to tal number o f pregn ancies in
each county and year.



                                                                                  -48-
TABLE 6.         ESTIMATED EFFECTS OF TRI CONCEN TRAT IONS BY POLLUTION CATEGORY AND MEDIUM


                    Variable                               Internal Infant Deaths                       Fetal      External
                                                                                                       Deaths      Deaths
                                                Re stricted Sam ple              Fu ll Sam ple
                                             (includes PM 10, ozone)       (without PM 10, ozone)
   TRI Carcinogenic Air (lbs/sq.mile)       0.2942*          0.4572***      0.4854***      0.4828***   -0.0243      -0.0134
                                            (0.1490)         (0.1457)       (0.1661)       (0.1668)    (0.2467)    (0.0587)
   (TR I Carcinogenic Air) 2               -0.0003**        -0.0005***     -0.0006***     -0.0006***    0.0003     -0.00002
                                           (0.0001)         (0.0001)       (0.0002)      (0.00001)     (0.00025)    (0.0001)
   TRI Dev/Rep Air (lbs/sq.mile)            0.0010          0.01467        0.00800        0.00793      -0.04489     0.00268
                                           (0.0488)         (0.0553)       (0.0528)       (0.0533)      (0.0440)   (0.00857)
   (TR I Dev/Rep A ir)2                    1.63e-6          -3.01e-8       4.58e-7        5.19e-7       1.58e-6     -1.54e-6
                                           (9.23e-6)       (0.00001)       (0.00001)     (0.00001)     (8.23e-6)   (1.60e-6)
   TRI Residual Air (lbs/sq.mile)          0.0234**         0.0289**       0.0204***     0.0203***     -0.00360     0.0008
                                            (0.0108)        (0.0134)        (0.0071)      (0.0071)     (0.00744)   (0.0016)
   (TR I Residual Air)2                    -1.08e-6*       -1.14e-6*       -5.53e-7**    -5.52e-7**     1.23e-7    -2.73e-9
                                            (6.27e-7)       (6.45e-7)      (2.47e-7)     (2.46e-7)     (4.18e-7)   (1.33e-7)
   TRI Carcinogenic W ater (lbs/sq.mile)     0.3025          0.3555          0.6464        0.6375      -0.3772*      0.0400
                                            (0.3732)        (0.5285)       (0.5485)       (0.5527)     (0.2182)     (0.0467)
   (TR I Carcinogenic W ater) 2              -0.0007         -0.0008        -0.0013       -0.0013       0.00032    -0.00004
                                            (0.0007)        (0.0009)       (0.0010)       (0.0010)     (0.0004)    (0.00009)
   TRI Dev/Rep W ater (lbs/sq.mile)          -1.0739          -1.360        -1.527**     -1.5429**      -0.0257      0.0503
                                            (0.9702)        (1.0010)       (0.7567)       (0.7643)     (0.5372)     (0.1181)
   (TR I Dev/Rep W ater) 2                   0.0019          0.0024         0.0029*       0.0030*       -0.0004     -0.0002
                                            (0.0021)        (0.0021)       (0.0016)       (0.0016)     (0.0012)     (0.0003)
   TRI Residual W ater (lbs/sq.mile)        0.0389**        0.0548**         0.0098        0.0098        0.0207     -0.0055
                                            (0.0189)        (0.0231)       (0.0106)       (0.0106)     (0.0214)     (0.0034)
   (TR I Residual W ater) 2                -5.12e-6**      -7.30e-6**      -1.29e-7       -1.29e-7     -3.48e-6     7.66e-7*
                                            (2.34e-6)       (3.05e-6)      (1.57e-7)     (1.57e-7)     (2.73e-6)   (4.05e-7)
   TRI Land (lbs/sq.mile)                    -0.0020         -0.0020        -0.0013       -0.0013       -0.0009     3.67e-6
                                            (0.0022)        (0.0023)       (0.0014)       (0.0014)     (0.0021)     (0.0005)
   (TRI Land)2                               1.76e-8         1.77e-8        1.34e-8       1.33e-8      5.79e-10     -2.67e-9
                                            (1.88e-8)       (1.92e-8)      (1.23e-8)     (1.23e-8)      (2.0e-8)   (5.00e-9)
   Non-Reporter Co ntrols                       Y                Y              Y             N             Y           Y

                                                                    -49-
    Mean PM 10 ( :g/m 3)                                   Y                 Y                 N               N             Y             Y
    M ean O zone (ppm )                                    Y                 Y                 N               N             Y             Y
    County In com e C ontrols                              Y                 N                 N               N             Y             Y
    Parental Characteristics                               Y                 N                 N               N             Y             Y
    State -Year Indicators                                 Y                 Y                 Y               Y             Y             Y
    Co unty Fixed-Effects                                  Y                 Y                 Y               Y             Y             Y
    Observations                                         4520              4698             42617           43124          4520          4520
    Adjusted R-squared                                  0.7924            0.7894            0.4132          0.4162        0.7555        0.2495

    State-level clustered standard errors in parentheses
    * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Note: Internal mortality rates are per 100,000 births and fetal mortality rates are per 100,000 pregnancies. Internal infant mortality regressions are weighted by
total num ber o f births in each co unty and year. Fetal mortality regression is for gestational period > 20 weeks and is weighted by to tal number o f pregn ancies in
each county and year.




                                                                                  -50-
TABLE 7.        ESTIMATED ELASTICITIES AND LIVES SAVED OR LOST : AVERAGE ANNUA L COUNTY-LEVEL VALUES



   Variable                                                     M ean Ch ange in   Estimated    Estimated Number of Lives
                                                                 Concentration     Elasticity          Save d (Lo st)
   TRI Air                                                          -9.469%         0.031198              9,979
   TRI W ater                                                       -12.36%         0.004109              1,716

   Carcinogenic Air                                                 -23.65%        0.002728               2,179
   Non-Carcinogenic, N on-Developm ental/R eproductive Air           -9.25%        0.031553               9,860
   Non-Carcinogenic, Non-Developmental/Reproductive W ater          -12.20%        0.004303               1,774




    Mean Internal Deaths (per 100,000 live births)                                 770.7866
    Total Births (000,000)                                                           31.3




                                                             -51-
TABLE 8.          ESTIMATED EFFECTS OF TRI CONCEN TRAT IONS BY POLLUTION MEDIUM INCLUDING LEADS AND LAGS ON INTERNAL
                  DEATHS


                                    Variable              Sep tem ber C ohort           Full Sample with Leads and Lags

           TRI Air (lbs/sq.mile)                        0.0203*        0.0276**    0.02106***      0.0256***      0.0253***
                                                        (0.0114)       (0.0105)     (0.0079)       (0.0087)       (0.0087)
           (TR I Air)2                                 -4.10e-07     -5.86e-07**   -7.10e-07**   -8.43e-07 **   -8.38e-07***
                                                       3.203-07       (2.45e-07)   (3.46e-07)     (3.85e-07)     (3.85e-07)
           TRI Air (lbs/sq.mile) (t+1)                                               -0.0023       0.00003         0.0002
                                                                                    (0.0094)      (0.0103)       (0.0103)
           TRI Air (lbs/sq.mile) (t-1)                                              -0.0015        0.0019         0.0018
                                                                                     (0.004)       (0.005)        (0.005)
           (TR I Air)2 : (t+1)                                                      1.07e-07      9.49e-08       9.02e-08
                                                                                   (3.56e-07)    (3.92e-07)     (3.90e-07)
           (TR I Air)2 : (t-1)                                                     -2.72e-08     -7.17e-08      -7.06e-08
                                                                                   (6.36e-08)    (7.41e-08)     (7.42e-08)
           TRI W ater (lbs/sq.mile)                      0.0305         0.0335       0.0091        0.0072         0.0072
                                                        (0.0294)       (0.0299)     (0.0113)      (0.0110)       (0.0111)
           (TR I W ater) 2                             -5.09e-07      -5.56e-07    -4.75e-08     -3.43e-08      -3.67e-08
                                                       (4.16e-07)     (4.25e-07)   (1.39e-07)    (1.42e-07)     (1.42e-07)
           TRI W ater (lbs/sq.mile):(t+1)                                            0.0047        0.0079         0.0080
                                                                                    (0.0097)      (0.0108)       (0.0109)
           TRI W ater (lbs/sq.mile):(t-1)                                           -0.0103        -0.008         -0.0077
                                                                                    (0.0067)      (0.0069)        (0.0070)
           (TR I W ater) 2: (t+1)                                                   2.20e-08      1.58e-08        1.43e-08
                                                                                   (6.47e-08)    (7.80e-08)      (7.85e-08)
           (TR I W ater) 2: (t-1)                                                   2.06e-08     -1.58e-08       -1.64e-08
                                                                                   (7.20e-08)    (7.48e-08)      (7.52e-08)
           TRI Land (lbs/sq.mile)                       -0.0034        -0.0029      -0.0020       -0.0021         -0.0021
                                                        (0.0039)       (0.0036)     (0.0017)      (0.0017)        (0.0017)
           (TRI Land)2                                  6.15e-08       5.38e-08     1.57e-08      1.80e-08        1.77e-08
                                                       (3.653-08)     (3.54e-08)   (1.55e-08)    (1.55e-08)      (1.55e-08)
           TRI Land (lbs/sq.mile): (t+1)                                             0.0013        0.0016          0.0016


                                                             -52-
                                                                                                                  (0.0010)           (0.0011)          (0.0011)
            TRI Land (lbs/sq.mile): (t-1)                                                                          0.0006              0.001            0.0007
                                                                                                                  (0.0007)           (0.0006)          (0.0006)
            (TRI Land)2 : (t+1)                                                                                  -9.09e-10          -4.64e-09          -4.85e-09
                                                                                                                 (1.05e-08)         (1.14e-08)        (1.14e-08)
            (TRI Land)2 : (t-1)                                                                                  -2.17e-09          -2.62e-09         -2.59e-09*
                                                                                                                 (1.42e-09)         (1.40e-09)        (1.40e-09)
            Non-Reporter Co ntrols                                               Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                 N
            Mean PM 10 ( :g/m 3)                                                 N                 N                  N                  N                 N
            Mean Ozone (ppm )                                                    N                 N                  N                  N                 N
            County In com e C ontrols                                            Y                 N                  Y                  N                 N
            Parental Characteristics                                             Y                 N                  Y                  N                 N
            State -Year Indicators                                               Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                 Y
            Co unty Fixed Effe cts                                               Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                 Y
            Observations                                                      40336             42194              35910              36537             36964
            Adjusted R-squared                                                0.0606            0.0585             0.4017             0.3994            0.4039

            State-level clustered standard errors in parentheses
            * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

No te: Interna l mortality rates are per 1 00,0 00 b irths. Internal infant mortality regression s are we ighted by total numb er of births in each county and year.




                                                                                     -53-
FIGURE I




FIGURE II




            -54-
FIGURE III




FIGURE IV




             -55-
FIGURE V




FIGURE VI




            -56-
