NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHY DO INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION REWARD RESEARCH WHILE
SELLING EDUCATION?
Dahlia K. Remler
Elda Pema
Working Paper 14974
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14974

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2009

This paper is based on many earlier versions by Dahlia Remler. Remler thanks Howard Alper, Sherry
Glied, Claudia Goldin, Joshua Graff Zivin, Lawrence F. Katz, Hank Levin, Arthur Levine, Dan O’Flaherty,
Michael Sparer, Lawrence White, and seminar participants at Teacher’s College, Columbia University
and the Baruch College School of Public Affairs for useful conversations, comments on various earlier
drafts and/or inspiring ideas. Remler would also like to thank those who participated in interviews
that provided background material. We both thank Paul Attewell for recent comments. Of course,
we alone are ultimately responsible for the content. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Dahlia K. Remler and Elda Pema. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Why do Institutions of Higher Education Reward Research While Selling Education?
Dahlia K. Remler and Elda Pema
NBER Working Paper No. 14974
May 2009
JEL No. I2,I21,I23,J24
ABSTRACT
Higher education institutions and disciplines that traditionally did little research now reward faculty
largely based on research, both funded and unfunded. Some worry that faculty devoting more time
to research harms teaching and thus harms students’ human capital accumulation. The economics literature
has largely ignored the reasons for and desirability of this trend. We summarize, review, and extend
existing economic theories of higher education to explain why incentives for unfunded research have
increased. One theory is that researchers more effectively teach higher order skills and therefore increase
student human capital more than non-researchers. In contrast, according to signaling theory, education
is not intrinsically productive but only a signal that separates high- and low-ability workers. We extend
this theory by hypothesizing that researchers make higher education more costly for low-ability students
than do non-research faculty, achieving the separation more efficiently. We describe other theories,
including research quality as a proxy for hard-to-measure teaching quality and barriers to entry. Virtually
no evidence exists to test these theories or establish their relative magnitudes. Research is needed,
particularly to address what employers seek from higher education graduates and to assess the validity
of current measures of teaching quality.

Dahlia K. Remler
School of Public Affairs
Baruch College
City University of New York
One Bernard Baruch Way
Box D-901
New York, NY 10010
and NBER
Dahlia.Remler@baruch.cuny.edu
Elda Pema
Graduate School of Business & Public Policy
Naval Postgraduate School
555 Dyer Road
Monterey, CA 93943
epema@nps.edu

I. Introduction
In recent decades institutions of higher education have increasingly emphasized research,
with faculty being promoted and rewarded more and more on the basis of research. Once the
trademark of prestigious institutions, research emphasis for faculty has now moved down the
prestige ladder. It has come to permeate many disciplines and professional schools that
traditionally did not emphasize it in the past. Institutions outside the United States have also
increased their emphasis on faculty research recently, making it a global phenomenon. For
faculty who engage in funded research, there is no economic mystery: research is the product
being sold and it makes sense to emphasize it. However, the rewards apply to unfunded research
also. Moreover, the phenomenon of faculty rewards for research is prevalent and growing in the
humanities, law schools, and other disciplines with little or no funded research—a trend that has
persisted for decades, across schools and across geographical boundaries.
A number of critics, from the popular press to scholars (Bennis and O’Toole 2005, Boyer
1990, Hearn 1992, Huber 1992, Kennedy 1997, Sykes 1988) and including former Harvard
University President Derek Bok (1991, 1992) contend that higher education is neglecting
teaching in favor of research to the detriment of students’ education. Since faculty time is a
limited resource, there must be at least some margins on which the incentives for faculty to put
time into research become incentives for faculty to reduce time devoted to teaching.
Others argue, however, that research and teaching are mutually sustaining. Goldin and
Katz (2008, p.263) state “the modern university is… a production center in which the research of
one part enhances the teaching and research of the other parts.” The Teagle Working Group
(2007) argues that thinking for oneself and other forms of deep-learning are particularly
important aspects of education and that researchers are better able to produce such learning.

1

Some evidence indicates that the market agrees with the view that research aids education—or at
least those elements of education valued by employers: Tracey and Waldfogel (1997) find that
the research prestige of a business school appears to raise student earnings, using observable
characteristics to predict what students would have earned without the degree. Supporters of this
view contend that another, much more recent trend of employing more teaching-only, non
tenure-track faculty, hurts student learning.
Education is now widely believed to be the foundation of a society’s productivity and
economic well-being (e.g., Economic Report of the President 2000, chapter 4, Goldin and Katz
2008). It is crucial to know whether the emphasis on faculty research harms, helps, or has no
impact on teaching and, therefore, on student learning and human capital accumulation. The
answer to this question should shape the role of research in higher education. To assess the
claims of harm and claims of support, we need to understand what drives the emphasis on
research and use that understanding to see if and how public policy could improve the situation
or the public perception of this trend.
Economic theory to date has not addressed this question directly. While a number of
theoretical economic models of higher education exist (see Winston 1999, for a summary), their
implications for faculty research emphasis, and the ramifications on teaching quality and higher
education outcomes, have not been explored. In this paper we review, synthesize, and extend the
higher education theoretical literature to extract explanations for the phenomenon of increased
faculty incentives for research even when there is no funded research. We also consider the
welfare implications of the different theories and the policy implications that follow. Relevant
theories range from claims that research improves overall effectiveness of faculty as teachers, to
more cynical arguments citing market failures and agency problems as the source of increased

2

research emphasis. The various theories do not always fit together to provide a cohesive answer
to the question at hand. Moreover, some of the theories suggest different and even divergent
policy implications, demonstrating the importance of further research in this area.
II. Trends in Higher Education and Economic Puzzles
The rising importance of research and the outcry against it began with the founding of the
research university at the end of the 19th century. The story told by non-economists is one of an
entrenched ivory tower culture that favors research and ignores students’ education (Cuban
1999). To an economist, such a story is implicitly one of market failure due to barriers to entry:
those universities that have prestige can choose to emphasize research over teaching because
they face a captive market. But this economic explanation suffers under close scrutiny. Using
everything from financial aid to amenities, institutions of higher education compete vigorously to
get the best students (Frank and Cook 1995). There are many universities at the top, competing
with one another, and none enjoy true monopoly power at any given prestige level. At all levels,
universities and colleges do move both up and down in rank: consider the rise of both Boston
University (BU) and New York University (NYU).
Although higher education is clearly not a perfectly competitive market, we contend that
it should nonetheless be fairly competitive. Consider the various factors interfering with
competition. First, higher education services are highly heterogeneous. However, heterogeneous
goods are consistent with monopolistic competition (e.g., banking services, computers,
automobiles). Second, the multi-dimensional nature of higher education creates a bundling
problem: people cannot shop separately for the different features of higher education (e.g., social
environment, practical training, amenities, intellectual excitement, etc.) and therefore a

3

competitive market cannot reach equilibrium in each dimension. Nonetheless, since there are so
many players, we would expect to see some competition along each valued dimension.
Third, there is imperfect information: students do not have the information to judge
quality education. The imperfect information is partially a consequence of the highly complex
and multi-dimensional nature of higher education (Clotfelter 1996, chapter 2; McPherson and
Winston, 1993). However, we contend that the importance of such imperfect information is
exaggerated. Major books and magazines, such as Barron’s Guides and US News and World
Report, investigate the institutions in general, evaluate them, and frequently describe them in
detail. People choosing an institution frequently know other students who have gone there.
Certainly most of the evils described by popular critics, like very large classes or teaching
assistants with poor English, are generally known or could be learned easily. Moreover, the
informational asymmetries of higher education are probably significantly less than those in many
professional services, such as psychotherapists or lawyers. While those markets are far from
perfectly competitive, competitive forces nonetheless exert considerable influence.
Fourth, there are barriers to entry in higher education. Creating an entirely new institution
is very difficult, particularly in light of the role of reputation on the demand for its services.1
However, the effect of these barriers is probably limited. Many institutions exist now and
expansion is common. Modifying one’s market niche is certainly possible. Both NYU and BU
are examples of universities that have risen dramatically in their prestige and their popularity
among students (Kirp 2003).
Empirical evidence lends support to the claim that the market for higher education is
fairly competitive. Some earlier analyses have used the extent of price competition, largely
1

Goldin and Katz (2008) report that “few private institutions were founded after the turn of the century, and those
that were have not been as prestigious” (p. 256). They contend that this is due to economies of scale and scope
which create barriers to entry. We discuss this theory in section V.C.

4

occurring through financial aid, as a measure of the competitiveness of higher education. Hoxby
(1997) offers some empirical evidence that the market structure of higher education used to
consist of geographically-based local monopolies but is now an increasingly competitive
industry. Rothschild and White (1993) and Zemsky, Shaman, and Shapiro (2001) also suggest
that higher education is relatively competitive.
If students prefer that faculty emphasize teaching more and research less, and if higher
education is competitive, we would expect to observe competition on the basis of teaching
emphasis and quality. However, when seeking to advance their positions as sellers of education
services, institutions generally work on their research reputation, and rarely on their teaching
reputation. In fact, universities emphasizing research have gotten more and more popular. For
example, Berkeley, the flagship campus of the University of California, dramatically increased
its share of the best UC students using this strategy (cited in Frank and Cook, 1995). Universities
such as BU, NYU, and the University of Texas at Austin, which have moved up in rankings have
apparently done so by improving their research status, primarily by attracting established
researchers from other universities (Kirp 2003, chapter 4). The universities that put the most
emphasis on research are precisely the universities that students make increasing efforts to
attend. Even those small liberal arts colleges that emphasize teaching quality have increased their
emphasis on their research reputations.
Most strikingly, professional schools, such as business schools, that at one time did not
stress research for their faculty, have come to increasingly emphasize research. For example,
business schools once promoted faculty primarily on the basis of teaching, consulting, and the
writing of cases to be used in teaching at other institutions. However, now business schools
emphasize research similar to that done in departments of arts and sciences (Bennis and O’Toole

5

2005). Law schools were once primarily concerned with law review articles that were similar to
judicial decisions. They too have shifted their interest to research.2 More recently, architecture
schools have been changing their faculty research expectations. Empirically, whatever
competitive forces are at work in the education services market, they appear to reward the
research reputations of institutions of higher education far more than they reward their teaching
reputations.
The persistence and growth of the rewards for research in the absence of clear and serious
market failures would lead an economist to infer that consumers’ revealed preferences document
genuine value—at least private value. If we understood which features of faculty incentives for
research are genuinely valuable to education and which ones are not, we could devise research
incentives that preserve their valuable effects while reducing their detrimental effects. That is
essentially the vision of Boyer (1990) and Glassick et al. (1997) who advocate “redefining
scholarship” and support the scholarship of teaching and learning (Carnegie Foundation 2009).
The competitiveness of the market for higher education and the pressures of such
competition are better understood in the traditional profit maximization setting. However,
Rothschild and White (1993) and Feldstein (1993) note that higher education institutions consist
almost exclusively of not-for-profit institutions for which the profit maximization objective
function is replaced with some less-understood objective function. If the objective functions of
higher education institutions favor research, and if the institutions are able to collude to keep out
for-profit institutions, they could continue to favor research over teaching without competitive
forces disturbing the equilibrium. However, this analysis implies that for-profit institutions of
higher education would enjoy a clear competitive advantage, contrary to general perceptions and

2

The transformation of business schools began in the 1960s, while that of law schools began later, in the late 1970s.

6

the general lack of for-profit success, even acknowledging the recent success of the University of
Phoenix (Breneman, Pusser, and Turner 2006).
What are the economic forces behind the incentives for faculty research even when
teaching, not research, is the only product sold? If education quality truly suffers from the
emphasis on research, why don’t particular institutions increase their student demand by
emphasizing faculty teaching relative to research? Is it a market failure? If so, what is the nature
of that market failure and could public policy improve the situation? If higher education has a
serious principal-agent problem, we should at least be able to specify what it is. Or does faculty
research benefit student learning sufficiently to make the growing emphasis on research optimal?
Should the growth of teaching-only faculty be opposed?
The driving forces behind faculty research incentives matter a great deal for several
reasons. First, education creates human capital, and human capital is increasingly central to the
productivity and thus wealth of our society (Economic Report of the President 2000, chapter 4).
Anything that harms the accumulation of human capital harms our economic well-being. If
faculty research incentives harm education, they are a serious problem.
Second, higher education is costly, costs are rising rapidly, and those rising costs may be
driven in significant part by the growth of research (Martin 2002; Ehrenberg, Rizzo, and
Jakubson 2003). Certainly every faculty member faces limited time resources and must decide
whether to allocate the marginal hour to teaching or research. If the added costs of additional
research do not bring sufficient added benefits, a reallocation of resources from research to
teaching would improve society.
Third, new information and communication technologies could potentially alter
dramatically both the education process and the overall structure of higher education institutions.
7

For example, much more education could be conducted through software. The merits of such
potential changes are controversial. Both the institutions themselves and government, as funder
and regulator, must decide how to respond (Levine 1997, Christensen, Horn, and Johnson 2008).

III. Theories of higher education’s value and how they could explain the value of
researchers in providing education
To understand why we see increased research incentives, and their effects on teaching
performance, educational outcomes, and society as a whole, we must construct a comprehensive
theoretical framework. Such a framework should explain the sources of demand for education,
characterize its production function, and finally describe the market structure under which
education is provided. Therefore, we review in turn each of the theories of why higher education
is demanded, exploring their implications and extending the theories where possible to explain
the emphasis on faculty research. Where possible, we attempt to synthesize the theories and
discuss their implications for one another with regard to faculty research incentives.
The theories presented are not mutually exclusive and could all be relevant. Moreover,
since both students and employers are heterogeneous, higher education could be valuable to
different individuals for different reasons. Since the economic forces driving rewards for funded
research are obvious, our focus is on unfunded research. We consider both graduate and
undergraduate education.3 Since the economic motivation for professional education is the most
salient, it is of particular interest.
III.A Research aids teaching
How and why does higher education raise the earning power of students? According to
human capital theory, education increases general human capital and the productivity of students
3

Doctoral programs will be excluded from this discussion, because what is demanded from most Ph.D. programs
depends on what is demanded from faculty and therefore analysis is circular.

8

in the labor market. But even in the context of general human capital, there is a range between
truly general analytic skills and more specialized general human capital. In fact, one could think
of a continuum of human capital ranging from very general to firm specific. The first notch down
this continuum would consist of very broad skills, for example, learning how to think for oneself;
the second category involves more specific general skills, like, for example, learning algebra; a
third might include more industry-specific but yet general skills, like programming in a particular
language; and the last category includes firm-specific skills (e.g. knowing a firm’s accounting
practices). The last category of skills, otherwise known as specific human capital in the
literature, is usually obtained through training or learning on the job rather than education, and
therefore we exclude it from our discussion. Our point is that even general human capital
acquired in school has varying degrees of specificity.
Faculty research could be critical to the enhancement of all three shades of general
human capital identified above. First, researchers may be better at teaching higher order skills,
such as the ability to learn for oneself. Engaging in academic research requires complex skills in
identifying and making sense of otherwise chaotic information. Research may serve as proof that
some faculty have acquired the necessary skills to think and research independently, making
them better able to teach such skills to the students. Since research is essentially the act of
learning for oneself, there is a certain sense in this argument. However, evidence is needed to
back up this claim.
Second, faculty engaging in research may be better at teaching more specialized general
human capital. This is especially true for fields undergoing rapid evolution, where perhaps only
faculty who do research are capable of possessing and communicating up-to-date content. For
example, in biochemistry, there may be recent discoveries that are important to those entering

9

common careers, such as physicians or drug company sales representatives. Information
technology is another area where up-to-date knowledge is critical to mainstream practitioners
and knowledge is evolving rapidly. Moreover, the growing complexity of many fields could be
making the specific, cutting-edge knowledge of research faculty more relevant in “real world”
applications. Examples of this phenomenon include intellectual property issues in law and even
statistics and economic models in baseball (Lewis, 2003).4
For many subjects, however, the need for up-to-date skills or knowledge hardly seems
compelling. For example, how does algebraic topology contribute to the teaching of calculus to
future engineers? Typical consumers of writing instruction want to learn how to communicate
well in order to be able to write a compelling business plan or office memo. They seem unlikely
to feel that content on literary criticism is an important element of the educational service.
Third, research could make faculty better selectors of course content, and also better at
conveying knowledge in its appropriate context. Specifically, they could be better at spotting and
choosing to teach deeper concepts or more important topics. In this case, the content of the
research itself could be important, not for the research per se, but for making the professor able
to determine what is important in specific subjects.5 For example, in accounting and financial
management, a researcher who focuses on dynamic stochastic calculus may emphasize in his
teaching the importance of thinking about and dealing with risk and uncertainty, in addition to
presenting the usual financial management and accounting practices. The research itself would
only be useful to the extent that it would shape the subject that the researcher chooses to present
4

We thank Larry Katz for this striking example.
This theory can explain why business school faculty conduct research in subjects relevant to business. Why not just
get brilliant mathematicians as faculty for all students? The answer seems to be that part of the role faculty play is in
spotting key ideas, trends, or facts related to subject matter. Thus, while the papers that business school faculty
produce may not be important for business school students, the ability of those faculty to discern deeper trends that
will be relevant to business people could be critical. We thank Dan O’Flaherty for this point.
5

10

and the context it is presented. Such teaching may add to industry-specific knowledge in a
broader sense than would simply presenting principles of financial management from a
practitioner’s point of view. Active researchers would also be continuously changing and
improving their course content, not simply in response to changes in the subject matter, but also
in response to the exchange of ideas with colleagues in conferences. Researchers are
continuously testing their knowledge and ideas in a wider forum than the classroom, and are,
therefore, less likely to fall into patterns.
Finally, faculty research could provide “motivational quality” to teaching if researchers
inspire or intimidate students into providing more effort. Perhaps, students’ productivity can be
improved by practice in figuring things out for themselves, conditional on any level of innate
ability. Researchers could be more demanding that students think for themselves, perhaps due to
a distaste for explaining critical but “obvious” concepts or perhaps due to researchers’ own taste
for thinking things through. In sum, researchers could teach students not to become passive
consumers of knowledge. In addition, researchers could serve as role models, because, in a way,
they continue to be students themselves (Teagle Working Group, 2007).
Empirically, the link between research and teaching quality has been found to be weak at
best. A meta-analysis of 58 studies by Hattie and Marsh (1996) finds that there is no relationship
between research and teaching. The studies reviewed were published between 1949 and 1992,
included mostly research universities, and were conducted across disciplines and schools. While
the overall relationship between research quality and teaching quality appears slightly positive at
first, Hattie and Marsh note that the effect has diminished over time. Interestingly, studies
focusing on humanities and natural sciences showed that the research-teaching relationship was
very similar and close to zero for both. In contrast, social sciences displayed a stronger positive

11

relationship between research and teaching. Finally, this study cites some evidence that faculty
knowledge of the topic, instructor enthusiasm, and organization of subject matter had a positive
effect on teaching quality.
III.B Higher Education – A Consumption or an Investment Good?
The discussion in the previous section assumes implicitly that higher education is an
investment good. However, higher education can also be viewed as a consumption good. As a
consumption good, students enjoy learning or being in an academic environment. Faculty
research may play a role in the value of higher education as a consumption good, and through
this channel affect the overall quality of education produced. Students could enjoy learning about
research or participating in research themselves. This is clearly important to some students
(Light, 2001) but is probably not common among large numbers of students. Faculty research
could also contribute to higher education as a consumption good if students like to be around
“celebrity” researchers, just as people like to be around television personalities (Cowen, 2000).
Value as a consumption good depends on individual tastes. If faculty research is particularly
valuable to the best students, it could attract those very best students.
Education’s roles as both consumption and investment good could interact. Consider
Rothschild and White’s (1995) theory that fellow student quality is an input into the value of
education (as an investment good), because students learn from one another. This theory implies
that the price of education takes the form of net payments for services provided and rendered.
Empirically, the theory is validated by the extensive and rising use of merit-based financial aid
(Winston 1999, 2001). Suppose that faculty research enhances the value of higher education as a
consumption good, particularly for high quality students. In that case, faculty research raises the

12

consumption good value to those students who raise the investment good quality of education for
all students.
It is not clear empirically to what extent education is a consumption good versus an
investment good. While higher education is certainly somewhat of a consumption good, it is
primarily seen as an investment good whose main purpose is to raise the earning power of
students (Freeman, 1986). The large government subsidies for higher education, the willingness
of middle- and working-class families to make significant sacrifices, and the stated beliefs of the
public about the role of higher education (Chronicle of Higher Education, 2003) provide support
for the view that higher education is primarily seen as an investment good.
Over the last two decades, incomes at the top of the income distribution have grown
dramatically, raising demand substantially for everything demanded by high income individuals.
If faculty research contributes to the value of education as an investment good or as a
consumption good for wealthier individuals, then demand for faculty research could have risen
indirectly due to rising demand for education driven by higher incomes (Clotfelter 1996).
IV. Education as a Signal
A more cynical take on the value of higher education is the signaling theory, in which
education has no intrinsic value, the opposite of the human capital theory of education. Rather,
education serves only to reveal innate ability that is otherwise difficult for employers to detect
(Arrow 1973, Spence 1973, Stiglitz 1975, Weiss 1995).6 Consider the theory in its simplest form.
Workers differ in their innate productivity and they know what it is. However, employers cannot
observe these productivity differences. The cost of being educated is higher for low productivity
workers, for ill-defined reasons that could include both psychic costs and the time it takes to get
6

Screening and signaling are formally distinguished by which player makes the first move in a game-theoretical
sense. In our context, this distinction not important.

13

a given amount of education. By making salary dependent on education in the appropriate
fashion, only the more productive workers select to receive education. In the purest form of the
theory, education plays no direct role whatsoever in increasing workers’ productivity.
Consequently, resources spent on education are wasteful, except that they are needed to reach a
separating equilibrium and the separating equilibrium is valuable. A less wasteful way to achieve
the same separating equilibrium would be socially beneficial.
We extend the theory to incorporate research. In a nutshell, we claim that research may
allow the separating equilibrium to be achieved more efficiently, with fewer resources wasted on
education. This occurs if better researchers are “worse teachers”, at least to the bottom of the
ability distribution—or more specifically if better researchers make education more costly to
those at the bottom of the ability distribution. As a result, better researchers can be better
screeners of the different worker types. In the spirit of the signaling theory, we assume that
education is not intrinsically valuable, but its value lies in achieving a separating equilibrium
between low- and high-ability workers. In this setup, research is socially valuable not because of
any intrinsic usefulness, but because it achieves the separation between high- and low-ability
types more efficiently.
IV.A The Signaling Model Revisited
Generalizing Spence’s (1973) model, workers of type H have a lifetime marginal product
of wH and incur a cost cH per year of education obtained, workers of type L have a lower
marginal product of wL and incur a higher cost of cL per year of education obtained. (Thus, wH >
wL and cL> cH.) If employers set a pay schedule such that anyone with more years of education
level greater than a minimum education level, E*, receives the higher wage, wH, and anyone with
less education receives the lower wage, wL, then workers will self-select appropriately and there

14

will be a separating equilibrium, provided that E* is chosen so that wH/cL < E* < wH/cH.7
Essentially, E* must be chosen so that only H types find it beneficial to get more education, but
not the L types.
Consider how this equilibrium is affected by the technological changes of the last 25
years. The return to higher productivity has risen, so that wH has grown. Lower productivity
workers now have a greater incentive to get E* education, despite their higher per-year education
costs of cL. If employers do not raise E*, lower productivity workers will get more education
and the separating equilibrium will break down. Therefore, employers need to raise E*
accordingly.
Spence’s model was designed to be parsimonious to make a point. Consequently, its
comparative statistics are not rich enough to accommodate and explain some recent
developments. While increasing wH, technological advances have also made possible the
substitution of capital for low-skilled labor, thus resulting in falling wL. According to the model,
this trend should have no effect on E*, since the only wage that matters in the separating
equilibrium is wH. Intuitively, however, declining wages for the less educated wL should affect
how much education low-ability workers choose.
This model is limited by the vagueness and simplicity of the psychic costs. Psychic costs
in the model increase linearly with years of education; in reality, they could increase
hyperbolically. Would the separating equilibrium break down in the face of ever increasing
levels of E* and even higher education costs? In addition, the financial and psychic costs of
education could interact in certain predictable ways with each other and with market wages.

7

Using the simplest, original Spence model, only the high skill wage, wH, enters the equation. In other formulations,
the skill premium, wH-wL, enters. The difference could matter because factors driving the decrease in the low-skilled
wage are not necessarily the same as those driving the increase in the skill premium (Acemoglu, 2002).

15

Non-cognitive attributes, such as persistence, motivation, leadership skills, and societal values
have been linked to higher returns, net of education (Waddell, 2006, Heckman, Stixrud, and
Urzua, 2006, Carneiro, Crawford, Goodman, 2007, Kuhn and Weinberger, 2005). These same
non-cognitive attributes may be directly linked to psychic costs of acquiring education, and even
financial costs, if people with these skills are more likely to find and obtain financial aid.
Without substantial extensions to the model, it is unclear how the interaction between wages and
education costs would affect the separating equilibrium.
Despite these limitations, the theory’s predictions seem to be empirically confirmed. The
last 25 years have seen rising quantities of education throughout society followed by an increase
in what is considered the minimum education for various “good jobs”. For example, today it is
said that a college degree does not get you anywhere and you need a graduate degree (Collins,
2002).
IV.B Are Better Researchers Worse Teachers and Better Screeners?
Suppose, however, that an institution could raise the cost to less productive workers of
obtaining education, cL, then it would be possible to make getting E* years of education not
worth it despite the rise in wH, without raising E*. Since in the purest forms of the signaling
theory, education is socially wasteful, raising cL rather than E* would be good for society:
sorting could be done with fewer wasted resources. Raising the cost of education to the less
productive implies that institutions of higher education should make education more unpleasant
or difficult for the less able! Accordingly, we define the “screening quality” of faculty as the
degree to which they make education harder for poorer quality students or raise cL.
Researchers may be poorer teachers to low-ability students and thus better screeners.
Why might this be so? Researchers may be unwilling, or even unable, to “spoon-feed” their
16

students. Basic concepts may appear so obvious to researchers that it does not occur to them to
explain those concepts. Those students who do not find the same ideas intuitively obvious and
require explanation will be left behind. Thus, researchers might make it much harder for the
students to learn the material, ensuring that only the most intrinsically able students are able to
acquire the education or acquire it at a reasonable “psychic cost.” In this case, research quality
would be a proxy for lower teaching quality and consequently a proxy for higher screening
quality.
A richer specification of psychic costs suggests other ways in which research could raise
the costs of education for low-ability types. For example, psychic costs could be due to the
disutility from studying minus the utility derived from learning and being in an educational
institution (that is, utility from education as a consumption good). From the discussion in section
III.B, it would be reasonable to assume that high-ability students derive more utility from
education as a consumption good than low-ability students. This would suggest that the net
psychic costs of education would be lower for the high-ability students, even if we were to
assume similar disutility from studying for both high- and low-ability types. And if research
increases the consumption value of education for high-ability types, this would be yet another
way that research would increase the cost gap between high and low ability students and improve
upon the separating equilibrium.
While these stories are essentially speculative, they have some face validity, being
consistent with popular accounts of academia. They are also consistent with all of the empirical
phenomena noted, including the growing popularity of research institutions and the spread of
faculty incentives for research down the prestige ladder and into new disciplines. On the other
hand, grade inflation and the small numbers of students who flunk out are empirical phenomena

17

at odds with this theory. Therefore, for the theory to be true, the process must be subtler. For
example, it could work by making the educational process unpleasant for some students causing
them to leave or not apply in the first place. Evidence that rising research prestige has driven out
lower ability students would provide further empirical evidence.
The human capital theory and the screening theory could both apply simultaneously to
various extents. Education may both increase the productivity of the students, and also serve as a
signal to separate types, who differ in qualities such as persistence and motivation, not
observable to employers. In the context of the above extension to the screening theory, better
researchers could be better screeners because they would raise the psychic (or other) costs to the
bottom of the distribution. However, if the human capital theory also applies, the bottom of the
ability distribution would then accumulate less human capital and be less productive. If both
theories apply to a certain extent, the benefits of faculty research for enhancing screening must
be weighed against its harm in reducing human capital. From a policy perspective, the relative
magnitude of the effects is critical, but determining them empirically is very difficult.
V. Market Failures as Drivers of Research’s Role in Higher Education
In this section we consider several theories that would explain increased research
incentives as the outcome of various other market failures. We illustrate how agency theory,
public goods provision, barriers to entry, non-economic factors and tournaments may give rise to
increased emphasis for research.
V.A Research Quality as a Proxy for Teaching Quality
We return to human capital theory and assume again that education raises human capital.
We define teaching quality as the extent to which faculty increase the human capital of their
students. The usual economic forces would then cause students to seek high-quality teaching

18

when choosing universities. Consequently, institutions would provide incentives for faculty to
provide high-quality teaching. Such incentives would require measures of teaching performance.
Student evaluations are the most commonly used methods of evaluating teaching. Their
use and importance have been growing since the 1970s (Theall, Abrami, and Mets, 2001).
However, studies show that student evaluations may be an imperfect way of measuring teaching
quality for a number of reasons outlined below. First, teaching quality is highly multidimensional. Certain components of teaching quality, such as liveliness and organization, are
relatively easy for students to observe and, therefore, reward in evaluations. Other components of
quality, such as depth of ideas or training people to think in new and abstract ways, may be much
harder to detect and evaluate. These dimensions of teaching quality will be particularly hard to
detect if the difference between more and less valuable ideas and skills only becomes apparent to
students over many years of use.
Second, while the dimensions of teaching quality more easily observed by students are
genuinely valuable (Theall, Abrami, and Mets, 2001), they may not be as important to employers
as other dimensions. Rapid technological change is thought to frequently erode the value of
specific knowledge and skills and to reward more general skills. Therefore, employers are
thought to place a premium on people who can continually learn and think things through for
themselves (U.S. Department of Labor, 1991). In that case, the most important features of higher
education to employers will be the teaching of higher order skills and screening for such innate
ability. Moreover, such abilities may be those for which employer information ex ante is poorest,
and, therefore, the role of education to employers most important.8

8

Hannaway (1992) points out that currently the assessment of teaching outcomes is better at measuring basic skills,
rather than higher order skills. As a result, higher order skills, which may be equally, if not more important, may be

19

The problems associated with imperfect measures of teaching are exacerbated by a time
inconsistency problem. Once students have entered a university with a given degree of teaching
quality, their goals are different. Students would like to receive grades that are as high as
possible while incurring the smallest psychic and/or time costs. Of course, students may also
want to learn more in the belief that this knowledge will be valuable, at least eventually.
However, for a given level of skills and knowledge obtained, students would prefer to obtain
them at the lowest psychic cost. Moreover, to the extent that the value of education to employers
lies in signaling or in the skill level of the average person with that education, rather than the
actual skill level of the particular individual, students may not value the actual learning.
Consequently, a student will choose a university with high teaching quality ex ante. Ex
post, the student takes the teaching quality as given, and minimizes his effort.9 This conflict
creates difficulties in using student evaluations of teaching to measure faculty performance.
Empirical evidence suggests that faculty can raise their student evaluations by giving higher
grades (Krautmann and Sander, 1999). Because students are already in the university and take its
teaching quality as given, students will reward easiness by faculty. That is precisely the opposite
of what the university wants to reward in order to improve its value in the market, because it was
assumed that prospective students will choose universities largely on the basis of quality.
In sum, student evaluations appear to be plagued by two main problems. First, they most
likely do not capture the more ephemeral dimensions of teaching quality, such as increasing the
ability of students to learn for themselves. Consequently, there could be an asymmetric
information problem in which students want to have faculty who are good at teaching these
underprovided, due to both lack of appropriate measures, and distortions induced by the focus on basic skill
measures.
9
In fact, the Japanese system of higher education works this way. Entry is extremely competitive, but higher
education itself is comparatively easy. We thank Claudia Goldin for making this point.

20

ephemeral skills, but lack effective means of measuring and contracting on teaching quality.
Second, there could be an ex-ante/ex-post conflict, in which students would like to attend
institutions with high teaching quality, but once enrolled, would prefer to spend less effort
learning. Teaching evaluations, in this case, would reward faculty who demand less time and
effort in their courses. Because of these problems with teaching evaluations, it is commonly
perceived that it is easier to objectively evaluate research than teaching, and, therefore, research
quality could be used as a proxy for teaching quality (Bok 1991, Siow 1997).
However, research may not be intrinsically easier to evaluate than teaching. After all,
what is ground-breaking and really important in the creation of new knowledge is frequently
unclear. In contrast, teaching is a more uniform product. Moreover, those who have the
knowledge to understand cutting-edge research are often few in numbers and may be prone to
their own biases and agendas. Those with the knowledge to evaluate good teaching are more
numerous. Thus, the comparative ease of measuring research quality may not be intrinsic to the
natures of research and education.
In fact, the relative easiness of evaluating research performance could be due to the
relatively large resources devoted to evaluating research. Specifically, there is an extensive
existing system of peer-review for research, including journal rankings, academic presses and
grant review agencies. They also be used for education. So, given that we have available all these
ranking systems for research work, and that we lack similar systems for evaluating teaching, it is
easier to evaluate research. More resources are devoted to the evaluation of research: consider
the time and effort that academics put into refereeing papers and reviewing grants. In contrast,
few resources have gone into the evaluation of teaching (Langemann 2000), although this has
recently begun to change. The only tool in general use is the student evaluation, with its widely

21

recognized limitations. However, the movement to measure educational outcomes in other ways
is now gaining ground (Banta and Associates, 2002).10
If teaching evaluation received resources similar to those received by research evaluation,
evaluating teaching might be easier than evaluating research. Perhaps it is the high demand for
methods of evaluating research that drives the high quantity of such measures. Once the
measures of research quality exist, they are non-rivalrous and can be cheaply used for the
evaluation of teachers. Thus, rather than being based on differences in the costs of supplying
valid measures of research and teaching quality, the relative ease of research evaluation could be
due to differences in demand for methods of evaluating teaching and research.11
The measurement problem theory posits that students and universities value teaching but
cannot measure its quality directly and therefore use research as a proxy. This theory lacks face
validity, because it is inconsistent with the culture within universities, which truly values
research. Research is prestigious—an issue discussed in section V.D. Moreover, whether
research quality and teaching quality are even related is disputed (Feldman 1987, Hattie and
Marsh, 1996). Even if research quality serves as a valid proxy for teaching quality, we have little
understanding of why this is so. Nor do we know what aspects of research quality are relevant
and what aspects of teaching quality they are proxying for—something that could vary by
discipline. Such information would enable the use research as a proxy more effectively. Finally,
measuring teaching quality directly, by developing and employing valid measures of teaching
quality, would be better than using research as a proxy.
V.B Research as a Public Good
10

The assessment movement took off with the First Conference on Assessment in Higher Education held in 1985.
By the mid-90s, most states had adopted assessment mandates for public colleges and universities (Ewell, 2002).
11
There is an issue of path-dependence here. Systems of peer-review for research evolved first, particularly in the
physical sciences, for reasons to do with demand for (often funded) research itself.

22

Knowledge is a classic public good— truly non-rivalrous and generally not excludable.
To the extent that research produces socially valuable knowledge, it too is a public good.12 Being
a public good might persuade school administrators, donors, government and others to support
research, including support for cross-subsidies from education to research, implemented through
both social norms and government policy. If the value of research as a public good has been
rising, perhaps support for cross-subsidies has risen also. However, if it were possible to identify
what unfunded research is desired and in what quantity, it would be more efficient to fund it
directly, rather than through cross-subsidies between teaching and research that raise costs and
lower quality of higher education services. On the other hand, the transaction costs of identifying
valuable research projects could make the cross-subsidy of unfunded research by education a
second-best solution.
Donors support higher education presumably because they believe the institutions’
products are underprovided public goods or goods with positive externalities. Education is
believed to have positive externalities and therefore is also worthy of donations. When donations
are made in an unrestricted way to the institution, it is unclear whether donors wish to support
teaching, research, or both. Donors may believe that the institutions are better at identifying
which goods should be subsidized and in which quantities. Or if donors are too small to acquire
the necessary information for earmarking contributions, they may resort to institutional
endowments for lack of better alternatives. In reality, private donors are increasingly
contributing their funds for specific uses. Brewer, Gates, and Goldman (2001) estimate that 70%
of private donations are made in the form of restricted donations, rather than blanket
contributions to the university’s endowment. Therefore, it becomes less clear why research
12

Some argue that research has positive externalities. The implications of positive externalities are the same as the
implications we describe for public goods.

23

would have to be funded via cross-subsidies from teaching, since, if the intention of
philanthropists is to subsidize it, they could do so in a more explicit way.
It could be argued that unfunded research has more pronounced public good attributes
than funded research. In particular, unfunded research cannot be patented, restricted in
circulation, or influenced by the agendas of the donors (Weisbrod, Ballou, and Asch 2008).
Perhaps consumers of unfunded research do not have financial means to fund it directly. Or
perhaps government is not as good as universities at discerning which unfunded research projects
will result in valuable knowledge — public goods. Subsidizing unfunded research, therefore,
would be socially beneficial.
V.C Barriers to Entry
Faculty control both the issuing of PhD-s and the hiring and promotion of their
colleagues. This could be because administrators lack the necessary information to evaluate
faculty performance and decide on hiring, promotions, and granting of PhDs. Alternatively, this
control could be due to governance rules that serve no legitimate purpose but reflect regulatory
capture by faculty.13 Regardless of the reason, this control enables faculty to ensure that only
research-oriented people enter and stay in the profession, erecting a barrier to entry. Barriers to
entry in the profession may then result in rents for employed faculty.
Research could be a consumption good for faculty. If faculty enjoy engaging in research,
then, faculty could be paid partially ‘in kind’ with research opportunities. Such in kind payments
are consistent with the observed compensating differential—lower pay in academia compared to
the private sector for similar skills. Combining this theory with barriers to entry suggests that

13

In its traditional sense, regulatory capture would involve the capture of regulators (such as accrediting
organizations) by the university, whereby the regulators set rules that are in the interest of universities, rather than
social interest. However, increased research incentives are not being generated solely or even mostly by accrediting
agencies. This version of regulatory capture involves the capture of university administrators by the faculty.

24

faculty might consume at least part of their rents in the form of engaging in research. Faced with
the growing demand for higher education described earlier, and the resulting growth in rents
available, faculty as a profession may have spent more of their increased rents on research.14
This theory would then explain the observed pattern of research growth.
The industry of higher education, rather than (or in addition to) the professorate itself,
could have barriers to entry. Higher education could be a natural monopoly for a number of
reasons. First, faculty could do better research (funded and unfunded) in the presence of likeminded people with whom they exchange ideas and cooperate on research projects. These could
be described as ‘peer effects’, resulting in economies of scale in the production of research, be it
funded or unfunded (Laband and Tollison, 2000, 2003). Second, funded and unfunded research
could exhibit economies of scope, if, unfunded research is an input in the production of funded
research. Unfunded research can be undertaken in the expectation of future funding. Third,
teaching and research could exhibit economies of scope. A good researcher may be a better
teacher for reasons discussed in Section III.A; at the same time, by teaching a subject a
researcher may gain new insights into the subject matter. Economies of scope between teaching
and funded research imply that faculty who do both provide the institution with a cost advantage
(Goldin and Katz 1999, 2008). Under these three assumptions, the production of teaching and
research (both funded and unfunded) would give rise to a natural monopoly, and consequently, to
entry barriers.
This theory would explain why we see all three products produced together, instead of
separately. However, in Continental Europe, teaching and research take place in largely separate
institutions by separate individuals (Owen-Smith et al. 2002, Enders and Teichler 1997, McCain,

14

We thank Michael Kremer for this insight.

25

1960).15 That practice does not contradict this theory, because European research and teaching
are generally both considered worse than those in the US (Goldin and Katz 2008 p. 258, Institute
of Higher Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2007). On the other hand, the poorer
performance of European higher education could be due to public sector work rules or other
differences. European universities are now starting to emphasize research, just as in the US.
Other evidence, however, contradicts this hypothesis. First, the theory only explains why
teaching and research (funded and unfunded) should be provided together in some disciplines
rather than the entire institution. Since most of the humanities and much of the social sciences,
mathematics, and professional school disciplines are largely without funded research, this theory
does not explain why research is the primary criterion for faculty promotion and hiring in
virtually all disciplines at more prestigious institutions and increasingly at other institutions
(Wilson, 2001). Finally, the theory does not explain the recent increase in the use of teachingonly, non-tenure track, and frequently non-PhD faculty (Bettinger and Long, 2004). That
increase has occurred at the same time as the increased emphasis on research for traditional
tenure-track faculty, although it is far more recent.
The policy conclusions depend on which of the entry barrier theories are correct. If
unfunded research is not intrinsically valuable and if professors are simply collecting rents in the
form of research, higher education policy should try to reduce the barriers to entry. For example,
accreditation and funding should not depend on having PhDs or researchers as faculty. On the

15

Research in Europe occurs mostly in research institutes and not in universities because of legal prohibitions in
some countries against faculty collaboration with commercial entities (Owen-Smith, Riccaboni, Pammolli, and
Powell, 2002). Additionally, the culture in European universities is such that it considers research collaboration of
faculty with private industries offensive and jeopardizing academic dignity and freedom (McCain, 1960). Enders
and Teichler (1997) also find that the division between teaching and research duties varies substantially across
European countries.

26

other hand, if there are really economies of scope and scale, then the barrier should persist but be
focused on those areas with funded research.
V.D Non-economic theories: Fairness, imitation and prestige
We have described some theories that explain why unfunded research should be
rewarded, such as economies of scope and scale and inputs to teaching, which make sense for
some disciplines, particularly those with funded research. But these theories do not explain the
value of unfunded research for other disciplines. We now turn to non-economic theories to see if
they can explain the spread to other disciplines or the increased emphasis on research in general.
The first theory is fairness, or more precisely social norms of fairness (Elster 1988). Both
funded and unfunded research are central to the natural sciences, the latter for reasons described
earlier. Consequently, natural science professors are rewarded for their research. Notions of
fairness—treating all faculty equally—may imply that all faculty, regardless of discipline, should
be promoted and rewarded using the same criteria. Such fairness norms could work, even against
forces of competition or efficiency. Faculty governance structures could further reinforce norms
of fairness. If the fairness theory is true, policy could be improved by allowing faculty rewards
for research to vary by field when the intrinsic value of unfunded research varies by field.
The second theory is that institutions imitate or model themselves on successful fields
and institutions, a sociological theory called institutional isomorphism (DiMaggio and Powell,
1983). The isomorphic change has several possible causes, two of which seem relevant to the
spread of research in higher education: pure imitation based on prestige, and socialization of
those who work in the organization. More specifically, if natural sciences were considered
successful, based on outcomes like major discoveries it could be that other fields imitated the
organizational model of the successful natural science fields. The other fields might do this even

27

if it is in fact inefficient. At the university level, a similar process could be responsible for
universities previously not emphasizing research to follow in the footsteps of prestigious
research universities. Moreover, for a university, becoming similar to other universities makes it
easier to establish reputation, interact with other universities, and fit in categories required to
attract public and private grants. In competing for faculty, universities are driven toward
homogenization, in part to ensure that they can provide the same professional environment and
resources as other schools. This would explain the spread of research emphasis down the prestige
ladder. According to the institutional isomorphism theory, homogenization is more intense under
certain conditions, including an unclear technology of production or ambiguous goals, which
clearly fits higher education.
Institutional isomorphism relies on the notion that research drives prestige. Why would
this be true? The third theory suggests that research increases the visibility of the institution and
through that its prestige, much like advertising (Kirp 2003). Once it is accepted that research
drives prestige, many of our earlier theories about the importance of research, such as signaling,
proxies for quality teaching, or consumption goods, follow easily. Some empirical evidence
favors the theory that prestige may be more of a signal than a truly human-capital enhancing
mechanism. Brewer, Eide and Ehrenberg (1999), find that substantial cross-sectional returns to
institutional prestige are largely reduced by partially correcting for selection effects, resulting in
statistically significant but practically only moderate rewards for institution prestige. Dale and
Krueger (2002), correcting for unobservable differences in student quality, do not find any
institutional prestige rewards.16 On the other hand, Tracey and Waldfogel (1997) find that the
research prestige of a business school is correlated with how much it appears to raise student

16

Some object to Dale and Krueger’s conclusion because they include resources as a control variable and resources
could be considered a possible mechanism through which prestige works.

28

earnings, using observable characteristics to predict what students would have earned without the
degree. This theory corresponds with the widely-held belief that research is a critical component
of general prestige, whether this link originates from imitation, visibility, signaling, or reasons as
yet unknown. General prestige, in turn, raises student demand for institutions of higher education
(Kirp 2003).
V.E Rank Tournaments and Positional Arms Races
Accepting that research is prestigious opens the door for another economic theory, which
suggests that the recent research emphasis is due to the pursuit of prestige. Frank and Cook
(1995) suggest that competition in higher education may take the form of prestige-based rank
tournaments which result in wasteful arms races. If an established system of rankings is accepted
by everyone (notably prospective students and employers), then that ranking system will be a
self-fulfilling prophecy. Even if a lesser-ranked institution is genuinely better at directly
increasing students’ human capital, attending the lesser-ranked university will be too costly a
choice for students (Cook and Frank 1993, Frank and Cook 1995). Therefore, any accepted
criteria for determining rank – research, athletic prowess, school colors and/or any other arbitrary
characteristic – will determine what an institution needs to do to climb in rank. Once research
determines rank, increasing the quality and quantity of research will be the best way to attract
better students, even if research were entirely irrelevant to anything employers or students
intrinsically valued.
Game-theoretical models tend to rely on intuitive and well-defined payoff matrices, such
as profits, income, or avoiding death. However, the payoff in the race for prestige is anything but
well-defined, since prestige itself and its relationship to research are not pinned down with any
accuracy. Nonetheless, if position in the research rankings is important, institutions will be

29

driven to spend resources on research, including resources to attract top research faculty. Rank
is, by definition, a positional good – what matters is where one institution stands relative to
others. Although each institution’s dominant strategy is to devote more and more resources to
improve its relative rank, on average, little or nothing can improve from the additional resources
if all institutions follow the same strategy. Prestige goods, therefore, are as wasteful as a genuine
arms race. If research is simply a driver of prestige and provides no real value, policy could
clearly be improved by strategies to reduce the role of research and the positional arms race.17
VII. Conclusions and Policy Implications
The writing of this paper would have been much easier if one of the theories described,
existing or proposed, had emerged as the most relevant. Unfortunately for intellectual clarity, this
is not the case: the theories described and extended in this paper all have some relevance. Each
theory has found substantial support from some knowledgeable and intelligent readers. Each
theory has also been dismissed by some of those readers. More theoretical and empirical
evidence is needed to explain current trends and evaluate their impact on education outcomes
and ultimately on human capital accumulation in the society.18
This paper has considered the various reasons why faculty research could hinder or help
the accumulation of human capital. While we cannot determine the truth or relative quantitative
magnitudes of the various theories, we can point out the policy implications of each of them. We
started with the standard assumption that education enhances human capital. Then we posited
that faculty who engage in research may also be better teachers since they may be better able to
(a) teach students higher order skills, (b) possess up-to-date knowledge in rapidly evolving

17

This race for prestige may also result in other negative consequences, such as increased inequality due to the
increased cost of attending prestigious schools (Frank and Cook, 1995).
18
The authors acknowledge the irony in proposing further (unfunded) research as one of the potential solutions to
the problem.

30

fields, (c) select relevant course content, and (d) motivate students. If we consider education an
investment good, and assume that research enhances the quality of teaching, then more research
is better for student learning. When assuming that education is in part a consumption good, we
also considered the hypothesis that faculty who engage in research may increase the
consumption good value of education to, at least, the better students. If we add peer effects to the
model, whereby better students contribute positively to the human capital accumulation of all
others, then more research, again, appears to be socially desirable. In either of these cases,
policies that undermine faculty incentives for research would be damaging to education and,
therefore, to human capital accumulation. Caution is warranted before reducing incentives for
research in hopes of supporting teaching.
Then we took the diametrically opposing view and assumed that education has no
intrinsic value, but that it serves as a credible signal that sorts workers according to ability. In
this context, we proposed a new theory claiming that faculty who engage in research make better
screeners because they make learning harder for low-ability students. According to this theory,
the emphasis on faculty research is effectively a second-best response to an existing market
failure. In the purest form of the signaling/screening theory, education itself is a socially wasteful
activity. In our extension of that theory, while faculty research itself is also intrinsically wasteful,
it is socially beneficial, because it reduces the quantity of wasteful education needed to maintain
the socially valuable sorting. Unfortunately, it does so through the perverse mechanism of worse
teaching for less able students. For professors who do research, including the authors and many
of our readers, this theory is highly ironic and even painful. If education is simply a signal, then
resources should be directly allocated to providing information about potential employees that is
valuable to employers, thus improving sorting directly.

31

Next, we looked at other market failures as potential explanations. First, we considered
the extent to which information problems make it hard to evaluate teaching. The existing
teaching measures – student evaluations – have been shown to have several shortcomings. They
convey limited information that may not capture the more ephemeral (and perhaps more
valuable) aspects of teaching. They may also be prone to a time inconsistency problem. Although
ex-ante students may prefer schools with higher standards and, thus, a better reputation, ex-post,
for any given ability level, students may try to minimize the psychic costs of education.
Therefore, student evaluations may reward faculty who are less demanding. Because nonrivalrous research evaluation methods already exist, we considered whether research quality is
being used as a proxy for teaching quality. The recent increase in the returns to education, and
the lack of appropriate teaching measures to contract on, may be responsible for the increased
emphasis on research. However, developing good teaching quality measures would be a more
direct (and perhaps less costly) solution than using research quality as a proxy.
We next considered the implications of unfunded research as a public good. In this case,
reallocating resources from teaching to research might be in the public interest, but public
finance theory suggests that direct subsidies of research would be better than obscure crosssubsidies from teaching that distort the education services market. Of course, direct financing of
many small research projects might bring large transactions costs that outweigh the distortions of
cross-subsidies from education. The next market failure theory we considered was that the
professorate has market power and chooses to “spend their rents” on research. In that case,
breaking up the cartel would benefit society. The increased use of faculty without Ph.D-s,
centrally developed distance learning tools, non-researcher teacher labor, and institutions such as
the University of Phoenix, could all reduce the rents increasingly spent on more research,

32

benefiting society. Such a view suggests that regulatory changes for higher education would be
socially beneficial. More research should investigate the value of the traditional researchperforming Ph.D. as a teacher of higher education. Since the value could vary by discipline, it
must be assessed on a subject-by-subject basis.
Next, we considered various non-economic theories. We first suggested that norms of
fairness within the university may have resulted in the use of the same research standards as a
way to evaluate all faculty, not only those in fields characterized by intensive research.
Alternatively, institutions and fields may be trying to copy prestigious fields and institutions,
which tend to engage in more research (institutional isomorphism). Finally, it could be that
research drives prestige because it provides prominence, thus driving both imitation and a
potentially destructive positional arms race. All these theories would explain the increased
emphasis on research and its spread across disciplines. However, they all raise efficiency
questions about this trend.
Because the various theories are not mutually exclusive and because both teaching and
research are highly multi-dimensional in nature, drawing unambiguous policy conclusions is
difficult. Ultimately, we would like to answer questions such as: Should accrediting
organizations and the government oppose the increased use of teaching-only faculty on the
grounds that research faculty make better teachers? Should legislatures reduce unfunded research
release for faculty at public universities? Before such questions can be answered, research is
needed to develop and test a coherent model that incorporates features of the existing theories.
More specifically, research is needed to address: Which aspects of education are valued in the
labor market, particularly those most difficult to measure, such as analytical thinking? Can valid
measures of those abilities be developed? How costly would they be to implement? How valid

33

are current measures of higher education teaching quality and can further valid and cost-effective
measures be developed? How does faculty research affect student learning? Does this vary by
discipline, and, if so, how? To what extent does unfunded research provide valuable public
goods? If such research were funded directly would the transactions cost be prohibitively large?
Higher education is very costly and the costs have been rising rapidly. Higher education
is also widely believed to be highly beneficial to our economy. Both private willingness to pay
for higher education and public support for public financing are certainly substantial. With stakes
so high, the question of the impact of faculty research on education is not one that we can afford
to ignore.

34

References
Acemoglu, Daron. 2002. “Technical Change, Inequality, and the Labor Market” Journal of
Economic Literature, 40(1), 7-72.
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1973. “Higher Education as a Filter” Journal of Public Economics, 2(3), 193216.
Banta, Trudy W. and Associates. 2002. Building a Scholarship of Assessment. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.
Bennis, Warren G. and James O’Toole. 2005. “How Business Schools Lost Their Way.”
Harvard Business Review, May, 96-104.
Bettinger, Eric and Bridget Terry Long. 2004. “Do College Instructors Matter? The Effect of
Adjuncts and Graduate Assistants on Students’ Interests and Success” NBER Working paper
10370.
Bok, Derek. 1991. The Improvement of Teaching. American Council of Learned Societies
Occasional Paper No. 16, 19-25.
Bok, Derek. 1992. “Reclaiming the Public Trust” Change July/August 1992: 13-19.
Boyer, Ernest L. 1990. Scholarship Reconsidered: Priorities of the Professorate, Princeton,
NJ: Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching.
Breneman, David W., Brian Pusser and Sarah E. Turner. 2006. Earnings from Learning: The
Rise of For-profit Universities. Albany, NY: SUNY Series, Frontiers in Education.
Brewer, Dominic J., Eric R. Eide and Ronald G. Ehrenberg. 1999. “Does it Pay to Attend an
Elite Private College? Cross Cohort Evidence on the Effects of College Type on Earning”
Journal of Human Resources 34(1): 104-123.
Brewer, Dominic J., Susan M. Gates, and Charles A. Goldman. 2001. In Pursuit of Prestige:
Strategy and Competition in U.S. Higher Education, Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Carnegie Foundation, 2009. Carnegie Academy for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning
http://www.carnegiefoundation.org/programs/index.asp?key=21, last accessed April 8, 2009.
Carneiro, Pedro, Claire Crawford, and Alissa Goodman, 2007. “The Impact of Early Cognitive
and Non-Cognitive Skills on Later Outcomes,” CEE Discussion Papers 0092, Centre for the
Economics of Education, LSE.
Christensen, Clayton M., Michael B. Horn and Curtis W. Johnson. 2008. Disrupting Class:
How Disruptive Innovation Will Change the Way the World Learns. McGraw Hill.

35

Chronicle of Higher Education. 2003. “The Chronicle Survey of Public Opinion on Higher
Education” Chronicle of Higher Education p. A11 May 2, 2003.
Clotfelter, Charles T., 1996. Buying the Best: Cost Escalation in Elite Higher Education.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Collins, Randall. 2002. “The Dirty Little Secret of Credential Inflation” Chronicle of Higher
Education, 49, 5, p. B20, September 27.
Cook, Philip J. and Robert H. Frank. 1993. “The Growing Concentration of Top Students at Elite
Schools” in Studies of Supply and Demand in Higher Education, Charles Clotfelter and
Michael Rothschild, editors. University of Chicago Press, 121-144.
Cowen, Tyler. 2000. What Price Fame? Harvard University Press.
Cuban, Larry. 1999. How Scholars Trumped Teachers: Change Without Reform in
University Curriculum, Teaching, and Research, 1890-1990. Williston, VT: Teachers College
Press.
DiMaggio, Paul J. and Walter W. Powell. 1983. “The Iron Cage Revisited: Institutional
Isomorphism and Collective Rationality in Organizational Fields.” American Sociological
Review, 48, 147-160.
Dale, Stacy Berg and Alan B. Krueger. 2002. “Estimating the Payoff to Attending A More
Selective College: An Application of Selection on Observables and Unobservables” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 117(4): 1491-1527.
Economic Report of the President 2000. 2000. Chapter 4. “Work and Learning in the 21st
Century”. Washington DC: Government Printing Office.
Ehrenberg, Ronald G., Michael J. Rizzo and George H. Jakubson. 2003. “Who Bears the
Growing Cost of Science at Universities?” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper no. 9627.
Elster, J. 1988. “Is There (Or Should There Be) A Right to Work?” In Democracy and the
Welfare State, Guttman, A., editor,, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 53-78.
Enders, Jurgen and Ulrich Teichler. 1997. “A Victim of Their Own Success? Employment and
Working Conditions of Academic Staff in Comparative Perspective.” Higher Education, 34(3),
347-372.
Ewell, Peter T. 2002. “An Emerging Scholarship: A Brief History of Assessment.” In Building a
Scholarship of Assessment, Trudy Banta and Associates, editors, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Feldman, Kenneth A. 1987. “Research Productivity and Scholarly Accomplishment of College
Teachers as Related to Their Instructional Effectiveness: A Review and Exploration” Research
in Higher Education, 26(3), 227-298.

36

Feldstein, Martin. 1993. Comment “The University in the Marketplace: Some Insights and Some
Puzzles” by Michael Rothschild and Lawrence White, in Studies of Supply and Demand in
Higher Education, Charles Clotfelter and Michael Rothschild, editors. University of Chicago
Press.
Frank, Robert H. and Philip J. Cook. 1995. The Winner-Take-All Society. Penguin.
Freeman, Richard B. 1986. “Demand for Education” in Handbook of Labor Economics, Orley
Ashenfelter and A. Layard, editors, volume 1. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
Glassick, Charles E., Mary Taylor Huber, and Gene I. Maeroff. 1997. Scholarship Assessed:
Evaluation of the Professoriate. Jossey-Bass.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz. 1999. “The Shaping of Higher Education: The Formative
Years in the United States, 1890-1940” Journal of Economic Perspectives 13(1): 37-62.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. The Race Between Education and Technology
Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Hannaway, Jane. 1992. “Higher Order Skills, Job Design, and Incentives: An Analysis and
Proposal” American Education Research Journal 29(1): 3-21.
Hattie, John and Herbert W. Marsh. 1996. “The Relationship Between Research and Teaching: A
Meta-Analysis, Review of Educational Research, 66(4), 507-542.
Hearn, James C. 1992. “The Teaching Role of Contemporary American Higher Education:
Popular Imagery and Organizational Reality” in The Economics of American Higher
Education, William E. Becker and Darrell R. Lewis, editors.
Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua. 2006. “The Effects of Cognitive and
Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior,” Journal of Labor
Economics, 24(3), 411-482.
Hoxby, Caroline M. 1997. “How the Changing Market Structure of U.S. Higher Education
Explains College Tuition” NBER Working Paper no. 6323.
Huber, Richard M. 1992. How Professors Play the Cat Guarding the Cream: Why We’re
Paying More and Getting Less in Higher Education, Fairfax VA: George Mason University
Press.
Kennedy, Donald.1997. Academic Duty, Cambridge and London: Harvard University Press.
Kirp, David L. 2003. Shakespeare, Einstein, and the Bottom Line: the Marketing of Higher
Education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Krautmann, Anthony C. and William Sander. 1999. “Grades and Student Evaluations of
Teachers” Economics of Education Review 18(1), 59-63.

37

Kuhn, Peter and Catherine Weinberger. 2005. “Leadership Skills and Wages" Journal of Labor
Economics, 23(3), 395-436.
Laband, David N., and Robert D. Tollison. 2000. “Intellectual Collaboration.” Journal of
Political Economy, 108(3), 632-662.
Laband, David N., and Robert D. Tollison 2003. “Good Colleagues.” Journal of Economic
Behavior & Organization, 52, 505-512.
Langemann, Ellen Condliffe. 2000. An Elusive Science: The Troubling History of Education
Research, University of Chicago Press.
Levine, Arthur. 1997. “How the Academic Profession is Changing” Daedalus, (Fall), 1-20.
Lewis, Michael. 2003. Moneyball: The Art of Winning an Unfair Game. New York, NY: W.
W. Norton & Company Inc.
Light, Richard J. 2001. Making the Most of College: Students Speak Their Minds. Harvard
University Press.
Martin, Robert. 2002. “Why Tuition Costs and Rising So Quickly” Challenge 45(4): 88-108.
McCain, James. 1960. “Professors and Students in European Universities: Observations of an
American College President.” The Journal of Higher Education, 31(4) 200-207.
McPherson, Michael S. and Gordon C. Winston. 1993. “The Economics of Cost, Price and
Quality in U.S. Higher Education” in Paying the Piper: Productivity, Incentives, and
Financing in U.S. Higher Education, Michael S. McPherson, Morton Owen Schapiro, and
Gordon C. Winston, editors, Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Owen-Smith Jason, Massimo Riccaboni, Fabio Pammolli, and Walter W. Powell. 2002. “A
Comparison of U. S. and European University-Industry Relations in the Life Sciences.”
Management Science, Special Issue on University Entrepreneurship and Technology Transfer,
48(1), 24-43.
Rothschild, Michael and Lawrence J. White. 1993. “The University in the Marketplace: Some
Insights and Some Puzzles” in Studies of Supply and Demand in Higher Education, Charles
Clotfelter and Michael Rothschild, editors. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Rothschild, Michael and Lawrence J. White. 1995. “The Analytics of the Pricing of Higher
Education and Other Services in Which the Customers are Inputs.” Journal of Political Economy
103(3), 573-586.
Siow, Aloysius. 1997. “Some Evidence on the Signaling Role of Research in Academia”
Economics Letters, 54(3), 271-276.
Spence, Michael A. 1973. “Job Market Signaling.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 87(3), 355374.

38

Stiglitz, Joseph. 1975. “The Theory of ‘Screening,’ Education, and the Distribution of Income.”
American Economic Review 65(3): 283-300.
Sykes, Charles J.1988. ProfScam: Professors and the Demise of Higher Education. St.
Martin’s Press.
Teagle Working Group on the Teacher-Scholar. 2007. “Student Learning and Faculty Research:
Connecting Teaching and Scholarship” Teagle Foundation White Paper. American Council of
Learned Societies. cpr.iub.edu/uploads/ACLS%20teagle5_SSB4.pdf, last accessed April 11,
2009.
Institute of Higher Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2007. Available at
http://ed.sjtu.edu.cn/rank/2007/ARWU2007_Top100.htm, last accessed April 13, 2008.
Theall, Michael, Philip C. Abrami and Lisa A. Mets. 2001. The Student Ratings Debate: Are
They Valid? How Can We Best Use Them? New Directions for Institutional Research Series
no.109, Jossey Bass.
Tracey, Joseph and Joel Waldfogel. 1997. “The Best Business Schools: A Market-Based
Approach.” Journal of Business 70(1), 1-31.
U.S. Department of Labor, 1991. “What Works Requires of Schools. A SCANS Report for
America 2000.
Waddell, Glen R. 2006. “Labor-Market Consequences of Poor Attitude and Low Self-Esteem in
Youth,” Economic Inquiry, 44(1), 69-97.
Weisbrod, Burton A., Jeffrey P. Ballou and Evelyn D. Asch. 2008. Mission and Money:
Understanding the University. Cambridge University Press.
Weiss, Andrew. 1995.“Human Capital vs. Signaling Explanations of Wages,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 9(4): 133-154.
Wilson, Robin. 2001. “A Higher Bar for Earning Tenure: Junior Faculty Members Find That
They Must Publish More and Publish Quickly.” The Chronicle of Higher Education 47, January
5.
Wilson, Robin. 2002. “Boyer Commission Says Colleges Have Been Making Improvements
Sought in 1998 Report.” Chronicle of Higher Education March 8, 2002.
Winston, Gordon C. 1999. “Subsidies, Hierarchy and Peers: The Awkward Economics of Higher
Education” Journal of Economic Perspectives 13(1): 13-36.
Winston, Gordon C. 2001. “The Positional Arms Race in Higher Education” Available at
net.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/ffp0103s.pdf, last accessed April 13, 2009.

39

Zemsky, Robert, Susan Shaman, and Daniel B. Shapiro. 2001. Higher Education as
Competitive Enterprise: When Markets Matter. New Directions for Institutional Research
Series no. 111, Jossey Bass.

40

