                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               REAL BALANCES, THE EXC RANGE RATE AND
                   INDEXATION: REAL VARIABLES
                        IN DISINFLATION


                         Stanley   Fischer




                      Working Paper No. 1)497'




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          November 198)4




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper ff1497
                                                November 1984




                   Real Balances, the Exchange Rate and
                        Indexation: Real Variables
                              in Disinflation


                                 ABSTRACT



      The recent appreciation of the dollar is widely believed to have reduced

 the output costs of the disinflation. But there remains the question of

 whether those early gains have to be repaid when the exchange rate

 depreciates.

      The first question taken up is the effect of real exchange rate

appreciation on the sacrifice ratio, or output cost, of disinflation. There

is no unambiguous presumption that exchange rate appreciation reduces the

sacrifice ratio. The direct favorable effects of cheaper imports on consumer

prices, on the prices of imported inputs, and on wage demands, may be

outweighed by the unemployment resulting from the reduced demand for exports.

      In the second part of the paper I examine the affects of wage indexation

on the sacrifice ratio. Economists have argued that wage indexation speeds

up disinflation; policymakers take the opposite view. The distinction

between ex ante and ex post indexing, defined in the paper, explains these

different views. Ex ante wage indexation speeds up disinflation. With ex

post indexation the real wage automatically rises when the inflation rate

falls. Even so, ex post indexing may speed up disinflation. But there has

to be subsequent downward adjustment of the wage if long—term unemployment is

to be prevented.




Stanley Fischer
Professor of Economics
MIT, E52—280A
Cambridge, MA 02139
(61 7)253—6666
       REAL BALANCES, THE EXCHANGE RATE, AND INDEXATION: REAL VARIABLES IN

                                           DIS INFLATION



                                      Stanley Fischer*


       It has   long   been known   that   at some stage in a disinflation process
initiated   by a discrete reduction in          the growth rate of the money stock, the
rate of inflation must fall by more than the reduction in money growth. The
reason is that the demand forreal balances in the new low inflation steady
state will be higher than in the high inflation equilibrium: the economy
produces real balances by causing the price level to grow more slowly than

the nominal money stock.

       In an economy with fully flexible prices, credible government policy and

rational expectations, the start of a disinflation program can be accompanied

by a discrete rise in the money stock that will prevent the price level

jumping and thus inflicting capital gains and losses on nominal creditors and

debtors. However, the credibility problem posed by such a policy is obvious:

to   start a disinflation program with an         increase in the money stock is to

court the suspicion that announcements and actions are not closely related.

The difficulty is compounded by the similarity between a stock increase in

the money stock and a change in its growth rate when data are reported at

discrete intervals.


Departinent of Economics, M.I.T. and Research Associate, NBER. An earlier
version of this paper was written while I was Max Bogen Visiting Professor of
Economics at the Hebrew University, Jerusalem. I am indebted to Rudiger
Dornbusch and Robert Gordon for comments, to Patricia Mosser for research
assistance, and the National Science Foundation for financial support.
                                              2




       In   an economy where prices are not perfectly    flexible in the   short run,


as   a result for example of long—term contracts, the increased demand for real

balances that accompanies a disinflation process increases the output costs

of disinflation, or the sacrifice ratio. The sacrifice ratio is the ratio of

the percentage of GNP (at an annual rate) lost to the reduction in the

inflation rate. For instance, the sacrifice ratio for the United States

disinflation, 1980—85, was about 5, meaning that over that five year period

cumulated GNP showed a reduction of 25 percent of one year's output while the

inflation rate fell by about 5 percent, from 10 percent to 5 percent.           This

sacrifice ratio is broadly consistent with the predictions of a model with

price stickiness induced by the existence of long—term labor contracts.1 It

is somewhat below earlier predictions of the output costs of disinflation by

Arthur Okun (1978) but in line with predictions, such as that of Robert

Gordon (1982), that allowed for exchange—rate changes as an extra channel

through     which monetary policy affects the inflation rate.
       The increase in real balances                    the real or relative
                                         is the best known of

price adjustments that take place during a disinflation. In this paper I
examine in detail two other, less well understood, real phenomena that may
play   an important   role in   determining   the output costs of disinflation. The
first is the exchange rate appreciation that accompanies monetary restriction

that   starts   the disinflation process. The second is the role of indexation.

In each case there is a puzzle that      needs    resolution.

       It is commonly argued that exchange rate appreciation during the United

States disinflation reduced the costs of the disinflation process relative to

costs that would have been incurred had the real exchange rate been held


1The calculation of the sacrifice ratio and its consistency with a simple
contracting model are presented in Fischer (1984).
                                            3



constant.       The argument is that the rapid response of the exchange rate

brought the inflation rate down rapidly and further put pressure on wages

through enhanced foreign competition. (Rudiger Dornbusch and Fischer

(1984)). Countering this analysis are two points: first, any         exchange rate
appreciation has eventually to be reversed, thus implying that the early

gains on the inflation front are transformed into later losses; second, to

the extent that the exchange rate appreciation increases competitive

pressure, it does so through the creation of unemployment. Willem Buiter and

Marcus Miller (1983) conclude that exchange rate appreciation and          subsequent
depreciation     during a disinflation does not affect the sacrifice ratio. 2
        In the case of indexation, theoretical analysis shows that indexation
reduces the output costs of disinflation by permitting a more rapid response
of    wages   to the reduced rate of price increases. But policymakers typically
argue that wage indexation is a prime obstacle rather        than an aid   to
disinflation.
     In this paper I analyze the roles of       the   exchange rate and indexation   in

disinflation,     using simple models with long—term contracts and rational
expectations. In Section I, I present an open economy model in which the
sacrifice ratio is not independent of the path of the exchange rate during
disinflation. The real exchange rate appreciation typical at the start of a
disinflation may either     increase or decrease the sacrifice ratio relative to

the    loss when the real exchange rate   is held relative to the loss when the

real   exchange rate is held constant. I identify the sources of the


2Buiter and Miller include a core inflation rate in the Phillips curve: this
rate is determined either by the current rate of money growth or by adaptive
expectations. E. John Driffill (1982) has extended the Buiter—Miller
analysis to examine optimal disinflation policies.
                                         4



ambiguity, and the parameters determining the relative sacrifice ratios in

Section I.

     In Section II, I turn to indexation, where the distinction between ex

post arid   ex ante indexation is essential.3 Actual indexation is typicallyex
post, with the current wage adjusting to lagged price levels. As a result,

the real wage tends to rise in a disinflation when wages are indexed. This

increase in the real wage is probably the source of the view that indexation

of wages is an obstacle rather than an aid to disinflation.



I. The Exchange Rate and Disinflation.

     Suppose a disinflation program starts with a permanent reduction in the

growth rate of money, not anticipated to that point but fully credible

thereafter. Wages, set in contracts, are not fully flexible. Given wage

stickiness, the disinflation program produces a recession. Over time, wages

adjust and the economy moves towards full employment. The sacrifice ratio is

a measure of the output loss during the transition to lower inflation.

     The question in this section is how the openness of the economy affects

the sacrifice ratio. The Dornbusch (1976) overshooting result shows that the

real exchange rate will typically appreciate when the growth rate of the

money stock is reduced. The appreciation occurs because the restrictive

monetary policy raises the domestic nominal interest rate, while foreign

nominal intereast rates are either unchanged or increase less than the

domestic rate. Interest rate equalization then requires the expectation of a

depreciation of the domestic currency. Given long run neutrality of money, a


3Mario H. Simonsen (1983), who in 1965 helped design ex ante indexation in
Brazil, shows the effects of lagged indexation on real wages.
                                                  5




depreciation    can be expected oiiy if the real exchange rate is currently

above the equilibrium level.

      The model presented in this section includes four channels through which

the exchange rate appreciation affects the sacrifice ratio. First, to the

extent that imported goods are consumer goods, exchange rate appreciation

directly affects the CPI, tending to speed up the price response to the

reduced growth rate of money. To the extent that the CPI is the price level

relevant to the demand for nominal balances, the more rapid response of

prices means a smaller reduction in real balances and less deflationary

pressure. Second, if imported goods are factors of production, the

appreciation reduces costs, and thus has a favorable effect on domestic

supply price, again tending to reduce the sacrifice ratio. Third, if wages

adjust to the expected price level, any quick success in reducing the price

level will have the effect of reducing wages negotiated during the adjustment

period. The more rapidly wages come down, the smaller the output loss.

Fourth, exchange rate appreciation reduces the trade surplus, thereby

reducing demand for domestic goods and output. This effect increases the

sacrifice ratio.

      Because the effects do not all operate in the same direction, it is not
                                                                          -


surprising we do not find an unambiguous answer to the question of how

exchange rate appreciation during a disinflation affects the sacrifice

ratio.

      The   model is a modified IS—LM type with inflation and real interest rate
neutrality in the long run. Wages are set in contracts. Perfect capital
mobility provides covered interest parity. The model consists of:
(1) mt —    t   =   - ait
(2)          y = b1(q   —
                            w)   +
                                     b2(q
                                            —
                                                et)
                                                                 6




(3)           y    =
                       _cr          +
                                        d(et
                                                +
                                                     p• q
(4)           Pt =              + (1      -



                   = 0t_i               + (1 —


6)           w =
         t—1 t         t—1 pt
                                        +ht—1yt
                   =
                       t-2t + ht2yt
(8)
                   =
                       rt   +       tt+i - t = r* + tet+i — et
Notation     is:                =       in CPI

                                = in      price of domestic output

                                =       in of   geometric average nominal wage


                        et =        in    nominal exchange rate


                   tPt =            E[ptlI±]           where
                                                                't—i   is the information set at (t —    i)
                                =
                                    E[ytIIt],           where        is in domestic output.

                                =   in    wage set      in period t —      i to apply at period t.
                                =   real domestic interest rate.
                                = nominal domestic interest rate.

                   *    denotes foreign variables (p* will be assumed equal to zero)

       The exchange rate affects both aggregate supply, in equation (2), and

aggregate demand, in (3).                       In   both cases an appreciation (decrease in

(e —   q))   tends to increase excess supply. The CPI, in                          (4),   is directly

affected by the exchange rate                        through the price of      finished goods imports.

Note   the   distinction between the CPI, relevant to the demand for real

balances and the definitions of the nominal interest rate, and the price of

domestic output, q, which appears in the supply function (2) and in the net

export term in (3).
                                               7



        Labor   contracts    are for either one or two periods:      t_lWt   is the wage

set for t at time t — 1, in all one—period contracts and in half the two—

period contracts;                is the wage set at t — 2 for period t, in half the

two period contracts. The coefficient 0 is the proportion of wages that

were    set one period back. Those wages are set on the basis of expected
prices and the expected level of output. Labor contracts are the source of
imperfect price flexibility, and the reason the adjustment to an
unanticipated reduction in the growth rate of money causes a recession.5
Slow adjustment of expectations——about either policy directly or the rate of
inflation——is an alternative source of slow adjustment. I will comment below
on   the   implications of slow expectations adjustment for the relative costs of
disinflating with and without         exchange rate appreciation.

        Treating      the average wage and expectations as predetermined, the model
is one in which aggregate demand (determined from the money and goods market
equilibriuni     conditions (1) and    (3)) and supply   (2)   interact to determine the
price    level and output. Given expectations, we can think           of (8) as an
equilibrium      condition that helps determine the exchange rate.

       We want now to examine the output costs of a disinflation program.

These costs can, in a model like that presented here, be reduced by

announcing      the   program some time in advance, and    also   by sophisticated

manipulation of the growth rate of money during the adjustment period. But

because of credibility problems, I assume the policy change takes the form of

Note that t_t is not the expectation at (t — i) of a random variable, Wt,
but instead is the wage fixed at (t — i) to apply in period t.
5Contracts are for no more than twoperiods for the sake of simplicity. They
are for more than one period to allow the speedier initial disinflation that
occurs with exchange rate appreciation to influence the path of nominal
wages.
                                                         8



an unannounced         and immediate fall in the growth rate of money by one
(percent). To analyze dynamics I assume expectations are rational and that
the change in monetary policy is fully credible once the initial cut in money
growth takes place:6 the policy change maintains the new lower growth rate
of money.
       The adjustment to the reduced growth rate of                  money       will be over within
                                             two. This is because the
two periods, that is, by the start of period
longest labor contract is for two periods: within two periods all outstanding

labor contracts have been renegotiated, taking into account the lower steady

state inflation. By period two the real exchange rate is back to its

equilibrium level. Denoting by                        the change in the price level (and

similarly for other variables) in period j                   relative   to the level it would

have attained had there been no change in monetary policy, we have

(9)
            =   tq       As. = _[j   +   1   +   a]                 j   )   2.

The inflation rate accordingly falls by one in steady state, while real
balances rise relative to their previous level by the amount a, as a
                                                                     result
of the lower nominal interest rate. The coefficient a, which is the extent
to    which the nominal interest rate                 affects velocity, determines the magnitude
of    the increase in real balances that                has to   take place during the

disinflation.

       During     periods   zero and     one     there are changes in real variables,

including       real   output and the real exchange rate. To examine the


6Th Fischer (i 984) I examine the costs of disinflation when expectations of
policy adjust slowly to changes in policy. As should be andexpected, a lack of
                                                              John Drifihl
credibility increases the sacrifice ratio. David Backus
       present a game—theoretic analysis of the role of credibility in
 (1984)
determining the output costs of disinflation.
                                               9



determinants     of the real exchange rate appreciation, it is useful to work

back from the period—one relationship between the exchange rate and domestic

output price.7

                        (1+a) (2÷a)b1 (i—o)
(10) e1 -          =-
                        b1(1-O)x1+1+a)x2

where           x1 = d + cp +   (1+a) —

                   = (1+b1hO)(d+c) +b18(1—i) +

The period one real appreciation is an increasing function of the proportion

(i—&) of two—period contracts, of b1 ,        the effect of the real wage on supply,

and   a, the interest elasticity of money demand; it is a decreasing function
of h, d, c and b2. These results can be suimnarized as showing that factors
that tend to produce larger price level responses by period one to the change
in monetary policy undertaken in period zero, reduce the extent of the real
appreciation.
        Going   back one period we find

(ii) e0     —      =                +              (e1 -
                       d+c+b2           d+cp+b2

Sincethe nominal wage is predetermined and does not respond to the change in
monetary policy in period zero, the structure of contracts          ()
                                                              does not

directly enter (ii). Given                the expectation of period one's real

7The model is solved by noting that   = —1, m1 = —2, '2 = — 3, and
    =
      e2 = —(3 + a) and then working back from the period 1 to the period
zero equilibrium.
                                                       10




                                  affects the current real appreciation by its effect
appreciation (te1 —        q1)
on goods market equilibrium through the real interest rate. But              of   course


q0 is affected by all
                                 the parameters of the model. Further manipulation of

equation    (ii)   does not, however, provide a tractable form of the expression

for    (e0 — q0). The complete solution of the model is contained in the
Appendix.
       In steady state (that is, period two and after), the inflation rate
falls by one. The sacrifice ratio is accordingly equal to the sum of output
losses   in periods zero and         one:
       SRi =           +
(12)            —[y0       y1]
General expressions for y0 and y1 are presented in the Appendix.
       Using the aggregate supply function, we obtain a convenient expression
for the sacrifice ratio:
                                                     (1-e)b
            =              +           -         +
(13) SRi
                -[b1q0         b2(q0       e0)                  q1

                                                                     (
                                                     1+b1he
                                                     b +b 8(1—u)
                                                 +                       —

                                                       1+b1hO

We    will later refer back to equation (13) in comparing the sacrifice ratio
with   and without exchange rate appreciation. Equation (13) shows clearly the

basis for the conventional view that exchange rate appreciation reduces the

sacrifice ratio: with q0 and q1 given, the appreciation in both periods

zero   and one reduces SRi. The zer&th period appreciation has a supply side
effect through b2; the first period appreciation has both a supply side
effect and, through the term b10(1—u) an effect that arises because the
appreciation reduces the CPI and thus wages in period 1.
       Understanding of the open economy effects on the sacrifice ratio is
gained by examining the special case in which there are only one period
                                               11




contracts (o=i). In this case there is no second period loss of output and

the sacrifice ratio is just equal to


                 b1
                      (1+a)2(d+cii)

                          D0

where D0 = (1+a)(b1+b2+d+cii) +                      > 0
                                      b1(d+cji-ji)
In this case, the output loss is increasing in (a, b1, c, d,        ii)   and

decreasing in b2. The loss increases in a because the required increase in

real balances to adjust to the new equilibrium is greater the larger is a;

increases in b1 becasue the rise in the real wage has a larger supply effect

the larger is b1; increases in c because the effect on aggregate demand of

the increase in the real interest rate is bigger the larger is c; increases

in d because the real exchange rate appreciation reduces aggregate demand

more the larger is d;8 and is increasing in ji because the larger is i,         the
greater the effect of the exchange rate appreciation on the price level and

thus   on the real interest rate.9 The output loss decreases in b because the

exchange rate appreciation reduces the costs of imported inputs.

       The main question we want to investigate is whether the sacrifice ratio

is higher or lower as a result of the real exchange rate appreciation. To

answer this question we have to specify the alternative policy: the

alternative   examined here is to keep the real exchange rate constant at its
steady state level during the disinflation. This is carried out through a
capital import tax that effectively isolates the domestic capital market and
prevents   domestic real interest appreciation from causing      exchange rate

appreciation.         With the real exchange rate held constant, the differential


81f    there was a J—curve, this effect would be delayed.
9Note that i.'   mostly    enters the expression for y0in the form c'i.
                                                12



between the domestic output price and CPI remains constant in the
disinflation process.10 Indeed, the dynamics of disinflation become those of

a closed economy.

      The sacrifice ratio when the real exchange rate is held fixed can be

calculated as:11

(14) SR2 =   - b1[q0    +
                                    q11

                        (14),                                            we appear to see
comparing (13) and              and noting that in (14), q1 =      e1,
that the real exchange rate appreciation reduces the sacrifice ratio——both

through the cost side and.       because    it speeds up the adjustment of wages.

      However this intuitive comparison of (13) and           (14) is misleading in

implicitly   treating           and q1 as   independent of   exchange rate behavior.

The   domestic   price level falls more when the exchange rate appreciates, and

on those grounds appreciation tends to increase the output loss. Thus it is

not obvious that SRi < SR2, i.e. that the sacrifice ratio is smaller with

exchange rate appreciation.

       Indeed, as   Table 1 shows, there is      no unambiguous relationship between

SRi   and SR2. The output costs of disinflation may be either larger or
smaller when the exchange rate is allowed to appreciate than when it is held

constant.    Table 1 suggests both the sources of the          ambiguity and the
determinants of     the extent of output loss when the exchange rate adjusts.


101n the modified system, through appropriate choice of constants, equation
(3) loses the terms following d; (4) becomes Pt =    and the second equality
in (8) is removed.

110eneral expressions are presented in the Appendix.
                                                 13




            Table 1     Disinflation With and Without Exchange Rate Appreciation

          (Base case is: a=.25, b1=.75, b2=.15, c=.15, d=.2, '=.8, O=.5, h=.5)

                           With appreciation               Without appreciation
Parameters*
                  y0 y1        ze0—zq0   e1—q1   SRi     SR2            Y1 O i
Base case        —.29 —.32      —1.27    —1.01   .61      .73 —.31     —.43 —.41 —1.34

    a=.1         —.26 —.31     —1.17     — .97   .57      .81   —.36 —.45 —.49 —1.42

    a=1          —.41   —.40   —1.75     —1.26   .81      .66 —.23 —.43 —.30 —1.36


                 —.36 —.39     —1.59     —1.23   .76      .73 —.31     —.43 —.41 —1.34
b2=0
                 —.18 —.21     — .80     — .66   .39      .73 —.31     —.43 —.41 —1.34
b2=.6
    d=0          —.08 —.19     —2.23     —1.57   .27      .73   —.31   —.43 —.41 —1.34

    d=.8         —.44 —.45     —0.54     —0.49   .89      .73   —.31   —.43 —.41 —1.34

*Th each caso, only one paraine ter value varies from those in the base case.

           In particular, the direct supply (b2) and demand (d) side effects of the

exchange       rate appreciation can by themselves reverse the relationship between
SRi and SR2. For instance, when b2 = 0, we find SR2 < SRI, but with b1

somewhat larger, the inequality is reversed. With b2 equal to the direct

effect on output supply of a reduction in the cost of imported materials, the

reason      for this result is obvious. Similarly, with d, the direct effect of
the exchange rate on aggregate demand equal to zero, SRi < SR2. The interest
elasticity of money demand likewise has a significant impact on the sacrifice
ratio. A low elasticity of money demand tends to produce relatively small
appreciations         and a lower sacrifice ratio.

•          Although analytical results are difficult to derive, calculations of

examples       over a wide range of parameter    values show the following intuitive

features:       increases in b1, the sensitivity of output to the real wage
                                                       14




increase the sacrifice ratios for both models; increases in c, the real

interest elasticity of aggregate demand likewise increase the sacrifice

ratios in both models; an increase in ji-—a reduction in the significance of

imported goods in the CPI—— increases the sacrifice ratio in the case where

                                                            in 0, the proportion of two year
the exchange rate appreciates; increases

contracts, increase the sacrifice ratio for both models; increases in h, the

sensitivity of the wage to expected output, reduce the sacrifice ratios for

both models. None of these results is in any way surprising.

       If   all contracts are one period (0 =                1) we can show directly the factors

determining
                the relationship between SRi and. SR2. Using the expressions for
    and y1      in the appendix, with 0 =              1, we obtain
                                                       b
                     as d          +       )[1 -   +
(15) SRi       SR2                     1




Note first that without a sizeable direct effect of the appreciation on
aggregate demand (d), the sacrifice ratio with appreciation (SRI) is bound to
be less than that without appreciation (SR2). The effects of b and i.i on the
inequality are similarly straightforward: the larger the supply effect (b2)
and the larger the weight (i - i) of the exchange rate in the price index,
the more likely SR2         is   to exceed SRi. Similarly, the larger is c and            the


smaller are a and b, the more likely is SR2                    to   exceed SRI.
       These results clearly establish that the sacrifice ratio is not
invariant to the path of the exchange rate, contrary to the Buiter—Miller
result (op. cit.). There are two reasons for the different results. First,
the alternative policy of controlling the exchange rate through taxation of
capital     inflows is not considered in B.iiter—Mi1ler.                  Second, in this model

wages respond to expected policy actions, whereas Buiter—Miller require
expectations to be affected only by actual rates of inflation.                       In their case
                                           15



it takes unemployment rather than expected policy actions to force down the
core rate of inflation.
     Although   the normal presumption would be that exchange rate appreciation

reduces the sacrifice ratio, that is not necessarily so. Large aggregate

demand effects of the appreciation can make for large output losses.       Of

course   there is a general presumption that the output costs of disinflation

can be made lower when both the exchange rate and price of domestic output

can be adjusted optimally. But whether the appropriate policy is to

appreciate or depreciate the exchange rate depends on the parameters of the

economy.



II. Indexation and Disinflation.

     Indexation of wage payments to the price level can take several forms

We distinguish among ex post, ex ante, and lagged ex post indexation. In

discussing these forms   of   indexation, we assume that the price index is

available only with a lag, typically two weeks, after the month to which is

applies. The lag is in practice about a month since the index refers to

prices centered on the middle of the month. We take the lag of the index as

given.

     Ex post indexation would make the wage payment for, say, June,

contingent on the actual June price index. The June wages could, for

instance, be paid on the day after the index appears. By that date the price

level that determines the real value of the wage is different from the price

level for which the wage was calculated. Given the price index     lag,   there is

no way of providing a truly certain real wage. In light of this difficulty,

ex post indexation is in practice lagged: the wage paid at the end of June is

adjusted for price level changes up to and including May (providing indexing
                                                     16




is monthly). The distinction between ex post and lagged ex post indexing

turns   on whether anyone who worked in June and then leaves the job will later
receive compensation for the June price rise. If they receive compensation,

indexation is genuinely ex post; if not, it is lagged ex post.

        Ex ante indexation makes the nominal wage paid in June conditional on

the price level expected at the end of Nay to obtain in June. Such

indexation is important only in long term contracts.                        If contracts are for


only one period, then the nominal wage will in any event reflect the price
level expected to obtain in the period of work. Ex ante indexation has been
used (by the government) in           Brazil,     but is      not   widely practiced.
        To clarify the    discussion, consider wage setting with one and two                  period

contracts    in a   closed economy version of             the   model of Section I. Some wages
for period t were set at the end of (t -                  1): they are determined by

(16) lwt =      t-it     +
                             ht_iyt
Since these wages are set for the next period, there is no indexing, but

wages negotiated for t at the end of (t —                  2) may be indexed: they are set by

the formula

              = (1 -                                      +             +
(17) 2Wt             A1
                             -
                                 A2)t_2Pt
                                            +
                                                 A11          X2tipt
The term in A1 represents          lagged ex      post indexing of the wage: the wage for

period t is adjusted on the basis of the actual period (t —                       1)   price level.

Ex ante indexation is represented by the coefficient A2: the wage for period

t is adjusted on the basis of the price level expected at the end of (t —                          1)

for period t.

        Exante indexation is a method of effectively reducing contract length

in an economy with long term contracts, with respect to expected price level

changes. For A2 =        I   (and A1 =      0)   ex ante indexed wages are, with respect to

the price level, the same as those in one period contracts.
                                                              17




        The difficulty with ex post indexation (from now on we omit the

'lagged') can be seen by examining (17) when all variables take their

expected values. In that case

(18) w - Pt =                    -         -            -
                         hyt
Given the wage equation (17), the real wage is lower the higher the inflation

rate. This phenomenon has been analyzed by Modigliani and Padoa-Schioppa

(1978) and Simonsen (1983); in effect it makes for a long—run tradeoff

between       inflation and output.                   Such a tradeoff no doubt would not persist

since    it    takes only a negotiation over the wage level to remove it. During a

disinflation, the nominal wage level has to be negotiated down; however, the

adjustment leaves            the real wage unchanged.              Such an adjustment at the

beginning       of   a disinflation program is likely to arouse the suspicions of

labor,   and to be resisted until the disinflation shows signs                     of working.

Because of the difficulty of renegotiating the level, ex post indexation

creates difficulties for successful disinflation through its automatic

effects on the real wage.12

       The complete model now consists of


(1) m_ P=Yt_ait
(19)           y = b(pt              —

                d =
(20)                     _crt
                     =                   + (1 —
                         0_1t
(8)                  =
                         r   +                 - Pt

12ff thewage bargain aims to reach the equilibrium real wage, then the wage
formula may be re—negotiated as contracts re—open. I refer to this
possibility in           footnote 14 below.
                                                    18




and the wage equations (16) and           (j7)•13
                                                of disinflation under three alternative
       We   now consider the output costs

assumptions about indexing: no indexation (x1 = A2
                                                   =                    0);   complete ex ante


                    1);      and complete lagged ex post indexing (x1              1).   Once
indexing (A2 =
                                         is instituted in period zero by reducing the
again, a disinflation program

growth rate of money by one. For purposes of analysis we assume there is no
readjustment of the base wage level with ex post indexation.
        In the case of both non—indexed and              ex   ante indexed wages, the real
               to the disinflation takes the form of a temporary reduction in
adjustment
output. With ex post indexation there is a                    permanent reduction    in output.


Using       to indicate the change in a variable relative to its previous

path, we obtain:

(21) y0 = bAp0


(22) y1 =
                                         - x1p0]
                             [(1-X2)p1
                         —
                   b(1       e)x1 =                           j   2.
(23) Ly2 =     —
                    1    + bh

        The general outline of the results can be seen from (21 )—(23). With no

indexation, real adjustment takes two periods.                    With complete ex ante

indexing, output is below its full employment level only in period zero. All
                                                                       lower prices, and there is
contracts thereafter adjust fully for the expected

no further output loss. This is the basis of the argument that indexation

helps speed up disinflation.

        However, comparison of the sacrifice ratio between the non—indexed


 (x1
       = A2 = 0) and ex ante indexed cases requires some care. The impact
 effect of the disinflation is different in the two cases.                      The price level in


 13The coefficient b1 in equation (2) is replaced in (19) by b.
                                               19



 period    zero falls more when the system is fully indexed than when it is not

 indexed. This is because the price level adjustment in period one is greater

 in   the indexed system and thus   the real   interest rate in period zero    is


higher    and output is lower.
       Accordingly, with ex ante indexation the impact      effect   of the
disinflation is greater: the initial recession is more serious (provided the
demand for money is interest elastic). But the recession is over more

quickly. The question then arises whether the total output cost is            greater

in    the indexed case. Simple calculations show that the total scrifice ratio
is higher when wages are not indexed than when they are. Ex ante indexation
of wages accordingly reduces the output costs of disinflation by producing a
shorter, sharper recession when the new monetary regime goes into effect.
       The comparison between the non—indexed and ex     post indexed systems is
interesting. The long run calculation is clear: if the real wage level is
not adjusted downwards at some stage, the sacrifice ratio for the ex post
indexed system is infinite, and     larger   than the sacrifice ratio for the non—
indexed system. But      the comparison in   the early stages of disinflation is
not   unambiguously in   favor of the non—indexed system.
       Assume for purposes of discussion that a = 0, so that the real interest

rate channel by which expected future deflation affects current output is cut

off. In period zero the nominal wage is given. The extent of the zero'th

period recession is thus the same between the two systems. (If a were not

equal to zero, the first period recession would be bigger in the indexed

system.)

       We want now to compare output losses in period one. In both systems

those wages that were negotiated at the end of period zero have reacted to

the disinflation program. In the indexed system, indexed wages are reduced
                                                         20



                                          non—indexed contracts, as a result of the lower
to   a level below those on

price level in period zero. The presumtpiOfl is then that output costs in

period one will be lower in the indexed system.
                                                              level in period 1 is lower by an
       In the non—indexed system the price

amount


(24) p1() =            -            b(i   - e)
                            1   +
                                    1   + bhO

In the indexed system the price level falls by                       more:

                                            b(1 - o)
                   —       —

                                    1 + b(1+
         p1                                    0)
                                        1    bhO

The more rapid deflation in the indexed system                       is a result of the lower

average nominal wage level in period 1 in that system, for output in the

indexed system is given by

t                  = — (1    b(1   o)(i + 2b)-
26 y1 EPI                 + b)[1 + bh0 + b(1 —                 o)J

while the output loss in the non—indexed system is
                                       2b(1 — o)
    27 ty1 NI =        —
                                    + hbO + b(1 — e)J

The latter output loss is larger.

       The conclusion is then that even ex post indexation may be an aid to

                                                         flexibility in the right direction in
rapid disinflation,                 by permitting some
wages set by long               term contracts. But unless           the base level nominal wage is

reset    appropriately, jost indexing                    will create more        long run output     costs


than    would occur in a non-indexed system.'
        The appropriate level readjustment                 takes place automatically with ex

ante indexing. That is why ex ante indexation provides the lowest sacrifice


 1If the wage level under ex post indexation is negotiated down     the                         at
 reopening of each contract, then disinflation has a lower output cost  with ex
 post indexation than when wages are not indexed.
                                             21




ratio. But ex ante indexation, it has to be recognized, is an unusual

concept   in   that it   explicitly sets wages on the basis of some agreed upon

price level forecast. Such forecasts are used by both sides to wage

negotiations, but they typically remain in the background. It is not

difficult to imagine that negotiators could agree that the forecasts of some

respected institution or economist could serve this purpose.



III. Conclusions.

     In this paper I have examined the consequences for the sacrifice ratio

of changes in real variables that may take place during a disinflation. In

addition to the well knowa reduction in the price level relative to trend

arising from an increase in the demand for real balances, we considered the

effects of exchange rate appreciation and wage indexation on the costs of

disinflation.

     There appears to be no unambiguous presumption about the effects of

exchange rate appreciation on the output costs of disinflation. But contrary

to other results, we did not find the sacrifice ratio to be invariant to the

path of the exchange rate. The major factors tending to make disinflation

with exchange rate appreciation less costly are a large supply side effect of

the real appreciation, and a large share of imports in the consumer price

index. A large demand side effect through reduced net exports can be

sufficient to make the sacrifice ratio with appreciation larger than that

when the real exchange rate is held constant.

     Indexation, ex ante or ex post, speeds up the response of the economy to

disinflation. In the early stages of the disinflation, indexation reduces

the extent of the recession (measured by total loss of output relative to

trend) caused by an unannounced but thenceforth fully credible reduction in
                                      22



the growth rate of the economy. But unless there is a base nominal wage
adjustment, the application of ex post indexing by formula will have a long
term recessionary effect. Such real wage level effects of indexation may
well account for the blame it receives an an impediment to disinflation.
                                            23



                                      REFERENCES




Backus, David and John Drif fill (1984). "Rational Expectations and Policy
     Credibility Following a Change in Regime," unpublished, Queen's
     University.

Buiter, Willem H. and Marcus Miller (1983). "Real Exchange Rate Over-
     shooting and the Output Cost of Bringing DDwn Inflation: Some Further
     Results," in Jacob A. Frenkel (ed.), Exchange Rates and International
     Macroeconomics, University of Chicago Press.

Dornbusch, Rudiger (1976). "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics,"
     Journal of Political Economy (Dec.), 1161—76.

       and Stanley Fischer (1984). "The Open Economy:         Implications for
     Monetary and Fiscal Pblicy,"unpublished, M.I.T.
Driffill,   E. John (i 982).   "Optimal Money and Exchange Rate Policies ,"
     Greek Economic Review, 4, 3 (December), 261—283.

Fischer, Stanley (1984). "Contracts,       Credibility, and Disinflation,"
     NBER Working Paper #1 339.

Gordon, Robert J. (1982). "Inflation, Flexible Exchange Rates, and the
     Natural Rate of Unemployment," in Martin N. Baily (ed.)., Workers, Jobs,
     and Inflation, Brookings Institution.

Modigliani, Franco and Toinmaso Padoa—Schioppa (1978). "The Management
     of   an Open Economy with '100% Plus'   Wage Indexation," Princeton Essays
     in   International Finance.

Okun, Arthur (1978), "Efficient Disinflationary Policies," American
     Economic Review (May), 348—352.

Siiuonsen, Mario H. (1983). "Indexation: Current Theory and the Brazilian
     Experience," in Rudiger Thrnbusch and Mario Simonsen (editors),
     Inflation, Debt, and Indexation, M.I.T. Press, 99—132.
                                                       24




                                                  Appendix



     This appendix contains general expressions for changes in the price
level,exchange rate, outut, and real interest rate following the change in

monetary    policy.

1.   When the real exchange rate is allowed to adjust, we obtain


     (Al) y1 =        _D1(l+a)(2+a)b1(l-O)(d+c1)
                  =
     (A2)    q1       -D1(i+a)(2+Sa)x2
     (A3)    e1 = _(2+a){l_D1b1(l-O)(d+c)}
     (A4) tr1 =
                  =
             D1        (l÷a)x2-s-b1(l—O)x1

                  =   (d+cii)+ (1   +a)   —




                      l
                                              +              +
                  = (l+b1hO)(d+cp)                b1O(l—)        b2

     (A5)
                  =
                           d+ci




     (A6)         =   D1 [—    d+cx
                                          y1(1——b2) +            (b2+d+ci.t)(ae1—l ]
                            C lIZ
     (A7)    Ae = D1 d+clI + (ae1-l )z1]

     (A8) 1r =
             D    =
                       z1(l+a+b1)—b1z2

             z1       .b1+ b2+d+cp
                  =
                       b1+ b2+p.
                                                        25



2.   When the real exchange rate is held fixed,

                                        j=O,l


     Then
                  =       -l   [b1 (1 -e) c(1   ÷a) (2+a)]
     (A9)    y1
     (AlO) q1         _G11 [(1+b1hO)c(l+a)(2÷a)]

     (All) r1 -
                  = [(l+bhO)c(1+a)          +    b1(1—O)(c+a)]


     (A12)    y = Gb1c               (aq1-1 )


     (Al3)            =
              q0          G01c      (aq1-l)
     (A14) r0 = -              2.



                      = b1(c+a)      + (1+a)c
