                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  OUTCOMES IN A PROGRAM THAT OFFERS FINANCIAL REWARDS FOR WEIGHT
                               LOSS

                                               John Cawley
                                              Joshua A. Price

                                          Working Paper 14987
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w14987


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        May 2009




The authors gratefully acknowledge a research grant from the Economic Research Service of the USDA
on Behavioral Health Economics Research on Dietary Choice and Obesity. The authors thank Company
X for providing their data and for the generosity of their time in explaining their intervention and discussing
the data. For helpful comments, the authors thank Dan Benjamin, Dhaval Dave, Ron Ehrenberg, Michael
Grossman, Naci Mocan, and participants in a Cornell work-in-progress seminar, the NBER pre-conference
on the Economic Aspects of Obesity, and the NBER Conference on Economic Aspects of Obesity.
 The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by John Cawley and Joshua A. Price. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Outcomes in a Program that Offers Financial Rewards for Weight Loss
John Cawley and Joshua A. Price
NBER Working Paper No. 14987
May 2009
JEL No. D01,D03,I1,J01

                                             ABSTRACT

Obesity rates in the U.S. have doubled since 1980. Given the medical, social, and financial costs of
obesity, a large percentage of Americans are attempting to lose weight at any given time but the vast
majority of weight loss attempts fail. Researchers continue to search for safe and effective methods
of weight loss, and this paper examines one promising method - offering financial rewards for weight
loss. This paper studies data on 2,407 employees in 17 worksites who participated in a year-long worksite
health promotion program that offered financial rewards for weight loss. The intervention varied by
employer, in some cases offering steady quarterly rewards for weight loss and in other cases requiring
participants to post a bond that would be refunded at year’s end conditional on achieving certain weight
loss goals. Still others received no financial incentives at all and serve as a control group. We examine
the basic patterns of enrollment, attrition, and weight loss in these three groups. Weight loss is modest.
After one year, it averages 1.4 pounds for those paid steady quarterly rewards and 3.6 pounds for
those who posted a refundable bond, under the assumption that dropouts experienced no weight loss.
Year-end attrition is as high as 76.4%, far higher than that for interventions designed and implemented
by researchers.


John Cawley
124 MVR Hall
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
jhc38@cornell.edu

Joshua A. Price
Cornell University
385 Ives Hall East
Ithaca, NY 14853
jap224@cornell.edu
Introduction:

           Obesity, defined as a body mass index2 (BMI) of 30 or higher, has more than

doubled in U.S. since 1980 (Flegal et al. 2002). As of 2003-2004, 66.3 percent of

Americans were at least overweight (BMI of 25 or higher) and 32.2 percent were obese

(Ogden et al. 2006).

           Obesity imposes a variety of health, financial, and psychic costs: greater risk of

illnesses such as diabetes and hypertension (Must et al. 1999), higher health care costs

(Finkelstein, Fiebelkorn, and Wang 2003), higher job absenteeism (Cawley et al. 2007),

lower quality of life, especially for women (Muennig et al. 2006), lower wages for

women, especially white women (Cawley 2004), and greater risk of death, especially

from cardiovascular disease (Flegal et al. 2007).

           A variety of approaches are being used to treat obesity and encourage weight loss.

One promising strategy based on psychology and behavioral economics is to offer

financial incentives for weight loss. Obesity is costly to health insurance companies

(Finkelstein et al. 2003) and employers (Cawley et al. 2007), so for either or both of those

organizations to offer monetary incentives for enrollees or employees to lose weight

could be mutually beneficial.

           This paper studies data from a firm that coordinates a program of financial

incentives for weight loss in various worksites in the U.S. We study attrition and weight

loss in three types of incentive programs: one that offers no financial rewards for weight

loss, one that offers quarterly payments that rise in value with the amount of weight loss,

and a third that takes deposits (bonds) that are only refunded if the employee achieves a

specific weight loss goal and also includes a quarterly lottery for those who have lost
2
    BMI is defined as weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared.


                                                      2
weight. Relative to previous studies of weight loss in response to financial incentives,

strengths of this study include a large sample size (2,407) and a long intervention (one

year).

         A 2007 Institute of Medicine report on obesity prevention set the immediate next

step – which it described as an essential priority action for the near future – as “learning

what works and what does not work and broadly sharing that information.” (IOM 2007,

p. 410). It also notes that “All types of evaluation can make an important contribution to

the evidence base upon which to design policies, programs, and interventions.” (Ibid, p.

4). This paper makes a contribution to that effort by documenting enrollment, attrition,

and weight loss in one interesting and promising intervention. This paper presents basic

patterns in the data; a subsequent paper will estimate regression models to test specific

hypotheses about attrition and weight loss.



Conceptual Framework and Previous Literature

         For obese people, weight loss would likely result in substantial benefits.3 For

example, the health benefits of modest weight loss (defined as 5-10% of starting weight)

include decreased blood pressure and cholesterol and a 25% reduction in mortality risk

for type 2 diabetics (Vidal, 2002). Weight loss may also improve quality of life (Ford et

al. 2001). There may also be financial benefits. Cawley (2004) finds a causal impact of

weight on wages, and that obese white females earn roughly 11 percent less than healthy-


3
  There are two ways researchers have sought to measure the benefits of weight loss. The first is to
examine changes in outcomes associated with losing weight. The second is to compare the outcomes of
individuals of different weight, and assume that the difference in outcomes is due to the difference in
weight. Each has its limitations: weight loss studies often lack power, and comparisons across weight
levels are confounded by differences in unobserved characteristics. Vidal (2002) assesses the evidence on
the benefits of weight loss and concludes that modest weight loss (5-10% of initial body weight) improves
cardiovascular risk factors and helps prevent or delay the onset of type 2 diabetes and hypertension.


                                                    3
weight white females. Finkelstein et al. (2003) calculate that, relative to the healthy

weight, the obese incur $125 higher annual out-of-pocket health care costs. With two-

thirds of Americans overweight or obese (Ogden et al. 2006), and given these potential

benefits of weight loss, it may not be surprising that 46 percent of all American women

and 33 percent of all American men are trying to lose weight (Bish et al. 2005).

         Most people fail in their attempts to lose weight4, and many of those who are

successful in losing weight regain it in a short period of time. 5 For example, in one

community-based study of weight gain prevention (Crawford et al., 2000), most (53.7%)

participants gained weight in the first twelve months, three-quarters gained weight over

three years, and only 4.6% lost weight and maintained the loss for three years.

         Theory and evidence from psychology and behavioral economics provide several

explanations for why so many weight loss attempts fail. First, the benefits of weight loss

are not salient. For example, foregone quality of life and lost wages are not visible and

therefore they are frequently unrecognized as opportunity costs (Bastiat, 1850).

         A second possible explanation for repeated failure at weight loss is that the

benefits of weight loss may not be immediate. Improvements in health and labor market

outcomes may not occur for some time after weight loss, and Ainslie (1975) finds




4
  Some obese individuals are able to lose weight by modifying their behaviors: eating less and exercising
more. In the select group enrolled in the Weight Control Registry, all of whom have lost at least 30 pounds
and kept it off for at least one year, 44.6% report losing the weight entirely on their own, that is, without the
help of a commercial program, physician, or nutritionist (Wing and Phelan, 2005). Clearly such statistics
do not generalize to the population; anyone who failed at initial weight loss is ineligible for this registry of
people who maintained weight loss for a year.
5
  Conventional wisdom is that virtually no one succeeds at maintaining weight loss. This perception has
been traced back to a 1959 study of 100 obese individuals in which only 2 percent maintained loss of 20
pounds or more two years after the treatment (Stunkard and McLaren-Hume 1959; Wing and Phelan 2005).
However, the 1959 study was based on a crude diet intervention with negligible support or follow-up so its
poor results may not generalize to today’s much more intensive interventions.


                                                       4
consistent evidence that there is a decline in the effectiveness of rewards as the rewards

are delayed from the time of choice.

       A third explanation for repeated failure at weight loss is that, contrary to the

standard economic model of discounted utility (Samuelson 1937), people may discount

hyperbolically, which produces time-inconsistent preferences (Ainsley 1975). In this

context, time inconsistent preferences mean that people want to do what is in their long-

run interest (lose weight), but they consistently succumb to the temptation to eat and be

sedentary. Thaler and Shefrin (1981) describe individual decision-making as a battle

between a farsighted planner (who in this context wants to diet) and a myopic doer (who

in this context wants to eat and be sedentary).

       One intervention, financial rewards for weight loss, may offer a solution to the

problems of salience, immediacy, and time-inconsistency. Financial rewards, even

though they may be dwarfed in value by the other benefits of weight loss, have the

benefit of being salient, with their amount and delivery date known with certainty in

exchange for clearly defined objectives. Even small financial incentives can be effective

because research has found that people tend not to compare payoffs to their income or

wealth but instead “bracket” them - consider them in isolation (Read et al. 1999;

Kahneman and Tversky 1979). Lotteries may be particularly cost-effective incentives for

healthy behavior. People tend to overweight the probability of unlikely events and

underweight the probability of likely events (Kahneman and Tversky 1979), implying

that lotteries can be more attractive than certain payments even if the two have equal

expected values. Financial rewards can also be paid immediately, before other benefits

of weight reduction may be realized.




                                             5
          Financial rewards can also be structured to help people with time-inconsistent

preferences stay committed to weight loss. In general, pre-commitment devices may help

people with time-inconsistent preferences empower their farsighted planner (Strotz 1956;

Laibson 1997). In this context, one could allow people to post a bond that is

automatically forfeited if they fail to achieve their weight loss goals. Such a bond allows

a person to influence their own future decisions by increasing the punishment for

succumbing to short-run temptation. People tend to exhibit loss aversion – they dislike

losing their own money more than they like winning an equal amount of someone else’s

money (Tversky and Kahneman 1991; Camerer 2005), which suggests that a posted bond

may be more effective than a reward of the same size. Using a bond to increase

adherence to a weight-loss regimen does not guarantee success. Even individuals who

are aware of their time-inconsistent preferences may still be partially naive in that they

overestimate their future willpower (O’Donoghue and Rabin 2001) and as a result may

either post too small a bond or have too much faith in the bond as a precommitment

device.

          Motivated by these theories and findings, several businesses now help employers

offer financial incentives for employee weight loss. In addition, several businesses help

consumers post bonds that are only refunded if one achieves specific weight loss goals.

The William Hill betting agency in the U.K. books wagers that the bettor cannot achieve

a specified weight loss in a specific period of time and verifies the weight loss with a

medical examination (Burger and Lynham 2008).6 A company named stickK.com7 that


6
  This market is relatively small – the annual number of applications for such bets is roughly 200 (Burger
and Lynham, 2008)
7
  The website’s Frequently Asked Questions page states that the company’s name includes two K’s because
"K" often symbolizes "contract" in legal writing.


                                                    6
was founded by Yale economists Ian Ayres and Dean Karlan allows people to post bonds

that are forfeited if they fail to meet their weight loss goal. However, verification is

weak: success in achieving one’s goal is determined (and refunds are made) based on

either the honor system or through verification by a third party chosen by the bettor, and

if the third party doesn’t submit a report the self-report of the bettor is accepted.

       The contribution of this paper is to examine outcomes in a program that offers

various financial rewards (including certain payments, lotteries, and refundable bonds)

for weight loss. The outcomes we examine include attrition and weight loss, both in

pounds and as a percentage of baseline weight.

       A substantial literature confirms that financial incentives influence healthy

behaviors. Kane et al. (2004) review 42 studies of the effect of economic incentives on

preventive behaviors such as immunization, smoking cessation, and exercise; they find

that the economic incentives were effective at changing behavior in 73% of studies.

Financial incentives form the basis for an innovative substance abuse treatment program

known as contingency management. A meta-analysis found overwhelming evidence that

such incentives raise compliance (drug abstinence) by an average of 30 percent (Lussier

et al., 2006). Consistent with bracketing, even small financial incentives have proven

effective; for example, as little as $2.50 for a single negative test result for cocaine

(Higgins et al., 2002).

       Specific to the current context, there is mixed empirical evidence on the extent to

which weight loss is responsive to financial rewards. A recent review and meta-analysis

(Paul-Ebhohimhen and Avenell 2007) identified nine published randomized controlled

trials (RCTs) that used guaranteed financial incentives (i.e. certain payments, not




                                               7
lotteries) for weight loss, with a follow-up of at least one year. The meta-analysis was

unable to reject the null hypothesis of no effect of financial rewards on weight loss; it

calculated a mean weight loss of 0.4 kg at 12 months, which was not statistically

significant. A broader set of studies (including, e.g., those with non-randomized designs

or shorter follow-up) are listed in Appendix Table 1.8

         Relative to past studies, ours has several advantages. This study has a relatively

large sample size (2,407); for comparison, the sample size of all published RCTs of

financial incentives for weight loss combined totals 424 (treatment N=252, control

N=172) (Paul-Ebhohimhen and Avenell, 2007). The intervention studied by this paper

also covers a relatively long time period (one year). Moreover, we examine data from a

real-world intervention rather than one constructed by and overseen by researchers,

which is important because a criticism of studies of weight loss programs is that it is

unclear how the results of pilot programs generalize to real-world implementation. A

limitation of this study, however, is that it is opportunistic data; individuals were not

randomly assigned to different incentive schedules for weight loss.



Description of the Intervention

         Our data come from a company (that we will call Company X) that helps

employers provide financial incentives for their employees to lose weight; specifically, it

monitors employee weight loss and pays the rewards. After an employer contracts with

Company X, Company X has a kickoff event in the workplace that explains the program

to the employees and encourages them to sign up. Participation is optional. Those who


8
 There are other studies that offer financial rewards for exercise or for attending weight loss programs, but
Appendix Table 1 is limited to studies of financial rewards for weight loss.


                                                      8
sign up select a physical activity regimen at either the foundation (easiest), intermediate,

or advanced level. The program consists of several elements: 1) daily email coaching

that includes information about healthy and effective methods of weight loss including

decreasing calorie intake and increasing physical activity in a manner consistent with the

regimen the enrollee chose at baseline; 2) call center support; 3) weigh-ins at least once a

quarter; and 4) financial incentives for achieving specific weight loss targets. Only

employees who are overweight (BMI of at least 25) are eligible to receive financial

rewards, and no financial rewards will be paid once an employee’s BMI falls below 25

(i.e. when the employee falls into the “healthy weight” category).

         The weigh-ins take place in HIPAA-compliant9 kiosks that company X installs in

the employer’s workplace. Employees enter the privacy-protected kiosk and stand on a

scale; their body mass index is recorded and sent over an internet connection to their

personal webpage as well as to Company X’s database. Participants can weigh

themselves as often as they like, and the lowest recorded weight will be counted as that

quarter’s weight. Financial rewards are paid based on percent of baseline weight lost.10

         Company X has a standard set of incentives that it proposes, but employers can

modify it. In our data, there are three incentive schedules. The first is Company X’s

standard set of incentives: the employee participants pay no fee (all costs are paid by the

employer), and employees receive quarterly payments determined by percent of baseline


9
  The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) regulates the disclosure of health
information.
10
   We asked Company X whether people game the system by trying to weigh more at baseline (from which
future weight losses are judged). They said that through the cameras installed in their kiosks they do not
see people wearing heavier clothes to the baseline weigh-in than to later weigh-ins; in all cases people seem
for vanity reasons to remove shoes and sweaters before weighing in. However, Company X acknowledges
that they have no way to know if people (e.g.) hid weights in their pockets or shoes before the baseline
weigh-in. If people engage in such deception then we would expect to see significant drops in weight at the
first weigh-in after baseline but we do not find this pattern in the data.


                                                     9
weight lost to date. Table 1 lists the standard set of incentives: payment thresholds occur

at each percentage point of weight loss up to 5% (1, 2, 3, 4, 5), then thresholds occur

every 5 percentage points (5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30) up to 30% of weight loss. The payment

associated with these thresholds varies; for the first seven (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 15) the reward

is a dollar per percentage point of weight loss. Then the per-percentage-point rewards

increase: $25 for losing 20%, $35 for losing 25%, and $50 for losing 30%. These are

monthly amounts that are paid quarterly, so someone who loses 5% of his weight and

keeps it off for three months receives a $15 check for the quarter ($5 monthly payment x

3 months). Five employers (with a total of thirteen worksites participating) used this

standard incentives schedule.

       The second incentive schedule, used by one employer (with two worksites

participating), is shown in Table 2 and includes both a lottery and a deposit contract. The

lottery takes place each quarter and the prizes are gift certificates (ten $50 gift cards and

ten $50 salon vouchers); only those who had lost some weight since baseline are eligible

for the drawing. The deposit contract is that employees must pay $9.95 per month

(except the first month, which is free), all of which (11 * $9.95 or $109.45) is refunded at

the end of the year if the respondent loses at least 5% of baseline weight by year’s end. If

the respondent loses 10% or more of their baseline weight, they receive in addition to

their refunded fees ($109.45) a $100 bonus, for a total of $229.40. In addition, the

“biggest loser” (as a percent of baseline weight) receives a $250 gift certificate at the end

of the year.

       Whether a participant would receive a higher payoff in the standard or modified

group depends on both quarter and magnitude of weight loss. In quarters one through




                                              10
three, the standard incentives are more generous than the modified incentives at all levels

of weight loss, with the exception that those losing between 0.1% and 0.9% of baseline

weight receive no reward in the standard incentives group but are eligible for the lottery

for gift cards in the modified incentives group. In quarter four, the standard incentives

are more generous for weight loss of between 1% and 4%, but the modified incentives are

more generous for weight loss of 5% or more.

       The third schedule, used by one employer (with a total of two worksites), offered

no incentives for weight loss, but did include one modest incentive to not attrite:

participants were promised $20 if they participated for the entire year (i.e. weighed in at

least once in each of the four quarters). This group received all of the features of the

Company X intervention (daily emails, call center access, weigh-ins at the kiosk) but

were offered no incentives for weight loss, making it useful both as a control group for

measuring the impact of financial incentives isolated from all the other program

elements, and for estimating the impact of the Company X treatment minus the financial

incentives.

       Figure 1 presents a flow diagram of attrition and analysis for all three groups

(standard incentives, modified incentives, control) combined.



Hypotheses

       Part of our purpose in this paper is exploratory - to measure enrollment, attrition

and weight loss in these programs. We focus in particular on attrition and weight loss as

outcomes because the NIH Technology Assessment Conference Panel (1993)

recommends using the percentage of all beginning participants who complete the




                                             11
program, and the percentage of those completing the program who achieve various

degrees of weight loss as measures of program success. The NIH considers a loss of 10%

of baseline weight in 6 months to one year to be good progress for an obese individual

(NHLBI 2000).

       Another purpose of this paper is to test the following hypotheses.

Hypotheses Regarding Enrollment

       There will be lower enrollment in the program that required people to post

forfeitable bonds. The law of demand states that the quantity demanded falls with price.

The program that requires people to post a forfeitable bond raises the expected price of

participation, assuming that not all possible participants expect a 100% probability of

success (and therefore the return of their bond). The published literature confirms that,

all else equal, enrollment in weight loss programs is lower if people are asked to post

forfeitable bonds (e.g. Jeffery et al. 1978).

       Those who are willing to post a forfeitable bond will be better motivated or

prepared for weight loss than those not required to post such a bond.

       In other words, we expect differential selection – those unwilling to post a

forfeitable bond are excluded from the modified incentives group but are not excluded

from the control group or standard incentives group. As a result, we expect that the

modified incentives group will be better prepared or motivated for weight loss than the

other groups.

Hypotheses Regarding Attrition

       There will be lower attrition in the program that required employees to post

bonds that are refundable based on achievement of weight loss goals. Those willing




                                                12
to post a bond are expected to be more motivated or determined to lose weight.

Selection aside, bonds may also increase retention.

        Those who attrite will have been relatively unsuccessful at weight loss.

Participants enroll with incomplete information about certain costs and benefits of

participating. Those that lose relatively little weight may update their prior beliefs and

conclude that it is utility maximizing for them to drop out of the intervention. This is

especially true of those in the modified incentives group, who are charged a monthly fee

for participation that will not be refunded if year-end weight loss is less than 5% of

baseline weight.

Hypotheses Regarding Weight Loss

        Weight loss will be greater for those offered financial rewards for weight

loss. Both the standard incentives group and the modified incentives group were offered

financial rewards for weight loss, whereas the control group were not offered any. In

other words, we hypothesize that financial rewards are effective in promoting weight

loss.

        In quarter 4 weight loss will be greater in the modified incentives group than

in the standard incentives group.

        This prediction is based on the magnitudes of the incentives; the modified

incentives group has much greater incentives for 5% and 10% weight loss by the end of

quarter 4. Specifically, the modified incentives group receives a refund of their $119.40

bond if at least 5% of weight is lost, with an additional bonus of $100 if 10% of weight is

lost. Moreover, those achieving very high weight loss will be in competition for the $250

bonus for being the “biggest loser”. In contrast, the standard incentives group is paid $5




                                             13
per month for losing 5% of starting weight and $10 per month for losing 10% of starting

weight (triple those amounts for the entire quarter). Relative to the standard incentives,

the modified incentives create greater incentive for weight loss by the end of quarter four.

       In addition, there are two reasons that the relative performance of the modified

incentives group by the end of quarter 4 might be better than one would expect based on

the magnitude of the rewards alone. First, we expect differential selection - those willing

to post a bond are likely better prepared or more motivated for weight loss. Second, the

research literature on loss aversion indicates that people are more motivated by a risk of

losing their own money (as in the modified incentives group) than they are by the

prospect of winning someone else’s money (as in the standard incentives group).

       In quarters 1 through 3, weight loss will be greater in the standard incentives

group than in the modified incentives group.

       This prediction is also based on the magnitudes of the incentives. In quarters 1

through 3, the standard incentives group is offered $5 per month for 5% weight loss, and

$10 per month for 10% weight loss (see Table 1 for the full schedule of financial

rewards). In contrast, there is no marginal reward for 5% or 10% weight loss in any of

the first three quarters for the modified incentives group (those losing any weight at all

are eligible for lottery prizes, but there is no additional reward for any weight loss above

the trivial amount that makes one eligible for the lottery).

       However, there are three reasons that the relative performance of the modified

incentives group in quarters one through three might be better than one would expect

based on the magnitude of the rewards alone. The first reason is differential selection.

The second reason is loss aversion; the fear of losing one’s money at year’s end may




                                             14
motivate members of the modified incentives group to lose weight in the early quarters,

even when there are no quarter-specific rewards for doing so. Third, it may take more

than one quarter to achieve 5% or 10% weight loss, so in order to meet their year-end

goals members of the modified incentives group may have to lose weight in earlier

quarters, even though they have no financial incentives for meaningful weight loss in

those quarters.



Methods and Data

       A limitation of our data is that they are not the result of a randomized controlled

trial. They are opportunistic data, provided to us by Company X. As a result, we face

two challenges: 1) assignment to the three treatment groups is nonrandom: the incentive

schedules were chosen by the employers; 2) the participation of employees is voluntary;

there is selection by employees.

       Regarding problem #1 (selection by employers into different incentive schedules),

we assume that this is ignorable. In other words, we assume that employer preference for

incentive structure is uncorrelated with unobserved employee characteristics that affect

attrition and weight loss. Company X told us that the reason that one employer requested

the modified incentives schedule (with forfeitable bonds) is because the company didn’t

want to pay for cash rewards. This would be more problematic if the employer requested

the modified schedule because the employer thought it would be more effective for their

particular employees.

       A related problem is that unobserved employee characteristics may vary

systematically across the three groups. Company X designed this intervention for office




                                            15
employees who spend their days in front of computers; it is they, for example, who are

most likely to read the daily emails regarding nutrition and physical activity. For the

most part, enrollees fit this description. Table 3 lists the industries of the employers. The

five employers (with a total of 13 worksites) in the standard incentive group include an

HMO office, an HMO clinic (in which enrollees are nurses), two bank offices, and an

insurance company. The one employer (with a total of two worksites) that instituted the

modified incentive schedule is an insurance company, and the one employer (with a total

of two worksites) in the control group is a grocery administrative office. Company X

tells us that the nurses (who face the standard incentive schedule) have generally been

least compliant with the program; they speculate that it may be because they do not work

in front of computers all day and thus derive less benefit from the daily emails and the

online tracking of measured weight.

       Regarding problem #2 (selection by employees into participation), we consider

this to be a limitation for generalizing results to the entire population but not a problem in

the sense that any similar intervention is also likely to be optional, and so the findings for

a set of volunteers is most relevant. All of the studies in Appendix Table 1 are all based

on volunteers recruited to participate in a weight loss program, and are likewise not a

random sample of the general population.

       An additional problem when studying weight loss is that there is attrition from the

program. Weight-loss interventions in general (even those without financial rewards)

typically have substantial attrition (Ware 2003; Gadbury et al. 2003). There are several

strategies for handling the attrition when evaluating interventions. The definitive is the

intent-to-treat analysis, which includes all patients in their groups, regardless of whether




                                              16
they received the treatment, deviated from the protocol or withdrew (Ware 2003).

However, to implement this one must have follow-up data on all of the dropouts, which is

not available in this case. Another option is to conduct a “completers” analysis, which

examines data only for those who completed the study. This is likely to be biased toward

showing an impact of the treatment, as those most likely to quit are probably those for

whom the intervention was least effective (Ware 2003). Another option is last-

observation-carried-forward, which assumes that the dropouts remained at their last

measured weight. This also likely results in upward bias in estimates of program

effectiveness, as weight regain is common (Ware 2003; Serdula et al. 1999). Another

option is baseline-carried-forward, which assumes that after attriting the subjects return to

their baseline weight. This may cause downward bias in the estimate of efficacy, as

weight regain may be incomplete or slow. We present findings for completers analysis,

last-observation-carried-forward, and baseline-carried-forward.

       The total number of employees in the dataset is 2,407: 1,513 facing the standard

incentives, 765 facing the modified incentives, and 129 in the control group with no

financial incentives. The data cover 2004-2008. We drop from the sample participants

with baseline BMI below 25 because they were not eligible for financial rewards.

Thirteen participants in the control group were dropped because they were

simultaneously participating in another workplace weight-loss intervention.

       We estimate attrition rates by quarter and group. We graph the distribution of

weight loss by group and quarter, both for a completers analysis (ignoring dropouts),

assuming that dropouts stayed at their last measured weight (last observation carried

forward) and assuming that dropouts return to baseline (baseline carried forward). We




                                             17
also calculate the unconditional mean loss in pounds and percent of baseline weight lost

by group and quarter, for a completers analysis, last observation carried forward, and

baseline carried forward.



Empirical Results

Descriptive statistics:

       Table 4 presents the summary statistics for participants by group. Our overall

sample (N=2,407) consists of 1,513 participants in the standard incentives group, 765

participants in the modified incentives group, and 129 participants in the control group.

       In each of these groups, men are a minority: 15.7% of the standard incentives

group, 21.2% of the modified incentives group, and 35.7% of the control group. The

average age of participants ranges from 43.0 to 46.2 across groups, and average baseline

BMI ranges between 31.3 and 32.8 across groups. In each group there is a strikingly high

prevalence of morbid obesity (BMI of greater than or equal to 40). In the U.S. as a whole,

the morbidly obese constitute 4.8% of the population and 7.3% of all overweight

Americans (Ogden et al. 2006). In contrast, the morbidly obese constitute 28.7% of the

standard incentives group, 30.5% of the modified incentives group, and 22.5% of the

control group.

Enrollment

       We hypothesized that: There will be lower enrollment in the program that

required people to post forfeitable bonds. Table 5 lists the percent of the workforce

that enrolled in the program, by incentive schedule. Ideally we would know the number

of employees with BMI of 25 or higher, because only they are eligible for financial




                                            18
rewards for weight loss. Instead, for the denominator we know only the total number of

employees (i.e. those of all BMI). As a result, these are likely to be underestimates of the

percentage of those eligible for financial rewards who enrolled in the program. Percent

enrollment was 18.6% for the modified incentives (which required a bond), 24.8% for the

standard incentives, and 20.3% for the program that offered no financial rewards for

weight loss but all of the other program elements (i.e. the control group). The point

estimates of enrollment are consistent with our prediction that the requirement of a bond

would result in lower enrollment, but the differences are not statistically significant.

       We also hypothesized that: Those who are willing to post a forfeitable bond

will be better motivated or prepared for weight loss than those not required to post

such a bond. There are two variables that can give us information about the degree of

such differences in selection. The first variable is the level of exercise regimen that the

employee chose at the beginning of the program. If those willing to pay the monthly fees

in the modified incentives group are more motivated or prepared to lose weight, one

should find that they are less likely to choose the easiest exercise regimen. This is

confirmed by the data. Table 4 indicates that the easiest exercise regimen (called

Foundation) was chosen by 60.1% of the standard incentives group but only 55.0% of the

modified incentives group, a difference significant at the 1% level. We also expected that

the control group, offered $20 if they participated for the full year, would be less

motivated on average and therefore more likely to choose the easiest exercise regimen

than those in the modified incentives group, but we do not find this – an even lower

percentage of the control group than the modified incentives group (48.8% versus 60.1%)

chose the easiest exercise regimen, but the difference is not statistically significant.




                                              19
       The second variable that sheds light on difference in selectivity is the percentage

of the program emails that enrollees read. If those willing to pay the monthly fees in the

modified incentives group are more motivated or prepared to lose weight, one should find

that they read a higher percentage of the program emails. That prediction is confirmed by

the data – Table 4 indicates that the average percentage of emails read was 51.0% for

members of the modified incentives group compared to 45.7% for members of the

standard incentives group, a difference significant at the 1% level. (A caveat is that this

variable is missing for 51.1% of the standard incentives group – it simply wasn’t

recorded for certain employers in certain years.)

       The control group, being paid to participate, had the lowest email open rate of

28.7%, which is significantly different from both other groups at the 1% level. It is

interesting that the control group had the lowest percentage choosing the easiest exercise

regimen (which suggests more motivation or better preparation) but the lowest email

open rate (which suggests lower commitment).

       Overall, the patterns of both exercise regimen and email opening suggest that the

group required to post a bond (i.e. the modified incentives group) was selected to be

better prepared and more serious about weight loss than the standard incentives group,

and therefore should be less likely to attrite and more likely to lose weight.

Attrition

       Table 6 lists the cumulative percentages dropping out, by quarter, for each group.

In the standard incentives group, 51.2% of baseline participants have dropped out by the

end of quarter 1, and cumulative attrition rises in the three subsequent quarters to 62.1%,

72.0% and 76.4%. In the modified incentives group, attrition is lower: 24.8% after one




                                             20
quarter, rising in the three subsequent quarters to 33.5%, 39.3%, and 57.4%. Even in the

control group, where participants are promised $20 if they weigh in every quarter for a

year, attrition is substantial: 25.6% after one quarter, rising in the three subsequent

quarters to 39.5%, 45.0%, and 48.1%. When considering the levels of attrition, one

should keep in mind that enrollees were already a select sample. Participation was

optional, and most employees declined to enroll.

       Attrition is typically substantial in weight loss interventions of all kinds (Ware

2003; Gadbury et al. 2003). However, the attrition in these groups is particularly high.

For example, a recent review (Paul-Ebhohimhen and Avenuell, 2007) of RCTs involving

financial rewards for weight loss found that the maximum attrition in any such study was

57.9% at 13 months, far below what the standard incentives group experienced in 12

months (76.4%) but roughly equal to what the modified incentives group experienced at

12 months (57.4%). This suggests that real-world interventions may experience far

higher rates of attrition than those overseen by researchers (who for the purposes of data

quality undertake extensive efforts to keep enrollees from attriting), which raises

questions about how well the results of pilot studies such as those in Appendix Table 1

can be duplicated on a larger scale.

       We hypothesized that There will be lower attrition in the program that

required employees to post bonds that are refundable based on achievement of

weight loss goals. The data are consistent with this hypothesis; in every quarter, attrition

is significantly lower in the modified than the standard incentives group. For example,

after quarter 1 attrition in the modified incentives group is only half that in the standard

incentives group (24.8% versus 51.2%). It impossible to tell from our data whether the




                                              21
difference in attrition is due to selection or loss aversion. Selection was evident in the

earlier finding that those in the modified incentives group were more likely to choose an

advanced physical activity regimen and tend to open more program emails; before

entering the program they may have been better prepared and more motivated to lose

weight. On the other hand, those in the modified incentives group have “skin in the

game” in the form of their deposits, and loss aversion may motivate them to stay in the

program.

       We also hypothesized that: Those who attrite will have been relatively

unsuccessful at weight loss. Table 7 lists the weight loss by quarter, categorized by

whether the participant dropped out in the following quarter or persisted in the program

through the following quarter. The table is divided vertically into four panels: full

sample, standard incentives group, modified incentives group, control group. Among the

full sample, those who drop out in the subsequent quarter have significantly lower

average weight loss than those who persist through the next quarter, in quarters 1, 2, and

3. In each case the difference in mean weight loss to date is statistically significant at

better than the 1% level. When we divide the sample by incentive schedule, the same

pattern exists for those in the modified incentives group: in each of the first three

quarters, weight loss to date is significantly lower among those who drop out in the

following quarter than those who persist through the following quarter. Note that those

in the modified incentives group have the greatest incentive to drop out if they are not

making progress, because to persist would require paying monthly fees that one is

unlikely to have refunded. The pattern is weaker for the standard incentives group; in

quarter 2 future dropouts have significantly lower weight loss than those who persist




                                             22
through the next quarter, but the difference is not statistically significant. In quarter 1

and in quarter 3 the sign is in the opposite direction and the difference is not statistically

significant. For the control group, in no quarter do future dropouts have significantly

lower weight loss to date than those who will persist in the program.

Weight Loss

         The distribution of percent weight loss, by quarter, is shown in Figures 2 (for the

standard incentives group), Figures 3 (for the modified incentives group), and Figures 4

(for the control group). The horizontal axis shows the percent of baseline weight lost

(rounded down to the nearest percentage point11) as of that quarter, and the vertical axis

indicates the percentage of that sample. For each group, there is a separate page devoted

to the data for each quarter. On each page are three graphs: the top graph is the

distribution of weight loss in a completers analysis that ignores dropouts, the middle

graph is from a last observation carried forward analysis in which dropouts are assumed

to have stayed at their last measured weight, and the bottom graph is the distribution of

weight loss in a baseline-carried-forward analysis that assumes that every dropout

returned to their baseline weight. For any given page, a comparison of the top, middle,

and bottom graphs confirms that how attrition is handled has a substantial impact on

estimated weight loss. In the top graphs (the completers analysis), the distribution of

outcomes seems more favorable (although the modal outcome is usually zero weight

loss), but in the middle and bottom graphs that include information on dropouts, by far




11
  We round down so that everyone indicated as having a specific percent weight loss received exactly the
reward associated with that percent weight loss. If we rounded to the nearest percentage point, a participant
who lost 4.6% of her starting weight would be rounded to 5% even though she would not have qualified for
the financial reward associated with achieving 5% weight loss.


                                                     23
the most common outcome is that respondents lost zero weight (largely driven by the

assumption of setting dropouts at baseline weight).

       Each of the graphs in Figure 3-4 indicate that more people in the modified

incentives group are just over the thresholds of 5% weight loss (at which participants are

refunded their year’s worth of fees, or $109.46) and 10% weight loss (at which they also

receive a $100 bonus), then just under the thresholds. This is less apparent in quarters 1-

3 (Figures 3-1, 3-2, and 3-3), when there were no financial rewards tied to those

thresholds for the modified incentives group. Moreover, such heaping is not apparent in

the distribution associated with the standard incentive schedule, which has more

continuous reward thresholds. This suggests that people may be pushing to achieve the

substantial payoffs associated with losing 5% or 10% of baseline weight.

       We next discuss the evidence regarding our hypotheses regarding weight loss.

       Weight loss will be greater for those offered financial rewards for weight

loss. We test for differences in unconditional means of weight loss in pounds and percent

of baseline weight by quarter and group. We then test for differences in unconditional

probability of losing 5% and 10% of baseline body weight. Note that the differences

between the treatment groups and the control group can be interpreted as the effect of the

financial incentives, distinct from all of the other program elements (e.g. daily emails and

call center support) shared by the control group.

       Table 8 lists weight loss in pounds and percent of baseline weight, by group and

quarter. The cells also list the minimum and maximum weight loss (a negative minimum

weight loss indicates weight gain) for that group in that quarter (the minimum and

maximum are not affected by how dropouts are treated, so they are entered in only the




                                            24
leftmost column for each group). Because so many participants drop out, and attrition is

correlated with weight loss success, estimates of average weight loss are extremely

sensitive to how attrition is handled. We focus here on the baseline carried forward

analysis, which assumes that everyone who dropped out went back to their baseline

weight.

          In the baseline carried forward analysis, average weight loss in the control group

is 2.6 pounds (1.29%) in the first quarter, 1.9 pounds (0.98%) in the second quarter, 1.7

pounds (0.82%) in the third quarter, and 1.7 pounds (0.87%) in the fourth quarter. These

can be interpreted as the unconditional average effect of the program elements other than

financial rewards (e.g. emails, call center access, and weigh-ins), because in a previous

randomized experiment, a control group that received no treatment of any kind

experienced virtually no change in average weight after 6 or 12 months (Jeffery, Wing, et

al., 1993). This suggests that changes in weight observed in the control group measure

the effect of all elements of Company X treatment except financial rewards.

          In the standard incentives group, average weight loss is 2.2 pounds (1.13%) in the

first quarter, 2.1 pounds (1.04%) in the second quarter, 2.2 pounds (1.03%) in the third

quarter, and 1.4 pounds (0.64%) in the fourth quarter. We fail to reject the null

hypothesis of no difference between the control and standard incentives group; in fact,

average weight loss is consistently lower in the standard incentives group than in the

control group.

          Despite the small average weight loss in the standard incentives group, there are

some substantial success stories; the maximum weight lost since baseline is 58.8 lbs. in

quarter 1, 89.4 lbs. in quarter 2, 109.2 lbs. in quarter 3, and 116.8 lbs. in quarter 4. For




                                              25
any given mean, success stories are balanced by failures; for example, the maximum

weight gain is 12.6 lbs. in quarter 1, 19.8 lbs. in quarter 2, 25 lbs. in quarter 3, and 25.6

lbs. in quarter 4.

        Weight loss in the modified incentives group averages 3.2 pounds (1.55%) in the

first quarter, 3.3 pounds (1.58%) in the second quarter, 2.5 pounds (1.21%) in the third

quarter, and 3.6 pounds (1.77%) in the fourth quarter. In quarter four (but not earlier

quarters) the difference between the modified incentives group and the control group in

average weight loss is statistically significant.

        We also measure weight loss by success in reaching certain benchmarks. Table 9

lists the percent of participants losing 5% of baseline weight, by group and quarter, for

completers, last observation carried forward, and baseline carried forward analyses. In

the baseline carried forward analysis, the percentage of the control group that lost 5% of

their baseline weight, by quarter, was: 9.3%, 7.8%, 13.2%, and 10.1%.

        Relative to the control group, it is generally the case that smaller percentages of

the standard incentives group achieved 5% weight loss in each quarter (8.3%, 8.2%,

7.9%, and 5.4%); the difference is statistically significant in quarters 3 and 4.

        Relative to the control group, higher percentages of the modified incentives group

achieved 5% weight loss in each quarter (12.6%, 16.5%, 14.0%, 19.5%); the differences

are statistically significant in quarters 2 and 4.

        We also examine the probabilities of losing 10% of baseline weight, the outcome

that the NIH (1990) recommends for evaluating weight loss programs. Table 10 lists the

unconditional probabilities of losing 10% of baseline weight by group and quarter, for

completers, last observation carried forward, and baseline carried forward analyses.




                                               26
Assuming that dropouts returned to their baseline weight, the percentage of the control

group that lost 10% of baseline weight, by quarter, was 0.0%, 2.3%, 2.3%, and 3.1%.

These are comparable to the corresponding percentages for the standard incentives group

(1.2%, 2.0%, 2.9%, and 2.4%); the differences are not statistically significant. Relative

to the control group, higher percentages of the modified incentives group achieved 10%

weight loss in each quarter (2.1%, 4.3%, 3.8%, and 6.5%) but the differences are not

statistically significant.

        We hypothesized that: In quarter 4 weight loss will be greater in the modified

incentives group than in the standard incentives group. This is true for the

unconditional means in Table 8. Assuming dropouts return to their baseline weight

(baseline carried forward), average year-end weight loss is 3.6 pounds (1.77%) in the

modified incentives group compared to 1.4 pounds (0.64%) in the standard incentives

group, a difference significant at the 1% level. Table 9 indicates that at the end of quarter

4, 19.5% of the modified incentives group had lost 5% or more of their baseline weight,

compared to only 5.4% of the standard incentives group, a difference significant at the

1% level. Table 10 shows that the percent losing 10% or more of baseline weight was

6.5% in the modified incentives group and only 2.4% in the standard incentives group, a

difference significant at the 1% level.

        In quarters 1 through 3, weight loss will be greater in the standard incentives

group than in the modified incentives group.

        Contrary to our prediction, weight loss is greater in the modified incentives group

than in the standard incentives group in quarters one through three. Table 8 shows that

those in the modified incentives group lost an average of 3.2, 3.3, and 2.5 pounds in the




                                             27
first three quarters, compared to the standard incentives group average losses of 2.2, 2.1,

and 2.2 pounds. This difference is statistically significant at the 1% level in quarters one

and two. Table 9 shows that in each case a higher proportion of the modified incentives

group than the standard incentives group achieved 5% weight loss: 12.6% versus 8.3% in

quarter one, 16.5% versus 8.2% in quarter two, and 14.0% versus 7.9% in quarter three;

in each case these differences are statistically significant at the 1% level. Table 10 shows

that the probability of losing 10% or more of baseline weight is consistently higher in the

modified incentives group than the standard incentives group, and the difference is

statistically significant in quarter 2.

        These results suggest that the effect of greater financial incentives for the standard

incentives group is swamped by some combination of more favorable selection into the

modified incentives group, loss aversion, and the necessity of starting early to achieve

5% or 10% weight loss by the end of quarter four.



Discussion:

        A 2007 Institute of Medicine report on preventing obesity set the immediate next

step – which it described as an essential priority action for the near future – as “learning

what works and what does not work and broadly sharing that information.” (IOM 2007,

p. 410). It also notes that “All types of evaluation can make an important contribution to

the evidence base upon which to design policies, programs, and interventions.” (Ibid, p.

4). This paper makes a contribution to that effort by documenting attrition and weight

loss in a large program that offers financial incentives for weight loss.




                                             28
          The program studied is of particular interest because it is a real-world

intervention, not a pilot program designed and monitored by researchers. As a result, the

data are informative about how such interventions work in the real-world. However,

because it is a real-world intervention, it suffers the limitations of selection by employers

of incentive schedule, and a relatively small control group (129 out of a total sample of

2,407).

          We study the two outcomes recommended by the NIH for evaluating weight loss

interventions: attrition and weight loss. We find higher attrition (up to 76.4% after one

year) than virtually all previous studies (see Appendix Table 1 and Paul-Ebhohimhen and

Avenell, 2007). Another recent study of real-world wagers on own weight loss also

found 80% failure (Burger and Lynham, 2008).

          We find that the financial rewards in this program are associated with modest

changes in weight. After one year, those in the modified incentives group lose 1.9

pounds more than those in the control group, while the weight loss of those in the

standard incentives group is not statistically distinguishable from that of the control

group. The NIH considers a loss of 10% of baseline weight in 6 months to one year to be

good progress for an obese individual (NHLBI 2000). By this standard, very few

participants in this program achieve good progress toward weight loss: just 2.4% of the

standard incentives group and 6.5% of the modified incentives group lost 10% of their

starting weight in 12 months. By most measures, participants in the modified incentives

group had 12-month weight loss that was greater than those in the standard incentives

group, but it is not clear how much of this is due to selection and how much is due to

bonds, controlling for selection.




                                               29
       The weight loss associated with the program we examine is generally smaller than

that documented in the previous literature. For example, Volpp et al. (2008) estimate

mean 16-week weight loss to be 13.1 lbs. when rewards take the form of a lottery with a

daily expected value of $3, and 14.0 lbs. when the rewards take the form of deposit

contracts or bonds, whose amount is chosen by the enrollee but can vary between $0 and

$3 per day and is matched 1:1 if the weight loss goal is achieved.

       Our findings are closer to those of Finkelstein et al. (2007), who find modest

weight loss (between 2.0 and 4.7 lbs.) at three months, but no significant weight loss at

six months, associated with financial rewards that varied between $7 and $14 per

percentage point of weight lost after six months. Likewise, Butsch et al. (2007) find no

significant difference in 12-week weight loss between a treatment group offered a $150

refund of their enrollment fee if they lost 6% of their initial weight, and a control group

which was not eligible for such a refund.

       Overall, our findings regarding attrition and weight loss suggest that the

experience of pilot programs (such as those described in Appendix Table 1) may be

overoptimistic about what can be achieved on a larger scale.

       To put our findings in a the broader context of what works to promote weight

loss, a literature review (Douketis et al. 2005) found that dietary and lifestyle therapy

tends to result in less than 5 kg weight loss after 2-4 years, pharmacologic therapy results

in 5-10 kg weight loss after 1-2 years, and surgical therapy results in 25-75 kg weight

loss after 2-4 years. At this point, financial rewards remain a promising method for

weight loss but it remains to be seen whether they can be as effective as traditional

medical approaches.




                                             30
       This paper presents the basic patterns in the data. Our follow-up work will

estimate hazard models of attrition and estimate regression models of weight loss to

measure the change in weight associated with the incentive schedules, controlling for the

observable characteristics of participants. Future research in this area should also focus

on the optimal design of financial incentives for maximizing loss of excess weight,

finding ways to decrease attrition, whether offering extrinsic rewards decreases intrinsic

motivation, and whether weight loss is maintained after financial incentives for weight

loss are removed.




                                            31
                                     Works Cited

Ainslie, G. (1975). “Specious Reward: A Behavioral Theory of Impulsiveness and
       Impulse Control.” Psychological Bulletin. 82(4): 463-496.

Bastiat, M. F. (1850). That Which is Seen, and That Which is Not Seen: The Unintended
        Consequences of Government Spending. (West Valley City, Utah: Waking Lion
        Press), reprinted 2006.

Beunckens, C. (2005). “Direct Likelihood Analysis versus Simple Forms of Imputation
      for Missing Data in Randomized Clinical Trials.” Clinical Trials. 2(5): 379-386.

Bish, C.L., Blanck, H.M., Serdula, M.K., et al. (2005). “Diet and Physical Activity
       Behaviors Among Americans Trying to Lose Weight: 2000 Behavioral Risk
       Factor Surveillance System.” Obesity Research. 13(3): 596-607.

Burger, N. and Lynham, J. (2008). “Betting on Weight Loss … and Losing: Personal
       Gambles as Commitment Mechanisms.” Working paper, University of California
       Santa Barbara.

Butsch, W.S., Ard, J.D., Allison, D.B., Patki, A., Henson, C.S., Rueger, M.M., Hubbert,
       K.A., Glandon, G.L. and Heimburger, D.C. (2007). “Effects of a Reimbursement
       Incentive on Enrollment in a Weight Control Program.” Obesity, 15(11): 2733-
       2738.

Camerer. C. (2005). “Three Cheers-Psychological, Theoretical, Empirical—For Loss
      Aversion.” Journal of Marketing Research. 42(5): 129-133.

Cawley, J. (2004) “The Impact of Obesity on Wages.” Journal of Human Resources.
      Spring, 39(2): 451-474.

Cawley, J, Rizzo, J.A. and Haas, K. (2007) “Occupation-Specific Absenteeism Costs
      Associated with Obesity and Morbid Obesity.” Journal of Occupational and
      Environmental Medicine. December, 49(12): 1317-1324.

Coates, T.J., Jeffery, R.W., Slinkard, L.E., Killen, J.D. and Danaher, B.G. (1982).
       “Frequency of Contact and Monetary Reward in Weight Loss, Lipid Change, and
       Blood Pressure Reduction with Adolescents.” Behavior Therapy. 13: 175-185.

Crawford, D., Jeffery, R.W. and French, S.A. (2000). “Can Anyone Successfully Control
      Their Weight? Findings of a Three Year Community-Based Study of Men and
      Women.” International Journal of Obesity. 24: 1107-1110.

Deci, E.L. (1971). “Effects of Externally Mediated Rewards on Intrinsic Motivation.”
       Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 18(1): 105-115.

Douketis, J.D., Macie, C., Thabane, L and Williamson, D.F. (2005). “Systematic Review
      of Long0Term Weight Loss Studies in Obese Adults: Clinical Significance and


                                           32
       Applicability to Clinical Practice.” International Journal of Obesity. 29: 1153-
       1167.

Finkelstein, E.A., Fiebelkorn, I.C., and Wang, G. (2003) “National Medical Spending
       Attributable to Overweight and Obesity: How Much, and Who’s Paying?” Health
       Affairs. Web Exclusive, W3-219.

Finkelstein, E.A., Linnan, L.A., Tate, D.F., Birken, B.E. (2007) “A Pilot Study Testing
       the Effect of Different Levels of Financial Incentives on Weight Loss Among
       Overweight Employees.” Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine.
       49(9): 981-989.

Fishbach, A. and Trope, Y. (2005). “The Substitutability of External Control and Self-
       Control.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology. 41(3): 256-270.

Flegal, K.M., Carroll, M.D., Ogden, C.L. and Johnson, C.L. (2002). “Prevalence and
        Trends in Obesity Among US Adults, 1999-2000.” Journal of the American
        Medical Association. 288(14): 1723-1727.

Flegal, K.M., Graubard, B.I., Williamson, D.F. and Gail, M.H. (2007). “Cause-Specific
        Excess Deaths Associated with Underweight, Overweight, and Obesity.” Journal
        of American Medical Association. 298(17): 2028-2037.

Ford, E.S., Moirarty,D.G., .G, Zack, M.M., Mokdad, A.H. and Chapman, D.P. (2001).
       “Self-Reported Body Mass Index and Health-Related Quality of Life: Findings
       from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System.” Obesity Research, 9(1):
       21-31.

Gadbury, G.L., Coffey, C.S. and Allison, D.B. (2003). “Modern Statistical Methods for
      Handling Missing Repeated Measurements in Obesity Trial Data: Beyond
      LOCF.” Obesity. 4: 175-184.

Higgins, S.T., Alessi, S.M. and Dantona, R.L. (2002). “Voucher-Based Incentives: A
       Substance Abuse Treatment Innovation.” Addictive Behaviors. 27: 887-910.

Hubbert, K.A., Bussey, B.F., Allison, D.B., Beasley, T.M., Henson, C.S. and
      Heimburger, D.C. (2003). “Effects of Outcome-Driven Insurance Reimbursement
      on Short-Term Weight Control.” International Journal of Obesity. 27, 1423-1429.

Institute of Medicine. (2007). Progress in Preventing Childhood Obesity: How do we
        Measure Up? (National Academies Press: Washington, D.C.).

Jeffery, R.W., Bjornson-Benson, W.M., Rosenthal, B.S., Kurth, C.L., Dunn, M.M.
        (1984). “Effectiveness of Monetary Contracts with Two Repayment Schedules on
        Weight Reduction in Men and Women from Self-Referred and Population
        Samples.” Behavior Therapy. 15: 273-279.




                                           33
Jeffery, et al. (1998).“Use of Personal Trainers and Financial Incentives to Increase
        Exercise in a Behavioral Weight-Loss Program” Journal of Consulting and
        Clinical Psychology. 66(5): 777-783.

Jeffery, R.W., Forster, J.L., French, S.A., Kelder, S.H., Lando, H.A., McGovern, P.G.,
        Jacobs, D.R. and Baxter, J.E. (1993). “The Healthy Worker Project: A Work-Site
        Intervention for Weight Control and Smoking Cessation.” Journal of Public
        Health. 83(3): 395-401.

Jeffery, R.W., Gerber, W.M., Rosenthal, B.S. and Lindquist, R.A. (1983). “Monetary
        Contracts in Weight Control: Effectiveness of Group and Individual Contracts of
        Varying Size.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 51(2): 242-248.

Jeffery, R.W., Hellerstedt, W.L. and Schmid, T.L. (1990). “Correspondence Programs for
        Smoking Cessation and Weight Control: A Comparison of Two Strategies in the
        Minnesota Heart Health Program.” Health Psychology. 9(5): 585-598.

Jeffery, R.W., Thompson, P.D. and Wing, R.R. (1978). “Effects on Weight Reduction of
        Strong Monetary Contracts for Calorie Restriction or Weight Loss.” Behavior
        Research and Therapy. 16: 363-369.

Jeffery, R.W., Wing, R.R., Thorson, C., Burton, L.R., Raether, C., Harvey, J. and Mullen,
        M. (1993). “Strengthening Behavioral Interventions for Weight Loss: A
        Randomized Trial of Food Provision and Monetary Incentives.” Journal of
        Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 61: 1038-1045.

Kahneman, D. and Tversky, A. (1979). “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision
     Under Risk. Econometrica. 47(2): 263-292.

Kane, R.L., Johnson, P.E., Town, R.J. and Butler, M. (2004). “A Structured Review of
       the Effect of Economic Incentives on Consumers’ Preventive Behavior.”
       American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 27(4): 327-352.

Kramer, et al. (1986). “Maintenance of Successful Weight Loss Over One Year: Effects
      of Financial Contracts for Weight Maintenance or Participation in Skills
      Training.” Behavioral Therapy. 17: 295-301.

Laibson, D. (1997). “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting.” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics. 112(5): 443-477.

Lepper, M.R., Greene, D., Nisbett, R.E. (1973). “Journal of Personality and Social
       Psychology.” 28(1): 129-137.

Loewenstein, G., Weber, E.U., Hsee, C.K., et al. (2001). “ Risk as feelings.”
      Psychological Bulletin. 127: 267-286.




                                            34
Lussier, J.P., Heil, S.H., Mongeon, J.A., et al. (2006). “A Meta-Analysis of Voucher-
       Based Reinforcement Therapy for Substance Use Disorders.” Addiction. 101:
       192-203.

Mann, R.A. (1972) “The Behavior-Therapeutic Use of Contingency Contracting to
      Control and Adult Behavior Problem: Weight Control.” Journal of Applied
      Behavior Analysis. 5(2): 99-109.

Muennig, P., Lubetkin, E., Jia, H. and Franks, P. (2006). “Gender and the Burden of
      Disease Attributable to Obesity.” American Journal of Public Health. 96(9):
      1662-1668.

Must, A., Spadano, J., Coakley, E.H., Field, A.E., Colditz, G. and Dietz, W.H. (1999).
       “The Disease Burden Associated with Overweight and Obesity.” Journal of the
       American Medical Association. 282(16): 1523-1529

NIH Technology Assessment Conference Panel. (1993). “Methods for Voluntary Weight
      Loss and Control.” Annals of Internal Medicine. 119(7, Part 2): 764-770.

O’Donoghue, T. and Rabin, M. (2001). “Choice and Procrastination.” Quarterly Journal
     of Economics. 116(1): 121-160.

Ogden, C.L., Carroll, M.D., Curtin, L.R., et al. (2006).“Prevalence of Overweight and
      Obesity in the United States, 1999-2004.” Journal of the American Medical
      Association. 295: 1549-1555.

Paul-Ebhohimhen, V. and Avenell, A. (2007). “Systematic Review of the Use of
       Financial Incentives in Treatments for Obesity and Overweight.” Obesity
       Reviews. 9: 355-367.

Petty, N.M. and Martin, B. (2002). “Low-Cost Contingency Management for Treating
        Cocaine- and Opiod-Abusing Metadone Patients.” Journal of Consulting and
        Clinical Psychology. 70(2): 398-405.

Read, D., Loewenstein, G. and Rabin, M. (1999). “Choice Bracketing.” Journal of Risk
       and Uncertainty. 19:1-3; 171-197.

Samuelson, P. A. (1937). “A note on measurement of utility.” Review of Economic
      Studies, 4: 155-161.

Serdula, M.K., Mokdad, A.H., Williamson, D.F., Galuska, D.A., Mendlein, J.M. and
       Heath, G.W. (1999). “Prevalence of Attempting Weight Loss and Strategies for
       Controlling Weight.” Journal of the American Medical Association. 282(14):
       1353-1358.

Sindelar, J.L. (2008). “Paying for Performance: The Power of Incentives Over Habits.”
       Health Economics. 17: 449-451.



                                           35
Strotz, R.H. (1955-1956). “Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization.”
        Review of Economic Studies. 23(3): 165-180.

Stunkard, A. and McLaren-Hume, M. (1959). “The Results of Treatment for Obesity.”
       Archives of Internal Medicine. 103, 79–85.

Thayer, R.H. and Shefrin, H.M. (1981). “An Economic Theory of Self-Control.” Journal
       of Political Economy. 89(2): 392-406.

Tversky, A. and Kahneman, D. (1991). “Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice: A Reference-
      Dependent Model.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 106: 1039-61.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2000). “The Practical Guide:
       Identification, Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults.”
       National Institutes of Health #00-4084. 80 pages.

Vidal, J. (2002). “Updated Review on the Benefits of Weight Loss.” International
        Journal of Obesity. 26 (Suppl 4): S25-S28.

Volpp, K.G., John, L.K., Troxel, A.B., et al. (2008). “Financial Incentive Based
       Approaches for Weight Loss: A Randomized Trial.” Journal of the American
       Medical Association. 300(22): 2631-2637.

Ware, J.H. (2003). “Interpreting Incomplete Data in Studies of Diet and Weight Loss.”
       New England Journal of Medicine. 348(21): 2136-2137.

Wing, R.R. and Phelan, S. (2005). “Long-Term Weight Loss Maintenance.” American
      Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 82 (supplement): 222S-225S.




                                          36
                                             Figure 1:
                                Flow Diagram of Attrition and Analysis




              Intervention established in worksite



Do not participate in program          Participate in program
         (N=11,727)                          (N=2,407)



                   Drop out during 1st quarter        Weigh in during 1st quarter
                            (N=997)                             (N=1,410)


                                      Drop out during 2nd
                                            quarter                   Weigh in during 2nd quarter
                                           (N=250)                            (N=1,160)



                                                     Drop out during 3rd quarter      Weigh in during 3rd quarter
                                                              (N=201)                          (N=959)



                                                                     Drop out during 4th quarter      Weigh in during 4th quarter
                                                                              (N=209)                          (N=750)




                                                              37
Figure 2-1: Distribution of Percent Weight Loss under Standard incentives
                                 Quarter 1


                          Ignoring Dropouts
    90
    80
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
     0
       less     ‐10      ‐5   0     5      10     15     20    more
     than ‐15                                                 than 25


                      Last Weight Carry‐Forward
    90
    80
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
     0
       less     ‐10      ‐5   0     5      10     15     20    more
     than ‐15                                                 than 25


                       Baseline Carry‐Forward
    90
    80
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
     0
       less     ‐10      ‐5   0     5      10     15     20    more
     than ‐15                                                 than 25




                                   38
Figure 2-2: Distribution of Percent Weight Loss under Standard incentives
                                 Quarter 2


                          Ignoring Dropouts
    90
    80
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
     0
       less     ‐10      ‐5   0     5      10     15     20    more
     than ‐15                                                 than 25


                      Last Weight Carry‐Forward
    90
    80
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
     0
       less     ‐10      ‐5   0     5      10     15     20    more
     than ‐15                                                 than 25


                       Baseline Carry‐Forward
    90
    80
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
     0
       less     ‐10      ‐5   0     5      10     15     20    more
     than ‐15                                                 than 25




                                   39
Figure 2-3: Distribution of Percent Weight Loss under Standard incentives
                                 Quarter 3


                          Ignoring Dropouts
    90
    80
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
     0
       less     ‐10      ‐5   0     5      10     15     20    more
     than ‐15                                                 than 25


                      Last Weight Carry‐Forward
    90
    80
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
     0
       less     ‐10      ‐5   0     5      10     15     20    more
     than ‐15                                                 than 25


                       Baseline Carry‐Forward
    90
    80
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
     0
       less     ‐10      ‐5   0     5      10     15     20    more
     than ‐15                                                 than 25




                                   40
Figure 2-4: Distribution of Percent Weight Loss under Standard incentives
                                 Quarter 4


                          Ignoring Dropouts
    90
    80
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
     0
       less     ‐10      ‐5   0     5      10     15     20    more
     than ‐15                                                 than 25


                      Last Weight Carry‐Forward
    90
    80
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
     0
       less     ‐10      ‐5   0     5      10     15     20    more
     than ‐15                                                 than 25


                       Baseline Carry‐Forward
    90
    80
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
     0
       less     ‐10      ‐5   0     5      10     15     20    more
     than ‐15                                                 than 25




                                   41
Figure 3-1: Distribution of Percent Weight Loss under Modified incentives
                                 Quarter 1


                              Ignore Dropouts
    90
    80
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
     0
       less     ‐10      ‐5      0    5    10     15     20    more
     than ‐15                                                 than 25


                      Last Weight Carry‐Forward
    90
    80
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
     0
       less     ‐10      ‐5      0    5    10     15     20    more
     than ‐15                                                 than 25


                       Baseline Carry‐Forward
    90
    80
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
     0
       less     ‐10      ‐5      0    5    10     15     20    more
     than ‐15                                                 than 25




                                     42
Figure 3-2: Distribution of Percent Weight Loss under Modified incentives
                                 Quarter 2


                              Ignore Dropouts
    90
    80
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
     0
       less     ‐10      ‐5      0    5    10     15     20    more
     than ‐15                                                 than 25


                      Last Weight Carry‐Forward
    90
    80
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
     0
       less     ‐10      ‐5      0    5    10     15     20    more
     than ‐15                                                 than 25


                       Baseline Carry‐Forward
    90
    80
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
     0
       less     ‐10      ‐5      0    5    10     15     20    more
     than ‐15                                                 than 25




                                     43
Figure 3-3: Distribution of Percent Weight Loss under Modified incentives
                                 Quarter 3


                              Ignore Dropouts
    90
    80
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
     0
       less     ‐10      ‐5      0    5    10     15     20     more
     than ‐15                                                  than 25


                      Last Weight Carry‐Forward
    90
    80
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
     0
       less     ‐10      ‐5      0    5    10     15     20    more
     than ‐15                                                 than 25


                       Baseline Carry‐Forward
    90
    80
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
     0
       less     ‐10      ‐5      0    5    10     15     20    more
     than ‐15                                                 than 25




                                     44
Figure 3-4: Distribution of Percent Weight Loss under Modified incentives
                                 Quarter 4


                              Ignore Dropouts
    90
    80
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
     0
       less     ‐10      ‐5      0    5    10     15     20    more
     than ‐15                                                 than 25


                      Last Weight Carry‐Forward
    90
    80
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
     0
       less     ‐10      ‐5      0    5    10     15     20    more
     than ‐15                                                 than 25


                       Baseline Carry‐Forward
    90
    80
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
     0
       less     ‐10      ‐5      0    5    10     15     20    more
     than ‐15                                                 than 25




                                     45
Figure 4-1: Distribution of Percent Weight Loss in the Control Group
                              Quarter 1


                            Ignore Dropouts
 90
 80
 70
 60
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
  0
     less     ‐10      ‐5      0    5       10    15    20     more
   than ‐15                                                   than 25


                    Last Weight Carry‐Forward
 90
 80
 70
 60
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
  0
     less     ‐10      ‐5      0        5    10    15    20
   than ‐15


                     Baseline Carry‐Forward
 90
 80
 70
 60
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
  0
     less     ‐10      ‐5      0    5       10    15    20     more
   than ‐15                                                   than 25




                                   46
Figure 4-2: Distribution of Percent Weight Loss in the Control Group
                              Quarter 2


                            Ignore Dropouts
 90
 80
 70
 60
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
  0
     less     ‐10      ‐5      0    5   10      15     20    more
   than ‐15                                                 than 25


                    Last Weight Carry‐Forward
 90
 80
 70
 60
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
  0
     less     ‐10      ‐5      0    5   10      15     20    more
   than ‐15                                                 than 25


                     Baseline Carry‐Forward
 90
 80
 70
 60
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
  0
     less     ‐10      ‐5      0    5    10     15     20    more
   than ‐15                                                 than 25




                                   47
Figure 4-3: Distribution of Percent Weight Loss in the Control Group
                              Quarter 3


                            Ignore Dropouts
 90
 80
 70
 60
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
  0
    less      ‐10      ‐5      0    5    10     15     20    more
  than ‐15                                                  than 25


                    Last Weight Carry‐Forward
 90
 80
 70
 60
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
  0
     less     ‐10      ‐5      0    5   10      15     20    more
   than ‐15                                                 than 25


                     Baseline Carry‐Forward
 90
 80
 70
 60
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
  0
     less     ‐10      ‐5      0    5    10     15     20    more
   than ‐15                                                 than 25




                                   48
Figure 4-4: Distribution of Percent Weight Loss in the Control Group
                              Quarter 4


                            Ignore Dropouts
 90
 80
 70
 60
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
  0
     less     ‐10      ‐5      0    5   10      15     20    more
   than ‐15                                                 than 25


                    Last Weight Carry‐Forward
 90
 80
 70
 60
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
  0
     less     ‐10      ‐5      0    5    10     15     20    more
   than ‐15                                                 than 25


                     Baseline Carry‐Forward
 90
 80
 70
 60
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
  0
     less     ‐10      ‐5      0    5   10      15     20    more
   than ‐15                                                 than 25




                                   49
                  Table 1: Financial Rewards Based on Weight Loss
                               “Standard incentives”

                   Weight Loss                  Dollar Reward Per Month
             (as % of Baseline Weight)               (Paid Quarterly)
                         1                                   1
                         2                                   2
                         3                                   3
                         4                                   4
                         5                                   5
                        10                                  10
                        15                                  15
                        20                                  25
                        25                                  35
                        30                                  50

Notes: Only participants with BMI over 25 (that is, those who are overweight or obese)
are eligible to receive incentives. Moreover, people can only get incentives for weight
loss down to a BMI of 25 – there is no financial incentive for anyone in the healthy
weight (18.5 to 25) or underweight (<18.5) BMI categories to lose weight.




                                           50
                  Table 2: Financial Rewards Based on Weight Loss
                                “Modified incentives”

               Weight Loss                                   Reward
         (as % of Baseline Weight)            (Some Quarterly, Some Annual)
              Greater than zero             Entered into quarterly drawing for gift
                                              certificates: ten $50 gift cards each
                                           quarter and ten $50 salon vouchers each
                                                              quarter.
                      5                      Complete reimbursement of monthly
                                           fees (11 * $9.95 = $109.45), paid at end
                                                              of year
                      10                     Complete reimbursement of monthly
                                            fees (11 * $9.95 = $109.45) plus $100
                                                   bonus, paid at end of year
      “Biggest loser” (as % of baseline)    $250 gift certificate, awarded at end of
                 at worksite                year, plus the appropriate award listed
                                           above for the specific amount of weight
                                                                loss


Notes: Only participants with BMI over 25 (that is, those who are overweight or obese)
are eligible to receive incentives. Moreover, people can only get incentives for weight
loss down to a BMI of 25 – there is no financial incentive for anyone in the healthy
weight (18.5 to 25) or underweight (<18.5) BMI categories to lose weight.




                                           51
                        Table 3: Description of Employers

Employer            Description                  Incentive Schedule
   1       HMO clinic - nurses                        Standard
   2       Banking office                             Standard
   3       HMO office                                 Standard
   4       Banking office                             Standard
   5       Insurance office                           Standard
   6       Insurance company                         Modified
   7       Grocery administrative office              Control




                                           52
                                    Table 4: Summary Statistics by Group

                                   Standard Incentives       Modified Incentives          Control Group
            Variable            Obs Mean        Std. Dev   Obs Mean      Std. Dev   Obs    Mean     Std. Dev
Initial BMI                     1513    32.8      6.24     765  32.8        6.00    129     31.3      5.72
Male                            1513 0.157       0.364     765 0.212       0.409    129    0.357     0.481
Age                             1513    46.2      10.4     765  43.0         8.8    129     44.4      10.6
Height                          1513    65.5      3.41     765  66.1        3.42    129     66.7      4.25
Overweight (30>BMI>=25)         1513 0.412       0.492     765 0.382       0.486    129    0.519     0.502
Obese (40>BMI>=30)              1513 0.301       0.459     765 0.314       0.464    129    0.256     0.438
Morbidly Obese (BMI>=40)        1513 0.287       0.452     765 0.305       0.461    129    0.225     0.419
Foundation exercise regimen     1513 0.601       0.490     765 0.550       0.498    129    0.488     0.502
Intermediate exercise regimen   1513 0.337       0.473     765 0.374       0.484    129    0.426     0.496
Advanced exercise regimen       1513 0.062       0.241     765 0.076       0.265    129    0.085     0.280
Email open rate                 740     45.7     36.41     765  51.0       35.09    129     28.7     32.47
                                                     Table 5: Enrollment Rates

                   Control         Standard Incentive      Modified Incentive
                   Group                Group                   Group                p-value           p-value           p-value
                     (1)                  (2)                     (3)             (1) equals (2)    (1) equals (3)    (2) equals (3)
Mean                0.203                0.248                   0.186                 0.613             0.839             0.477
(Std. Dev.)        (0.100)              (0.115)                 (0.024)


Note: Enrollment rates are calculated by the fraction of those who enroll in the program by the total population of the work place.
Individuals with BMI<25 may enroll in the program, but receive no payouts.




                                                                  54
                              Table 6: Cumulative Attrition, by Group and Quarter

    Quarter                    Standard                           Modified                         Control
                               Incentives                        Incentives                        Group
                                       t
        1                       51.2%*                             24.8%                            25.6%
                                       t
        2                       62.1%*                             33.5%                            39.5%
                                       t
        3                       72.0%*                             39.3%                            45.0%
                                       t
        4                       76.4%*                             57.4%*                           48.1%
* represents significant difference with the control group at the 5% level
t
  represents significant difference between standard and modified incentive groups at the 5% level




                                                          55
                 Table 7: Weight Loss by Future Attrition Status

 Full Sample
  Quarter    Persist in next quarter      Dropout next quarter     ttest p-value
     1                 4.67                      3.49                  0.004
                     (2.3%)                     (1.8%)
     2                 5.73                      3.33                 0.000
                     (2.8%)                     (1.7%)
     3                 6.38                      4.23                 0.008
                     (3.1%)                     (2.0%)

 Standard Incentive Group
  Quarter    Persist in next quarter      Dropout next quarter     ttest p-value
     1                 4.90                      4.07                  0.122
                     (2.5%)                     (2.1%)
     2                 6.67                      3.99                 0.003
                     (3.2%)                     (2.0%)
     3                 6.93                      8.96                 0.128
                     (3.2%)                     (4.3%)

 Modified Incentive Group
 Quarter      Persist in next quarter     Dropout next quarter     ttest p-value
   1                    4.66                      1.03                 0.000
                      (2.3%)                    (0.6%)
   2                    5.36                      0.76                0.001
                      (2.6%)                    (0.3%)
   3                    6.77                     -1.91                0.000
                      (3.4%)                   (-1.0%)

Control Group
 Quarter        Persist in next quarter    Dropout next quarter    ttest p-value
    1                     3.42                     3.54                0.929
                        (1.8%)                    (1.5%)
    2                     3.46                     1.36               0.325
                        (1.9%)                    (0.6%)
    3                     1.82                     7.99               0.041
                        (0.9%)                    (4.0%)
Weight loss in pounds (Percent weight loss in parenthesis)




                                        56
                     Table 8: Weight Loss in Pounds and Percent of Baseline Weight, by Group and Quarter
                            Standard                               Modified                              Control
                            Incentives                            Incentives                             Group
Quarter      Ignoring          Last     Baseline     Ignoring         Last       Baseline     Ignoring      Last             Baseline
            Dropouts          Weight     Carry-      Dropouts       Weight        Carry-      Dropouts    Weight              Carry-
                              Carry-    Forward                     Carry-       Forward                  Carry-             Forward
                             Forward                               Forward                               Forward
    1            4.6           2.2 t       2.2 t         4.2           3.2          3.2           3.4        2.6                2.6
              (2.31%)        (1.13%)      (1.13)      (2.06%)       (1.55%)      (1.55%)       (1.73%)    (1.29%)            (1.29%)
            Min = -12.6                             Min = -11.6                              Min = -6.0
            Max = 58.8                              Max = 34.6                               Max = 19.6

    2         5.5* t           2.7         2.1 t              4.9             3.3          3.3         3.1          2.4         1.9
             (2.73%)        (1.34%)      (1.04%)           (2.38%)         (1.64%)      (1.58%)     (1.62%)      (1.21%)     (0.98%)
            Min = -19.8                                  Min = -18.4                               Min = -8.8
            Max = 89.4                                   Max = 52.8                                Max = 30.2
     3           7.77* t           3.2         2.2            4.1             2.6          2.5         3.0          2.2         1.7
                (3.68%)         (1.54%)     (1.03%)        (2.00%)         (1.27%)      (1.21%)     (1.49%)      (1.06%)     (0.82%)
               Min = -25                                 Min = -29.8                               Min = -22.2
              Max = 109.2                                Max = 53.6                                 Max = 32
                      t                           t
     4            6.1              3.2        1.4            8.4*             3.3         3.6*         3.2          2.9         1.7
                (2.75%)         (1.52%)     (0.64%)        (4.15%)         (1.61%)      (1.77%)     (1.68%)      (1.47%)     (0.87%)
              Min = -25.6                                Min = -30.6                               Min = -13.8
              Max = 116.8                                Max = 61.2                                Max = 30.8
Note: A positive number indicates weight lost. A negative number (e.g. for the minimum weight loss) indicates weight gain.
* represents significant difference with the control group at the 5% level
t
  represents significant difference between standard and modified incentive groups at the 5% level



                                                                57
                    Table 9: Percent of Respondents Losing 5% of Baseline Weight, by Group and Quarter


                         Standard                                   Modified                                Control
                         Incentives                                Incentives                               Group
Quarter     Ignoring       Last         Baseline      Ignoring       Last        Baseline     Ignoring      Last      Baseline
            Dropouts      Weight         Carry-       Dropouts      Weight        Carry-      Dropouts     Weight      Carry-
                          Carry-        Forward                     Carry-       Forward                   Carry-     Forward
                         Forward                                   Forward                                Forward
     1          17.1%         8.3% t       8.3% t         16.7%        12.6%        12.6%        12.5%     9.3%        9.3%
     2                               t           t
                21.6%        10.8%         8.2%          24.8%*        16.9%       16.5%*         12.8%    10.1%        7.8%
     3                                             t
                28.1%         13.0%        7.9%*          23.1%        15.0%        14.0%         23.9%    15.5%       13.2%
     4         22.7%  t
                             13.3%   t
                                           5.4%*   t
                                                         45.7%*        20.9%       19.5%*         19.4%    17.8%       10.1%
* represents significant difference with the control group at the 5% level
t
  represents significant difference between standard and modified incentive groups at the 5% level




                                                                 58
                   Table 10: Percent of Respondents Losing 10% of Baseline Weight, by Group and Quarter


                             Standard                                Modified                             Control
                            Incentives                              Incentives                             Group
  Quarter Ignoring             Last       Baseline      Ignoring       Last      Baseline     Ignoring     Last     Baseline
             Dropouts         Weight       Carry-      Dropouts      Weight      Carry-       Dropouts    Weight     Carry-
                              Carry-      Forward                    Carry-     Forward                   Carry-    Forward
                             Forward                                Forward                              Forward
     1          2.4%           1.2%          1.2%         2.8%         2.1%        2.1%         0.0%       0.0%      0.0%
     2                             t             t
                5.2%          2.2%          2.0%          6.5%         4.3%        4.3%         3.8%       2.3%      2.3%
     3                t
               10.4%           3.8%          2.9%         6.3%         4.1%        3.8%         4.2%       2.3%      2.3%
     4         10.1%  t
                              4.4% t
                                            2.4% t
                                                         15.3%*        6.8%        6.5%         6.0%       4.7%      3.1%
* represents significant difference with the control group at the 5% level
t
  represents significant difference between standard and modified incentive groups at the 5% level




                                                                 59
                                                              Appendix Table 1:
                                          Previous Literature on Financial Incentives for Weight Loss

   Study          Study Design            Intervention and Incentives             Sample Size and        Duration           Weight Loss            Attrition
                                                                                    Population
Volpp et al.    Randomized           3 groups:                                 N=57 (19 in each of 3    16 weeks       Mean weight loss:         8.8%
(2008)          controlled trial                                               groups)                                 Lottery: 13.1 lbs
                                     Deposits contract of $0-$3 / day
                                     matched 1:1.                              Patients at                             Deposit contracts: 14.0
                                                                               Philadelphia Veterans
                                     Lottery for daily prize with E[V]=$3.     Affairs Medical Center                  Control: 3.9 lbs.
                                                                               with BMI 30-40
                                     Self-reported daily weight.

                                     $20 for monthly weigh- in,
                                     unconditionally
Burger and      Opportunistic data   Maximum bet of $65. William Hill          N=51                     Average of 8   Approximately 80% of      Approximate
Lynham          from William Hill    offered odds ranging from 5:1 to 50:1;                             months         people betting on their   ly 80% of
(2008)          betting agency for   potential payoff averaged $1,926.         Self-selected members                   weight loss lose the      people
working         1993-2006                                                      of British population.                  bet                       betting on
paper                                Average duration of bet is 8 months,                                                                        their weight
                                     weight to be lost ranges from 28-168                                                                        loss lose the
                                     lbs.                                                                                                        bet

                                     Each bettor weighed at start and end of
                                     bet by physician.

                                     No control group.
Finkelstein     Randomized trial,    Three groups:                             N=207 (72 in Back        6 months       Mean weight loss 3        54% in Back
et al. (2007)   no control group     Back loaded: $0 at 3 months, $14 per      Loaded, 64 in Front                     months:                   Loaded, 45%
                                     % point lost at 6 months                  Loaded, 71 in Steady                    2 lbs for Back Loaded,    in Front
                                                                               Payment)                                4.7 lbs for Front         Loaded, 31%
                                     Front loaded: $14 per % point lost at 3                                           Loaded, 3 lbs for         in Steady
                                     months, $0 at 6 months                    Overweight and obese                    Steady Payment            Payment
                                                                               employees at one
                                     Steady payment: $7 per % point lost at    university and 3                        Mean weight loss at 6




                                                                               60
                                     both 3 months and 6 months                community colleges in                months not
                                                                               NC                                   significantly different
                                     Weigh-ins at 3 months and 6 months.                                            from zero

                                     Incentives only up to 10% weight loss
                                     ($140)
Butsch et al.   Sequential           Treatment group eligible for 50%          N=401 (241                12 weeks   Mean weight loss:           Not stated
(2007)          control-             reimbursement of enrollment fee ($150     intervention of which                2.25% in control
                intervention, not    of $300) if lose 6% of initial weight     59 enrolled, 160                     group, 3.27% in
                randomized           and attend 10 of 12 group sessions        control of which 40                  intervention group;
                                                                               enrolled)                            difference not
                                     Control group was not eligible for                                             statistically significant
                                     reimbursement                             Participants in Univ.
                                                                               Alabama at
                                                                               Birmingham EatRight
                                                                               Lifestyle Program

                                                                               BMI 30 and over.
Hubbert et      Propensity score     Treatment group eligible for 50% of       N=125:                    12 weeks   Mean weight loss: 7.3       Not stated
al. (2003)      matching of 4        cost of program fees ($150 of $300) if    25 in intervention                   kg (6.1%) in
                controls to each     lose 6% of initial weight and attend 10   group, 100 in control                intervention group, 4.0
                member of            of 12 group sessions.                     group                                kg (3.9%) in control
                intervention group                                                                                  group; both
                                     Control group was not eligible for        Participants in Univ.                differences are
                                     reimbursement                             Alabama at                           statistically significant
                                                                               Birmingham EatRight
                                                                               Lifestyle Program and
                                                                               members of UAB-
                                                                               owned HMO

                                                                               BMI 30 and over.
Jeffery,        Block-               Worksites divided evenly between          32 worksites in           2 years    No treatment effect         No attrition
Forster, et     randomized           treatment and control groups.             Minneapolis / St. Paul               was found for weight.       of worksites.
al. (1993)      controlled                                                     metropolitan area.
                experiment           Treatment (Healthy Worker Project)                                             In cohort survey,
                (worksites           consisted of health education classes     Of 10,000 employees                  average change in
                randomized)          and payroll deductions that served as     in treatment worksites,              BMI was 0.08 units for




                                                                               61
                              bonds – refunded if achieve weight loss   2,041 employees                      control group, -0.02
                              goals or donated to charity otherwise.    participated in weight               units for treatment
                                                                        control program.                     group; not statistically
                              Goals chosen by employee and ranged                                            significant.
                              from minimum of 0 lb and maximum
                              of 1% body weight loss each week.                                              In cross-sectional
                                                                                                             survey, average
                              Participants chose amount of payroll                                           change in BMI was -
                              deduction (minimum of $5 biweekly).                                            0.05 in both the
                                                                                                             treatment and control
                              200 employees surveyed at baseline                                             groups.
                              and again after 2 years (cohort).
                              Another 200 employees surveyed after
                              2 years (cross-section).

                              Weight self-reported but corrected for
                              reporting error.
Jeffery,         Randomized   Five groups: 1) control; 2) standard      N=202 men and            18 months   No effect of financial     11% attrition
Wing, et al.     controlled   behavioral therapy (SBT); 3) SBT plus     women from                           incentives or the          at 6 months,
(1993)           experiment   food provision; 4) SBT plus incentives;   Pittsburgh and                       interaction of financial   13% at 12
                              5) SBT plus food provision plus           Minneapolis-St. Paul,                incentives with food       months, 15%
                              incentives.                               of which 40 to 41 were               provision                  at 18 months
                                                                        in each of the 5
                              Weekly incentives: $0 if gained weight,   groups.
                              $2.50 if did not gain weight; $12.50 if
                              weight loss was 50% of goal, $25 if       Had to be 14-32 kg
                              weight loss reached goal.                 overweight

                              Weight-loss goals could be either 14,
                              18, or 23 kg during course of program.

                              Weight measured at baseline, 6, 12,
                              and 18 months. There were also
                              optional weekly weigh-ins.
Jeffery et al.   Randomized   Two groups: 1) offered a weight           N=1,304 residents of     6 months    Weight loss averaged       3.8% did not
(1990)           experiment   control newsletter program for price of   Bloomington                          about 4 lbs for $5         return survey
                              $5; 2) offered the same program for       Minnesota:                           program and 8 lbs for




                                                                        62
                              free but requiring a $60 deposit that       1,190 in the $5                     incentive program.
                              would be refunded based on                  newsletter program
                              (proportional to) success in weight loss.   group and 114 in
                                                                          newsletter plus
                              Individuals chose weight loss goals of      incentive program
                              not more than 4 lb a month.                 group

                              Weight self-reported (questionnaire,
                              telephone survey). For subset of
                              respondents, validation of self-report
                              through measurement of weight.
Kramer et        Randomized   Three groups: 1) monthly financial          N=85 individuals who     1 year     Incentives had no      6 of 28
al. (1986)       controlled   contingencies for weight maintenance;       had already lost 10%                impact on weight       (21%) of the
                 experiment   2) monthly financial contingencies for      or more of their body               maintenance / amount   incentives
                              participation in training sessions to       weight through a 15-                of weight regained.    group refused
                              solidify behavioral changes; 3) no          week weight-loss                    Average weight         to attend
                              treatment.                                  program.                            regain: 10.3 lbs in    final weigh-
                                                                                                              control group, 11.9    in. They self-
                              $120 deposit. For each of 12 sessions                                           lbs. in group with     reported
                              not attended, participant forfeited $10.                                        incentives.            weight, and 5
                              Refund also withheld if weighed more                                                                   lbs was
                              than “baseline” (post-first-treatment)                                                                 added to
                              weight. Withheld refunds (forfeited                                                                    account for
                              moneys) were distributed among those                                                                   under-
                              who were at or below “baseline”                                                                        reporting.
                              weight at final session.

                              Weight measured at “baseline” and at
                              one year.
Jeffery et al.   Randomized   Three groups: 1) regular contract, 2)       N=113                    15 weeks   Average weight loss:   11 subjects
(1984)           controlled   difficulty-grade contract; 3) no contract                                       26.2 lbs (12.8%) in    (10%)
                 experiment   (control)                                   Roughly half recruited              difficulty-grade       refused to
                                                                          from population                     contract               attend final
                              All deposited $150.                         sample and the other                21.7 lbs (10.8%) in    weigh-in.
                              Immediately refunded to control group.      half from newspaper                 regular contract       They self-
                              Regular contract group received $30         advertisements                      17.7 lbs (8.5%) in     reported
                              for each 5-lb. increment of weight loss                                         control group          weight, and 5




                                                                          63
                              Difficult-grade contract group received                                                                  lbs was
                              $5 for first 5 lbs lost, $10 for second,                                                                 added to
                              $20 for third, $40 for fourth, and $75                                                                   account for
                              for fifth.                                                                                               under-
                                                                                                                                       reporting.
Jeffery et al.   Randomized   Six treatment groups: 3 levels of          N=89                      15 weeks   Individuals rewarded     None
(1983)           experiment   deposit ($30, $150, $300) times two                                             for group performance
                              types of payoff criteria: individual       Men in the                           lost on average 5 lbs.
                              weight loss or mean group weight loss.     Minneapolis area with                more weight. This
                                                                         self-reported weight at              difference was
                              All received 15-week behaviorally          least 30 pounds above                maintained over 1 year
                              oriented program. Goal was 30 pounds       the ideal.                           follow-up.
                              lost.
                                                                                                              No significant effects
                              Cash refunds per week at rate of $1, $5,                                        of contract size.
                              or $10 per pound up to 2 pounds per
                              week.

                              Monies not refunded for weight loss by
                              end of program were distributed
                              equally among those who achieved the
                              30-pound weight loss goal.

                              Participants were weighed weekly.
Coates et al.    Randomized   Four treatment groups: 2 incentivized      N=36                      15 weeks   The treatment group      None
(1982)           experiment   behaviors (weight loss or decrease in                                           receiving rewards for
                              calorie consumption) by 2 frequencies      Adolescents at least                 weight loss and
                              of therapeutic contact (5 times or 1       10% above average                    coming to the clinic 5
                              time per week)                             weight-for-height.                   times per week was
                                                                                                              the only group to
                              Deposits were equal to 15 weeks’                                                significantly reduce
                              allowance or 50% of earnings from                                               the percent
                              part-time work; amounts varied from                                             overweight.
                              $15-$240 (mean=$67.75). Source of                                               Treatment effects
                              payment: parents (51.5%), subjects                                              maintained over a 6-
                              (39.4%), shared (9.1%).                                                         month follow-up
                                                                                                              period.




                                                                         64
                                   Weight loss goal was 1 lb. per week, or
                                   caloric reduction necessary to lose 1 lb.                                           Significant correlation
                                   per week. Monetary reward was                                                       between initial
                                   delivered either once per week or once                                              monetary deposit and
                                   per week at treatment center.                                                       percent overweight
                                                                                                                       lost.
                                   Weighed at each clinic visit.
                                   Food records checked                                                                No significant
                                                                                                                       difference based on
                                                                                                                       whether parents or
                                                                                                                       subject paid the
                                                                                                                       deposit
Jeffery et al.   Randomized        Three treatment groups: deposits were       N=31                    10 weeks        Groups rewarded for       4 of 7 in
(1978)           controlled        returned contingent on either                                                       weight loss or calorie    control group
                 experiment.       attendance, calorie restriction, or         Respondents to                          reductions lost an        quit.
                                   weight loss. Also a control group.          newspaper                               average of 20 lbs,
                                                                               advertisement for                       significantly more
                                   Each of the three treatment groups          people who need to                      weight loss than either
                                   deposited $200. One group paid $20          lose 50 lbs. or more.                   the group rewarded for
                                   for losing 2 lbs. per week. Another                                                 attendance (8.6 lbs) or
                                   paid $20 for calorie restrictions                                                   the control group (12.4
                                   calculated to cause loss of 2 lbs. per                                              lbs).
                                   week. Third group paid $20 for weekly
                                   attendance.
Mann             Single-subject    Subjects deposited a large number of        N=8                     Durations of    Average weekly            None
(1972)           reversal design   valuables (e.g. money, jewelry, medals)                             treatments      weight loss of 1.6 to
                                   with the researcher and signed a            Respondents to          varied; total   1.7 pounds during
                                   Contingency Contract allowing the           newspaper               study ran at    treatment, regain of
                                   researcher to switch them from              advertisement. All      least 400       1.4 pounds per week
                                   treatment to control conditions, with       agreed to lose 25       days            when incentives
                                   the treatment being valuables being         pounds or more and                      removed.
                                   either returned or forfeited based on       had physician
                                   weight loss.                                approval.

                                   One valuable was returned for each 2
                                   lb weight loss over a 2-week period.




                                                                               65
Subjects weighed every Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday.




                                 66
