NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SHORT RUN CONSTRAINTS AND THE INCREASING MARGINAL VALUE OF
TIME IN RECREATION
Raymond B. Palmquist
Daniel J. Phaneuf
V. Kerry Smith
Working Paper 14986
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14986

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2009

Partial support for this research was provided by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under
grant no. R-82950801and by CEnREP at North Carolina State University. Thanks are due Doug Larson
and two anaonymous referees for very helpful comments on an earlier draft, to Jaren Pope and Brian
Stynes for their assistance in conducting the survey used for this analysis, and to Melissa Brandt, Michael
Darden, Eric McMillen and Vincent McKeever for assistance in assembling the data from the household
survey. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Raymond B. Palmquist, Daniel J. Phaneuf, and V. Kerry Smith. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Short Run Constraints and the ¸˛Increasing Marginal Value of Time in Recreation
Raymond B. Palmquist, Daniel J. Phaneuf, and V. Kerry Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 14986
May 2009
JEL No. D13,J22,Q26
ABSTRACT
Leisure activities such as local recreation trips usually take place in discrete blocks of time that are
surrounded by time devoted to other commitments. It can be costly to transfer time between blocks
to allow for longer outings. These observations affect the value of time within those blocks and suggest
that traditional methods for valuing time using labor markets miss important considerations. This
paper presents a new model for time valuation that uses non-employment time commitments to infer
the shadow value of time spent in recreation. A unique survey that elicited revealed and stated preference
data on household time allocation is used to implement the model. The results support the conclusion
that there is an increasing marginal value of time for recreation as the trip length increases.

Raymond B. Palmquist
Department of Economics
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27695-8110
palmquist@ncsu.edu
Daniel J. Phaneuf
Department of Agricultural
and Resource Economics
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, N.C. 27695
dan_phaneuf@ncsu.edu

V. Kerry Smith
Department of Economics
W.P. Carey School of Business
P.O. Box 873806
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85287-3806
and NBER
kerry.smith@asu.edu

Short Run Constraints and the Increasing Marginal Value of Time in Recreation

1.

Introduction
Time may well be the ultimate scarce resource for many people in contemporary society.

Choices about time allocation can signal consumer preferences about the balance between
market and non-market activities. While these choices are made continually throughout each
day, they are nonetheless undertaken within a defined set of constraints. Some are imposed by
nature, such as the hours of daylight. Others are imposed by institutional conventions such as the
distinction between weekdays and weekend days. Still others are the result of commitments
made in earlier time intervals that constrain future patterns of time use. Some of these decisions
have long-term consequences, such as labor market choices and retirement planning. Others are
mundane and easy to adjust. These can include a multitude of everyday activities, such as
running errands or taking a walk in a park. Since decisions about time allocation are made in
different contexts and with different constraints, the marginal value of time to an individual may
vary depending on prior commitments, context and the needs of the specific time use. Estimates
of the value of time are especially important in understanding recreation demand.
Early work in recreation modeling has largely relied on established labor market models
for estimating the shadow value of time. This pattern is also true for other sub-fields in
economics where time allocation questions arise. The relationships between the opportunity cost
of time and labor market choices have been assumed to apply equally well to long-term decisions
about jobs and to short-run choices such as allocating time for a short recreation trip. While it
stands to reason that these types of decisions involve substantially different choice margins, little
conceptual or empirical research exists that differentiates the alternative time frames and
analyzes their consequences for the shadow value of time. This paper presents a new approach

1

for time valuation.
We propose and illustrate a new strategy for combining stated and revealed preference
data to estimate how the value of time for short term decisions can be different from the shadow
values implicit in long term labor market choices. The model and empirical results show that the
short run value of time varies with the size of the block of time involved. By contrast, most
empirical research on time has assumed time is fungible. Our starting point is that time, unlike
many other resource endowments, is not perfectly fungible. The way total time is divided affects
how it can be used. For example, one four-hour period of time allows different consumption
possibilities than four one-hour periods. This notion of the imperfect divisibility of time,
particularly over a short planning horizon, is central to our analysis. We highlight the fact that
discretionary time is usually available in non-contiguous blocks of time, and it is not possible to
move time freely between blocks. People do a variety of activities in these non-work blocks of
time. Some activities can be broken-up into parts and partially reallocated between time periods.
This type of decomposition may, however, entail greater costs. Other activities require
contiguous blocks of time. Recreation is an activity that falls primarily in the latter category.
The travel costs of outdoor recreation introduce indivisibility in time allocations. That is, it
would be costly to replace a day-long recreation trip to a site with several shorter trips to the
same site, and would likely involve different activities even if the total time used were the same.
Finding a block of time for recreation in one period may require shifting competing
activities to other periods. Some of these activities may be necessary but not especially
enjoyable, such as cleaning the house or tending the yard. It is likely that there is diminishing
marginal productivity of time in these alternative activities in a given block of time, perhaps due
to other fixed inputs or fatigue. This relationship implies that completing household tasks in one

2

period in order to free another period for recreation would result in an increasing marginal
opportunity cost of the time made available for recreation, as a greater amount of time is shifted.
Our conceptual model accounts for the imperfect divisibility of time. The assumption of
different choice margins for time allocation is used in a two-step estimation strategy to measure
the shadow values of different sized blocks of leisure time. We designed and conducted a new
survey of homeowners in Wake County, North Carolina to test our framework. Our findings
indicate the marginal value of time can increase by several percentage points for each additional
hour included in the time block.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a short overview
of previous research on the value of time and describes the strategic role that different choice
margins play in each approach. Our theoretical model is developed in Section 3. In the model,
an individual’s time allocation decisions over sequentially unfolding short horizons are
conditional on long term decisions such as employment. The short term decisions allocate
blocks of time to recreation and “household maintenance”. To obtain longer blocks of time for
recreation, maintenance activities must be reallocated over time, and so the marginal value of
time increases with the length of the block of recreation time. Because this conceptual model
examines time use decisions over many short time periods, an empirical version would require
panel data on household time use that is generally not available at reasonable cost. In Section 4
we therefore modify the model to enable a tractable empirical strategy that still addresses the
central issue, which is the relative importance of time commitments in addition to employment in
determining the opportunity cost of time. We investigate whether the time required for
household activities is a commitment that can be displaced or broken up in some time periods to
allow the accumulation of time for other tasks. This response is another margin of adjustment

3

that is intermediate to changes in work commitments, and therefore may better reflect the short
run value of time. The model requires data on representative individual time allocations as well
as our stated preference question on substitutes for personal time in household chores. Section 5
describes the survey used to collect our data, while section 6 discusses the implementation and
results. The last section discusses some general implications of the model and a summary of our
overall findings.
2.

Previous research
Numerous studies have questioned the use of the wage rate as the relevant opportunity

cost of time, yet the profession seems far from a consensus on an alternative basis for estimating
how individual circumstances and different types of decisions condition the relevant opportunity
cost. In dealing with time, the existing literature has considered models that vary along three
dimensions. The first involves if and how time enters preferences. The second considers how
time budgets constrain choices, and how multiple money and time constraints are specified. The
last describes how time ‘prices’ are associated with the consumption of final goods and services
that contribute to well being.
Classic papers by Becker [1965], Johnson [1966], and De Serpa [1971] began the
consideration of the allocation and value of time. They showed that the value of time need not
be equal to the wage rate. While the earliest studies of the value of time were transportation
related, the importance of the issue for recreation demand was also recognized in an early paper
by Cesario [1976], which cites the transportation research in proposing a one-third the wage rate
rule for valuing travel time. Shortly thereafter McConnell and Strand [1981] included mileagerelated travel costs and travel-time costs (measured using the wage rate) as separate arguments in
a travel cost demand model to test the Cesario approximation. This strategy could also be

4

interpreted as a test of the Becker [1965] full price logic in costing trips to recreation sites. Their
results suggest that an individual is unable to perfectly exchange time units.1
In another important paper Bockstael, Strand, and Hanemann [1987] model recreation
decisions conditional on whether individuals face limits on their ability to re-allocate time. In
their case, time enters preferences as leisure. Recovering estimates of the opportunity cost of
time requires understanding how agent’s constraints condition what can be learned from
observed time use. People differ in their work time environment. Those working full time may
not be able to freely adjust work hours, and so we do not observe their opportunity cost of time
through the wage rate. In cases where adjustment is possible, the rate of compensation maybe an
overtime wage that can differ from the regular wage. These insights suggest the most effective
way to account for differences in the shadow value of time is to classify individuals into flexible
versus inflexible in their time allocation decisions. Thus, the Bockstael, Strand, and Hanemann
logic for describing time allocation follows conventional labor economics and implies a
piecewise linear budget constraint. Importantly, we learn very little about the value of time for
individuals without flexible work hours. By contrast, the choices of flexible individuals do
reveal an opportunity cost for time as their wage, while those with second jobs reveal an excess
demand for work and a reservation value for leisure less than the wage on their primary job.
This implies there are important limitations in our ability to use labor market choices to
measure shadow values of time. The only opportunity to use revealed preference information to
recover measures for the value of time with traditional full time workers is through their
decisions to change jobs. Using revealed and stated preference data Feather and Shaw [1999]
illustrate one way to address this issue. Their approach adapts Heckman’s [1974] labor supply
model to recover some information about shadow values of time for individuals who are unable

5

to adjust their work time. They use a simple stated preference question paralleling Heckman’s
strategy for recovering the shadow values of time for constrained individuals. They offer
respondents the opportunity to relax their labor market constraints. People were told they could
increase working time and receive additional earnings or they could decrease work with a
corresponding reductions in earnings, each at a constant wage rate corresponding to their hourly
rate. Survey respondents’ answers determine whether a non-flexible individual’s existing wage
is an upper or lower bound on their reservation wage. By combining flexible and non-flexible
individuals Feather and Shaw identify a reservation wage equation for all labor market types. In
short, their framework reveals the long run shadow value of time based on a set of stated
opportunities to renegotiate employment conditions.
Larson and Shaikh [2001] and Shaikh and Larson [2003] extended the two-constraint
model in several directions. The value of time is reflected in the relative scarcity of time versus
money in the task of maximizing utility. Each person has a unique opportunity cost of time that
is the same regardless of how it is used. All time is fungible and interchangeable, but its shadow
value need not equal the wage. In the most recent application of this two constraint model, Lew
and Larson [2005] demonstrate how a joint framework linking the Feather-Shaw strategy to
Larson and Shaikh model can control for unobserved heterogeneity in a mixed logit model for
recreation site choice. However, their framework requires that the shadow value of time be
invariant to the timing of the decision. Although the shadow value varies with individual
characteristics, it is constant for choices based on daily, weekly, and annual time budgets.
Several lessons emerge from the literature to date. While early conceptual research
highlighted the different margins at which time allocations are made, empirical models were not
able to incorporate them into the measurement of the implied values for time. What appears to

6

be missing is recognition that some time allocation choices create cascading commitments on
both the amounts and the margins for decisions in later time choices. For example, job decisions
limit the discretion in labor-leisure choices. Depending on the job they can involve quasi-fixed
commitments to work at specific times for specific periods of time. It seems reasonable to
assume these types of choices reflect a longer run time horizon and are taken as given when an
individual plans weekly leisure activities. They are also likely to be considered fixed in planning
day trips or longer recreation outings. This hierarchical decision structure is an alternative to the
model in Lew and Larson, which jointly estimates the job choice decision and the beach trip
decision. In contrast, our model recognizes that people attempt to make commitments to jobs
that will be consistent with what they anticipate will be their subsequent short term time needs.
Models for short run choices should consider time’s role both as a constraint on choice and as an
input in the production of utility-generating services. The framework used to estimate the
opportunity cost of time should reflect the relative scarcity of time and money in the planning
horizon that is relevant to the choices under analysis.
3.

Conceptual Model
Our model of individual behavior assumes decisions take place over different time

horizons. This formulation allows us to explore time-related insights without reliance on a less
tractable dynamic model.2 We begin by noting that different types of commitments are made by
individuals. Each of these can limit the discretionary uses available to the time remaining. The
largest commitments stem from employment and residential location decisions, which are not
easily changed and are assumed to be part of long run choices. Other decisions also imply longer
term time commitments. For example, decisions such as owning a house, having children, or
purchasing a pet have implications for a household's time commitments. These choices can

7

require repeated home production tasks such as preparing food, caring for dependents, cleaning
the house, feeding and exercising a pet, and tending the yard. We label this class of activities as
‘household maintenance’. There are two important aspects of these commitments. First, the
amount of time spent on them can vary over short periods largely by displacing the timing of the
activities or delaying some tasks. Nonetheless, the needs motivating the time do not go away
unless the nature of the commitment is changed. So in the longer term displaced time needs to
be made up. Second, the total level of maintenance is determined by the personalities and habits
of the members of each household, so we expect to observe differences in the importance of
these commitments and differential effects on their opportunity costs of time. For short-run
decisions, including day-trip recreation behavior, households take employment, residential
location, and total maintenance over the long term as predetermined.3
Ideally, one would use a panel of choices over time to learn, through adjustments in these
commitments, the full dimensions of each individual’s opportunity costs of time. A necessary
condition for this type of analysis is the ability to observe people’s responses to temporally
delineated constraint sets through unique diary-type datasets. Our strategy mimics but avoids
this fully detailed description by using a set of real and hypothetical choices, together with the
envelope conditions they imply, to recover the shadow values for different types of time
adjustments.
We begin our model by assuming that short-run decisions unfold over J weeks. Each
week offers the same discretionary time (which can be allocated to leisure activities and
maintenance) as any other week. Let T j represent the total amount of non-work (and non-sleep)
time that is available in week j. This time is used for household maintenance and short term
leisure activities such as recreation activities. We denote the output of maintenance in week j by

8

M j, and assume that Mj is strictly positive. The individual produces maintenance in week j using
own time denoted t mj and purchased inputs. The maintenance production function is defined by

M j (t mj ), where purchased inputs are suppressed for notational convenience. The marginal
product of own time is assumed to be positive but exhibits diminishing returns. While
maintenance is defined for each week, we also assume it is possible to shift maintenance
activities between weeks.4 This shifting is a key element in isolating the short-term, intertemporal substitution that identifies how people tradeoff non-work time uses. Total maintenance,
M, is the sum of maintenance in the various weeks and is predetermined. In the absence of other
considerations, if the weekly maintenance functions were the same, each individual would spend
equal amounts of time each week to minimize the total time costs of reaching the fixed level of
total maintenance.5 To the extent the functions differ by week, time would be allocated to
equalize implied marginal costs of producing the required level of total maintenance. Other uses
of non-work time, however, imply the allocation is more complex.
In our model, the alternative use of non-work time is local recreation, R j. Recreation is
produced using time spent in the activity and complementary purchased goods, such as out-ofpocket travel costs. Again suppressing these other inputs for notational convenience we denote
the recreation production function for week j by R j (t rj ) where trj ≥ 0 , so that recreation can be
zero in a given week. The marginal product of time for recreation is positive, and the marginal
productivity of time in recreation is increasing over the relevant range. Though asserted rather
than tested, the local convexity of Rj(·) seems reasonable. As a larger block of time becomes
available constraints on activity choices are relaxed (longer-commitment activities become
possible), thereby expanding the utility-generating options inherent in the block. Thus our

9

maintained assumption is that larger blocks of recreation time are more useful in producing
recreation.
The individual gets satisfaction from allocating time to the leisure activity (recreation)
and from purchased goods. Purchased goods are denoted by x, where price has been normalized
to one, and income for the period is y. The individual allocates non-work time and income to
maximize utility subject to income and time constraints as well as to the maintenance
requirement. Formally the individual solves the constrained maximization problem
max U ( R1 (tr1 ),..., R J (trJ ), x )

tmj ,trj ∀j

s.t. T j = tmj + trj ∀j ,

y = x, M = ∑ M j (tmj ).

(1)

j

This model combines elements from several earlier treatments of time. Time can make different
contributions to utility through the various R’s. There could also be contributions from both
work and maintenance time allocations. These are not explicitly entered in this definition of the
choice problem because both are assumed to be pre-determined as part of long-run decisions.
Inverting the J time constraints and substituting them into the maintenance function reduces the
J+2-constraint problem to a more familiar two-constraint case with maintenance serving a role
comparable to the time constraint:
M = ∑ M j (T j − t rj ).

(2)

j

Maximizing utility subject to (2) and the income constraint leads to solutions for the
optimal time allocation and the indirect utility function V(y,T1,…,TJ,M). With λ and μ, the
Lagrangian multipliers for money and maintenance, respectively, the Envelope Theorem implies
Vy = λ and VM = μ. More importantly we also have:
VT j = μ

∂M j
∂M j
μ
.
=
∂T j
∂t mj

10

The marginal utility of time depends on the marginal product of time in maintenance. As a
result, the marginal opportunity cost of time in time period j, ρj, can be defined in terms of this
household production activity.
VT j

μ ∂M j
.
ρ =
=
V y λ ∂t mj
j

(3)

Maintenance’s role as a recurring activity offers repeated time allocations, which provide
opportunities for short term adjustments. Properties of the maintenance activity imply, for given
values of μ and λ, the marginal value of time is larger when the marginal product of time in
maintenance is larger.6 If little time is spent on maintenance, the marginal productivity of
maintenance effort is high, and the opportunity cost of spending that time in leisure activities is
also high. As a consequence, the shadow value of different blocks of recreation time will depend
on their size (i.e., the amount of time that must be assembled). Total and marginal utility from
recreation are dependent on the amount of time available to produce the experience. It may be
optimal to reallocate maintenance across periods to assure that more time is available for longer
recreation trips. For a given individual these choices can result in differing marginal values of
time for trips of different lengths. The challenge is designing an empirical strategy to measure
these different values. This task is especially problematic when one considers the challenges in
collecting data on people’s time allocations (see Kahneman, et al [2004] for discussion of some
aspects of this issue). In the next section we describe simplifications to our model that are
needed to test the framework with data collected from a single cross sectional sample.
4.

Empirical Strategy

The model in the last section is based on choices within individual weeks. We recognize
that the time spent in both recreation and maintenance can vary by week. In the absence of a
panel with detailed records on time use patterns across individuals, we structured hypothetical
11

choices along with the specification of the production function for household maintenance to
learn how the opportunities to adjust some aspects of one’s commitments influence time
tradeoffs. An individual’s marginal value of time for recreation in a given week will vary
depending on the time she spends in recreation. In addition, her marginal product of
maintenance depends on the time she spends on maintenance that week. Because of the overall
time constraint for recreation and maintenance time, the two decisions are linked. If we can
estimate the household production function for maintenance, we can use the results to derive
estimates of the value of time. Our strategy uses data on the household’s maintenance and other
activities for a “typical” week, and the household’s response to a stated preference question
providing a market opportunity to purchase maintenance services. The question offers an option
to purchase (at a fixed hourly price ws) regularly scheduled hours of weekly services that can be
used for maintenance (i.e., lawn services, cleaning services, and a variety of other time saving
market services).
For the empirical model we assume an individual’s utility for a representative week is
given by U ( x, H ; M ) where M is average time per week devoted to maintenance and is
predetermined.7 H represents leisure of all types including recreation. Let the individual’s labor
devoted to household maintenance production be L and purchased hours of maintenance service
labor be LS.8 We define f (L) to be the contribution to total maintenance from own labor, where
f ′ (L)>0 and f''(L)<0, and we normalize the units for maintenance so that one hour of
professional service provides one unit of maintenance. Maintenance is therefore the total of own
and purchased production, given by
M = f ( L) + LS .

12

(4)

Utility is maximized subject the budget constraint y = x + wsLS, (where x is the numeraire and ws
is the price per hour of purchased maintenance) and time constraint T = H + L. Substituting the
time constraint and the maintenance function in (4) into the budget constraint yields
y = x + ws [ M − f (T − H )] .

(5)

There are two types of solutions to this utility maximization problem. The first involves
individuals who purchase a positive amount of service at the offer price, resulting in an interior
solution. In this case, the value of time in a typical week with the option of purchased
maintenance services, ρs, is

ρs =

UH
= ws f ' (T − H ). 9
Ux

(6)

In the second case we have individuals who choose not to purchase service at the offered price.
As a result, it is not possible to collapse the maintenance and time constraints into the budget
constraint. The value of time for these individuals is determined by a corner solution in the
purchased service market:

ρs =

UH μ
= f ' (T − H ) < ws f ' (T − H ),
Ux λ

(7)

where μ is the Lagrange multiplier for the maintenance constraint.
Estimating equations can be derived from (6) and (7). Using censored regression and a
specification for f we can estimate a transformation of the weak inequality

ρs
ws

≤ f ' ( L), 10

(8)

where L is the amount of own maintenance labor when the service is available at a price ws and

ρ s is the mean value of time, which is determined in the long run. We use the Feather and Shaw
(1999) approach, discussed in section 2, to estimate the long run work/leisure tradeoff. The

13

responses to our actual and hypothetical behavior survey questions allow equation (8) to be
estimated. Our description of the hypothetical service is presented in the next section.
Once the marginal product function has been estimated it is possible to calculate the
value of the marginal product for each individual’s own maintenance labor in the absence of the
hypothetical purchased personal service. This is the marginal product evaluated at the observed
allocation of personal labor to maintenance in the baseline, designated here as L*. With the
baseline marginal product and the long term value of the shadow wage ρ s it is possible to
calculate μ/λ, the marginal value of maintenance as:

μ
ρs
=
.
λ f '( L* )

(9)

Since decisions about work time and overall maintenance levels are determined in the
long run, the marginal utilities of income and of maintenance are constant over the short time
period that is the focus of this analysis. Thus, the primary influence on the short run value of
time from equation (3) will be due to time allocated to maintenance in a particular week. If a
person wants to enjoy additional recreation during the week, he needs to adjust his time
allocation accordingly. The resulting reduction in maintenance activities has an increasing
marginal opportunity cost, in that progressively more productive hours of maintenance are given
up to produce additional recreation. The forgone maintenance is made up in other time periods,
but with reduced productivity, due to the diminishing marginal product of time in maintenance.
With estimates for the marginal product of maintenance as well as the long-horizon shadow
wage, our model allows estimation of the time cost of varying recreation time allocations. The
details of this procedure are given in Section 6.

14

5.

Data

The data used here were collected as part of a larger effort that sought to integrate
residential housing sales information, survey data on homeowners’ recreational activities, and
their household characteristics, within a spatially delineated framework that allows inclusion of
detailed information on the quality of the recreation sites. The focus of this analysis is on the
components of the survey that requested information on household time allocation decisions.
Between May and September 2003 a mail survey was sent to a sample of homeowners in Wake
County, North Carolina, USA. The target population was homeowners who had purchased their
homes between 1992 and 2001. A random sample of 9,000 of these households, stratified by
geographical location, was drawn from this population. To verify that the survey would be sent
to the owner (and resident) of the house, the addresses listed for tax purposes were cross checked
with names and addresses of the individuals purchasing each house. The sample was limited to
cases where the addresses of the housing unit and the individual receiving the tax bill matched.
7,554 surveys reached valid addresses where it would be possible to receive a response.11 The
Dillman (1978) method for mailed surveys was followed with two mailings and a reminder
postcard. Returned surveys amounted to 31.7 percent of the mailings to correct addresses. After
screening for missing and implausible values, there were 1,719 useable responses for this
analysis.12 The sample for this analysis is less than the number of returned valid questionnaires
due to item non-response.
Our response rate is at the lower end of what conventionally has been considered
desirable based on experience in the nineties. However, recent research on the topic suggests
that low response rates alone do not signal non-response bias. For example, Holbrook, Krosnick,
and Pfent (2005) conclude their detailed evaluation of 100 random digit dialed telephone studies

15

over a 10 year period noting that “…lower response rates seem not to substantially decrease
demographic representativeness within the range we examined” (p.38).13 Our comparison with
Census information suggests our survey is consistent with their findings. To confirm this, we
also estimated a selection model. The results are virtually identical to those from the estimation
described here. The coefficient of the inverse Mills ratio is not significant at the 5% level and
the coefficients of each of the variables are not different between the two equations. There is
also no economically significant difference in the resulting marginal values of time. Since nonresponse bias appears to make no significant difference, we have not included the adjustment for
it here.14
Two aspects of the questionnaire are directly relevant to our model. First, we solicited
time usage for the respondent and spouse (if any) for fifteen activities including primary and
secondary employment, commuting, and a wide variety of non-work activities. The survey also
includes questions about how much paid help the household hired for maintenance services, and
whether they could freely choose how much time they allocated to each of the activities. In
addition, we asked about the flexibility they had in their work time. Our survey also asked labor
supply choices using the same question developed by Feather and Shaw (1999).15
Second, each household was asked about a personal assistance service (i.e., the stated
choice question discussed earlier) that offers a substitute for each respondent’s time in household
tasks. After describing the services available and presenting a randomly-assigned16 market price
per hour, we asked if the respondent would purchase the service and, if so, how many hours in a
typical week. The framing of the question implies that it could be used for any of the activities
undertaken by adults in the household. We assume all hours allocated to household maintenance
can be aggregated. The personal assistant question was followed by several regarding how

16

respondents would use any time made available by purchasing the service. The specific question
about the potential purchase is reproduced in the Appendix.17 We also collected information on
the earnings and non-labor income of the household, job characteristics, and a variety of other
socio-economic variables. The variables definitions and descriptive statistics are given in Table
1.
Households’ reports of the time devoted to household activities (e.g. cleaning, cooking,
etc.); yard work/gardening; activities related to your children; and shopping for routine
needs/running errands were assumed to correspond to maintenance. Following the unitary
household assumption the times reported for the respondent and the spouse or partner (if present)
were combined. The amount of time for household maintenance is assumed to be the sum of
times reported in these four categories. Time allocated to maintenance when the hypothetical
personal services are available is estimated by subtracting stated time purchases from the
baseline measure of their time allocated to maintenance.18
6.

Empirical implementation and results

Our estimation of the short-run value of time function for households requires estimates
of the long-run shadow wage. The Feather and Shaw (1999) framework assumes the market and
shadow wages are equal for respondents with flexible work schedules. For unemployed, underemployed, and over-employed people the relationship between the shadow and market wages is
an inequality. The model begins with specifications for the shadow and market wage equations

ρis = Ω1 F1i + α hi + ε i
w = Ω 2 F2i + ui ,

(10)

where ρis and wi are person i's shadow and market wages, respectively, F1i and F2i are sets of
exogenous variables, hi is hours of work, (Ω1,Ω2,α) are parameters, and εi and ui are error terms.

17

The form of the estimating equation for each person in the sample depends on their responses to
the question about adjusting their hours. For flexible workers the relationship wi = ρis holds,
while we have wi ≤ ρis and wi ≥ ρis for under- and over-employed people, respectively. For
unemployed people wi ≤ ρis also holds, where in all cases ρis is evaluated at the observed level
of hi. If we assume the errors are jointly normal, these inequalities can be used to bound the
support of error values that are consistent with observed outcomes, and maximum likelihood can
be used to estimate the parameters of the shadow wage and market wage functions.
Our specifications for these functions follow the original Feather and Shaw application.
The shadow wage function includes a constant and variables for work hours, non-work income,
spouse work hours, and qualitative variables indicating the presence of young children, gender,
and an interaction term between gender and the presence of young children. The market wage
function includes a constant and variables for age, education, and indicators of race and gender.
The parameter estimates are given in Table 2. The estimates are generally consistent with a
priori expectations with most coefficients significant at conventional levels. For the individuals
in our sample, the mean predicted shadow wage is $26.64 and the median is $19.61 (in 2003
dollars).
Estimation of the marginal product of maintenance requires specification of the personal
maintenance production function. We expect that this function would vary by individual and
exhibit diminishing marginal product. We focused on two specifications for this function, a log
form and a quadratic form. The results were quite comparable. Since the quadratic form
introduces more flexibility, those results are presented here.19
The simple quadratic household production is
f ( L) = aL2 + bL.

18

(11)

This form allows testing for diminishing MP. A vector z including any observable
individual/family characteristics that might influence productivity can be included in this
equation. Inverting the marginal product function implied by equation (11) and using the
equality form of the first order condition given in equation (8) (recalling that ρs is the shadow
wage and ws is price of personal services), the estimating equation is then.
⎛ ρs ⎞
L = β 0 + z β z + β1 ⎜ ⎟ + ε .
⎝ ws ⎠

(12)

Algebraic transformations allow the structural parameters of the marginal product for time in
maintenance to be recovered from the estimated coefficients. That is: β1=1/(2a) and β0 + zβz
=−b/(2a), or a=1/(2β1) and b=−2a(β0 + zβz). Thus, the prediction would be β0>0 and β1<0.
With this functional form it is possible to have estimates for the β’s that imply the marginal
product is not positive even for parameters with the theoretically predicted signs. A positive
marginal product would be consistent with a rational time allocation in our model. Thus, this
feature offers an indirect empirical test for the framework.
The dependent variable is the number of hours devoted to household maintenance. We
use maximum likelihood assuming a censored normal distribution for the error. The estimates
are presented in of Table 3. Column two reports a parsimonious specification that includes
relative price and a constant. Even in this specification, the marginal product is positive in the
range of the data and diminishing as expected. Our two step estimation strategy uses an estimate
of the conditional expectation for ρS in the numerator of the ratio of shadow value to service
price. As a result, the estimated model is expected to have a non-spherical error. To take
account of this issue, all of our tests use Huber’s (1967) robust covariance matrix for the
estimated model parameters.

19

We hypothesize that the characteristics of households also play an important role in
explaining the differences in behavior with respect to maintenance. Column three of Table 3
provides the results for a more complete specification. There are a number of factors that play a
significant role in the maintenance decisions. Households with higher labor income and thus
probable higher opportunity costs of time do less own maintenance. Households where a
“significant other,” typically a spouse, is present do more own maintenance production. Recall
that maintenance is the sum of both members’ home production, so this does not represent any
substitution within the household but rather a difference by household type. The number of
family members in the house also increases maintenance. There is some support for the logic
associated with our unitary household model in that the sex of the respondent was not a
significant variable in this or other specifications and was not included. Similarly, race was
never significant and was omitted. Age is not significant here but was included since it
displayed some explanatory power in other specifications.
The difference in the number of hours worked by the respondent compared to his or her
spouse is also hypothesized to influence reported own maintenance. Our formulation of this
effect codes this variable in qualitative terms with one indicating that the respondent works at
least ten hours more per week than the spouse, a zero if there is less than a ten hour difference
between the work weeks for the couple, and a negative one if the respondent works at least ten
hours less than the spouse. This variable was included to control for any differences in
perceptions depending on the relative workforce participation of the respondent compared to the
spouse in the household.20 It is not significant in column three but is in the more complete
specification in column four. This pattern is repeated with the work flexibility variable.

20

The fourth column in the table reports the last and most complete specification of the
model. The first of the additional variables uses the number of non-work hours calculated in two
ways. The first uses the number of hours in a week and subtracts the number of hours that
respondents reported they devoted to all employment plus the time spent commuting plus an
allowance for time spent sleeping. We expect the respondent to be quite accurate in reporting
work and commute time. As a result, this measure probably represents a fairly accurate measure
of non-work time. The second strategy simply uses the total of all the time reported for nonwork activities. The difference in the two measures captures the accuracy and completeness of
the respondent’s accounting for non-work time.21 As expected, if the accounting for non-work
activities in general was higher, the reported time spent on maintenance was also higher.
The other two variables included in this full specification are based on the responses to
the question about what survey respondents would do with the new time made available by
employing the hypothetical personal services. The variables are dichotomous variables for those
who said they would work longer hours and for those that said they would devote the time to
housework. The omitted category was for those who would use the time for leisure activities.
The individuals who would take more leisure tended to report more time spent on maintenance.
Finally, the time flexibility measure is positive and significant, whereas in the previous
specification it was not significant. Households where there was flexibility in shifting the work
schedule devote more time to household maintenance. Diminishing marginal product in
household maintenance is more of an issue if work hours cannot be shifted, so this is a plausible
result.
This last specification of the quadratic model is our preferred model and is used in
calculating the value of different blocks of time. In estimating the household’s maintenance

21

services production function, we used the exogenous price of purchased services that was given
in the stated preference question. However, the individual’s actual value of time is based on her
actual choices. Therefore, to calculate the value of time using equation (6), we use the marginal
product of own labor computed at the actual level of household services, rather than the level if
the purchased services were available. If maintenance is then shifted to allow for recreation, it
increases the marginal product of maintenance and raises the marginal cost of time for
recreation. By this logic different marginal values of time can be calculated for different length
trips.
Specifically, from equations (3) and (9) we can express the short run marginal value of
recreation time (MVT) as
MVT (t ) =

ρs
f ′( L )
*

× f ′( L* − t ),

(13)

where L* is the actual amount of maintenance expected per week, t is the amount of maintenance
time displaced by recreation, and estimates of the parameters in f(·) come from Table (3). Note
that MVT(t) is increasing in t due to the diminishing marginal product of time in maintenance.
Equation (13) shows that a given individual’s value of time will be influenced by her long run
shadow wage and by her individual characteristics, since the maintenance production function
includes these variables. This means that for a given length trip, there is a distribution of
marginal values of time between the individuals in the sample. Table 4 provides the sample
quantiles of the distribution of the predicted marginal value of time for blocks of recreation time
that displace 2, 4, 6, and 8 maintenance hours, as well as the long-run shadow value of time of
these individuals. The marginal value of time increases as the proposed blocks of recreation time
become longer.

22

Our framework has several important implications for recreation research. First, the
opportunity cost of time spent in travel and on site is arguably the largest component of the costs
of local and day recreation trips. To provide a sense of the potential importance of the treatment
of these costs Table 5 presents summaries for the total opportunity cost of time measured using
four different time valuing strategies for trips of varying lengths. We report the sample mean of
the baseline marginal value of time and the sample mean total value of time for 2, 4, 6, and 8
hour combinations of travel and onsite time. For the one-third the wage rate, wage rate, and
Feather and Shaw strategies the marginal value of time is constant, and so the total time values
are simple products of the opportunity cost estimate and the time involved. For our approach the
marginal value is not constant, so we obtain the total value of the block of time by integrating
MVT(t) in equation (13) from zero to the trip length t, where t=2,4,6,8 in the table. The results
using the wage rate or one-third the wage rate are quite different from the results using our
measure, as might be expected. We focus our comments on the differences between our model
and the Feather and Shaw model, since the two provide identical baseline marginal values. For
short trips the differences in the total time costs of the trip are relatively small. However when a
four hour block of time is accumulated, the total value increases by nearly five percent. This
climbs to nearly ten percent for eight hour trips.
Second, the framework implies that when the marginal value of time does change
appreciably with the amount of time, conventional demand (and random utility specifications for
choice models) will need to be revised to incorporate the full implications of nonlinear budget
constraints for the choice process. Ideally a fully integrated model would link recreation choices
with the adjustments considered in altering time constraints as implied by the envelope
conditions we used to develop or estimates. Short of such a complete framework our estimates

23

suggest it may be desirable to adapt the methods used for measuring benefits of changes in
access conditions or the quality of local recreation sites using an extension to the framework
proposed by Reiss and White [2006]. Finally, our analysis reinforces the need for micro models
of individual behavior to deal more explicitly with individual heterogeneity in constraints and
preferences.
7.

Conclusion

People’s choices about their time allocations take place on a variety of margins and
timeframes. They are made sequentially with some choices constraining others that come later
(at least until the consequences are important enough to warrant incurring the costs of revision).
This recursive structure has been implicitly discussed in the environmental economics literature,
but its implications have not been fully utilized. In this paper we have shown that it is possible
to use the different margins on which time allocations occur to estimate a shadow value of time
that is partially decoupled from the labor market, and is appropriate for short run choices. In
doing so we have shown how non-work choices can convey information on the value of time.
Many recreation activities require blocks of time, and the value of time for these activities may
differ depending on the size of the block. This is because constraints on how time can be
assembled are imposed by its imperfect transferability, and choices must be made if a larger time
block is desired. Our strategy for valuing time for recreation has used information from revealed
and stated preferences together with a recognition that decisions represented in each of these
sources of choice information may well be made in quite different time frames. The results
indicate that the marginal value of time can be increasing as the size of the block time increases.
This finding has implications for valuing different types of recreation experiences. For
example, small blocks of time are adequate for a visit to a local park, while larger blocks are

24

necessary for trips to a regional park. For a given individual the marginal value of time devoted
to the latter trip will be higher. Similarly, these findings also have implications for assigning the
values of time to visitors living different distances from a site. The greater the distance, the
greater is the time commitment, and the higher is the relative value of time.
Our research has focused primarily on developing methods for valuing time used in local
recreation outings for non-market valuation purposes. It is worth noting, however, that our
approach has applicability for a wide range of extra-market valuation problems. In particular
there has been recent discussion of methods needed for augmenting the national income and
product accounts to reflect non-market activities (see Nordhaus [2006] and Frazis and Stewart
[2007]) as well as attention to non-work time allocation in general. For any research involving
non-work time allocation at least two definitional challenges must be met and made operational.
The first concerns defining the utility-generating non-market outputs that time contributes to, and
the second concerns defining and measuring a ‘price’ for these outputs. Landefeld and McCulla
[2000] address the definition of outputs, describing the so-called third person test. In this case
the household produced outputs are defined based on the potential substitutes available in the
market. Our maintenance function is an operational example of this strategy in that we define
the commodity in terms of its purchased substitute. Importantly, it also highlights the critical
role of the time horizon in defining the non-market output. This is a point that has received less
attention in the general time allocation literature, but is closely related to the second definitional
challenge. Frazis and Stewart [2007] describe two ways to price household produced outputs:
using the market wage of the household member, and valuing the output by its market
replacement cost. Dissatisfaction with the former has been expressed for many of the reasons
long cited in the environmental economics literature, yet as an alternative it seems that the latter

25

ignores the crucial issue of the individual’s opportunity cost of time.22 What is missing is the
recognition that the frequency and timing of the non-market activities matter, and that short run
time constraints and the production technology imply a shadow value of time (and hence
opportunity cost of the non-market output) that need not be equal to the wage rate. Our research
shows how a strategic stated preference question might be used to define the non-market
commodity, partially understand its production technology, and assess its shadow value. We
also demonstrate the importance of including questions in time use surveys that acquire
information about the decisions on how much home production to undertake as a means of
gauging short run time constraints and values.
Finally, our empirical application highlights a new role for stated choice questions. Most
applications in environmental economics have focused on new choices, offering individuals the
opportunity to decide about an amenity that has previously been outside the domain of their
choice set (or one where it was difficult to make large changes). In addition, many previous
efforts at joint estimation were designed to use revealed preference data to calibrate stated
preference responses. Our model relies on an integrated strategy in which the stated preference
model offers a different type of choice margin that may serve to relax time constraints for some
individuals. This new information can be combined with data on actual time allocation decisions
to recover a better description of how differential time constraints among individuals influence
the choices they make involving the mixes of goods and time consumed.

26

References

Becker, Gary S. [1965]: “A Theory of the Allocation of Time,” Economic Journal,
75(September): 493-517.
Bockstael, Nancy, Ivar Strand, and W. Michael Hanemann [1987]: “Time and the Recreational
Demand Model,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 69(2): 293-302.
Cesario, Frank J. [1976]: “Value of Time in Recreation Benefit Studies” Land Economics,
52(February):32-41.
DeSerpa, Alan [1971]: “A Theory of the Economics of Time,” The Economic Journal, 81(324):
828-846.
Dillman, Don R. [1978]: Mail and Telephone Surveys: The Total Design Method, New York:
John Wiley & Sons,
Feather, Peter M., and W. Douglass Shaw [1999]: “Estimating the Cost of Leisure Time for
Recreation Demand Models,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
38(1): 49-65.
Frazis, Harley and Jay Stewart [2007]: “Where Does Time Go? Concepts and measurement in
the American Time Use Survey,” in Hard-to-Measure Goods and Services: Essays in
Memory of Zvi Griliches, edited by E.R. Berndt and C.M. Hulten (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research).
Hall. Robert E. [2009]: “Reconciling Cyclical Movements in the Marginal Value of Time and the
Marginal Product of Labor”, Journal of Political Economy,117(2): 281-323.
Hamermesh, Daniel S. [2005]: “Routine,” in The Economics of Time Use, edited by D.S.
Hamermesh and G.A. Pfann), (Amsterdam, Elsevier).

27

Heckman, James [1974]: “Shadow Prices, Market Wages, and Labor Supply,” Econometrica,
42(4): 679-694.
Holbrook, Allyson L., Jon A Krosnick, and Alison Pfent [2005]: “The Causes and Consequences
of Response Rates in Surveys by the News Media and Government Contract Survey
Research Firms,” discussion paper.
Huber, P.J. [1967]: “The Behavior of Maximum Likelihood Estimates under Non-Standard
Conditions.” in Proceedings of the Fifth Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and
Probability. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Johnson, M. Bruce [1966]: “Travel Time and the Price of Leisure,” Western Economic Journal
4: 135-145.
Kahneman, Daniel, Alan B. Krueger, David A. Schkade, Norbert Schwarz, and Arthur A. Stone
[2004]: “A Survey Method for Characterizing Daily Life Experience: The Day
Reconstruction Method,” Science, 306(December): 1776-1780.
Keeter, Scott, Carolyn Miller, Andrew Kohut, Robert M. Groves, and Stanley Presser (2000):
“Consequences of Reducing Nonresponse in a National Telephone Survey.” Public
Opinion Quarterly. 64, 125-148.
Landefeld, J. Steven and Stephanie H. McCulla [2000]: “Accounting for Non-market Household
Production Within a National Accounts Framework,” Review of Income and Wealth,
46(3): 289-307.
Larson, Douglas M. and Sabina L. Shaikh [2001]: “Empirical Specification Requirements for
Two-Constraint Models of Recreation Choice,” American Journal of Agricultural
Economics, 83(2): 428-440.

28

Lew, Daniel K. and Douglas M. Larson [2005]: “Accounting for Stochastic Shadow Values of
Time in Discrete-choice Recreation Demand Models,” Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management, 50(2): 341-361.
McConnell, Kenneth E. [1999]: “Household Labor Market Choices and the Demand for
Recreation,” Land Economics, 75(3): 466-477.
McConnell, Kenneth E., and Ivar Strand [1981]: “Measuring the Cost of Time in Recreation
Demand Analysis: An Application to Sportfishing,” American Journal of Agricultural
Economics, 63 (Feb):153-156.
Nordhaus, William D. [2006]: “Principles of National Accounting for Non-Market Accounts,” in
A New Architecture for the U.S. National Accounts edited by D.W. Jorgenson, J.S.
Landefeld and W.D. Nordhaus (Chicago: University of Chicago Press for National
Bureau of Economic Research).
Reiss, Peter C. and Matthew W. White [2006]: “Evaluating Welfare with Nonlinear Prices,”
NBER Working Paper No. 12370, July.
Shaikh, Sabina L., and Douglas M. Larson [2003]: “A Two-Constraint Almost Ideal Demand
Model of Recreation and Donations,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(4):
953-961.
Smith, V. Kerry, William Desvousges, and Matthew McGivney [1983]: “The Opportunity Cost
of Travel Time in Recreation Demand Models,” Land Economics, 59(August): 259-278.

29

Table 1: Variable Definitions and Summary Statistics

a

Variable Definition

Mean

Std. Dev.a

Hours of household maintenance

42.40

29.83

Personal services price

21.26

16.01

Respondent’s labor income

65,346 50,477

Spouse, etc. in household

0.866

-

Number of family members in house

2.97

1.36

Age

44.46

9.84

Work distribution in household

0.18

-

Flexibility in work hours

0.12

-

Accuracy and completeness of response -69.49

52.01

Choose more paid work

0.04

-

Choose more housework

0.20

-

Work hours

31.39

21.33

Non-work income

43,780 52,706

Spouse hours

24.88

22.92

Kids<6

0.444

0.793

Male

0.47

-

Black/Hispanic

0.07

-

Education

6.32

1.70

Wage (2003 dollars)

38.05

78.67

Shadow wage (2003 dollars)

26.65

33.50

Standard deviation not given for discrete variables

30

Table 2: Shadow Wage Estimationa
Shadow wage variables
Constant
Work hours
Non-work income
Spouse hours
Kids<6
Kids<6×male
Male
Market wage variables
Constant
Male
Black/Hispanic
Age
Education
Error variance
Std. dev. Shadow wage
Std. dev. Market wage
Correlationb
a

Estimate
0.4209
0.0661
0.0455
-0.0097
0.7184
-0.7553
-0.0799

t-statistic
1.55
7.293
4.71
-4.472
6.668
-5.63
-0.492

4.1693
0.6765
-0.5793
0.318
0.0749

12.964
4.532
-7.049
2.178
2.87

2.5543
3.2322
1.7867

39.176
39.085
4.857

Dependent variable is the natural log of the wage rate
correlation is ρ=exp(δ)/1+exp(δ) where δ is estimated

b

31

Table 3: Maintenance Function Estimation
Variable
Constant
Shadow wage/ personal services
price

Quadratic Model
Estimated coefficient
(Robust z-statistic)
115.42
59.76
60.24
(32.20)
(6.05)
(8.19)
-2.29
(-4.24)

-2.11
(-4.49)

-2.50
(-7.51)

Respondent’s labor income

-1x10-4
(-4.66)

-1.4x10-4
(-5.73)

Spouse, etc. in household

27.11
(4.86)

41.30
(8.68)

Number of family members in
house

12.49
(8.32)

10.13
(8.77)

Age

-0.153
(-0.82)

.056
(0.38)

Work distribution in household

2.81
(1.00)

4.98
(2.31)

Flexibility in work hours

8.50
(1.41)

12.37
(2.61)

Completeness of response

0.37
(14.68)

Choose more paid work

-31.68
(-6.18)

Choose more housework

-43.49
(-11.49)

Sigma
Log Likelihood
# of obs.
# uncensored

55.24

44.97

33.97

-2104.82
1907
310

-1836.23
1719
282

-1718.66
1719
282

32

Table 4: Sample Quantiles of Marginal Value of Time for Trips of Different Lengths
(2003 dollars per hour)
Quantile
10%
25%
50%
75%
90%

Baseline
1.65
5.70
19.61
31.89
57.64

2-hour trip
1.74
5.94
20.14
33.10
61.19

4-hour trip
1.80
6.10
20.80
34.32
64.20

6-hour trip
1.88
6.17
21.48
35.61
66.58

8-hour trip
1.97
6.39
22.19
37.00
69.05

Table 5: Sample Averages for Total Value of Time for Trips of Different Lengths
(2003 dollars per hour)

Baseline Marginal
2 Hour Trip
Mean Total
Mean Marginal
4 Hour Trip
Mean Total
Mean Marginal
6 Hour Trip
Mean Total
Mean Marginal
8 Hour Trip
Mean Total
Mean Marginal

One-Third
Wage Rate

Wage Rate

Feather
and Shaw

PPS

12.56

38.05

26.65

26.65

%
Difference:
FS and PPS
0.00

25.11
12.56

76.10
38.05

53.30
26.65

54.51
27.89

2.27
4.65

50.23
12.56

152.20
38.05

106.60
26.65

111.57
29.29

4.66
9.91

75.34
12.56

228.30
38.05

159.90
26.65

171.54
30.71

7.28
15.23

100.45
12.56

304.40
38.05

213.20
26.65

234.37
32.15

9.93
20.64

33

Appendix A: Excerpt from survey
10. Personal Assistance Services
It is becoming more common to see firms that provide personal assistant services starting up. These types of
businesses organize and perform many household tasks such as house cleaning, lawn care, food shopping, and a
wide array of other tasks. Clients typically contract for a specific number of hours per week and specify the
activities employees of the firm are to do. If transportation is needed for the tasks, it is provided by the firm and
included in the number of hours that are purchased. Guarantees are made that the service is safe and reliable. It
is not necessary for clients to be present when the tasks are performed. In spite of the growth in this industry,
little is understood about how much of these services would be used.
If this personal assistance service was $5.501 per hour used, would you purchase any time?
______ yes
______ no
If you answered yes, how much personal service time would you purchase in a typical week? Please check the
relevant box or write in the value. (If no, skip to Part C, “Leisure Outings”).
Hours Purchased In a
Typical Week

Total Weekly Cost

1

$5.50 x 1 = $5.50

2

$5.50 x 2 = $11

3

$5.50 x 3 = $16.50

4

$5.50 x 4 = $22

5

$5.50 x 5 = $27.50

If your purchase would be more than five hours,
please indicate how many:

Please Check the
Relevant Box

□
□
□
□
□
____ hours per week

The hours I would purchase would replace paid services I currently use for some household tasks.

□ yes
□ no
On average, how would you most likely use the time you saved by purchasing this service? (check most
use)

□ Use the time to work additional hours
□ Use the time for activities I enjoy
□ Use the time for other household tasks
1

Prices of $5.50, $8, $10, $20,$30, and $50 were used on different versions of the survey.

34

likely

Notes
1

Smith et al. [1983] also showed, using a related model, that the relationship between the value
of time and the wage rate varied extensively. Larson and Shaikh [2001] suggest that both sets of
results may well yield biased estimates because they failed to include a time budget variable in
the site demand.
2

Completely modeling the dynamic tradeoffs implied by inter-temporal choices might seem
desirable. However, such a framework requires not only a record of the sequencing and duration
of activities, but perhaps more importantly, an understanding of the constraints to the allocation
of time over the course of a day, week, or month. At this time both data and modeling
limitations preclude such a fully dynamic model. The sequential model presented here maintains
the important insights while remaining empirically tractable.
3

Multiple day vacations or recreation trips requiring an overnight stay are not included among
these short run decisions, since their planning horizon is likely to be longer than we are focusing
on in this model.

4

We assume that individuals never choose to completely shift all maintenance from a period
because the high initial marginal productivity of maintenance. This assumption seems to accord
well with actual behavior and guarantees interior solutions.

5

This is consistent with Hamermesh’s (2005) treatment of the role of household
production for the timing of activities:
“Routine (selecting the same time for the same activity and repeating it at the
same time over several periods) is productive, in that it enables the
producer/consumer to mechanize decisions about when and how to engage in
each activity, thus allowing her to produce/consume more of each commodity”
(p.82, parenthetical description inserted).
Hamermesh also discusses the costs of shifting activities between periods to gain variety. His
model suggests that variety contributes to utility, but routine behavior reduces the costs of the
activity.

6

Both Lagrange multipliers are functions of the parameters of the optimization problem.
Holding the parameters constant we can describe the effects of the marginal product function for
a given level of time allocated to maintenance on the opportunity cost of time implied by the
framework.
7

Since total maintenance over the time periods is predetermined as is the number of time
periods, the average per period is predetermined.

35

8

In this empirical model we use L to denote own maintenance labor to distinguish the amount of
planned labor in the typical week from the actual amount of labor t mj , decided at the short time
horizon.

9

An alternative way to interpret this equation would be to divide both sides by the marginal
product of own labor. The individual should equate the marginal cost of own production to the
price for purchased maintenance services.

10

At a conceptual level there are parallels between our structure and what Hall [2009] uses
recently in a macro context. He finds the disparity between the value of time and the marginal
product of labor can be reconciled through complementarities between consumption and labor.
In our context it is the opportunity to adjust a discrepancy in the marginal product of labor for
maintenance that allows measurement of the opportunity cost of time.
11

This figure reflects adjustment for changes that were not captured with the cross check of tax
records. These include household re-location, death, age limiting a designated respondent’s
ability to answer, and mail loss.
12

We eliminated observations with a predicted shadow wage greater than $500, those with
reported own maintenance hours greater than 150 hours/week, and those who reported they
would purchase more hypothetical hours of services than they reported actually doing
themselves.
13

Response rates in the studies these authors considered ranged from 4 percent to 70 percent. A
second study by Keeter et al. (2000) compared a “standard” and “rigorous” survey using
identical questionnaires. The standard realized a response rate of 36 percent and the rigorous
60.6. The authors considered 96 comparisons, no difference exceeded 9 percentage points and
the average difference was 2 points.
Details of the estimation controlling for non-response are available in an appendix available
from the authors.

14

15

In the questions preceding the time allocation questions, to orient respondents to time related
choices, the survey also asked about a variety of time-saving market products and services they
may have used recently.

16

Each respondent was offered a specific price that was randomly selected from six prices. The
six prices are given in the Appendix.
17

The complete sections of the survey on time use and time-saving activities are available from
the authors on request.
18

Some of the respondents indicated that they were using hired assistance already for household
tasks. For those who indicated that the hypothetical services we offered would be substituted for

36

the services they already used, we added their own household time and the hired time before
subtracting their purchase of the offered services. For those who said the offered services would
not be substituted for the hired services they were currently using, we used the current own time
and subtracted their purchase of the offered services.
19

The results for the log form are available from the authors.

20

Recall that the dependent variable is the combined hours of maintenance in the household and
not hours done by the respondent.

21

See Kahneman et al. (2004) for related discussion of this issue.

22

Frazis and Stewart observe that the opportunity cost approach to valuing labor time has
conceptual and practical difficulties. They highlight that: “On a conceptual level, the implicit
assumption that hours of paid work are freely variable at the margin may not hold; workers, at
least in the short run, may have little choice in their working hours. Perhaps more importantly,
the opportunity cost approach assumes that people who are highly productive in market work are
just as productive doing household work. It is hard to imagine that lawyers are five times more
productive building a deck than a carpenter” (p.14).

37

Survey Sections on Time Use and Values
(to be available from the authors)
B. Time Use and Time Saving Activities
6.

Now we would like you to think about your typical weekly schedule and what you and your
spouse/partner do with your time on average. In a typical week, about how much time do you and your
spouse/partner (if relevant) spend on each of the following activities? For some categories you may
hire paid help. If so, the third column asks how many hours in a typical week you pay someone to help
with some of these activities. Finally, if you feel you are able to freely choose the amount of time you
spend each week on an activity please check the associated line in the last column.

Activities/Tasks

You

Spouse/Partner

Paid Help

Freely Choose

commuting to work

____ hrs

____ hrs

____

paid work (primary job)

____ hrs

____ hrs

____

second job (if relevant)

____ hrs

____ hrs

____

household activities
(e.g. cleaning, cooking, etc.)

____ hrs

____ hrs

____ hrs

____

yard work / gardening

____ hrs

____ hrs

____ hrs

____

activities related to your children

____ hrs

____ hrs

____ hrs

____

reading newspapers, books, magazines

____ hrs

____ hrs

shopping for routine needs and
running errands (e.g. food)

____ hrs

____ hrs

watching TV/video

____ hrs

____ hrs

____

family related social activities

____ hrs

____ hrs

____

outdoor leisure activities away
from your house (e.g. walking,
fishing, boating, riding a bike, etc.)

____ hrs

____ hrs

____

time on the computer/internet
away from work

____ hrs

____ hrs

____

entertainment away from home

____ hrs

____ hrs

____

church activities

____ hrs

____ hrs

____

exercise/workouts

____ hrs

____ hrs

____

1

____
____ hrs

____

5.

Is the time you have available for leisure flexible in terms of both the day of the week and the time of
day? (Choose one)
_____ flexible - can use time for leisure activities anytime of the day or week
_____ limited by work schedule
_____ limited by non-work commitments (e.g., volunteer, children’s activities, etc.)
_____ limited by both work and non-work commitments

6.

If you had the opportunity to work fewer hours and receive less income or work more hours and receive
more income with the rate of pay in each case consistent with your current earnings (on approximately a per
hour basis), would you change your hours? Please check the appropriate response.
_____ I would work more hours and receive more income
_____ I would work less hours and receive less income
_____ I would not change my working time

2

9. There are many ways people try to save time. We buy time saving appliances, shop with catalogs or online,
hire others to help with activities around the house, etc.
Please check any of the following types of time saving appliances or services that you have purchased or
used because you wanted to save time.

□ shop with catalog or on an internet web site
□ used on-line banking
□ used an ATM
□ used a home cleaning service
□ used a lawn service
□ used clothes cleaning services
□ used a drive-up pharmacy
□ ate at a fast food restaurant
□ purchased frozen dinners or ready made meals
□ used periodic babysitting services
□ had daily childcare service
□ used a mobile phone regularly
□ used a food shopping service
□ purchased delivery pizza
□ used dog walking service

3

10. Personal Assistance Services
It is becoming more common to see firms that provide personal assistant services starting up. These types of
businesses organize and perform many household tasks such as house cleaning, lawn care, food shopping,
and a wide array of other tasks. Clients typically contract for a specific number of hours per week and
specify the activities employees of the firm are to do. If transportation is needed for the tasks, it is provided
by the firm and included in the number of hours that are purchased. Guarantees are made that the service is
safe and reliable. It is not necessary for clients to be present when the tasks are performed. In spite of the
growth in this industry, little is understood about how much of these services would be used.
If this personal assistance service was $5.50 per hour used, would you purchase any time?
______ yes

______ no

If you answered yes, how much personal service time would you purchase in a typical week? Please check
the relevant box or write in the value. (If no, skip to Part C, “Leisure Outings”).
Hours Purchased In a
Typical Week

Total Weekly Cost

1

$5.50 x 1 = $5.50

2

$5.50 x 2 = $11

3

$5.50 x 3 = $16.50

4

$5.50 x 4 = $22

5

$5.50 x 5 = $27.50

If your purchase would be more than five hours,
please indicate how many:

Please Check the
Relevant Box

□
□
□
□
□
____ hours per week

The hours I would purchase would replace paid services I currently use for some household tasks.

□ yes
□ no
On average, how would you most likely use the time you saved by purchasing this service? (check most
likely use)

□ Use the time to work additional hours
□ Use the time for activities I enjoy
□ Use the time for other household tasks
4

