                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN NEIGHBORHOOD QUALITY AND OBESITY
                           AMONG CHILDREN

                                            Bisakha Sen
                                        Stephen Mennemeyer
                                            Lisa C. Gary

                                        Working Paper 14985
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14985


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2009




We thank Susan Averett and attendees at the NBER Obesity Conference for valuable comments. We
thank Laura Argys for her generous help in constructing the bodyweight variables in this paper. The
responsibility for all errors and opinions is ours. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Bisakha Sen, Stephen Mennemeyer, and Lisa C. Gary. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Relationship Between Neighborhood Quality and Obesity Among Children
Bisakha Sen, Stephen Mennemeyer, and Lisa C. Gary
NBER Working Paper No. 14985
May 2009
JEL No. I1,J13

                                                ABSTRACT

It has long been posited by scientists that we need to have a better understanding in the role that larger
contextual factors – like neighborhood quality and the built environment – may have on the nation’s
obesity crisis. This paper explores whether maternal perceptions of neighborhood quality affect children’s
bodyweight outcomes, and whether racial and ethnic differences in such perceptions may explain any
of the hitherto unexplained gap in bodyweight and obesity prevalence among Whites and minorities. The
project uses data from the NLSY79 and the CoNLSY datasets. Results indicate that overall neighborhood
quality is not significantly related to children’s bodyweight. However, one particular characteristic,
namely whether or not the mother believes there is enough police protection in the neighborhood,
is related. Lack of police protection has robust and significant effects on the BMI-percentile of the
children, though it has less robust effects on the risk of becoming obese per se. Finally, there are differences
in perceptions about adequate police protection in their neighborhood between Whites and minorities
which remain after controlling for other socio-economic characteristics like maternal education, family
income and family structure. However, these differences play a minor role in explaining part of the
 gap in bodyweight between White and minority children.


Bisakha Sen                                            Lisa C. Gary
Health Care Organization & Policy                      Health Care Organization & Policy
University of Alabama at Birmingham                    University of Alabama at Birmingham
RPHB 330 R                                             RPHB 330K
1530 3rd Avenue S                                      1530 3rd Ave S
Birmingham, AL 35294-0022                              Birmingham, AL 35294-0022
bsen@uab.edu                                           lgary@uab.edu

Stephen Mennemeyer
Health Care Organization & Policy
University of Alabama at Birmingham
RPHB 330
1530 3rd Ave S
Birmingham, AL 35294-0022
smenneme@uab.edu
“Overweight and obesity are among the most important of these new health challenges. Our modern
environment has allowed these conditions to increase at alarming rates and become highly pressing health
problems for our Nation. At the same time, by confronting these conditions, we have tremendous
opportunities to prevent the unnecessary disease and disability that they portend for our future.”
                 Secretary of Health and Human Services, Tommy G. Thompson, in ‘The Surgeon
                 General's call to action to prevent and decrease overweight and obesity.’ (2002) 2 .




INTRODUCTION.
        The prevalence of overweight and obesity has increased markedly in the U.S. over the
last three decades, and is considered to be a leading health problem. The Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention reports that the percentage of obese adults increased from 14.6 percent in
1971-74 to 32.2 percent in 2003-2004 and for children aged 6 to 11, the percentage increased
from 4 to 18.8 percent over the same period. When children who are at risk of obesity are added
to the group, the number of children affected increases dramatically -- for example, Hedley et al
(2004) reports that in 1999-2002, 31 percent of all children aged 6-11 were either obese or at risk
of obesity. 3
            It is widely recognized that obesity is not merely a cosmetic disorder. Obesity has
been linked to increased incidence of diabetes, high blood pressure, heart disease, colorectal
cancer and gall bladder disease (Powers et al., 1997). An editorial in JAMA (Koplan & Dietz,
1999) reports that approximately 60% of overweight 5- to 10-year-old children already have one
clinical cardiovascular or an associated biochemical risk factor, such as hyperlipidemia, elevated
blood pressure, or increased insulin levels, and 25% have two or more, and that these risk factors
in children increase their likelihood of developing chronic diseases in adulthood. Allison et al
(1999) find that only smoking exceeds obesity in its contribution to total mortality rates in the
United States. By some estimates, the direct and indirect costs of obesity account for 10 percent
or more of the national health care budget in the U.S. The hospital costs associated with



2
  http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/topics/obesity/calltoaction/toc.htm
3
  Unlike adults, there are no specific BMI cut-offs that denote obesity among children. Instead, sex-
specific BMI-for-age growth charts based on national data from 1963-1994 (provided from CDC) are
used, and the convention is that children who are at or above the 95th percentile of the sex-specific BMI
for their age-group are classified as ‘overweight’ or ‘obese’, and children who are at or above the 85th
percentile but less than the 95th percentile are classified as ‘at risk of overweight’ in some studies, and ‘at
risk of obesity’ in others. We use the terminology ‘obesity’ and ‘at risk of obesity’.



                                                       2
childhood obesity alone were estimated at $127 million during 1997–1999 (in 2001 dollars), up
from $35 million during 1979–1981 (U.S. Department of Health & Human Services).
       Given the epidemic proportions of this problem, it is imperative from a policy-making
perspective to decipher the factors that influence the likelihood of obesity in children. A report
from the National Center for Environmental Health (Cummins & Jackson, 2004) recognizes that
community and neighborhood can potentially play important roles in child health – including
obesity. However, the report also emphasizes that there has been relatively limited research that
actually documents the nature of the relationship between community, neighborhood, and
various aspects of child health, and concludes that “This new research field is wide open.”
Particularly, we were able to identify just one study that explored the relationship between
neighborhood quality and obesity in children (Lumeng et al, 2006) using data from 10 cities.
        In this study, we extend extant research by exploring the relationship between children’s
body-mass index (BMI) as well as probability of obesity with different aspects of the
neighborhood as reported by the mother using linked data from the National Longitudinal Survey
of Youth 1979 (NLSY79) and the Children of NLSY79 (CoNLSY). We also analyze the extent
to which hitherto ‘unexplained’ differences in the prevalence of obesity between non-Hispanic
White children and minority children may be explained by the differences in neighborhood
quality. We use several years of data where the mothers in the NLSY79 are asked about how
they rate their neighborhood as a place to raise children, and also asked about several specific
characteristics about their neighborhood, such as whether run-down buildings, lack of jobs, lack
of police, inadequate transport, indifferent neighbors and so forth are a problem. Our results find
that overall maternal rating of the neighborhood as a place to raise children is a significant
predictor of the child’s BMI or obesity-risk in some models, but that these results are not robust,
nor are they statistically significant in models that control for unobserved heterogeneity via
‘fixed effects’. However, one key neighborhood quality – whether the mother believes that there
is sufficient police protection in the neighborhood – plays a significant role in predicting child
BMI and remains robust across a range of model specifications.


BACKGROUND.
Neighborhood Quality, Physical Activity, Obesity.




                                                  3
       There is an emerging consensus in the scientific community that environmental factors
play a role in the obesity epidemic, and that environmental solutions will be needed to address
the problem. Thus, there is growing interest in understanding what is an “obesogenic
environment” (Glass et al, 2006), with a focus both on characteristics of the built environment –
such as transportation or availability of physical activity facilities, as well as socio-economic
deprivation at the community level. This literature has been encouraged, in part, by work
indicating that moving to a better neighborhood impacts educational outcomes for minority
children, though the results are different boys versus girls (Leventhal et al., 2005). Several
studies have explored the relationship between neighborhood characteristics and physical
activity, though the results have not always been consistent. For example, a report the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (1999) using data from the Behavioral Risk factor Surveillance
System found that higher levels of perceived neighborhood safety correlated with higher levels
of physical activity for adults. In contrast, Romero et al (2001) found that children’s own
perceptions of neighborhood safety were actually inversely related to self-reported physical
activity and BMI. Another study, by Brownson et al (2001), found no statistical correlation
between neighborhood crime rates and adult physical activity. A review of 19 quantitative
studies by Humpel et al (2002) found that neighborhood safety had positive associations with
physical activity in some studies, and no statistical association in others, though no negative
association was found in any study. In a relatively recent study, Gordon-Larsen et al (2006)
found that inequality in access to physical-activity facilities were a major predictor of obesity-
risk as well as physical activity, and that low socio-economic status neighborhoods as well as
high-minority population neighborhoods were less likely to have good access to physical-activity
facilities. Glass et al (2006) used data on elderly adults in the Baltimore area, and found that
residents of neighborhoods that ranked high in psychosocial hazards had higher BMI, less
physical activity, and less healthy diets than their peers in neighborhoods ranking lower in
psychosocial hazards, even after controlling for race-ethnicity, education, household wealth and
substance use. However, one problem that few of these studies have been able to address is the
potential endogeneity between neighborhood characteristics and either physical activity or
obesity. Namely, that the neighborhood that people reside in is at least partly due to their own
choice, and persons with unmeasured personal or cultural propensities for greater physical




                                                  4
activity and energy-balanced lifestyles might be more likely to live in neighborhoods that
facilitate that physical activity and lifestyle.
        We are aware of only two studies that directly test the relationship between neighborhood
perceptions and obesity. The first of these is by Burdette et al (2006), and use data from the
Fragile Families and Child Well-being study. Perceptions of the mothers in that survey about the
neighborhood are measured using two separate indexes – a ‘neighborhood safety/social disorder’
scale based on eight items, like how often the women saw loitering people, drunks/drug dealers,
gang activities, and disorderly/misbehaving people in the neighborhood, and a ‘collective
efficacy’ scale based on whether the mothers felt that their neighbors could be trusted, and
whether the neighbors would intervene in situations like a fight breaking out in near vicinity or
children loitering around. The study finds that mothers living in neighborhoods that they
perceived to be relatively unsafe were more likely to be obese than counterparts living in
neighborhoods they perceived to be safe, after controlling for indicators of socio-economic status
(SES) like income, education, race/ethnicity and marital status. The second study by Lumeng et
al (2006), use a sample of 768 children from 10 cities in the U.S., who were part of the National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development Study of Early Child Care & Youth
Development. They obtain neighborhood quality perceptions using a 16-item measure of
neighborhood characteristics, that was completed by the mother and at least one other adult
guardian in the household (father, stepfather, grandparent) when the child was in the first grade.
The items are then divided into two scales – the ‘neighborhood safety subscale’ and the
‘neighborhood social involvement subscale’. They find that, among 7 year old children, those
residing in neighborhoods were the perceived neighborhood safety index was in the lowest
quartile had a higher risk of being obese than counterparts in other neighborhoods, and this
relationship held after controlling for parental marital status, education, race\ethnicity, and
child’s participation in after-school activities. This study is based on a relatively small sample of
children that is 85 percent White, thus its results may not be generalizable.
        Finally, extant studies have found a correlation between time spent watching television
and obesity among children (Dietz & Gortmaker, 1985; Robinson et al, 1993; Robinson, 1997).
If there is a correlation between neighborhood quality and the time spent by children in
sedentary, indoor activities like watching television, then this could be a potential pathway
through which perceived neighborhood quality affects children’s’ bodyweight. However, we are


                                                   5
not aware of any study that explores the relationships between parental neighborhood
perceptions and the amount of time children spend watching television.


Race-Ethnicity, Socio-Economic Status (SES) & Obesity Among Children
       It is well established that obesity disproportionately affects certain minority youth
populations. Results from the 1999-2002 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
(NHANES) found that African American and Mexican American adolescents ages 12-19 were
more likely to be overweight (21 percent and 23 percent respectively) than non-Hispanic White
adolescents (14 percent). Among children 6-11 years old, 22 percent of Mexican American
children and 20 percent of African American children were overweight, compared to 14 percent
of non-Hispanic White children (NCHS, 2008). Furthermore, the rate of increase in obesity
prevalence among children has been more pronounced among minority children than White
children. For example, between 1986 and 1998, obesity prevalence among African Americans
and Hispanics increased 120 percent, as compared to a 50 percent increase among non-Hispanic
Whites (Strauss and Pollack, 2001).
       A comprehensive review of literature by Stobal and Stunkard (1989) finds that, among
adults, there is a consistent negative relationship between higher socioeconomic status (SES) (as
measured by income, education, or occupation status) and being obese, but the relationship
appears weaker and less consistent in children. While many studies included in the above review
find that SES is negatively associated with children’s obesity risk, other research suggests that
this relationship varies by ethnicity. Specifically, the negative relationship between better SES
and prevalence of obesity seems more apparent among White children and adolescents, but
much less apparent among Black or Mexican-American (and presumably other Latino)
adolescents (Troiano and Fegal, 1998). In other words, Black and Latino children from families
with higher SES are no less likely to be overweight or obese than those in families with lower
socioeconomic status. It has been speculated that the difference in the relationship between SES
and obesity may be driven by cultural differences in eating habits as well as attitudes towards
body weight (Strauss & Knight, 1999). We speculate that one other factor may play a role –
specifically, neighborhood quality. Extant research finds that White families are more likely than
Black and Latino families to move into better and ‘non-poor’ neighborhoods, even after
accounting for income (South & Crowder, 1997; Hango, 2002), and that Black families are less


                                                 6
likely than non-Black families to convert dissatisfaction with neighborhood to an actual move
(South & Deane, 1993). If better neighborhood quality is negatively related to the risk of
childhood obesity, then the racial and ethnic differences in neighborhood quality among families
of comparable SES might explain some of the racial and ethnic differences in children’s obesity
among families of comparable SES.


DATA & METHODS.
Theoretical Framework & Empirical Models
       Essentially the approach we take here is to assume that there exists a simple “production
function” of a child’s BMI percentile (or, alternatively a binary indicator of whether the child is
obese or not) as a function of caloric intake and energetic versus sedentary activities, and these in
turn are determined by the mother’s perception of the neighborhood, as well as other familial,
demographic and socio-economic characteristics that might have a bearing on the child’s
exercise and eating patterns.
       We posit a very simple model that is broadly within the framework of Grossman’s model
of health, where parents attempt to optimize ‘healthy weight’ for the child, where the arguments
in the production function for healthy weight include the child’s caloric intake, and caloric
expenditure through exercise and activity. Thus, the child’s BMI can be written as a ‘production
function’ of these inputs:
       BMI = F(C (+) , E (-) , S (+) ; R)                                            (i)
       Where C represents caloric intake, E represents time spent in energetic activity, and S
represents time spent in sedentary activities. Arguably the two groups of activities are mutually
exclusive and exhaustive, however we choose to explicitly include both in the production
function. R represents other ‘residual’ unobserved factors, including genetics. The signs in
parenthesis indicate whether each of these components is expected to increase or decrease BMI.
Fully specifying and expanding the model -- which would yield demand functions for caloric
intake and types of activities as functions of the market prices of the inputs, shadow prices of
time, and income – is beyond the scope of this paper. However, we can posit that neighborhood
quality is a factor in the demand functions of each of the components of the production function,
since it arguably plays a role in determining the ‘price’ of each of the components.




                                                 7
Specifically, C = C ( N, X) ; E = E (N, X); S = S (N, X).                                      (ii)
Where ‘N’ is neighborhood quality, and ‘X’ represents other demographic and socio-economic
characteristics that play a role in determining market or shadow prices, as well as income and
preferences.
        Poor-quality and dangerous neighborhoods are likely to make outdoor activities – be it
playing outdoors or walking to schools and recreational facilities – hazardous and hence more
‘costly’. Thus, children may be made to spend more time indoors by parents, and thus spend
more time in sedentary occupations. Poor-quality and dangerous neighborhoods could also make
it more difficult for parents to acquire healthy foods like fresh produce, which in turn could
contribute to an unhealthy diet by the children. On the other hand, it could be argued that, if
older children in particular had more license to be outdoor and to walk to various places, then
they may also be able to go to stores or fast-food establishments and buy calorically dense foods
without their parents’ supervision. Furthermore, it could be argued that other neighborhood
characteristics – for example, the lack of sidewalks – could make the issue of outdoor activities
moot even if the neighborhood was otherwise perceived as high-quality and safe. Thus, it is
difficult to predict a priori what effects neighborhood quality will have on each of the arguments
in the production function for healthy-weight, and thus, ultimately, how neighborhood quality
will affect a child’s weight, and this question must be empirically determined.
        To explore this empirically, we start by Substituting (ii) into (i) and creating a reduced-
form BMI production function as
        BMI = F (N, X, R)                                                             (iii).
        Based on equation (iii), we posit a simple linear specification model such that the BMI of
the ith child in the tth period is expressed as
        BMIit = αNit + Xitβ + Rit+ εit                                                (iv)
        Empirical studies on children’s weight often use dichotomous models to investigate what
covariates influence the odds of children being obese or overweight. However, a recent study by
Field et al (2005) reports that, simply being in the upper half of the age and gender specific BMI
distribution is a good predictor of becoming obese as an adult as well as developing health
problems like hypertension in early adulthood. This suggests that, in addition to investigating
what factors correlate with the risk of obesity/overweight in children, researchers should also be
concerned about what factors simply predict a higher BMI in children. Hence, we estimate


                                                  8
models with continuous measures of BMI (specifically, the BMI percentile score as well as the
BMI-z score), in addition to linear probability models when the dependent variable is a binary
indicator of whether the child is obese or not. To account for the fact that there are repeated
observations for each child, as well as multiple children of the same mother in the data, standard
errors are clustered at the maternal level.
       We face the standard dilemma here that Rit, which represents unobserved determinants of
the child's obesity, may also be correlated to neighborhood quality. Neighborhood quality is not
a purely exogenous variable. For example, it may be speculated that families who have
unobserved preferences for sedentary pastimes may disproportionately select into neighborhoods
which are not conducive to outside activities. There may also be certain maternal characteristics -
that correlate both to her perceptions about the neighborhood and her children’s health outcomes.
For example, a mother who is suffering from depression or other mental health issues may be
more likely to perceive the neighborhood as being unsafe and of poor quality, and at the same
time also be less able to properly monitor the caloric intake and physical activities of her children
to ensure their healthy weight. Finally, if the mother has a genetic predisposition towards obesity
which she passes on to her children, then that predisposition towards obesity could also impose
wage-penalties upon her (Cawley, 2004), and in turn decide the quality of the neighborhood that
she can afford to live in. Thus, failing to account for these unobservables are likely to result in
biased estimates of the effects of neighborhood quality on child bodyweight.
       We initially approach this problem by explicitly controlling for past maternal BMI in the
model. The argument here is that past maternal BMI may serve both as a proxy for the genetic
endowments in the family as well as the mother's unobserved preferences for caloric intake and
physical activity, but it will not in itself be affected by current neighborhood quality (though one
might argue that some mothers will continue to be in neighborhoods that are identical or very
similar to the ones they grew up in themselves). Thereafter, we also use the fairly standard
methods of 'fixed effects' models, where we first estimate the models after including mother-
level fixed effects, and thereafter we estimate them including child-level fixed effects. We have a
slight preference for the former -- since the neighborhood quality is based on the mother's
reports, arguably the primary concern is the correlation of maternal unobserved
characteristics with her perceptions about the neighborhood as well as her children's bodyweight
outcomes. We also attempt a ‘propensity score regression method’ where we calculate the


                                                  9
probability of the mother living in a neighborhood of a certain quality based on an extensive list
of her characteristics, and include that probability as a specific control variable in the regression
equation (give cites). We recognize the inherent shortcomings of all of these methods. For
example, the fixed effects methods fail to account for unobservables that may be time-variant
over the period of study, tend to accentuate the effects of measurement error, and can lead to the
loss of statistical power. Propensity score regressions account for mother-level observables, but
insofar as there exist unobservable variables that are not adequately captured, this method cannot
eliminate the bias in the results. Nonetheless, we believe that these are the best tools that we have
to minimize the effects of bias-inducing unobservables in this study, even if we cannot altogether
eliminate that bias. 4
        One of the specific contributions of this paper is to explore whether differences in
neighborhood quality can explain any of the hitherto unexplained differences in BMI and
obesity-risk between minority and non-minority children. To do this, we start by estimating the
following empirical model:
        Nit = Miμ + Xitλ + uit                                                          (v)
        Where Mi are binary indicators of the race-ethnicity of the mother – one binary indicator
to denote whether she is Black, and one binary indicator to denote whether she is of Hispanic
origin. Xit is now defined (with slight abuse of notation) as a vector of indicators of socio-
economic and demographic status other than race-ethnicity. The purpose is to statistically test
whether the above minority populations are likely to have worse perceptions of their
neighborhood compared to their White peers after controlling for the other socio-economic and
demographic characteristics.
        We follow this up with a Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition (Blinder, 1973; Oaxaca, 1973),
which is a technique that was originally used in labor market analysis to compare mean
differences between two groups in the dependent variable of a regression model – typically
wages. Here we use the technique to examine mean differences in the BMI percentile score of
groups of children. We compare Non-Hispanic Whites (hereafter, “Whites”) to African-
Americans (hereafter “Blacks”) and, later, Whites to Hispanics using the approach discussed in
Jann (2008).

4
 We debated using instrumental-variable techniques, but were not aware of any viable instruments that
would correlate to maternal perceptions of the neighborhood, but not have any direct bearing on the BMI
of her children.


                                                  10
The Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition can be summarized with the expression
R= {E(Xw ) – E(Xb)}  Bw + { E(Xb )  (Bw - Βb)}                                    (vi)
This can be abbreviated as
R=Q+U                                                                               (vii)
Where:
Q = {E(Xw ) – E(Xb)}  Bw                                                           (viii)
U = { E(Xb )  (Bw - Βb)}                                                           (ix)
Assume that we estimated a linear model for the BMI percentile score for Whites (subscript w)
and then again for Blacks (subscript b). Here, Q represents the difference in the mean values of
right hand side regressors E(Xw ) – E(Xb) (i.e. the “endowments”) multiplied by the regression
coefficients Bw of the White group against which it is assumed that there is no discrimination
(or alternatively, for whom it can be assumed that the coefficient estimates represent the ‘correct’
response of the dependent variable to a change in the independent variable) . Thus for our
analysis, Q is the part of the differential in the BMI percentile score that is explained by group
differences in the levels of the regressors (the “quantity effect”). U is the unexplained part of the
differential. In the labor market literature, U is often interpreted to be the part due to
“discrimination” as well as the effect of any unobserved differences between the two groups. In
our analysis, we interpret U as the effect of unobserved differences between the two groups.


Data
    The primary sources of data for this project are the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth
1979 cohort (NLSY79) and the Children of the NLSY79 (CoNLSY). We use survey year data
from 1992 to 2000, which are the only years when questions were asked about neighborhood
quality.
         The NLSY79 is a multi-purpose panel survey that originally included a sample of 12,686
individuals who were within the age-range of 14 to 21 years of age on December 31, 1978. This
original sample consists of three subsamples: a cross-sectional sample of 6111 individuals
representative of the non-institutionalized civilian U.S. population within the prescribed age-
range; a supplemental sample designed to oversample Hispanics, Blacks, and economically
disadvantaged White U.S. population within the prescribed age-range; and a sample of 1280
respondents designed to represent U.S. military personnel within the prescribed age range.


                                                  11
       Annual interviews were conducted beginning in 1979, with a shift to a biennial interview
mode after 1994. The NLSY79 provides extensive information on all its respondents, including
labor force activities, demographic characteristics, marital status, income, education, spousal
characteristics, health status, and other socio-economic characteristics. In year 2000, 4,113 of the
original 6,283 female respondents remained in the sample. Of the missing 2,170, 441 were
members of a military over-sample dropped in 1984, 890 were from an over-sample of
economically disadvantaged White people dropped in 1990, and 105 were deceased. The
remainder is lost due to attrition
       The CoNLSY sample is comprised of all children born to NLSY79 female respondents
who live with their mother fulltime or at least part time, who have been independently followed
and interviewed in various ways biennially, starting in 1986. Children who cease to live with
their mothers altogether following a divorce are no longer included. The records from NLSY79
and CoNLSY can be easily linked via the mother’s sample identification number. As of 2000, a
total of 11,205 children had been identified as having been born to the original 6,283 NLSY79
female respondents, mostly during the years that they have been interviewed (of course, an
unknown number of additional children may have been born to respondents after they attritioned
or were dropped from the sample). Given the design of the CoNLSY survey, not all the children
are assessed in each survey year. Children ‘enter’ the dataset after they are born, and once they
reach the age of 15, they are dropped from this survey. 5 Given this design, there are more very
young children entering the CoNLSY dataset in the early years, when the mothers in the
NLSY79 are in their peak childbearing years; whereas in the later years there are fewer children
in the dataset overall (since more have exceeded the age of 15), and fewer very young children
are entering the dataset since fewer NLSY79 female respondents are giving birth.
       Neighborhood Perceptions: In 1992, the NLSY79 started to include a series of questions
addressed to the mothers in the dataset about their perceptions about their neighborhood. They
were asked how they rated their neighborhoods overall as a place to raise children, with potential
answers being ‘excellent’, ‘very good’, ‘good’, ‘fair’ and ‘poor’. Thereafter the respondents are
specifically asked about selected neighborhood features, including neighbors lacking respect for
law and order, crime and violence, abandoned and run down buildings, lack of police protection,


5
 Once the children are over the age of 15, they leave the CoNLSY and enter another survey called the
‘NLSY79 Young Adults.’


                                                  12
lack of public transportation, parents who do not supervise children, neighbors who are
indifferent about other neighbors, and people unable to find jobs. For each of these issues,
respondents state whether they consider it ‘a big problem’, ‘somewhat of a problem’ or ‘not a
problem’ in their neighborhoods. These questions were discontinued after the 2000 survey.
       We use this information to create binary variables for overall neighborhood quality –
namely, whether the mother qualifies the neighborhood as being an excellent or very good place
to bring up children, and whether she qualifies it as only a fair or a poor place to bring up
children. Thereafter we create a series of binary indicators for the specific characteristics to
indicate whether the mother considers each of those characteristics to be at least somewhat of a
problem in the neighborhood.
       Height & Weight Information: The CoNLSY survey covers numerous developmental
and health aspects of the children. For all children below the age of 14, the child’s height and
weight at the time of interview are recorded. In the majority (approximately 65%) of cases,
interviewers measure height by tape measure and weight using a scale. In the remaining cases
height and weight are reported by the child’s mother. We include all child-observations,
regardless of whether the height and weight were mother-reported or interviewer-measured.
However, we do include an explicit binary indicator to identify those cases where height and
weight were interviewer-measured.
       While the above height and weight information can be used to create a conventional BMI
score using the standard formula of (weight in lbs x 703)/ (height in inches)2 , it should be noted
that, unlike adults, absolute BMI scores carry less meaning for growing-age children in terms of
health-markers. Therefore, we follow the convention in the literature and alternately use BMI-z
scores and BMI-percentile scores, which show how the child’s BMI compares with his or her age
and gender specific BMI distribution. 6 Equation (iv) is estimated using both BMI-z and BMI-
percentile scores. We also follow the convention of denoting a child to be obese if his or her
BMI is at or above the 95th percentile of the age and gender specific BMI distribution of the
reference period.



6
 The BMI-z and BMI-percentile scores were created using SAS programs provided by the CDC at
http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpa/growthcharts/resources/sas.htm. We acknowledge our debt to Laura
Argys, who played a key role in using the programs and generating the BMI-z and BMI-percentile values.
These scores were initially created for use in an ongoing project by Argys & Sen (2008).


                                                  13
         Other Variables: We draw upon the rich array of information on socio-economic and
demographic characteristics that are available in the NLSY79 and CoNLSY for all respondents
to control for other familial characteristics. Since current maternal BMI may also be a function
of contemporaneous neighborhood quality (since poor neighborhood quality may also limit adult
physical activity), we use maternal BMI based on height and weight information from the first
time it was asked in the NLSY79 – in the 1981 survey. Finally, we include information from the
NLSY79 Geocode data to identify the counties where each mother lives in each survey year, and
use this information to merge in county characteristics likely to be associated with neighborhood
perceptions. Specifically, we used FBI Uniform crime statistics aggregated at the county level.
Variables included murders, forcible rapes, robberies, aggravated assaults, burglaries, larcenies,
motor vehicle thefts, and arsons each defined per hundred thousand of population in the county.
These data are available annually. We used the collection from the University of Virginia. (U.S.
Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2004). Other descriptors of the county include the percentages
of the county population that was Black and Hispanic, the percent of households with a female
head, and income per capita were obtained from Area Resource File using data from the U. S.
Census for 1900 and 2000 (and for 1995 for per capita income) and interpolated from
intervening years. (U.S. Bureau of Health Professions, 2007). County annual unemployment
rates were obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1992 -
2000).


RESULTS & DISCUSSION
Neighborhood Quality and Child Bodyweight.
         Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the full sample, by race-ethnicity, and by
neighborhood quality rating. The mean BMI-percentile in the pooled full sample is 56.9, and the
obesity rate is about 17 percent. About 56 percent of the pooled full sample report that their
neighborhood is a ‘very good’ or ‘excellent’ place for children (hereafter referred to as ‘very
good’), while 23 percent rate it as ‘fair’ or ‘poor’ (hereafter referred to as ‘not good’). The
remaining rate it as ‘good’. Among the specific characteristics, the one that is perceived as at
least somewhat of a problem by the largest fraction of responding mothers is ‘unsupervised
children’ (45.6 percent), followed by lack of respect for law and order (36.7 percent), jobless
people (35.2 percent), indifferent neighbors (33.2 percent), crime & violence (30.4 percent), lack


                                                  14
of transport (30.1percent), lack of police protection (25.4 percent) and run-down buildings (19.9
percent). Not surprisingly, the Black and Hispanic sub-samples rate their neighborhoods more
poorly and report more problems than does the White sub-sample. This is probably due at least
in part to the fact that the Black and Hispanic sub-samples also have lower family income, lower
levels of educational attainment, and higher proportions of them live in central-cities compared
to the White sub-sample. It can also be seen that the sub-sample living in ‘not good’
neighborhoods have higher mean BMI-percentile for their children as well as higher rates of
obesity. Not surprisingly, higher proportions of this sub-sample are minorities, more likely to
live in the inner city, be single-parent households, have lower family income, have mothers who
are not working and with lower educational attainment, and have mothers who had higher BMI
themselves in 1981, compared to their counterparts living in better neighborhoods. Living in ‘not
good’ neighborhoods also correlates with reporting higher rates of specific neighborhood
problems. With the exception of ‘lack of transportation’-- where the proportions across the two
groups are somewhat comparable -- those living in ‘not good’ neighborhoods are substantially
more likely to answer in the affirmative about the existence of specific problems in the
neighborhood. The Cronbach’s alpha for the eight specific dimensions of neighborhood quality
is 0.84, indicating high internal consistency. Therefore, these eight items reliably represent the
construct of perceived neighborhood quality.
       Table 2 presents three sets of results from regressing measures of the child’s bodyweight
(BMI-percentile, BMI-z score, and a binary indicator of obesity) upon the overall neighborhood
rating and other characteristics. The initial specification includes demographic and geographic
characteristics, but no other indicators of socio-economic status. The second specification
includes measures of socio-economic status – maternal education, presence of a father in the
household, total family income and maternal employment status. The third and final specification
additionally includes maternal BMI as measured in 1981. Perceived neighborhood quality is
captured by two binary indicators of ‘very good’ and ‘not good’, with the basis for comparison
being whether the neighborhood is ‘good’. It can be seen that being in a not-good neighborhood
is associated with a higher BMI-percentile in the first two model specifications, and with a
higher BMI-z score in the first model specification. However, once the full range of familial
socio-economic characteristics as well as maternal BMI from 1981 are controlled for, no further
statistical associations remain between any of the outcome variables and the overall


                                                 15
neighborhood quality measures. Models using maternal fixed effects and child fixed effects also
failed to find any statistical relationship between the outcome variables and the neighborhood
quality measures. Those results are available upon request.
       We repeated the estimations after substituting each of the eight specific neighborhood
characteristics (that is, the binary indicator for whether a specific issue was at least ‘somewhat’
of a problem) in place of the general rankings. For brevity, only the results pertaining to the
neighborhood characteristics are presented (Table 3). Most of the specific characteristics do not
have any significant relationship to the BMI outcomes or obesity risk -- with the exception of the
problems of indifferent neighbors and inadequate police protection. The children of mother’s
who report that indifferent neighbors are a problem on average belong to a 1.84 higher BMI-
percentile and are at a 2 percent higher risk of obesity compared to children whose mothers do
not report it as a problem. The children of mother’s who report that inadequate police protection
is a problem on average belong to a 3.65 higher BMI-percentile and are at a 3 percent higher risk
of obesity compared to children whose mothers do not report it as a problem.
       Thereafter, we used only these two characteristics to estimate further models, including
those that controlled for the mother’s BMI from 1981, and those that included maternal and child
fixed effects. We found that there no longer remained any significant relationship between the
problem of indifferent neighbors and the outcomes. However, inadequate police protection
continued to have a significantly negative effect both on the BMI-percentile and BMI-z-scores in
almost all the model specifications, though not always on the risk of obesity per se (Table 4). We
also ran models that included the full set of specific neighborhood characteristics in addition to
other characteristics, and there too inadequate police protection continued to be statistically
significant in almost all models, thus alleviating the concern that the estimated effects of
inadequate police protection when included only by itself was simply picking up the effects of
other neighborhood characteristics omitted from the model.
       Upon re-running the analyses separately for (non-Hispanic) Whites, Blacks and
Hispanics, we found that inadequate police protection typically had larger and more significant
effects on BMI-percentile of Black and Hispanic children compared to Whites, but that for all the
sub-samples, the effects on the risk of obesity per se tended to be statistically imprecise. These
results are also in Table 4.




                                                 16
        As mentioned earlier, we used one further approach to test the robustness of the results
pertaining to inadequate police protection – a propensity scores approach. This method,
described by D’agostino (1998), and used in previous studies like Sen and Swaminathan (2007),
essentially involves estimating first stage binary regressions for the ‘treatment’ in question using
as control all available and relevant observable characteristics; obtaining the predicted
probabilities of being subject to the treatment; and finally, including that predicted probability
(i.e. the ‘propensity for the treatment’) as an added control in the final outcomes regression
which also includes the binary indicator of treatment. While propensity scores, by definition,
only control for observable factors, if one is able to use a wide range of observables that directly
measure or adequately proxy for the potential confounders to construct this scores, then arguably
the omitted variable bias in the coefficient estimate of the binary treatment is substantially
reduced. The advantages of including the propensity score in the final regression rather than
attempting a more conventional propensity score ‘matching’ method proposed by Rosenbaum &
Ruben (1984) is that it prevents the loss of sample size since we do not have to omit observations
from the control group which do not closely match members from the treated group, and also
helps avoid the problems regarding which particular matching technique is the appropriate one.
        We estimate initial probit equations on neighborhood quality using the following
maternal characteristics: whether she grew up in an intact parental family herself, whether either
parent was an immigrant and a foreign language was spoken at home, her religious attendance as
reported in the first survey year, whether her mother was employed outside the home, proxy
variables for the importance of education in the home environment in form of whether
newspapers came to the house and whether the family had a library card when she was 14,
whether she reported binge drinking in a past survey (the question is asked in the 1985 survey),
whether anyone in her family had a problem with alcohol, her family’s poverty status in 1978,
and whether in the 1982 survey she reported facing discrimination when looking for a job based
on sex, race, or nationality, whether she faced discrimination based on age (i.e. considered too
young), and finally, her self-esteem score based on the 10-item Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale
based on the individual’s self-evaluation Higher scores on this scale are indicative of greater self-
esteem. 7 The NLSY79 administered these questions and created the scale in the 1980 and 1987


7
  The scale is short, widely used, and has accumulated evidence of validity and reliability. It contains 10
statements of self-approval and disapproval with which respondents are asked to strongly agree, agree,


                                                     17
interviews. We use the information from 1987. Of our selected variables, being in poverty in
1978 and binge drinking significantly increases the probability of reporting inadequate police
protection, whereas maternal employment, newspapers and a library card in the house when she
was 14, and higher self-esteem significantly reduces the probability of reporting inadequate
police protection. Living in an intact parental family herself reduces the probability of reporting
inadequate police protection with weak statistical significance, while religious attendance,
parental immigrant status or alcohol problems among other family members do not have any
significant effect. Full results are available upon request. As explained above, we then create the
predicted probabilities (i.e. the ‘propensity scores’) of reporting inadequate police protection
from the probit model, and then use that as an added control in our equations for the child’s
bodyweight. We find that the relationship between inadequate police protection and child’s BMI-
percentile as well as likelihood of being obese remain comparable to earlier findings using
maternal fixed effects – namely, inadequate police protection significantly increases both BMI-
percentile and risk of obesity for the full sample, but for sub-samples by race-ethnicity, the
effects on risk of obesity tend to be statistically imprecise, and the effects on BMI-percentile
appear to be larger and more significant for Blacks and Hispanics compared to Whites. 8
        It would be useful to be able to explore the causal pathways between perceived
inadequate police protection and children’s bodyweight. Unfortunately, the CoNLSY datasets
provide very limited information on either energetic versus sedentary activities or diet quality.
The only ‘pathway’ we were able to consider is the sedentary activity of television watching, an
activity that has been found to be associated with increased risk of obesity in previous studies
(Dietz & Gortmaker, 1985; Robinson et al, 1993; Robinson, 1997). The mother’s reporting
inadequate police protection appeared to be associated with children watching about 0.47 hours
more television on average during weekdays. The estimated effect fell to 0.32 hours more of


disagree, or strongly disagree. Of these, on five items disagreeing is indicative of higher self-esteem,
while on the remaining five disagreeing is indicative of lower self-esteem, and thus must be reversed
when the items are added.
8
 It has been argued that propensity score regressions yield results similar to those yielded by including all
mother level characteristics in the final model individually, with the only advantage being that fewer
degrees of freedom are lost when including a single propensity score rather than an array of individual
variables. (Bhattacharya and Vogt, 2007) Indeed, when we repeated the regression models for child BMI-
percentile and obesity-risk after explicitly including all maternal characteristics instead of the predicted
propensity score, our results stayed very similar.


                                                     18
television in models that include maternal fixed effects. , but it remains significant. No
significant relationship exists between inadequate police protection and TV-watching during
weekends. However, we remain skeptical about the validity of the results because of possible
measurement error in this variable in the CoNLSY dataset. A number of respondents reported
watching television for more than 20 hours a day on weekdays and weekends, and some reported
watching television for more than 24 hours a day! Hence, we do not present those results here,
though they are available upon request. Ultimately, this issue would have to be addressed using
other datasets that provide more thorough and better measures of energetic/sedentary activities
and diet quality.
       Finally, as a prelude to exploring whether differences in police protection can explain any
part of the variation in children’s bodyweight across race-ethnicity, we first verify that there exist
differences in levels of (perceived) police protection between White mothers, Black mothers and
Hispanic mothers that cannot be explained by differences socio-economic factors such as
income, education, presence of a husband in the household and so forth. Table 5 reports results
from linear probability models based on equation (v), where the lack of police protection, as well
as a general rating of the neighborhood as not good, are regressed on race-ethnicity as well as all
the socio-economic and geographic controls in the other models. Results show that, compared to
White mothers, Black mothers have a 13 percent higher probability and Hispanic mothers have a
8.2 percent higher probability of reporting that lack of police protection is a problem in their
neighborhood. Moreover, compared to White mothers, Black mothers have about a 16.3 percent
higher probability and Hispanic mothers have about a 8.3 percent higher probability of reporting
that the overall quality of the neighborhood was not good. Hence, there exist differences across
race-ethnicity in neighborhood quality that are not explained away by differences in socio-
economic status across race-ethnicity. This provides justification for doing an Oaxaca-Blinder
decomposition.


Oaxaca-Blinder Decomposition.
       Table 6 shows the Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition based on OLS models with robust
standard errors, and Table 7 shows the Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition based on models with
mother-level fixed effects. For brevity, we mostly confine our detailed discussion to the results
presented in Table 6. The left hand side of the table (columns 2 to 4) has the (non-Hispanic)


                                                 19
White v. Blacks comparison; the right hand (columns 5 to 7) is the (non-Hispanic) White v.
Hispanic comparison. In case of Whites versus Blacks, for example, the mean predicted BMI
percentile scores are respectively 55.06 and 60.46 with a statistically significant difference (at
1%) of -5.40 BMI percentile points. This difference can be broken down in columns 3 and 4
respectively into the total explained part that is due to differences in the levels of the regression
variables – i.e. Q in equation (vii) -- which is -2.73 ( z= 2.75), and the total unexplained part , U
in equation (vii), which is -2.67 (z=1.91). The rest of the entries in columns 3 and 4, show the
decomposition at the level of the individual variables.
   The differences in the levels of police protection between Blacks and Whites account for
somewhat more than 12 percent (-0.348 v. -2.729) of the ‘explained’ gap between the two
groups – however, the result is not statistically significant. For Whites versus Hispanics the
differences in the level of police protection account for almost 15 percent (-0.2681 v. -1.771) of
the ‘explained’ gap between the two groups, but again, the result is not statistically significant.
The differences in the mother’s BMI contributes significantly to the explained gap between both
Whites and Blacks and Whites and Hispanics. Some other variables that are significant but have
no practical implications are a variable that summaries the effects of the various year dummies
and a binary indicator of whether the child’s height and weight were measured by the survey
interviewer (rather than being based on the mother’s report.).
       The differences in the levels of police protection are not statistically significant in the
Oaxaca-Blinder decompositions based on fixed effects models either. However, one factor that is
significant in these fixed effects models and worth commenting on is the presence of the father in
the household. A father’s presence in the household has an important effect on the weight of a
Black child but no discernible effect for White children. For a Black child, a father’s presence
has a statistically significant effect that on average reduces a child’s weight by almost 7
percentile points. For a White child, a father’s presence has a small (1/10 of a BMI percentile
point) and statistically insignificant effect on the child’s weight. (Detailed regression results for
these effects are not reported here but are available from the authors.) White children in the
NLSY sample have more fathers present than Black children (77% v. 35%). The Oaxaca
decomposition says that, for two otherwise identical White and Black children, if a Black father
had acted like (i.e. had the same regression coefficient as) a White father, then the child would
be heavier by about 2.3 BMI percentile points. Further, if as many Black children had fathers


                                                  20
present as White children and if the fathers acted like White fathers, this would have no
statistically significant effect on the average weight of Black children. Thus, when they are
present, Black fathers have an important and favorable influence on their children’s weight.
        In the White v. Hispanic comparison, the presence of a father does not appear to play a
statistically significant role in explaining differences between the two groups.
        Our main regression analysis found that mothers who are concerned about a lack of
police in their neighborhoods tend to have heavier children. We also found that minority mothers
reported greater lack of police protection than their White counterparts even after accounting for
other family characteristics. Nonetheless, the Oaxaca-Blinder decompositions show that this
difference in perceived police protection is not able to explain away the difference in the average
bodyweight of minority children compared to White children. Hence we conclude that there are
other unobserved factors that largely account for these group differences.


Correlates of Perceived Neighborhood Quality.
        One issue in this paper is that the neighborhood quality variables are based purely on the
mother’s reports, and there is no external validation. Thus, this raises the question about what
factors may play a role in affecting the mother’s perceptions. This is a particularly important
issue, especially if the larger policy implication here is that one method to address the childhood
obesity epidemic might be to improve neighborhoods that they reside in.
    While we have no objective measures of neighborhood characteristics, we can identify the
counties that the respondents reside in using the NLSY79 Geocode data. 9 One hypothesis is that
women who live in counties that have high crime and where the population has low socio-
economic status will, ceteris paribus, express more concern about poor neighborhood quality and
inadequate police protection (we make this hypothesis with the caveat that there may be
immense within-county variation in quality of neighborhoods). To examine this issue, use the
county identifier to link each responding mother to crime statistics and other variables we have
attempted to link the mothers’ perceptions to official crime data and other variables describing
the county in which the mother lived at the time of the NLSY surveys.



9
 Unfortunately, the Geocodes are not able to do the linkage for finer resolution such as a census track
which might be linked to data from individual police departments.


                                                    21
       We estimate linear probability regressions for whether or not the mother reports
inadequate police protection after including all county-level characteristics as well as mother-
level characteristics that are potentially time-variant, both without (model 1) and with (model 2)
mother-level fixed effects, for the full sample and separately by race-ethnicity. Results are in
Table 8.
       We find that the crime variables have mixed effects on the probability of mothers
reporting inadequate police protection. In fact, none of the variables yield estimated effects that
are consistent in terms of direction and significance across the two sets of models. For example,
rape and aggravated assault increase the probability for the full sample in model 1, but are not
consistent across the sub-samples. In model 2, rape has a counterintuitive negative sign for
almost all the groups. We speculate that one reason for the counterintuitive negative signs is that
certain types of violent crime could lead to the deployment of more police in the county, so that
police presence may actually become more visible in the immediate aftermath of an increase in
crime. The county characteristics that seem to consistently affect the probability of reported
inadequate police protection in model 1 are the percent of female headed households and the per
capita income in the county, with the former increasing and the latter decreasing the probability
of reported inadequate police protection. Higher unemployment rates increase the probability of
reported inadequate police protection for Whites and Blacks, but surprisingly, seem to decrease it
for Hispanics. In model 2 the directions of the effects remain the same, but they become
statistically imprecise, possibly because of the lack of variation in these county-level variables
over the period of the study.
   With regard to the personal maternal characteristics that affect maternal reports of inadequate
police protection, the ones that remain significant in model 2, even after accounting for
unobserved mother-level time-invariant heterogeneity, are the variables indicating the mother’s
education level. Residing in central city is significant for all groups except Hispanics, while total
family income is only significant for non-Hispanic Whites. We repeated the analyses using
maternal fixed effects and the mother-level characteristics but omitted the county level
characteristics, and found very similar results.
   A final question may be whether changes in perceptions about police protection are driven
by changes in the quality of the existing neighborhood or by an actual relocation to a different
neighborhood. About 35 percent of the sample of mothers change their reports about adequacy of


                                                   22
police protection at least once over the period of study. Unfortunately, once again, the Geocode
data does not permit us to identify how many of these women actually changed neighborhoods,
but only if their county of residence changed between one survey and the next. About 28 percent
of our sample change their counties of residence at least once within the period of study.
However, of those who reported a change in adequacy of police protection, only 27 percent also
reported a change in county of residence, and of those who did change their county of residence,
66.7 percent reported no change in adequacy of police protection. We emphasize again that we
are not able to capture changes in residential locations that occur within a county in this dataset,
but the above findings do suggest that most of the reported variation in police protection cannot
be explained by relocations to new neighborhoods in different counties.


CONCLUSION
       Our paper addresses the relatively unexplored question of the effects of contextual factors
– such as neighborhood quality – on children’s bodyweight and obesity-risk. The main
advantages of this study include the nationally representative nature of the data, as well as the
longitudinal nature of the data, which allows us to control for time-invariant confounding factors
at the maternal level. In summary, our paper finds that overall neighborhood quality is not a
particularly strong determinant of children’s bodyweight outcomes. However, one specific
neighborhood characteristic – the perceived lack of police protection, is a significant determinant
of such bodyweight outcomes. Moreover, there are significant differences in perceived lack of
police protection between White and minority women, even though this does not explain the
hitherto unexplained gap in bodyweight between White and minority children.
       It is not entirely clear why police protection in particular plays a significant role in
effecting children’s bodyweight, when other neighborhood characteristics – such as crime and
violence, or lack of respect for law and order, do not. One might speculate that, at the margin,
visible police presence might reduce certain activities that would make parents fearful of letting
their children outdoors -- such as drug-peddling, loitering, or physical violence and bullying on
the playground.
       The paper has several shortcomings. The most important of these is our inability to
completely control for time-variant unobservable factors that might both influence the mother’s
perceptions of police protection as well as the child’s weight. Furthermore, the key variables of


                                                 23
interest – overall neighborhood quality and specific neighborhood characteristics -- are based
purely on mother reports, with no external validation. Also, we are not able to account for any
characteristics of the child’s school, including the quality of physical education programs or of
school lunches in those schools, since the CoNLSY does not include that information. Insofar as
children from low-quality neighborhoods are also more likely to go to schools were meal plans
are of a lower quality and physical education programs are sub-standard, this could exacerbate
the detrimental effects of poor neighborhood quality on bodyweight. Finally, we are not able to
adequately explore what causal pathways might lead from perceptions of inadequate police
protection to increased child bodyweight.
        Since this is one of the first papers that explore the relationship between neighborhood
quality and children’s bodyweight outcomes using a national-level dataset, it would seem
premature to make any definitive policy recommendations before these results are validated via
further research. On the other hand, it can be argued that these results are somewhat promising
from a policy perspective. While policy-makers can probably do little about indifferent
neighbors, unsupervised children, or a general lack of respect for law and order, it may be
comparatively easy to provide resources that increase police-protection in low-income and
minority neighborhoods. 10 Another mechanism might be expanding the housing subsidies that
allows a low-income individual to move into a higher socioeconomic neighborhood, which
would presumably also have better police protection. 11
        At the same time, this paper suggests that if economic downturns and state budget cuts
lead to a decrease in state police forces, then the detrimental effects of that may extend beyond
expected increases in crime, and also serve to exacerbate the obesity crisis.




10
   Alternate policy recommendations may include giving mothers the resources to acquire more
education, or giving women in inner-city neighborhoods assistance in order to move out of such
neighborhoods. Both of these had significant effects on the probability of reporting inadequate police
protection in Table 8. However, it is likely that there exist other unobservable time-variant maternal
characteristics that correlate both with her getting further education/living the inner city and reporting
adequate police protection, and more research is required to establish whether these are, indeed, causal
effects.
11
   We could not explore this issue with the NLSY because, while it does report on the receipt of housing
subsidies, it does not distinguish between living in a public housing facility in a low income
neighborhood or living in free standing rental space in a better neighborhood.



                                                    24
25
Table 1. Descriptive Statistics
Variable       Description                                     Full Sample      White        Black       Hispanic    Poor Neighborhood A   Good Neighborhood B
                                                                (N=12256)     (N=6434)     (N=3431)     (N=2391)          (N=2805)              (N=9451)
                                                                   Mean         Mean         Mean          Mean
bmipct         Child BMI Percentile                               56.904       55.021       60.457        56.871           59.191                 56.22
                                                                 (34.508)     (34.002)     (34.608)      (35.318)         (34.043)              (34.543)
bmiz           Child BMI-z score                                   0.134        0.056        0.287         0.125            0.205                 0.112
                                                                  (1.881)      (1.783)      (1.950)       (2.022)          (2.081)               (1.810)
vow            Binary indicator child is obese                     0.171        0.144        0.214         0.180            0.190                 0.164
ngh_rate_n~d   Neighborhood rates ‘fair’/ ‘poor’                   0.230        0.123        0.386         0.292              --                    --
ngh_rate_v~d   Neighborhood rates ‘excellent’ /‘very good’         0.563        0.702        0.381         0.452              --                    --
ngh_nolaw      No respect for law & order a problem                0.367        0.283         0.504        0.394            0.778                 0.244
ngh_crime      Crime and violence a problem                        0.304        0.191         0.473        0.365            0.670                 0.190
ngh_bldg       Run-down buildings a problem                        0.199        0.139         0.307        0.206            0.454                 0.123
no_police      Lack of police protection a problem                 0.252        0.165         0.365        0.323            0.522                 0.171
no_trans       Lack of transport a problem                         0.301        0.262         0.373        0.299            0.330                 0.291
no_super       Unsupervised children a problem                     0.456        0.394         0.571        0.459            0.778                 0.360
no_care        Uncaring neighbors a problem                        0.332        0.263         0.426        0.383            0.623                 0.244
no_jobs        Too many jobless people a problem                   0.354        0.213         0.556        0.443            0.679                 0.258
male           Child is male                                       0.505        0.506         0.489        0.526            0.528                 0.498
Black          Mother is African-American                          0.281          --            --           --             0.472                 0.224
Hisp           Mother is Hispanic                                  0.195          --            --           --             0.247                 0.179
childage       Child’s age                                         7.197        7.017         7.469        7.291            7.400                 7.135
                                                                  (2.531)      (2.535)       (2.518)      (2.503)          (2.481)               (2.542)
scaletape      BMI from scale & tape measures by interviewer       0.697        0.679         0.730        0.700            0.700                 0.696
mom_age        Mother’s age                                       26.585       27.169        25.766       26.196           25.711                26.840
                                                                  (3.881)      (3.752)       (3.935)      (3.881)          (3.821)               (3.860)
no_smsa        Does not live in MSA                                0.173        0.207         0.158        0.103            0.141                 0.182
cen_city       Lives in central city                               0.164        0.079         0.294        0.207            0.285                 0.128
momnowork      Mother not employed outside home                    0.215        0.199         0.220        0.250            0.287                 0.193
dadpresent     Father in household                                 0.628        0.772         0.347        0.647            0.396                 0.699
tnfaminc_r~l   Annual family income (real)                       60883.07     73692.61      40655.15     55639.23         37762.99              67772.79
                                                               (104320.20)   (118856.40)   (72355.05)   (96230.12)       (49040.12)           ( 114903.40)
momed12_15     Mother has some college                             0.700        0.680         0.737        0.701            0.721                 0.692
momed16_20     Mother has at least 4 yrs of college                0.189        0.264         0.116        0.096            0.061                 0.226
mombmi81       Mother’s BMI, 1981                                 21.887       21.388        22.604       22.196           22.470                21.715
                                                                  (3.509)      (3.270)       (3.857)      (3.387)          (3.875)               (3.373)
Notes: A: Those who rate neighborhood as fair or poor. B: Those who rate neighborhood as ‘good’ or higher.
                                                                                 26
Table 2. Regression Results for Child BMI, Obesity-Risk & Overall Neighborhood Ratings.
                                 Model 1                                         Model 2                                         Model 3
                    BMI-        BMI-z score        Obese            BMI-        BMI-z score        Obese            BMI-        BMI-z score        Obese
                 percentile                                      percentile                                      percentile
                      β               β               β               β               β               β               β               β               β
                   (t-stat)        (t-stat)        (t-stat)        (t-stat)        (t-stat)        (t-stat)        (t-stat)        (t-stat)        (t-stat)
ngh_rate_n~d      2.421**         0.024**           0.059         2.350**           0.017           0.072           1.710           0.043           0.011
                   (2.24)          (2.25)          (0.98)          (2.13)          (1.56)          (1.21)          (1.57)          (0.73)          (0.99)
ngh_rate_g~d        0.999          0.017*           0.029           0.792           0.011           0.027           0.309           0.005           0.006
                   (1.03)          (1.70)          (0.56)          (0.81)          (1.08)          (0.53)          (0.32)          (0.11)          (0.61)
male                0.306        0.028***           0.058           0.413        0.029***           0.064           0.567          0.071*        0.030***
                   (0.37)          (3.28)          (1.41)          (0.51)          (3.34)          (1.55)          (0.70)          (1.73)          (3.59)
Black            4.461***        0.070***        0.200***        4.052***        0.064***        0.196***         2.613**         0.130**        0.050***
                   (3.64)          (5.52)          (3.20)          (3.18)          (4.79)          (3.02)          (2.08)          (2.03)          (3.78)
Hisp                2.261        0.046***           0.101           2.064        0.039***           0.103           1.173           0.062         0.030**
                   (1.63)          (3.55)          (1.42)          (1.47)          (2.96)          (1.45)          (0.86)          (0.90)          (2.29)
childage         1.379***        -0.007***       0.068***        1.314***        -0.007***       0.066***        1.058***        0.054***        -0.010***
                   (5.76)          (-2.83)         (5.46)          (5.46)          (-2.97)         (5.22)          (4.44)          (4.24)          (-4.14)
scaletape        -7.114***       -0.085***       -0.369***       -7.135***       -0.085***       -0.368***       -7.04 ***       -0.364***       -0.084***
                   (-9.36)         (-9.97)         (-8.93)         (-9.41)        (-10.06)         (-8.96)         (-9.34)         (-8.87)        (-10.04)
mom_age             0.155           0.000           0.005           0.193           0.001           0.005          -0.001          -0.004          -0.001
                   (0.71)          (-0.07)         (0.43)          (0.87)          (0.44)          (0.47)          (0.00)          (-0.32)         (-0.47)
no_smsa             0.361           0.006           0.049           0.220           0.002           0.047          -0.431           0.017          -0.005
                   (0.28)          (0.50)          (0.71)          (0.17)          (0.16)          (0.69)          (-0.35)         (0.26)          (-0.38)
cen_city            1.423           0.011           0.055           1.359           0.010           0.056           0.874           0.034           0.005
                   (1.18)          (0.80)          (0.88)          (1.13)          (0.76)          (0.89)          (0.74)          (0.55)          (0.42)
momnowork                                                        -4.605***       -0.028***       -0.231***       -4.386***       -0.221***       -0.026***
                                                                   (-4.40)         (-2.85)         (-4.01)         (-4.22)         (-3.83)         (-2.68)
dadpresent                                                         -0.872          -0.002          -0.009          -0.900          -0.011          -0.003
                                                                   (-0.83)         (-0.20)         (-0.17)         (-0.86)         (-0.20)         (-0.24)
tnfaminc_r~l                                                        0.000        0.000***           0.000           0.000           0.000           0.000
                                                                   (-0.73)         (-2.81)         (-1.05)         (-0.38)         (-0.69)         (-2.47)
momed12_15                                                         -0.702          -0.011           0.018          -0.086           0.046          -0.005
                                                                   (-0.47)         (-0.67)         (0.21)          (-0.06)         (0.52)          (-0.33)
momed16_20                                                         -1.797        -0.051***         -0.006          -0.623           0.047         -0.039**
                                                                   (-0.96)         (-2.59)         (-0.06)         (-0.34)         (0.46)          (-2.06)
mombmi81                                                                                                         1.470***        0.067***        0.015***
                                                                                                                  (10.05)          (8.72)          (9.97)
R2                  0.07           0.06            0.04            0.08              0.06           0.05             0.10            0.07            0.06
F                   60.23          44.77           23.87           47.64            34.49          20.83            54.67           35.76           26.29
Notes: All models also include region fixed effects and year fixed effects. Standard errors clustered upon mothers. *: p<0.10, **: p<0.05, ***: p<0.01.
                                                                               27
Table 3. Child BMI, Obesity Risk, and Specific Neighborhood Characteristics.


                                                     BMI-percentile      Obese
                                                           β                β
                                                        (t-stat)         (t-stat)
ngh_nolaw   No respect for law & order a problem         0.94            -0.004
                                                        (1.11)           (-0.50)
ngh_crime   Crime and violence a problem                 1.13             0.007
                                                        (1.27)           (0.82)
no_super    Unsupervised children a problem              0.27            -0.001
                                                        (0.33)           (-0.33)
ngh_bldg    Run-down buildings a problem                 0.44            -0.005
                                                        (0.43)           (-0.49)
no_jobs     Too many jobless people a problem            1.09             0.01
                                                        (1.19)           (0.99)
no_trans    Lack of transport a problem                  0.39            -0.003
                                                        (0.52)           (0.39)
no_care     Uncaring neighbors a problem               1.84**            0.02**
                                                        (2.23)           (2.31)
no_police   Inadequate police protection a problem     3.65***          0.03***
                                                        (3.98)           (2.82)
Notes: All models also control for the variables included in model 2, Table 2, as well as region and year fixed effects. Standard errors clustered upon mothers.
*: p<0.10, **: p<0.05, ***: p<0.01.




                                                                                    28
Table 4. Different Models for Child BMI, Obesity Risk, and Lack of Police Protection, Full
Sample and by Race-Ethnicity.

                                              BMI-percentile   Risk of Obesity
Full Sample                                         β                 β
                                                 (t-stat)          (t-stat)
Models excluding mother’s BMI                   3.65***           0.03***
                                                 (3.98)            (2.82)
Models including mother’s BMI                   3.10***            0.02**
                                                 (3.46)            (2.27)
Models with maternal fixed effects              2.44***             0.016
                                                 (2.64)            (1.45)
Models with child fixed effects                  1.93**             0.01
                                                 (2.04)            (1.08)
Models including maternal propensity scores     3.22***            0.02**
                                                 (3.47)            (2.40)
Full Sample,
Includes Other Neighborhood Characteristics
Models excluding mother’s BMI                    3.77 ***         0.03***
                                                  (3.76)           (2.70)
Models including mother’s BMI                    3.44***          0.03***
                                                  (3.47)           (2.44)
Models with maternal fixed effects                2.37**            0.01
                                                  (2.41)           (1.33)
Models with child fixed effects                   1.93**            0.01
                                                  (2.04)           (1.14)
Models including maternal propensity scores      3.49***           0.02**
                                                  (3.42)           (2.45)
Non-Hispanic Whites

Models excluding mother’s BMI                     2.45*            0.02*
                                                  (1.64)           (1.94)
Models including mother’s BMI                      1.72             0.02
                                                  (1.18)           (1.46)
Models with maternal fixed effects                 1.26             0.02
                                                  (0.89)           (1.11)
Models with child fixed effects                    0.51             0.01
                                                  (0.37)           (0.60)
Models including maternal propensity scores        1.81             0.02
                                                  (1.18)           (1.57)
Blacks

Models excluding mother’s BMI                    3.09**             0.02
                                                 (2.14)            (1.34)
Models including mother’s BMI                    2.65*              0.01
                                                 (1.91)            (0.79)
Models with maternal fixed effects               2.97*              0.02
                                                 (1.86)            (0.94)
Models with child fixed effects                  2.94**             0.02
                                                 (1.96)            (0.91)
Models including maternal propensity scores      3.01**             0.02
                                                 (2.06)            (1.18)
Hispanics

Models excluding mother’s BMI                    5.32***            0.03
                                                  (2.84)           (1.52)

                                                   29
Models including mother’s BMI                      4.67**            0.03
                                                   (2.51)           (1.29)
Models with maternal fixed effects                 3.68*             0.01
                                                   (1.85)           (0.46)
Models with child fixed effects                     2.64             0.01
                                                   (1.36)           (0.44)
Models including maternal propensity scores        4.55**            0.02
                                                   (2.41)           (0.83)
Notes: The second set of models control for the full array of specific neighborhood characteristics in
addition to inadequate police protection. All models also control for the variables included in model 2,
Table 2, as well as region and year fixed effects. Standard errors clustered upon mothers.
*: p<0.10, **: p<0.05, ***: p<0.01.




                                                    30
Table 5: Reported Lack of Police Protection, Poor Neighborhood Quality & Respondent
Characteristics.

               Lack of Police Protection A Problem   Overall Neighborhood Rating ‘Fair’ or ‘Poor’
                                β                                         β
                             (t-stat)                                  (t-stat)
Black                       0.129 ***                                0.163 ***
                              (7.07)                                    (9.03)
Hisp                        0.083 ***                                 0.082***
                              (3.77)                                    (4.09)
childage                       0.003                                   -0.004
                              (1.03)                                   (-1.22)
mom_age                       -0.001                                   -0.003
                              (-0.32)                                  (-1.10)
no_smsa                      0.047 **                                 -0.029 *
                              (2.49)                                   (-1.85)
cen_city                    0.119 ***                                 0.116***
                              (6.52)                                    (6.20)
momnowork                   0.044 **                                 0.056 ***
                              (2.51)                                    (3.58)
dadpresent                    -0.035                                 -0.125 ***
                              (-2.33)                                  (-8.61)
tnfaminc_r~l                0.000 ***                                0.000 ***
                              (-2.91)                                  (-5.63)
momed12_15                 -0.108 ***                                -0.115 ***
                              (-4.11)                                  (-4.59)
momed16_20                 -0.180 ***                                -0.191 ***
                              (-6.18)                                  (-7.07)
R2                             0.09                                     0.150
F                            21.03                                      42.93
Notes: All models also control for region and year fixed effects. Standard errors clustered upon mothers.
*: p<0.10, **: p<0.05, ***: p<0.01.




                                                     31
Table 6: Oaxaca-Blinder Decomposition of BMI-Percentile Difference.
                               White v Black                             White v Hispanic
                                     β                                          β
                                  (t-stat)                                   (t-stat)
                Differential    Explained      Unexplained   Differential   Explained   Unexplained

Prediction_1    55.059***                                    55.059***
                 (80.442)                                     (80.439)
Prediction_2    60.462***                                    56.966***
                 (69.952)                                     (52.198)
Difference      -5.402***                                      -1.907
                 (-4.900)                                     (-1.480)
no_police2                         -0.348          -0.339                     -0.268         -0.944
                                 (-1.173)        (-0.458)                    (-1.165)       (-1.244)
mombmi81                        -1.809***          2.927                    -1.192***         -3.488
                                 (-4.720)         (0.405)                    (-3.555)       (-0.402)
male                               0.009           0.406                      -0.012          -0.655
                                  (0.474)         (0.433)                    (-0.486)       (-0.599)
childage                          -0.295*          -5.336                    -0.180*          -6.996
                                 (-1.946)        (-1.334)                    (-1.811)       (-1.542)
scaletape                        0.411***          -0.921                       0.172          0.621
                                  (3.807)        (-0.675)                     (1.628)        (0.449)
mom_age                             0.187          8.511                       0.130          -0.056
                                  (0.422)         (0.676)                     (0.421)       (-0.004)
no_smsa                            0.001           0.088                       0.002          0.387
                                  (0.012)         (0.184)                     (0.012)        (0.974)
cen_city                            0.094           0.148                       0.058         -0.477
                                  (0.214)         (0.186)                     (0.214)       (-0.700)
momnowork                          0.126          -0.311                      0.274*          -0.901
                                  (1.185)        (-0.616)                     (1.879)       (-1.298)
dadpresent                         -0.450          0.228                      -0.130         -1.247
                                 (-0.688)         (0.266)                    (-0.683)       (-0.739)
tnfaminc_real                      -0.078         -0.066                      -0.041         -0.089
                                 (-0.501)        (-0.177)                    (-0.498)       (-0.225)
momedu                             -0.462          -3.414                      -0.597        -2.369
                                 (-1.416)        (-1.113)                    (-1.296)       (-0.791)
region                           -1.050**         4.571*                       -0.992        6.045*
                                 (-2.390)         (1.799)                    (-1.614)        (1.801)
years                           0.934***        -4.374**                    1.003***         -1.632
                                  (4.174)        (-2.255)                     (4.163)       (-0.722)
Total                           -2.729***        -2.673*                     -1.771*         -0.136
                                 (-2.756)        (-1.910)                    (-1.955)       (-0.093)
*: p<0.10, **: p<0.05, ***: p<0.01.




                                                        32
Table 7: Oaxaca-Blinder Decomposition of BMI-Percentile Difference With Fixed Effects..


                               White v Black                           White v Hispanic
                                     β                                         β
                                  (t-stat)                                  (t-stat)
                Differential    Explained    Unexplained    Differential   Explained   Unexplained

Prediction_1    55.059***                                   55.059***
                (155.273)                                   (155.273)
Prediction_2    60.462***                                   56.966***
                (112.723)                                    (90.582)
Difference      -5.402***                                   -1.907***
                 (-8.402)                                    (-2.641)
no_police2                        -0.256         -0.626                      -0.197       -0.773
                                 (-0.887)       (-0.796)                    (-0.886)    (-0.985)
male                               0.022          0.722                      -0.027       -1.580
                                 (1.052)        (0.849)                     (-1.094)    (-1.558)
childage                           0.040          3.403                       0.025      -10.358
                                 (0.086)        (0.236)                     (0.086)      (-0.656)
scaletape                       0.324***          0.196                     0.136**        0.560
                                 (4.321)        (0.154)                     (2.035)      (0.425)
mom_age                           -0.968         32.948                      -0.673      -18.572
                                 (-0.665)       (0.663)                     (-0.664)    (-0.331)
no_smsa                           -0.033         -0.639                      -0.073       -0.182
                                 (-0.373)       (-0.989)                    (-0.374)    (-0.390)
cen_city                           0.230          0.993                       0.142       -0.911
                                 (0.537)        (1.122)                     (0.537)      (-1.244)
momnowork                          0.062         -0.100                       0.135        0.311
                                 (1.434)        (-0.163)                    (1.611)      (0.387)
dadpresent                        -0.043        2.369**                      -0.012       -1.053
                                 (-0.055)       (1.994)                     (-0.055)    (-0.466)
tnfaminc_real                      0.116         -0.161                       0.061        0.291
                                 (0.790)        (-0.372)                    (0.786)      (0.499)
momedu                            -0.820          0.233                      -0.800        6.560
                                 (-0.692)       (0.025)                     (-0.521)     (0.750)
region                             0.241          2.836                      2.931*     -19.614*
                                 (0.205)        (0.374)                     (1.690)      (-1.832)
years                           1.300***         -7.084                    1.382***        1.009
                                 (2.584)        (-1.116)                    (2.598)      (0.143)
Total                              0.215       -5.618***                      3.029     -4.936**
                                 (0.107)        (-2.688)                    (1.268)     (-1.991)
*: p<0.10, **: p<0.05, ***: p<0.01.




                                                           33
Table 8. Lack of Police Protection and County & Respondent Characteristics. By Race-
Ethnicity.
                         Models Without Fixed Effects                                Models With Fixed Effects
                                        β                                                        β
                                     (t-stat)                                                 (t-stat)
                     All       Whites        Blacks      Hispanic           All         Whites        Blacks      Hispanic
murder100k           -0.000       -0.000    -0.003**          -0.002         0.003          0.002         0.004       -0.002
                   (-0.289)     (-0.154)     (-2.570)      (-0.722)        (1.451)        (0.744)      (1.336)      (-0.353)
rape100k             0.000*        0.000         0.001         0.000        -0.000        -0.001*     0.003**     -0.004***
                    (1.921)      (0.769)       (1.401)       (0.220)     (-0.374)        (-1.730)      (2.191)      (-2.614)
rob100k               0.000        0.000        0.000*         0.000         0.000          0.000        -0.000        0.000
                    (1.338)      (0.184)       (1.800)       (0.709)       (1.040)        (0.964)     (-0.084)       (0.944)
aggas100k            0.000*       -0.000    0.000***           0.000         0.000          0.000         0.000       -0.000
                    (1.702)     (-0.169)       (3.328)       (0.815)       (0.635)        (0.616)       (0.598)     (-0.019)
burg100k             -0.000       0.000*        -0.000         0.000        -0.000          0.000      -0.000*         0.000
                   (-0.417)      (1.669)     (-0.986)        (0.030)     (-1.244)         (0.173)     (-1.722)       (0.941)
larc100k        -0.000***         -0.000   -0.000***          -0.000         0.000         -0.000         0.000        0.000
                   (-3.061)     (-1.108)     (-3.031)      (-0.718)        (0.528)       (-0.768)      (1.186)       (1.459)
mvtheft100k           0.000       -0.000         0.000         0.000         0.000          0.000         0.000       -0.000
                    (0.468)     (-0.800)       (0.690)       (0.611)       (0.123)        (0.325)       (0.756)     (-1.299)
arson100k             0.000        0.000         0.000         0.000    0.001***            0.001         0.001        0.000
                    (1.362)      (1.055)       (0.631)       (1.208)       (2.967)        (1.574)      (0.703)       (1.133)
unemplyrate          -0.001       0.004*        0.009*    -0.007**          -0.007         -0.004        -0.003        0.004
                   (-0.760)      (1.801)      (1.799)      (-2.330)      (-1.194)        (-0.568)     (-0.168)       (0.352)
pctBlack              0.000       -0.001        -0.001        -0.001      -0.020*          -0.016        -0.035        0.039
                    (0.465)     (-1.033)     (-1.043)      (-0.435)      (-1.795)        (-1.033)     (-1.624)       (0.812)
pcthisp          0.001***       0.001**    -0.005***           0.001        -0.005          0.008        -0.019        0.005
                    (3.048)      (2.117)     (-4.683)        (0.923)     (-0.730)         (0.884)     (-1.415)       (0.234)
pctfemhead       0.008***         0.004*    0.009***       0.008**           0.025         -0.002         0.061        0.031
                    (4.817)      (1.844)       (2.896)       (1.995)       (1.312)       (-0.093)      (1.599)       (0.612)
pcincome        -0.000***     -0.000***          0.000   -0.000***          -0.000          0.000        -0.000       -0.000
                   (-4.751)     (-4.311)       (0.801)     (-3.412)      (-0.461)         (1.170)     (-0.406)      (-1.142)
mom_age            -0.002*         0.001      -0.005*         -0.005        -0.002          0.001        -0.005       -0.001
                   (-1.949)      (0.751)     (-1.866)      (-1.531)      (-1.429)         (0.238)     (-1.617)      (-0.211)
no_smsa          0.044***         0.027*     0.063**          -0.021         0.001         -0.014         0.001       -0.060
                    (3.600)      (1.910)       (2.235)     (-0.556)        (0.027)       (-0.405)       (0.017)     (-0.632)
cen_city         0.081***       0.036**     0.109***           0.020    0.121***         0.067**     0.151***          0.007
                    (6.713)      (1.960)       (4.910)       (0.752)       (5.679)        (2.215)      (3.758)       (0.150)
momnowork        0.037***      0.033***         -0.003    0.075***         0.035*           0.033        -0.010      0.092*
                    (3.882)      (2.848)     (-0.162)        (3.222)       (1.920)        (1.416)     (-0.288)       (1.941)
dadpresent      -0.051***     -0.043***    -0.048***           0.026    -0.039**           -0.024        -0.035        0.025
                   (-6.034)     (-3.745)     (-2.705)        (1.211)     (-2.520)        (-1.078)     (-1.174)       (0.652)
tnfaminc_real   -0.000***     -0.000***       -0.000*       -0.000*    -0.000***        -0.000**         -0.000       -0.000
                   (-3.922)     (-2.606)     (-1.751)      (-1.652)      (-2.730)        (-2.311)     (-1.270)      (-0.665)
momed12_15      -0.121***     -0.128***    -0.171***          -0.015   -0.101***       -0.118***     -0.110**         -0.018
                   (-9.530)     (-6.304)     (-7.092)      (-0.598)      (-3.699)        (-2.717)     (-2.272)      (-0.359)
momed16_20      -0.196***     -0.193***    -0.248***        -0.067*    -0.165***       -0.154***    -0.189***         -0.027
                 (-12.623)      (-8.707)     (-7.216)      (-1.645)      (-5.276)        (-3.367)     (-2.945)      (-0.332)
R2                 0.087        0.043        0.102         0.031         0.172           0.215        0.180         0.118
F                    47.252       12.507        16.503         3.903         6.388          2.671         2.897        1.309
Notes: All models also control for region and year fixed effects. Standard errors clustered upon mothers.
*: p<0.10, **: p<0.05, ***: p<0.01.

                                                          34
REFERENCES.
   Argys, L and B. Sen. 2008. “Parental Time, Income and Children’s BMI.” Working paper.
Dept of Healthcare Organization & Policy, University of Alabama at Birmingham. Earlier
versions of this paper were presented at the Eastern Economics Association Annual Conference,
Philadelphia, PA, February 2006, and the International Health Economics Association 5th World
Congress, Barcelona, Spain, July 2005.
   Averett, S. L. and S. Korenman. 1996 “The Economic Reality of ‘the Beauty Myth’:
Economic Differentials by Body Mass.” Journal of Human Resources, 31(2): 304.
   Bhattacharya, J., and W.B. Vogt, 2007 "Do Instrumental Variables Belong in Propensity
Scores?" National Bureau of Economic Research Technical Working Paper Series, No. 343.
   Biron, P., J. Mongeau, and D. Bertrand. 1977. “Familial Resemblance of Body Weight and
Weight/Height in 374 Homes with Adopted Children.” Journal of Pediatrics, 91: 555.
   Blinder, A. S., 1973, "Wage Discrimination: Reduced Form and Structural Estimates,"
Journal of Human Resources 8, 436-455.
   Boutelle, K., J.A. Fulkerson, D. Neumark-Stzainer and M. Story , 2003. “Mothers’
Perceptions of their Adolescents’ Weight Status: Are They Accurate?” Obesity 12(11): 1754-
1757.
   Brownson RC, Baker EA, Housemann RA, Brennan LK, & Bacak SJ. 2001. "Environmental
and policy determinants of physical activity in the United States." Am J Public Health. 91:
1995–2003.
   Burdette, HL, TA. Wadden & Robert C. Whitaker. 2006. "Neighborhood Safety, Collective
Efficacy, and Obesity in Women with Young Children." Obesity 14: 518-525.
   Case, A., D. Lubotsky, and C. Paxson. 2002. “Economic Status and Health in Childhood:
The Origins of the Gradient.” American Economic Review 92(5): 1308-1334
   Cawley J. 2004. “The Impact of Obesity on Wages.” Journal of Human Resources, 39(2):
451-474.
   Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1999. "Neighborhood safety and the prevalence
of physical inactivity: selected states, 1996." MMWR. 48:143– 6.
   Coate, D. 1983. “The Relationship between Diet, Parent’s Fatness, and Obesity in Children
and Adolescents.” National Bureau of Economics Working Paper No. 1072.
   Coates, T.J. and C.E. Thoresen. “Treating Obesity in Children and Adolescents: A Review.”
Am J Public Health 68: 103.

                                               35
   Cummins SK, Jackson RJ, 2004. "The Built Environment and Children's Health," Pediatric
Clinics of North America, 48(5), pp. 1241-1252.
http://www.cdc.gov/healthyplaces/articles/The%20Built%20Environment%20and%20Children%
20Health.pdf#search=%22built%20environment%20and%20children's%20health%22. Last
accessed Sept 2006.
   D’agostino RB. 1998. “Tutorial in biostatistics: Propensity score methods for bias reduction
in comparison of a treatment to a non-randomized control group.” Stat Med 1998; 17: 2265-
2281.
   Dennison, B. A., T. A. Erb, and P. L. Jenkins. 2002. “Television Viewing and Television in
Bedroom Associated with Overweight Risk among Low-Income Preschool Children.”
Pediatrics. 109(6): 1028-1035.
   Dietz W & Gortmaker S. 1985. "Do we fatten our children at the television set? obesity and
television viewing in children and adolescents." Pediatrics 75:807-812.
   Dietz, W.H. 1997. “Periods of Risk in Childhood for the Development of Adult Obesity –
What Do We Need to Learn?” Journal of Nutrition, 127: 1884-1886.

   Field, AE, NR. Cook & MW. Gillman. 2005. " Weight Status in Childhood as a Predictor of
Becoming Overweight or Hypertensive in Early Adulthood." Obesity 13:163-169.
   Hango, Darcy W. 2002. The Anchoring of American Families to their Homes and
Neighbourhoods: Determining Factors of Residential Mobility. Working Paper. Department of
Sociology, Ohio State University.
   Hedley, A.A., C.L. Ogden, C.L. Johnson, M.D. Carroll et al. 2004. “Prevalence of Obesity
and Overweight among U.S. Children, Adolescents and Adults 1999-2002.” JAMA 291(23):
2347-2350.
   Humpel, N, N Owen & E. Leslie. 2002. "Environmental Factors Associated with Adults’
Participation in Physical Activity: A Review." Am J Prev Med 22(3):188–199.
   Jann, B. (2008). A Stata implementation of the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition. ETH Zurich
SociologyWorking Paper No. 5, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich
   Jones, F. L., 1983, "On Decomposing the Wage Gap: A Critical Comment on Blinder's
Method," Journal of Human Resources 18, 126-130.
   Leventhal, T., Fauth, R. C. & Brooks-Gunn, J. 2005 "Neighborhood Poverty and Public
Policy: A 5-Year Follow-up of Children’s Educational Outcomes in the New York City Moving
to Opportunity Demonstration." Developmental Psychology, 41(6): 933-52.



                                               36
     Lumeng, JC, D Appugliese, H J. Cabral, RH. Bradley & B Zuckerman. 2006.
"Neighborhood Safety and Overweight Status in Children." Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 160:25-
31
     Manlove, E.E. and L. Vernon-Feagans. 2002. “Caring for Infant Daughters and Sons in
Dual-earner Households: Maternal Reports of Father Involvement in Weekday Time and
Tasks.” Infant and Child Development, 11(4): 305-20.
     National Center for Health Statistics. 2008. “Prevalence of Overweight Among Children and
Adolescents: United States, 1999-2002” Downloaded from:
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/pubs/pubd/hestats/overwght99.htm Accessed: Feb. 2009.
     Nayga, R. M. 2001. “Effect of Schooling on Obesity: Is Health Knowledge a Moderating
Factor?” Education Economics 9(2): 129-137.
     Nielsen, H. S., 2000, "Wage discrimination in Zambia: an extension of the Oaxaca-Blinder
decomposition," Applied Economics Letters 7, 405-408(4).
     Oaxaca, R., 1973, "Male-Female Wage Differentials in Urban Labor Markets," International
Economic Review 14, 693-709.
     Pagan, J. A. and A. Davila. 1997. “Obesity, Occupational Attainment, and Earnings.”
Social Science Quarterly, 78(3): 756-770.
     Phillips R.G. and A.J. Hill. 1998. “Fat, Plain, but not Friendless: Self-esteem and peer
acceptance of obese pre-adolescent girls.” International Journal of Obesity 22: 287-293.
     Power, C. J.K. Lake, and T.J. Cole. 1997. “Measurement and Long-term Health Risks of
child and Adolescent Fatness.” International Journal of Obesity. 21: 507-526.
     Robinson, T. N. 1999. “Reducing Children’s Television viewing to prevent Obesity: A
randomized controlled trial.” JAMA 282 (16) 1561-1567.

     Robinson, T. N., L. D. Hammer, J. D. Killen, H. C. Kraemer, et al . 1993. “Does Television
Viewing Increase Obesity and Reduce Physical Activity? Cross-sectional and Longitudinal
Analyses among Adolescent Girls.” Pediatrics, 91(2): 273-280.
     Romero A, Robinson T, Karemer H, et al. 2001. "Are perceived neighborhood hazards a
barrier to physical activity in children?" Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 155: 1143-1148.
     Rosenbaum PR & Rubin DB. 1984. “Reducing bias in observational studies using
subclassification on propensity scores.” J Am Stat Assoc ; 79: 516-524.
     Schwimmer, J.B., T.M. Burwinkle and J.W. Varni. 2003. “Health-related Quality of Life of
Severely Obese Children and Adolescents.” JAMA 289(14): 1813-1819.
     Sen, B & Swaminathan, S. 2007. “Maternal Prenatal Substance Use and Behavior
                                                37
Problems Among Children in The U.S.” J Ment Health Policy Econ 10, 189-206
   Sherwood, N.E., M. Story and E. Obarzanek. 2004. “Correlates of Obesity in African-
American Girls: An Overview.” Obesity 12 (Supplement): 3S-6S.
   Sobal, J. & Stunkard, A.J. 1989. Socioeconomic status and obesity: A review of the
literature. Psychological Bulletin, 105, 260-275.
   South, S J. & Deane, GD. 1993. “Race and residential mobility: Individual determinants and
structural constraints,” Social Forces 72(1): 147-167.
   South, S J. & Crowder, KD. 1997. “Escaping distressed neighborhoods: Individual,
community, and metropolitan influences,” Am J Sociology 102(4): 1040-1084.
   Strauss, R.S. & Knight, J. 1999. Influence of the home environment on the development of
obesity in children. Pediatrics, 101 (6).
   Strauss, R.S. and Pollack, H.A. 2001. “Epidemic Increase in Childhood Overweight, 1986-
1988.” JAMA 280(22): 2845-2848.
   Troiano, R.P. & Flegal, K.M. 1998. “Overweight children and adolescents: Description,
epidemiology, and demographics.” Pediatrics, 101 (3), 497-504.
   U.S. Bureau of Health Professions. "Area Resource File (Arf)," Department of Health and
Human Services Health Resources and Services Administration, Rockville, MD, 2007.
   U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. "Labor Force Data by County, Annual Averages
Downloaded from Http://Www.Bls.Gov/Lau/#Data Date Accessed: January 15, 2009." 1992 -
2000.
   U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation. " Uniform Crime Reports County Data. Retrieved
November 18, 2008, from the University of Virginia, Geospatial and Statistical Data Center:
Http://Fisher.Lib.Virginia.Edu/Collections/Stats/Crime/." 2004.
   Waizenhofer, R.N., C.M. Buchanan, and J. Jackson-Newsom. 2004. “Mothers’ and Fathers’
Knowledge of Adolescents’ Daily Activities: Its Sources and Its Links with Adolescent
Adjustment.” Journal of Family Psychology, 18(2): 348-60.




                                                38
