                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        EFFECTS OF WEIGHT ON ADOLESCENT EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT

                                         Robert Kaestner
                                        Michael Grossman
                                        Benjamin Yarnoff

                                       Working Paper 14994
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14994


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2009




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Robert Kaestner, Michael Grossman, and Benjamin Yarnoff. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Effects of Weight on Adolescent Educational Attainment
Robert Kaestner, Michael Grossman, and Benjamin Yarnoff
NBER Working Paper No. 14994
May 2009
JEL No. I1,I21

                                             ABSTRACT

In this paper, we investigate the association between weight and adolescent’s educational attainment,
as measured by highest grade attended, highest grade completed, and drop out status. Data for the
study came from the 1997 cohort of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), which contains
a large, national sample of teens between the ages of 14 and 18. We obtained estimates of the association
between weight and educational attainment using several regression model specifications that controlled
for a variety of observed characteristics. Our results suggest that, in general, teens that are overweight
or obese have levels of attainment that are about the same as teens with average weight.


Robert Kaestner                                     Benjamin Yarnoff
Institute of Government and Public Affairs          Department of Economics
University of Illinois                              University of Illinois at Chicago
815 West Van Buren Street, Suite 525                601 South Morgan Street
Chicago, IL 60607                                   Chicago, IL 60607
and NBER                                            byarno2@uic.edu
kaestner@uic.edu

Michael Grossman
Ph.D. Program in Economics
City University of New York Graduate Center
365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10016-4309
and NBER
mgrossman@gc.cuny.edu
Introduction

        The documented growth in obesity over the last thirty years has resulted in widespread

public and private concern over the consequences associated with this significant change in the

human body. Most of this concern is focused on health, as obesity has been linked to poor

health, particularly diabetes and cardiovascular disease (NHLBI 1998). The perceived

seriousness of the health consequences of obesity has resulted in an explosion of research

seeking to identify the causes of obesity and polices that may reduce obesity.

        While the health consequences of obesity are clearly important, researchers and others

have recognized that obesity may adversely affect other determinants of well being such as

earnings and marriage.1 Obesity may also affect educational attainment, which is arguably the

most important determinant of well being. Surprisingly, there is little research on this issue

despite widespread belief that obesity has a negative impact on children’s, and thus adult,

educational achievement (National Education Association 1994).

        Obesity may affect educational achievement in several ways. First, peers and teachers

may discriminate against overweight and obese children and this will adversely affect

educational achievement (National Education Association 1994). Second, obesity may affect

health in ways that lower achievement. Obesity is associated with sleeping disorders (e.g., sleep

apnea) and depression and these illnesses may result in poor cognitive functioning and more

missed days of school. Third, obesity may affect how children spend their time and specifically

how much time they spend studying. Overweight and obese children may spend less time in

physical activity and engaged in social activities, and as a result, spend more time studying,

which suggests that obesity may positively affect educational achievement.


1
 See Averett and Korenman (1996), Cawley (2004), Cawley et al. (1996), Fu and Goldman (1996), Sobal et al.
(1992), and Gortmaker et al. (1993).


                                                                                                             1
         The possibility that obesity may affect education is more than a private issue of concern

only to families. While it is true that families will make decisions about food consumption and

children’s education that incorporates any effects of obesity on education, these decisions will, in

part, reflect government policy. For example, farm subsidies affect the price of food, and

transportation policy and land regulation affect the price of physical activity (e.g., walking).

These government interventions will partly determine obesity, and therefore possibly determine

education. Thus, analyses of the effect of obesity on children’s educational achievement are

particularly relevant for public policy. Moreover, if obesity lowers educational attainment, this

will worsen the already significant health problems of obese persons given the protective effects

of education on health (Grossman 2006).

         In this paper, we investigate the effect of obesity on educational attainment of

adolescents. We study a nationally representative sample of children ages 14 to 18 drawn from

the 1997 cohort of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth. Our results indicate that weight

status (under- and overweight) does not have large effects on educational attainment, as

measured by grade progression and drop out status. While we cannot rule out the possibility that

weight may have small effects on educational attainment, there is little evidence that being under

or overweight has systematically positive or negative effects on grade progression and the

probability of dropping out.

Previous Literature2

         There are relatively few studies of the effects of obesity on educational achievement.3

Studies of adolescents often find negative associations between obesity and educational


2
 This section draws heavily on Kaestner and Grossman (2008).
3
 There is a somewhat larger, although still relatively small, literature on the effects of child health on educational
achievement and some of these papers use weight as an indicator of child health (e.g., Edwards and Grossman 1979;
Shakotko et al. 1981; Blau and Grossberg 1992; and Korenman, Miller and Sjaastad 1994; Rosenzweig and Wolpin


                                                                                                                     2
achievement. Shakotko, Edwards, and Grossman (1981) investigated the effect of being overweight in

childhood (ages 6-11) on scores from the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC) and the Wide

Range Achievement Test (WRAT) in adolescence (ages 12-17) using children who were examined in two

consecutive National Health Examination Surveys (II and III). Estimates were obtained in the context of

a Granger-causality model. Coefficients of overweight were positive, but not significant. Falkner et al.

(2001) studied grade progression among 10th, 11th, and 12th grade students in Connecticut.

Results from multivariate regression analyses indicated that obese females were 1.51 times more

likely to be held back a grade than normal weight females. A similar association was not found

for males. Ding et al. (2008) studied the GPA of high school students in northern Virginia.

They performed an instrumental variables estimation using a genetic obesity marker as an

instrument for obesity and found that obese females had GPAs 0.45 points lower than normal

weight females. This association was not found for males. Sabia (2007) studied a

geographically broader sample of adolescents aged 14 to 17 drawn from the National

Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent Health, and he used a variety of statistical methods (e.g.,

fixed effects and instrumental variables) to account for potential confounding from omitted

variables. In general, he found that obesity was negatively correlated with grade point average

(GPA), although the most robust and consistent evidence of this association was limited to white,

female adolescents. For this group, the GPA of obese females was approximately 10 percent

lower than that of normal weight females. However, Crosnoe and Muller (2004), who also used

data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent Health, found no effect of obesity on

GPA after controlling for prior achievement. Additionally, Fletcher and Lehrer (2008) use data

from the National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent Health and find no effect of obesity on



1994; Kaestner and Corman 1995). However, all but Shakotko et al. (1981) and Edwards and Grossman (1979)
focused on underweight as a measure of health.


                                                                                                           3
PIAT scores after controlling for confounding factors with fixed effects and instrumental

variables. Finally, Sigfusdotir et al. (2006) found that among Icelandic youth aged 14 to 15, a

high Body Mass Index (1 or 2 standard deviations above mean) was associated with lower grades

after adjusting for personal and family characteristics. While not an exhaustive review, these

studies are the largest and most sophisticated and their findings suggest that obesity is associated

with lower educational achievement of adolescents.4

        While the findings from previous studies suggest that obesity has an adverse effect on

adolescent educational achievement, more study is warranted. First, there are relatively few

studies and only three that use nationally representative data from the US (Sabia 2007; Crosnoe

and Muller 2004; Fletcher and Lehrer 2008). These three studies use the same data (National

Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health) and surprisingly reached different conclusions. The

paucity of research in this area is significant given the importance of education to lifetime well

being. Here we begin to address this shortfall by providing an analysis of the effect of weight on

adolescent educational achievement using a large, national sample of children aged 14 to 18 that

have not been previously used to study this question. Second, more research is needed that

recognizes that current educational achievement is a function of a lifetime of influences (Todd

and Wolpin 2003, 2007). Past research has not paid appropriate attention to this issue and as a

result has proceeded in an ad hoc basis that may explain some of the inconsistent findings of past

research. In this paper, the cumulative nature of educational achievement is a central focus and

we provide an arguably more theoretically consistent analysis than prior studies.




4
 Canning and Mayer (1967) compared obese and non-obese high school student in suburban Boston and found no
difference in test (SAT) scores or educational aspirations. Gortmaker et al. (1993) studied adolescents and young
adults from the 1979 cohort of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth and found that females between the ages
of 16 and 23 who were overweight had 0.3 years less education than normal weight females eight years later.


                                                                                                                    4
Empirical Framework5

           Our empirical analysis is based on the educational production function approach that is

widely used to identify the effects of family and school resources on educational achievement

(Hanushek 1986; Todd and Wolpin 2003; Todd and Wolpin 2007). As Todd and Wolpin (2003,

2007) emphasize, an important aspect of these models is that current educational achievement is

a function of all past family and school resources devoted to children’s education. Here, we

incorporate this idea into our analysis using the following model:

                                   t
        GRADEit = α i + γ t + ∑ (τ k OWN ik + β k HEALTH ik + δ k PARik ) +
                                 k =0
                    t
(1)                 ∑ (λk TEACH ik + π k PEERik + Z ik Γk ) +u it
                   k =0
        t = 14,15,16,17

Equation (1) indicates that the grade level (GRADE) of child i at age t depends on a child-

specific endowment (αi), developmental age at time t (γt), the time the child spends in

educational activities (OWN) at each age from birth to age t, child health (HEALTH) at each age

from birth to age t, time spent by family members (e.g., mother) producing education (PAR)

from birth to age t, the quantity and quality of school and teacher inputs (TEACH) from birth to

age t, the quantity and quality of peer inputs (PEER) from birth to age t, and other market goods

(Z) from birth to age t that are used to produce educational achievement.

           Equation (1) allows determinants of educational achievement to have different effects

depending on age, for example, the parental time input (PAR) may have a different effect at age

14 than at age 17 because at age 14 children may spend more time at home with the parent

studying. However, equation (1) assumes that effects of educational inputs do not depend on

time since investments were made, which is equivalent to assuming that there is no depreciation

5
    This section draws heavily on Kaestner and Grossman (2008).


                                                                                                     5
of education capital. This specification was chosen to facilitate estimation, which we discuss in

more detail below including ways to test the restrictions embodied in equation (1).

         Our interest is to obtain estimates of the effect of weight on educational achievement. As

noted, there are several ways that weight (overweight) may affect educational achievement. One

of the most cited potential causes is size (weight) discrimination. Overweight and obese children

face a variety of discrimination from peers and teachers that may adversely affect educational

achievement (Ritts et al. 1992; NEA 1994; Neumark-Sztainer et al. 1998; Jalongo 1999; Solovay

2000; Puhl and Brownell 2003; Schwartz and Puhl 2003; Eisenberg et al. 2003; Janssen et al.

2004). In terms of equation (1), size (weight) discrimination would affect the quantity and

quality of school and teacher inputs and the quantity and quality of peer inputs. Weight may

even affect the quantity and quality of parental inputs if households allocate resources in

response to size discrimination (Crandall 1995; Puhl and Latner 2007).

         Discrimination against overweight and obese children may also lead to depression

(HEALTH in equation 1) that can adversely affect educational achievement (Wurtman 1993;

Smith et al. 1998; Hoebel et al. 1999; Goodman and Whitaker 2002).6 Childhood obesity is also

associated with other aspects of health such as asthma, sleep apnea and sleeping disorders, which

may adversely affect cognitive functioning and school attendance, and thus educational

achievement (Gozal 1998; Dietz 1998; Must and Strauss 1999; Redline et al. 1999; Mutius et al.

2001; Gilliland et al. 2003; Beuther et al. 2006; Geier et al. 2007).7

         Size (weight) discrimination could also affect the child’s time use. Ostracism may lead a

child to have fewer social relationships and engage in fewer social activities. This may result in
6
  However, the causal relationship between obesity and depression is unresolved and some have argued that
depression causes obesity, for example, because of affective disorders such as binge eating. Others argue that there
is a common genetic component linking depression and obesity (Mustillo et al. 2003; Bjontorp and Rosmond 2000;
Rosmond et al. 2001).
7
  In the case of sleeping disorders, the direction of causality is uncertain, as some have argued that inadequate sleep
is a cause of obesity (Sekine et al. 2002).


                                                                                                                          6
greater time spent in educational activities and higher educational achievement (all else equal).

A child’s weight may also affect their physical fitness and prevent children from engaging in

recreational activities, which again may provide more time for educational activities.

       In sum, past study from a variety of disciplines (e.g., psychology and medicine) suggests

that overweight and obese children may have lower educational achievement than normal weight

children, although the alternative, that obesity is associated with higher achievement, is

plausible. One way to incorporate these causal pathways in the conceptual model is to replace

the proximate causes of educational achievement (e.g., child health) with determinants of those

causes, most notably child weight. Making these substitutions results in the following:

                      t                       ~
(2) Eit = α~i + γ~t + ∑ ( ρ k WEIGHTik + Z ik Γk ) + u~it
                     k =0

Equation (2) is a quasi-reduced form model because we have substituted for the determinants of

educational achievement, but weight (WEIGHT) remains endogenous. We discuss the source of

this endogeneity below. We have used the symbol ~ to indicate a reduced form parameter. The

coefficient on weight will measure the effect of weight that operates through changes in the

quantity or quality of educational inputs (e.g., child’s use of time, child health, and school

resources).

       The quasi-reduced form production function represented by equation (2) is the basis of

our empirical model. The main problem associated with obtaining estimates of an empirical

analog to equation (2) is that weight (WEIGHT) may be correlated with the error, which includes

unmeasured exogenous determinants of the inputs in the production function (equation 1).

Further, the data requirements necessary to obtain unbiased estimates of equation (2) are

daunting, as the entire history of the exogenous determinants of production function inputs enter

the model.


                                                                                                    7
         One way to reduce the data necessary to estimate equation (2) is to examine changes in

educational achievement between two ages. Such a model is given by:

(3) GRADEit − GRADEi (t −1) = (γ t − γ t −1 ) + ρ t WEIGHTit + Z it Γt + (u it − u i (t −1) )

As is made clear by equation (3), the difference in educational achievement between ages t-1 and

t depends on the difference in developmental age (γt - γt-1) and resources used between these

ages. Notably, endowed intelligence (αi) is eliminated from the model.8 However, one

consequence of this approach is that estimates of the effects of educational inputs are specific to

age t (Todd and Wolpin 2003, 2007).

         Three aspects of equation (3) merit discussion. The first point relates to the fact that the

left hand side of equation (3) is the change in educational achievement, but the right hand side

variables are the levels of inputs between ages t-1 and t, or the change in stock (i.e., investment)

of what may be referred to as educational capital. For example, it is the weight of the child

between ages t-1 and t that enters and not the change in weight between ages t-1 and t. This

specification results from the assumption of equation (1) that the effects of educational inputs are

cumulative. Consider child weight and the hypothesis that there is size (weight) discrimination.

The change in grade attainment between ages t-1 and t depends on the child’s weight at (during)

age t. This is reasonable. It is not the change in weight that matters, but the weight itself that

brings forth discrimination that adversely affects achievement. Analogously, it is not the change

in family resources that matter, but the actual amount of time and money spent during the period

producing child education. This point has not been well understood by previous researchers and

as a result, their models have been arguably mis-specified (Todd and Wolpin 2003). For

example, Sabia (2007) used fixed effects methods that regress differences in educational

8
 This is not necessarily the case, as the endowment could have different age-specific effects. If so, there would be
an age subscript on the endowment in equation (1) and differencing would not eliminate the endowment effect.


                                                                                                                       8
achievement (e.g., GPA) on differences in children’s weight, which is incorrect given the

specification of equation (1).9

        Second, because most educational inputs are not measured, proxy variables (i.e., reduced

form determinants) are often used. For example, mother’s educational achievement is used as a

measure of the quality of parental time input. This “quality” input enters the production function

each period and therefore is included in equation (3) even if it is time-invariant. Similarly, a

time-invariant demographic characteristic such as race, which may be a proxy for unmeasured

inputs, also enters the model because of the age-specific effects of inputs. The age-specific

estimates of equation (3) merit further discussion. The coefficient on weight (e.g., obesity)

measures the effect of obesity on the growth in educational attainment between time t-1 and t.

Obesity (and other inputs) may have a different effect at each age. For example, discrimination

associated with obesity may be more important at older than younger ages.

        While equation (3) reduces the data necessary to estimate the model considerably, it

remains unlikely that all relevant variables will be measured and estimates of the effect of weight

(obesity) may still be biased. Given the common set of underlying factors that affect resource

allocation decisions, the quantities of measured inputs (weight) are likely to be correlated with

the error, which includes time-varying, unmeasured exogenous (e.g., preferences) determinants

of educational inputs. One solution is instrumental variables and the structure of equation (3)

suggests many potential instruments. Specifically, inputs in periods prior to t-1 may be used as

instruments because only time t inputs are included in equation (3) (Todd and Wolpin 2003).

The assumption underlying this approach is that the future does not cause the past and so, for

9
 There may be a measurement error problem given the nature of most available data. In our case, weight is
measured at time t-1 and t and may not be constant during the period. However, most interviews in the NLSY97
occurred between October and March and our dependent variable is grade progression. So weight during the
academic year is a reasonably good empirical measure. Using the difference in weight between periods, however, is
not justified.


                                                                                                                9
example, weight in period t-2 will be uncorrelated with the error (uit − ui ( t −1) ) in equation (3).

Therefore, weight (and all other inputs) in period t-2 can be used as an instrument for weight in

period t. Past weight is likely to be a particularly good instrument in that it is likely to be

strongly correlated with current weight given the documented persistence of weight (Serdula et

al. 1993; Lake et al. 1997; McTigue et al. 2002; Whitaker et al. 1998).

        The fact that past period inputs, or their determinants, do not enter equation (3) provides

a basis for a specification test. If included, past period inputs should have no statistically

significant effect on educational attainment. We implemented this test by including lagged

values of respondent’s weight, drinking and smoking behavior, and health. In all cases, we could

not reject the null hypothesis that these lagged variables were jointly insignificant (at the 0.05

level of significance). These results provide some evidence to support the specification of

equation (3).

Data

        The data for the analysis are drawn from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth-

1997 Cohort (NLSY97). The NLSY97 is a national sample of individuals ages 12 to 16 as of

December 31, 1996, who were interviewed in 1997 and each subsequent year. The NLSY97 was

designed to be representative of persons born in the U.S. between 1980 and 1984. Black and

Hispanic persons are over represented in the data. We focused on children between the ages of

14 and 18 (grades 8th through 12th) drawn from survey years 1997 to 2002.

        Educational attainment was measured by grade progression and drop out status. As

indicated by equation (3), we examined changes in grade, or grade progression, between two




                                                                                                         10
survey dates: when a person is age t-1 and age t.10 We define grade progression in two ways: as

the change in highest grade attended, or the change in highest grade completed, from age t-1 to

age t.11 In most cases, the interval between ages t-1 and t is between 10 and 21 months with a

median of 13 months, but the median time between surveys was larger for younger age groups.

For example, for those age 14 at time t-1 the median time to the next interview (t) was 18

months. We classified someone as a drop out if they were not enrolled in school and they did not

have a high school degree. Someone who was not enrolled and had a GED was classified as a

drop out. We grouped respondents by age (rounded to the nearest year) and conducted all

analyses separately for persons age 14, 15, 16 and 17 at time t-1.12

        The weight and height of children was self-reported and we used these self-reported

measures to calculate body mass index (BMI).13 We then categorize children’s weight status

according to where their BMI falls in the distribution of children’s weight in the NLSY97

sample. Separate weight distributions were calculated for males and females and by age. We

use the following percentile categories: 0-10, 11-25, 26-75, 76-90, 91-100.14 As described

above, ideally we would be able to measure weight (and all educational inputs) during the

interval between time t-1 and t. Here we have opted to use values of weight and other inputs

(determinants) at time t-1. This is reasonable given that most interviews occurred during the


10
   The NLSY97 also collected data from school transcripts from which there is information on the number and types
of credits taken in high school and grade point average. However, this information is missing for a large portion of
the sample.
11
   If grade progression, grade completion or drop out was negative we dropped the observation. Similarly, if grade
progression or grade completion appeared unreasonably large (e.g., >3), we dropped the observation. Observations
dropped for these reasons were 1.3 percent of the total.
12
    Some individuals will be the same age at two consecutive interviews and in these cases we used the first
interview we observed a person to be of a particular age.
13
   We acknowledge that self-reported weight and height has considerable measurement error. In the best case, this
will result in attenuation bias, but if measurement error is systematic, estimates may be upward or downward biased.
14
   The distribution of weight in the NLSY97 is shifted to the right relative to a national sample from the National
Health and Nutritional Survey. See Appendix Table 1, which shows the distribution of the NLSY97 sample in terms
of the NHANES 2000 sample (CDC 2000). For example, 15% of 16 year old females in the NLSY97 are in the 91-
100 percentiles of the NAHNES distribution.


                                                                                                                 11
academic year between October and March and it is the performance during the academic year

that determines whether a person will progress (drop out) in grade.

       To control for other unmeasured determinants of educational attainment we used a

variety of proxy variables. As is common in similar analyses, we are missing information on

most inputs that are likely to enter the educational production function. Therefore, we use

variables that proxy for these inputs such as mother’s education and family structure (e.g., two

biological parents), which are likely to be correlated with the quantity and quality of the inputs

used to produce educational achievement. Specifically, we use the following variables: the

number of months between surveys, dummy variables for respondent’s age in months at baseline

grade, dummy variables for month of interview at baseline grade, dummy variables for year of

interview at baseline grade, dummy variables for highest grade attended at baseline, dummy

variables for race/ethnicity (white, black, Hispanic, Asian, other), mother’s age at birth of

respondent (continuous), dummy variables for mother’s educational attainment (LTHS, HS,

some college, BA plus), dummy variables for family structure (two biological parents, two

parents, one biological parent, other, on own), dummy variables for respondent health (excellent,

poor, other), number of days respondent smoked in last 30 days at baseline, number of cigarettes

respondent smoked per day in last 30 days at baseline, number of days respondent drank in last

30 days at baseline, number of drinks respondent drank per day in last 30 days at baseline,

dummy variables for residence in MSA (MSA-central city, MSA-non-central city, non-MSA),

continuous unemployment rate in local labor market, and county per-capita income

Results

Descriptive Analysis




                                                                                                     12
        Tables 1 and 2 present (unweighted) means for highest grade attended, highest grade

completed and drop out status by gender and weight status. Figures are presented separately by

age. Figures in Table 1 suggest that there is little difference in grade attainment and drop out

status by weight for male adolescents. At younger ages (14 and 15), there is some evidence that

underweight (0-10 percentiles) males have made less progress in school than average (26 to 75

percentiles) weight males. At older ages (16 and 17), drop out rates of overweight (91-100

percentiles) males tend to be higher. Overall, however, the figures in Table 1 do not indicate

large or systematic differences in grade progression and drop out status by weight among male

adolescents. Table 2 provides sample means for females. For this group, we observe slower

progress in school among overweight (91-100 percentiles) females ages 16 and 17. Otherwise

there are few statistically significant, or large, differences in educational attainment among

female adolescents.15

        Table 3 presents (unweighted) sample means of other characteristics by weight for

females.16 The purpose of this table is to investigate whether there are significant differences in

observed characteristics by weight that may confound the relationship between weight and

educational attainment observed in Tables 1 and 2. Figures in Table 3 show some systematic

differences. Children in the upper tail of the weight distribution are more likely to be Black, be

in poorer health, live in single parent families, and live in central cities, and their mothers tend to

be less educated and younger at the time of birth of the child. Figures in Table 3 provide some

evidence that children in the upper tails of the weight distribution may differ in measured and




15
   In Appendix Table 1, we show sample means for females by weight status when weight status is classified using
NHANES distribution. Conclusions are similar as those stated in the text. Among older females, ages 16 and 17,
there is some evidence that overweight females have progressed in school more slowly than average weight females.
16
   An analogous table for males provides similar evidence of some selection on observed characteristics.


                                                                                                              13
unmeasured ways and that these differences may confound the relationship between weight and

educational attainment.17

         To further explore the extent of selection on observable variables, we present estimates of

the association between weight and the respondent’s score on the Peabody Individual

Achievement Test (PIAT) in mathematics. The PIAT mathematics test is a widely used,

validated assessment of a person’s achievement in mathematics as taught in mainstream

education. Estimates of the association between weight and PIAT scores are obtained from a

simple cross sectional regression model because the PIAT test was administered most widely in

1997 (Round 1), and in a limited way in later interviews. Specifically, all respondents not yet

enrolled in 10th grade were administered the test in 1997 and only those who were 12 as of

December 1996 were administered the test in later rounds. Therefore, we are unable to exploit

the longitudinal nature of the NLSY97 for this measure of achievement. Here we limit the

sample to those ages 14 and 15 in 1997 because this is part of the age range used in later

analyses.

         Table 4 presents the estimates. We obtain estimates for two regression model

specifications: a basic specification that includes only a limited number of covariates and a

model with additional controls for individual and family characteristics (See notes to Table 4 for

details). Estimates in Table 4 suggest small differences in PIAT test scores by weight status,

which is consistent with the small differences in educational attainment by weight observed in

Tables 1 through 2. Among males, the only statistically significant estimates are for those in the

lowest weight category; those in the lowest weight category have test scores that are 3.24 points
17
   In Appendix Table 2, we present means of the ASVAB test percentile score and other characteristics by weight
status for children ages 14 to 17. We do not present separate means by age because the ASVAB test was only
administered in 1997. In Appendix Table 2, we observe significantly lower test scores for males and females in the
upper right tail of the weight distribution. However, we also observe significant differences in other characteristics
(females only presented) for those in the overweight (91-100 percentiles) category. These results are consistent
with those presented in the text on grade progression.


                                                                                                                    14
lower than those of average weight (reference group is 26 to 75 percentile). The magnitude of

this estimate represents approximately 0.2 standard deviations or 4 percent of the mean PIAT

score. Other estimates for males are smaller. In the case of females, there are no statistically

significant estimates once controls for observed characteristics are included. Moreover, among

those in the over weight category (91-100 percentiles), controlling for observed characteristics

greatly reduces the magnitude of the estimates. Finally, we re-estimated the models in Table 4

including controls for the highest grade attended and estimates from this model were quite

similar to those presented in Table 4. This is not surprising given the weak association between

weight status and highest grade attended in Tables 1 and 2. In sum, there are small differences in

PIAT test scores by weight status that are similar to the small differences in grade attainment and

drop out status by weight status. While these descriptive statistics and simple regression

estimates are not definitive, they suggest that if there is a causal effect of weight status on

educational achievement, it is likely to be quite small. We now turn to analyses of grade

progression, grade completion and drop out status that exploit the longitudinal nature of the

NLSY97 data.

Analyses of Grade Progression, Grade Completion and Dropping Out

       In this section, we present estimates of equation (3). We obtain estimates for two

specifications of this model. A basic specification that includes only a limited number of

covariates: dummy variables for weight status (see Table 1), dummy variables for number of

months between surveys, dummy variables for respondent’s age in months at baseline (t-1)

grade, dummy variables for month of interview at baseline grade, and dummy variables for year

of interview at baseline grade. We also estimated a model with additional controls for individual

and family characteristics: dummy variables for race/ethnicity (white, black, Hispanic, Asian,




                                                                                                   15
other), mother’s age at birth of respondent (continuous), dummy variables for mother’s

educational attainment (LTHS, HS, some college, BA plus), dummy variables for family

structure (two biological parents, two parents, one biological parent, other, on own), dummy

variables for respondent health (excellent, poor, other), number of days respondent smoked in

last 30 days at baseline, number of cigarettes respondent smoked per day in last 30 days at

baseline, number of days respondent drank in last 30 days at baseline, number of drinks

respondent drank per day in last 30 days at baseline, dummy variables for residence in MSA

(MSA-central city, MSA-non-central city, non-MSA), unemployment rate in local labor market,

and county per-capita income.

       Table 5 presents estimates of the association between weight status and change in

educational attainment between time t-1 and t for children age 14 at time t-1. Estimates for the

male sample are presented in the top panel and estimates for the female sample are presented in

the bottom panel. For each dependent variable, two specifications of the model are estimated: a

basic model (column 1) and an extended model that includes additional controls (column 2). We

will focus our discussion on estimates obtained from the extended model. The sample size and

mean of the dependent variable are presented in the bottom rows of each panel. Note that the

mean change in grade attended and grade completed is significantly greater than one because the

interval between surveys, particularly for the younger age groups, is on average over a year and

in some cases as much as two years.

       The first point to note about Table 5 is that there are few statistically significant

estimates. For males, there are no statistically significant estimates. However, there is some

consistent evidence that overweight (76-90 and 91-100 percentiles) males are less likely to

progress in grade or complete an additional grade, and more likely to drop out. Effect sizes are




                                                                                                   16
relatively large. Consider estimates associated with dropping out. Males in the 91-100

percentiles have a probability of dropping out that is 1.6 percentage points higher than average

(26-75 percentiles) weight males. Given a mean drop out rate of 4 percent, these are large

estimates in relative terms.

        These estimates illustrate that the power to detect small effects may be limited.

According to the National Center for Education Statistics (2006), between 5 and 7 percent of

students in grades 6 through 12 are retained in grade each year and between 5 and 6 percent of

students in grade 10 to 12 drop out. Data from the NLSY97 indicate somewhat higher retention

rates. Among those interviewed during the school year (November to March) at time t and re-

interviewed approximately one year later (10 to 13 months), retention rates, specifically failing

to attend a higher grade (which would encompass dropping out), are between 5 and 17 percent;

retention rates increase with age and are somewhat larger for males than females.18 Standard

errors of estimates of the association between weight status and change in grade attended

(completed) are in the 3 to 4 percentage point range indicating that we are unable to reject effect

sizes smaller than 6 to 8 percentage points. These minimum effect sizes necessary to reject the

null hypothesis of no effect are relatively large given an expected mean of the dependent variable

of between 5 and 15 percent (on an annual basis, larger for longer intervals between interviews).

So only if weight status had particularly large effects, for example 33 percent or more of the

mean, would we be able to detect reliably such an effect.

        Estimates in the bottom panel of Table 5 pertain to adolescent females. Again there are

few statistically significant estimates, and standard errors are relatively large. For this group,

estimates indicate that those in the lowest (0-10) and highest (91-100) weight categories are more


18
 By age 16, 20 percent of males and 11 percent of females in the NLSY97 reported being held back a grade.
However, approximately 20 percent of sample is missing this information.


                                                                                                            17
likely to progress in grade and less likely to drop out than those in the average weight category.

Again, effect sizes are relatively large; females in the 91-100 percentiles have a drop out

probability that is 4.1 percentage points lower than average weight females. Other than these

associations, there do not appear to be any further evidence of a systematic effect of weight

status.

          Estimates of the associations between weight status and educational attainment of 15 year

old persons are presented in Table 6. For the male sample (top panel), there are few statistically

significant estimates. Overweight (91-100 percentiles) males are more likely to progress in

grade and more likely to drop out. These are inconsistent findings; faster grade progression

should be associated with lower rates of dropping out. These results also contrast with the

finding that among 14 year olds, overweight males were less likely to progress in grade. For

underweight (0-10 percentiles) males, there is consistent evidence of reduced achievement—

slower grade progression and higher rate of dropping out—but these estimates are not

statistically significant. Among 15 year old females, estimates indicate that those in the lower

weight classes (0-25 percentiles) have significantly higher rates of grade progression and grade

completion and lower rates of dropping out than average weight females. Estimates indicate that

low-weight females have approximately a six percentage point (five percent) higher rate of grade

completion than average weight females.

          Table 7 present estimates of the association between weight status and educational

attainment for 16 year old persons. Again, there are very few statistically significant estimates

observed in Table 7. The standard errors are somewhat smaller too for these moderately larger

samples; standard errors associated with estimates of the effect of weight status on grade




                                                                                                    18
progression and grade completion are in the two to three percentage point range. Nevertheless,

standard errors of this magnitude still result in relatively imprecisely estimated parameters.

       For males age 16, there is evidence that those in the lowest weight category (0-10

percentiles) have lower rates of grade progression and grade completion than average weight

males; estimates suggest that these low-weight males are 5.6 percentage points (4.8 percent) less

likely to progress in grade and 4.1 percentage points (3.6 percent) less likely to complete an

additional grade. The estimate pertaining to grade progression is significant at the 0.10 level. In

contrast, overweight (91-100 percentiles) males have higher rates of grade progression and grade

completion and lower rates of dropping out than average weight males. However, none of these

estimates are statistically significant even though they are relatively large, for example, the

estimate for dropping out is -0.031, which represents a 39 percent increase above the mean drop

out rate. Among 16 year old females, there is little evidence that weight is systematically related

to educational attainment. There are few statistically significant estimates and there are few

consistent indications that weight status positively or negatively affects the three educational

outcomes.

       The final set of estimates is for persons 17 years of age and these are presented in Table

8. Similar to previous findings, there are few statistically significant estimates in Table 7.

Perhaps more importantly, there is little systematic evidence that weight status is associated with

educational attainment.

       We estimated several alternative specifications, all of which produced similar results to

those presented here. We estimated a model using the four traditional relative weight categories

(underweight, normal weight, overweight, and obese). Results from this specification were

comparable to those from the models using five relative weight categories presented here.




                                                                                                   19
Additionally, we attempted to unpack the reduced form estimates and control for potential

offsetting effects that would result in the reduced form estimate being zero. To this end, we

estimated a model that included measures of physical health and depression. The results from

this specification were similar to those from the models presented here, finding no evidence of a

systematic relationship between weight status and educational attainment.

IV Estimates

       The final set of estimates we present are the instrumental variables (IV) estimates of

equation (3) for both the basic and extended models. Theoretically, IV estimation will control

for correlation between weight and the error term. Correlation is possible given that the error

may include time-varying, unmeasured exogenous determinants of educational inputs such as

preferences that are most likely determinants of weight as well. If we assume a myopic model of

weight determination, unmeasured determinants of education and weight in the present do not

cause weight in the past. This means that weight in period t-2 will be uncorrelated with the error

(uit − ui ( t −1) ) in equation (3) and we can thus use it as an instrument for weight between periods

t-1 and t. In order to increase efficiency, we also include two period lags of the other

explanatory variables in the extended model as instruments.

       Tables 9, 10 and 11 present the IV estimates. In general, IV estimates are imprecisely

estimated and the pattern of estimates fails to indicate a consistent relationship between weight

status and educational achievement. Because our data set is an unbalanced panel, IV estimates

obtained using two period lags reduced the sample size that was used and further exacerbated the

limited statistical power of the analysis. While some IV estimates are statistically significant, for

example, estimates for 15 year females in Table 9 (e.g., a 37 percent point reduction in the

probability of attending a higher grade for those in the lowest weight category), the large



                                                                                                         20
standard errors and absence of a consistent pattern to the results makes us cautious about

drawing inferences. Overall, IV estimates provide little new information.

        If individuals do not behave myopically, then past weight status will be a poor instrument

for current weight status. Because of this potential problem, we also estimated an alternative IV

specification, using county level weight category prevalence as an instrument for weight status.

However, this alternative specification produces similar estimates, finding no evidence of a

systematic relationship between weight status and educational attainment.

Conclusion

        Obesity is an important health issue and the health consequences of obesity have received

much attention because of the rapid growth in obesity over the last thirty years. But obesity may

have other important consequences that have received less attention from policy makers and

researchers. In this paper we investigated whether obesity, and more generally weight status

(over- or underweight), was associated with educational attainment of adolescents. This research

was motivated by plausible causal mechanisms that link obesity to (lower) educational

attainment and the potential importance of the issue in light of the central role that education

plays in determining lifetime well being. Moreover, the question of whether obesity affects

educational attainment is interesting from a policy perspective because government intervention

in several markets may significantly affect obesity and possibly education as a result. Therefore,

policies that reduce obesity may have large long term benefits if reductions in obesity increase

educational attainment, as some prior research suggests. Finally, although we do not study the

issue here, if obesity is associated with lower educational attainment and one of the causes of this

is discrimination in the school context, government action to eliminate such discrimination may

be justified.




                                                                                                   21
        To investigate the issue of whether weight status is associated with educational

attainment, we used data from the NLSY97 cohort, which is a large, national sample of

adolescents. We focused on adolescents 14 to 18 years of age. Educational attainment was

measured by highest grade attended, highest grade completed and whether a person had dropped

out of school. We obtained age- and gender-specific estimates of the effect of weight status on

changes in the educational attainment measures.

        Our results suggest that the association between weight status and the measures of

educational attainment we use are not large, and that there is little systematic evidence that

weight status either adversely or positively affects educational attainment. While there was some

limited evidence of large associations between weight status and educational attainment for

certain weight groups at certain ages for either males and females, overall estimates were

sufficiently mixed (sign and magnitude) to conclude that weight status does not seem to have a

significant effect on grade progression and dropping out among teens aged 14 to 18. However,

a caveat of our analysis is that we lacked statistical power to detect reliably small effects. The

explanation for this is that the outcomes we studied are relatively infrequent events with

approximately five to ten percent of the population likely to fail to progress in grade or drop out,

and relatively small samples of teens that were in the upper or lower tails of the weight

distribution.

        The findings from our analysis raise questions as to whether obesity is associated with

lower educational attainment, as suggested by some previous research and some professional

groups such as the National Education Association (1994). In earlier research, we also found

that obesity was not associated with young children’s cognitive achievement as measured by

scores on achievement tests (Kaestner and Grossman 2008). Indeed, simple descriptive statistics




                                                                                                     22
presented in this paper, in the earlier paper by Kaestner and Grossman (2008) on younger

children, and in Crosnoe and Muller (2004) suggest that the association between obesity and

educational attainment is unlikely to be large, as there are relatively small differences in means

between obese and average weight children. For example, Tables 1 and 2 reported typical

differences in highest grade attended between obese and average weight teens of 0.1, which is

approximately 0.2 of a standard deviation. Appendix Table 2 presents differences in the ASVAB

percentile score by gender and weight status. Overweight females have an ASVAB score that is

11 percentage points lower than average weight females, but this 11 percentage point difference

is 0.4 of a standard deviation. For males, the difference in ASVAB scores between overweight

and average weight persons is only 0.17 of a standard deviation. Crosnoe and Muller (2004)

reported that the difference in GPA between obese and non-obese teens was approximately 0.2

of a standard deviation. While not trivial, these simple differences in mean educational

achievement suggest relatively small effects that are likely to be much smaller once the

significant amount of selection on observed characteristics is eliminated.

       In sum, we do not find much evidence that obesity, and more generally weight status, is

significantly related to educational attainment. The potential importance of this issue and the

limited amount of prior study make this a topic for further research. Additional research can also

address several of the limitations of our study. Most importantly, we lacked statistical power to

detect small effects. Second, we were unable to effectively address the likely endogeneity of

weight status. While instrumental variables is a plausible solution in our context (i.e., first

difference model), we did not have samples of sufficient size to draw reliable inference from this

approach. Third, while our measures of educational attainment were of significant practical

importance given the centrality to well being of obtaining a high school degree, they are




                                                                                                     23
relatively limited in their ability to reflect differences in achievement by weight status. Finally,

our measures of weight and height were self reported and the measurement error associated with

these variables may have biased estimates.




                                                                                                   24
References

Averett, S. and Korenman, S. (1996). The Economic Reality of the Beauty Myth. The Journal
       of Human Resources. 31(2):304-330.

Blau, F. and Grossberg, A. J. (1992). Maternal Labor Supply and Children’s Cognitive
       Development. Review of Economics and Statistics, 74(3) (August):474-481.

Beuther, D. A., Weiss, S. T. and Sutherland, E. R. (2006). Obesity and Asthma. American
      Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 174(2): 112-119.

Bjorntorp, P. and Rosmond, R. (2000). Neuroendocrine Abnormalities in Visceral Obesity.
       International Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic Disorders, 24: S80–S85.

Canning H, Mayer J. Obesity: an Influence on High School Performance. The American
      Journal of Clinical Nutrition 1967; 20 (4); 352-354.

Cawley, J, J Heckman, L Lochner, and E Vytlacil. (1996). Ability, Education and Job Training
      and Earnings. Mimeo, University of Chicago.

Cawley, J. (2004). The Impact of Obesity on Wages. Journal of Human Resources, 39(2): 451-
      474.

Crandall CS. Do Parents Discriminate Against Their Heavyweight Daughters? Personality and
      Social Psychology Bulletin 1995; 21 (7); 724-735.

Crosnoe, R and Muller, C. (2004). Body Mass Index, Academic Achievement, and School
      Context: Examining the Educational Experiences of Adolescents at Risk of Obesity.
      Journal of Health and Social Behavior. 45(4):393-407.

Dietz, W. H. (1998). Health Consequences of Obesity in Youth: Childhood Predictors of Adult
       Disease. Pediatrics, 101(3): 518-525.

Ding, W., Lehrer, S., Rosenquist, N. and Audrain-McGovern, J. 2008. “The Impact of Poor Health on
       Academic Performance: New Evidence Using Genetic Markers.” NBER Working Paper #12304.

Edwards, L. N. and Grossman, M. (1979). “Adolescent Health, Family Background, and
      Preventive Medical Care.” In Health: What Is it Worth, edited by Selma J. Mushkin and
      David W. Dunlop, Elmsford, New York: Pergamon Press, 1979, pp. 273-314.

Eisenberg, M. E., Neumark-Sztainer, D. and Story, M. (2003). Associations of Weight-Based
       Teasing and Emotional Well-being among Adolescents. Archives of Pediatrics and
       Adolescent Medicine, 157: 733-738.

Falkner, N. F., Neumark-Sztainer, D., Story, M., Jeffery, R. W., Beuhring, T. and Resnick, M. D.
       (2001). Social, Educational, and Psychological Correlates of Weight Status in
       Adolescents. Obesity Research, 9(1): 33-42.


                                                                                               25
Fletcher, J. and Lehrer, S. 2008. “Using the Genetic Lottery to Estimate the Impacts of Poor Health on
       Education.” Working Paper.

Fu, H and Goldman, N. (1996). Incorporating Health into Models of Marriage Choice:
       Demographic and Sociological Perspectives. Journal of Marriage and the Family.
       58(3):740-758.

Geier A, Foster G, Womble L, McLaughlin J, Borradaile K, Nachmani J, Sherman S, Kumanyika
       S, and Shults J. (2007). The Relationship Between Relative Weight and School
       Attendance Among Elementary Schoolchildren. Obesity. 15:2157–2161.

Gilliland, F. D., Berhane, K., Islam, T., McConnell, R., Gauderman, W. J., Gilliland, S. S., Avol,
        E. and Peters, J. M. (2003). Obesity and the Risk of Newly Diagnosed Asthma in School-
        Age Children. American Journal of Epidemiology, 158:406–415.

Goodman, E. and Whitaker, R. C. (2007). A Prospective Study of Role of Depression in the
     Development and Persistence of Adolescent Obesity. Pediatrics, 109(3): 497-504.

Gortmaker SL, Must A, Perrin JM, Sobol AM, Dietz WH. Social and Economic Consequences
      of Overweight in Adolescence and Young Adulthood. The New England Journal of
      Medicine 1993; 329; 1008-1012.

Gozal, D. (1998). Sleep-Disordered Breathing and School Performance in Children. Pediatrics,
       102(3): 616-620.

Hanushek, E. (1986). The Economics of Schooling: Production and Efficiency in Public
      Schools. Journal of Economic Literature, 24(3):1141-1177.

Hoebel, B. G., Rada, P. V., Mark, G. P. and Pothos, E. N. (1999). Neural Systems for
      Reinforcement and Inhibition of Behavior: Relevance to Eating, Addiction, and
      Depression. In . Well-Being: The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology, Edited by
      Kahneman D, Diener E and Schwarz N. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.

Jalongo, M. R. (1999). Matters of Size: Obesity as a Diversity Issue in the Field of Early
       Childhood. Early Childhood Education Journal, 27(2): 95-103.

Janssen, I., Craig, W., Boyce, W. and Pickett, W. (2004). Association Between Overweight and
       Obesity with Bully Behaviors in School-Aged Children. Pediatrics, 113(5)1187-94.

Kaestner, R. and Corman, H. (1995). The Impact of Child Health and Fmaily Inputs on Child
      Cognitive Development. NBER Working Paper #5257, Cambridge, MA: NBER

Kaestner, R. and Grossman, M. (2008). Effects of Weight on Children’s Educational
       Achievement. NBER Working Paper #13764, National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                                                                                   26
Korenman, S., Miller, J. and Sjaastad, J. (1995). Long-Term Poverty and Child Development in
      the United States: Results from the NLSY. Children and Youth Services Review,17:127-
      55

Lake, J.K., Power, C., and Cole, T.J. (1997). Body Mass Index and Height from Childhood to
       Adulthood in the 1958 British Born Cohort. 66(5):1094-101.

McTigue, K., Garrett, J., and Popkin, B. (2002). The Natural History of the Development of
      Obesity in a Cohort of Young U.S. Adults between 1981 and 1998. Annals of Internal
      Medicine. 136(12):857-864.

Must, A. and Strauss, R. S. (1999). Risks and Consequences of Childhood and Adolescent
       Obesity. International Journal of Obesity, 23(s2): s2-s11.

Mustillo, S., Worthman, C., Erkanli, A., Keeler, G., Angold, A. and Costello, E. J. (2007).
       Obesity and Psychiatric Disorder: Developmental Trajectories. Pediatrics, 111(4): 851-
       859.

National Center for Education Statistics. (2006). The Condition of Education: Grade Retention.
       Washington, DC.

National Education Association, (1994). Report on Size Discrimination. Washington, DC.

(NHLBI) National Heart, Lung and Blood Insititue. (1998). “Clinical guidelines on the
     identification, evaluation, and treatment of overweight and obesity in adults. p. 12-19.
     (http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/obesity/ob_home.htm)

Neumark-Sztainer, D., Story, M. and Faibisch, L. (1998). Perceived Stigmatization among
     Overweight African American and Caucasian Adolescent Girls. Journal of Adolescent
     Health. 23(5): 264-70.

Puhl, R. M. and Brownell, K. D. (2003). Psychosocial Origins of Obesity Stigma: Toward
       Changing a Powerful and Pervasive Bias. Obesity Reviews, 4(4): 213-227.

Puhl, R. M. and Latner, J. D. (2007). Stigma, Obesity and the Health of the Nation’s Children.
       Psychological Bulletin, 133(4): 557-580.

Rosmond, R. (2001) Visceral Obesity and the Metabolic Syndrome. International Textbook of
     Obesity pp337-350.

Redline, S., Tishler, P. V., Schluchter, M., Aylor, J., Clark, K. and Graham, G. (1999). Risk
       Factors for Sleep-Disordered Breathing in Children: Association with Obesity, Race and
       Respiratory Problems. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine,
       159(5): 1527-32.




                                                                                                 27
Ritts, V., Patterson, M. L. and Tubbs, M. (1992). Expectations, Impressions and Judgments of
        Physically Attractive Students: A Review. Review of Educational Research, 62(4): 413-
        26.

Rosenzweig, M. R. and Wolpin, K. I. (1994). Are There Increasing Returns to the
      Intergenerational Production of Human Capital? Maternal Schooling and Child
      Intellectual Achievement. Journal of Human Resources, 29(2): 670-693.

Sabia, J. (2007). The Effect of Body Weight on Adolescent Academic Performance. Southern
        Economic Journal, 73(4): 871-900.

Sekine, M., Yamagami, T., Handa, K., Saito, T., Nanri, S., Kawaminami, K., Tokui, N., Toshida,
       K. and Kagamimori, S. (2002). A Dose-Response Relationship Between Short Sleeping
       Hours and Childhood Obesity: Results of Toyama Birth Cohort Study. Child: Care,
       Health and Development, 28(2): 163-170.

Serdula, M. K., Ivery, D., Coates, R.J., Freedman, D.S. Williamson, D.F., and Byers, T. (1993).
       Do Obese Children Become Obese Adults? A Review of the Literature. Prev Med.
       22(2):167-77.

Schwartz, M. B. and Puhl, R. (2003). Childhood Obesity: A Social Problem to Solve. Obesity
      Reviews, 4: 57-70.

Shakotko, R. A., Edwards, L. N. and Grossman, M. (1981). An Exploration of the Dynamic
      Relationship Between Health and Cognitive Development in Adolescent. In
      Contributions to Economic Analysis: Health, Economics, and Health Economics. Edited
      by Jaques van der Gaag and Mark Perlman. Amsterdam: North Holland Publishing
      Company.

Sigfusdotir, I. D., Kristjansson, A. L. and Allegrante, J. P. (2006). Health Behavior and
       Academic Achievement in Icelandic School Children. Health Education Research, 22(1):
       70-80.

Smith, D. E., Marcus, M. D., Lewis, C. E. , Fitzgibbon, M. and Schreiner, P. (1998). Prevalence
       of Binge Eating Disorder, Obesity, and Depression in a Biracial Cohort of Young Adults.
       Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 20: 227–332.

Sobal, J, Rauschenbach, B S, and Frongillo, E A. (1992). Marital Status, Fatness and Obesity.
        Social Science and Medicine. 35(7):915-23.

Solovay, S. (2000). Tipping the Scalesof Injustice: Fighting Weight-basedDiscrimiantion.
      Prometheus Books: Amherst, NY.

Todd, P. E. and Wolpin, K. I. (2003). On the Specification and Estimation of the Production
       Function for Cognitive Achievement. Economic Journal, 113(485): F3-F33.




                                                                                                28
Todd, P. E. and Wolpin, K. I. (2007). The Production of Cognitive Achievement in Children:
         Home, School, and Racial Test Score Gaps. Journal of Human Capital. 1:91–136.

von Mutius, E., Schwartz, J., Neas, L. M., Dockery, D. and Weiss, S. T. (2001). Relation of
      Body Mass Index to Asthma and Atopy in Children: the National Health and Nutrition
      Examination Study III. Thorax, 56: 835–838.

Whitaker R., Pepe M., Wright J., Seidel K, and Dietz, W. (1998). Early Adiposity Rebound and
      the Risk of Adult Obesity. Pediatrics. 101(3):e5.

Wurtman, J. J. (1993). Depression and Weight Gain: the Serotonin Connection. Journal of
     Affective Disorders, 29(2-3):183–192.




                                                                                              29
                                                Table 1
              Educational Attainment of Male Adolescents by Age and Relative Weight Status

                                                              Relative Weight Status
                                     0-10%           11-25%          26-75%          76-90%          91-100%
Age 14
Highest Grade Attended                7.6*             7.8             7.8             7.9              7.9
Highest Grade Completed               6.8*             7.0             7.0             7.0              7.1
Dropout                               0.00             0.02            0.01            0.03            0.04*

Number of Observations                128              192             654             196              128

Age 15
Highest Grade Attended                8.7*              8.8             8.9             8.9             9.0*
Highest Grade Completed               7.8*              7.9             8.0             8.0             8.1*
Dropout                              0.00*             0.02            0.03            0.04             0.04

Number of Observations                203              365             1122            341              223

Age 16
Highest Grade Attended                9.8               9.8             9.8             9.9*            9.9
Highest Grade Completed                8.9              8.9             8.9             9.0             8.9
Dropout                               0.03             0.03            0.05            0.05            0.08*

Number of Observations                313              454             1513            421              288

Age 17
Highest Grade Attended                10.7             10.7            10.7            10.8*            10.7
Highest Grade Completed                9.8              9.8             9.8             9.9*             9.8
Dropout                               0.08             0.09            0.09            0.09             0.11

Number of Observations                359              618             1822            564              332

Notes:
1. Data drawn from survey years 1997 to 2003.
2. * indicates that the estimate is statistically different (p<0.05) from the estimate for adolescents in 26-75
    percentiles.




                                                                                                               30
                                               Table 2
            Educational Attainment of Female Adolescents by Age and Relative Weight Status

                                                               Relative Weight Status
                                     0-10%           11-25%           26-75%          76-90%         91-100%
Age 14
Highest Grade Attended                7.9              8.0             8.0             7.9              8.0
Highest Grade Completed                7.1              7.2             7.2             7.1              7.1
Dropout                               0.01             0.01            0.02            0.03             0.03

Number of Observations                118              182             605             175              120

Age 15
Highest Grade Attended                8.9               8.9*           9.0             9.0               9.0
Highest Grade Completed                8.0              8.1             8.1             8.1              8.1
Dropout                               0.04             0.02            0.03            0.04             0.03

Number of Observations                204              311             1011            296              211

Age 16
Highest Grade Attended                9.9*             10.0            10.0             9.9             9.8*
Highest Grade Completed               9.0*              9.1             9.1             9.0             9.0*
Dropout                               0.04             0.03            0.05            0.04             0.02

Number of Observations                264              451             1391            419              284

Age 17
Highest Grade Attended                10.9             10.9            10.9            10.8*           10.7*
Highest Grade Completed               10.0             10.1            10.0            9.9*             9.8*
Dropout                               0.09             0.06            0.08            0.11*           0.11

Number of Observations                340              488             1780            495              322

Notes:
1. Data drawn from survey years 1997 to 2003.
2. * indicates that the estimate is statistically different (p<0.05) from the estimate for adolescents in 26-75
    percentiles.




                                                                                                               31
                                                   Table 3
       Individual and Family Characteristics of Female Adolescents by Age and Relative Weight Status

                                                             Relative Weight Status
                                 0-10%             11-25%           26-75%          76-90%               91-100%
Age 14
Black                             0.14*             0.19               0.25             0.42*              0.48*
Hispanic                          0.19              0.19               0.20             0.21               0.22
Excellent Health                   0.75              0.77              0.76             0.62*              0.53*
Smoke                             0.25              0.29               0.34             0.37               0.27
Age in Months                     168.7             169.1             169.1             168.9             169.9*

Mom Age at Birth                  26.1              25.7               26.0              24.2*             24.7*
Mom LTHS                          0.18              0.19               0.20              0.24              0.23
Mom BA                            0.22              0.21               0.19              0.07*             0.09*
Two Biological Parents            0.58*             0.55               0.48              0.44              0.38*

Central City Resident             0.32               0.27              0.28             0.38*              0.47*

Age 16
Black                             0.20*             0.20*              0.24              0.33*              0.46*
Hispanic                           0.13*            0.21               0.20              0.25               0.19
Excellent Health                  0.69              0.75              0.73              0.62*               0.50*
Smoke                             0.47              0.42               0.46             0.42                0.44
Age in Months                    191.8*             192.5             192.5             192.8              192.5

Mom Age at Birth                  25.5              25.8               25.9             25.0*              24.5*
Mom LTHS                          0.19              0.21               0.20             0.25*              0.25*
Mom BA                            0.14              0.21               0.17              0.11*              0.10*
Two Biological Parents            0.53              0.53               0.48              0.45               0.35*

Central City Resident             0.26               0.29              0.32              0.34              0.40*

  Notes:
  1. Data drawn from survey years 1997 to 2003.
  2. Sample sizes are same as in Table 1b.
  3. * indicates that the estimate is statistically different (p<0.05) from the estimate for adolescents in 26-75
      percentiles.




                                                                                                                32
                                                      Table 4
                                 Estimates of the Effect of Relative Weight Status
                         on PIAT Math Score: Adolescents Ages 14 and 15 in Round 1 (1997)

                                     Males PIAT Math Score                             Females PIAT Math Score
                                    (1)                  (2)                           (1)                  (2)
 Weight 0-10%                     -2.78*               -3.24**                        2.09                 0.70
                                  (1.62)               (1.46)                        (1.60)               (1.48)
 Weight 11-25%                     -0.23                -0.69                         0.71                 -0.16
                                  (1.32)               (1.19)                        (1.41)               (1.31)

 Weight 76-90%                     -2.01                     -0.87                    -2.43                     0.48
                                  (1.37)                    (1.23)                   (1.36)                    (1.29)
 Weight 91-100%                    -1.97                     0.93                    -4.68**                    -1.46
                                  (1.63)                    (1.49)                   (1.67)                    (1.58)

 Basic Model                       Yes                                                 Yes
 Extended Model                                              Yes                                                Yes

 Mean Dep. Var.                                 73                                                  73
 Num. Obs.                                     1404                                                1264
Notes:
1. The basic model includes the following: dummy variables for weight status (see table, 26-75 percentiles are reference
    category), dummy variables for respondent’s age in months at time of survey, dummy variables for month of interview,
    and dummy variables for year of interview.
2. Extended model includes all variables in basic model and the following: dummy variables for race/ethnicity (white,
    black, Hispanic, Asian, other), mother’s age at birth of respondent (continuous), dummy variables for mother’s
    educational attainment (lths, HS, some college, BA plus), dummy variables for family structure (two biological parents,
    two parents, one biological parent, other, on own), dummy variables for respondent health (excellent, poor, other),
    number of days respondent smoked in last 30 days at baseline, number of cigarettes respondent smoked per day in last
    30 days at baseline, number of days respondent drank in last 30 days at baseline, number of drinks respondent drank
    per day in last 30 days at baseline, dummy variables for residence in MSA (MSA-central city, MSA-non-central city,
    non-MSA), continuous unemployment rate in local labor market, and county per-capita income.
    * indicates (0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.10), ** indicates (p-value ≤ 0.05)




                                                                                                                        33
                                                          Table 5
                                     Estimates of the Effect of Relative Weight Status
                                    on Change in Educational Attainment from Age 14

 Males                      Higher Grade Attended           Higher Grade Completed                   Dropped Out
                               (1)           (2)               (1)            (2)                 (1)            (2)
 Weight 0-10%                0.031         -0.045             0.041         -0.022              -0.023         -0.015
                            (0.037)       (0.037)            (0.035)       (0.037)             (0.020)        (0.022)
 Weight 11-25%               -0.011        -0.046             0.007         0.009               -0.014         -0.001
                            (0.032)       (0.031)            (0.030)       (0.031)             (0.017)        (0.019)

 Weight 76-90%               -0.010           -0.022           0.015           -0.004           0.010            0.015
                            (0.031)          (0.031)          (0.029)         (0.030)          (0.017)          (0.018)
 Weight 91-100%              -0.049           -0.026           -0.036          -0.038           0.033            0.016
                            (0.038)          (0.038)          (0.036)         (0.037)          (0.021)          (0.022)

 Basic Model                  Yes                              Yes                               Yes
 Extended Model                                Yes                              Yes                               Yes

 Mean Dep. Var.              1.60             1.60             1.47             1.48            0.04             0.04
 Num. Obs.                   1182             1040             1180             1040            1184             1042

 Females                    Higher Grade Attended           Higher Grade Completed                   Dropped Out
                               (1)           (2)                (1)          (1)                  (2)            (1)
 Weight 0-10%               0.087**       0.081**             0.040         0.034               -0.014         -0.010
                            (0.038)       (0.037)            (0.038)       (0.038)             (0.021)        (0.022)
 Weight 11-25%               -0.003        0.015              -0.010        0.003               -0.022         -0.027
                            (0.031)       (0.031)            (0.031)       (0.032)             (0.017)        (0.018)

 Weight 76-90%               -0.041           -0.025           -0.017          -0.006           -0.025          -0.035*
                            (0.033)          (0.033)          (0.033)         (0.034)          (0.018)          (0.019)
 Weight 91-100%              -0.001           0.026            -0.005          0.044           -0.039*          -0.041*
                            (0.039)          (0.039)          (0.039)         (0.041)          (0.021)          (0.023)

 Basic Model                  Yes                              Yes                               Yes
 Extended Model                                Yes                              Yes                               Yes

 Mean Dep. Var.              1.54             1.52             1.43             1.42            0.04             0.04
 Num. Obs.                   1079             968              1080             969             1079             968
Notes:
1. The mean for “Higher Grade Attended (Completed)” is greater than 1 because some respondents may have skipped a grade
    or the interval between interviews was long enough to include more than one grade.
2. The basic model includes the following: dummy variables for weight status (see table, 26-75 percentiles are reference
    category), dummy variables for each number of months between surveys, dummy variables for respondent’s age in
    months at baseline grade, dummy variables for month of interview at baseline grade, and dummy variables for year of
    interview at baseline grade.
3. Extended model includes all variables in basic model and the following: dummy variables for race/ethnicity (white,
    black, Hispanic, Asian, other), mother’s age at birth of respondent (continuous), dummy variables for mother’s
    educational attainment (lths, HS, some college, BA plus), dummy variables for family structure (two biological parents,
    two parents, one biological parent, other, on own), dummy variables for respondent health (excellent, poor, other),
    number of days respondent smoked in last 30 days at baseline, number of cigarettes respondent smoked per day in last
    30 days at baseline, number of days respondent drank in last 30 days at baseline, number of drinks respondent drank
    per day in last 30 days at baseline, dummy variables for residence in MSA (MSA-central city, MSA-non-central city,
    non-MSA), continuous unemployment rate in local labor market, county per-capita income, and dummy variables for
    highest grade attended at baseline survey.
4. * indicates (0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.10), ** indicates (p-value ≤ 0.05)




                                                                                                                    34
                                                       Table 6
                                  Estimates of the Effect of Relative Weight Status
                                 on Change in Educational Attainment from Age 15

Males                  Higher Grade Attended            Higher Grade Completed             Dropped Out
                          (1)           (2)                 (1)           (2)           (1)           (2)
Weight 0-10%            -0.011        -0.024              -0.003        -0.015         0.021         0.028
                       (0.038)       (0.041)             (0.030)       (0.031)        (0.018)       (0.019)
Weight 11-25%           0.022         0.017               -0.020        -0.027         0.018         0.027
                       (0.030)       (0.032)             (0.024)       (0.024)        (0.014)       (0.015)

Weight 76-90%            -0.028           0.008           -0.007          0.019        0.016          0.008
                        (0.031)          (0.033)         (0.025)         (0.025)      (0.015)        (0.015)
Weight 91-100%           0.044           0.089**          -0.008          0.012       0.033*         0.033*
                        (0.037)          (0.040)         (0.030)         (0.030)      (0.018)        (0.018)

Basic Model              Yes                               Yes                          Yes
Extended Model                              Yes                           Yes                          Yes

Mean Dep. Var.           1.33              1.32           1.28            1.27         0.05            0.05
Num. Obs.                1999              1720           2001            1720         2003            1723

Females                Higher Grade Attended            Higher Grade Completed               Dropped Out
                          (1)           (2)                (1)           (1)              (2)            (1)
Weight 0-10%            0.017         0.017             0.062**       0.059**         -0.037**         -0.030
                       (0.034)       (0.034)             (0.027)       (0.028)         (0.018)        (0.018)
Weight 11-25%          0.067**       0.057**            0.047**       0.064**           -0.014         -0.009
                       (0.028)       (0.029)             (0.023)       (0.023)         (0.015)        (0.015)

Weight 76-90%            0.007             0.028          0.020           0.026        0.013          0.008
                        (0.029)           (0.029)        (0.024)         (0.024)      (0.015)        (0.016)
Weight 91-100%         -0.089**            -0.011       -0.061**          -0.007       0.016          0.009
                        (0.035)           (0.036)        (0.028)         (0.029)      (0.018)        (0.019)

Basic Model              Yes                               Yes                          Yes
Extended Model                              Yes                           Yes                          Yes

Mean Dep. Var.           1.33              1.31           1.29            1.28         0.05            0.05
Num. Obs.                1778              1584           1782            1586         1784            1587
  Notes: See notes to Table 4.




                                                                                                          35
                                                       Table 7
                                  Estimates of the Effect of Relative Weight Status
                                 on Change in Educational Attainment from Age 16

Males                  Higher Grade Attended            Higher Grade Completed              Dropped Out
                          (1)           (2)                 (1)           (2)            (1)            (2)
Weight 0-10%           -0.052*       -0.056*              -0.035        -0.041         0.003          0.007
                       (0.029)       (0.031)             (0.027)       (0.028)        (0.018)        (0.018)
Weight 11-25%           -0.041        -0.025              -0.029       -0.0001         -0.002         -0.012
                       (0.025)       (0.026)             (0.024)       (0.024)        (0.015)        (0.016)

Weight 76-90%            0.018             0.002          0.030           0.029        -0.012         -0.013
                        (0.026)           (0.028)        (0.025)         (0.025)      (0.016)        (0.016)
Weight 91-100%           -0.007            0.035          0.010           0.039        -0.010         -0.031
                        (0.031)           (0.033)        (0.029)         (0.030)      (0.019)        (0.019)

Basic Model              Yes                               Yes                         Yes
Extended Model                              Yes                           Yes                         Yes

Mean Dep. Var.           1.19              1.17           1.16            1.15         0.08           0.08
Num. Obs.                2597              2245           2601            2249         2606           2252

Females                Higher Grade Attended            Higher Grade Completed              Dropped Out
                         (1)            (2)                (1)           (1)             (2)           (1)
Weight 0-10%            0.025         -0.024              0.007         0.011         0.034*          0.029
                       (0.034)       (0.033)             (0.027)       (0.028)        (0.018)        (0.018)
Weight 11-25%           0.024         0.020               0.028         0.004          -0.008         0.001
                       (0.028)       (0.026)             (0.021)       (0.022)        (0.014)        (0.015)

Weight 76-90%            -0.010            -0.024         -0.021          -0.031      0.036**        0.022
                        (0.029)           (0.028)        (0.022)         (0.023)      (0.015)       (0.015)
Weight 91-100%           -0.015            0.012        -0.058**        -0.060**       0.009        -0.0001
                        (0.035)           (0.033)        (0.027)         (0.028)      (0.018)       (0.018)

Basic Model              Yes                               Yes                         Yes
Extended Model                              Yes                           Yes                         Yes

Mean Dep. Var.           1.23              1.21           1.20            1.18         0.07           0.07
Num. Obs.                2450              2166           2455            2169         2450           2165
  Notes: See notes to Table 4.




                                                                                                         36
                                                       Table 8
                                  Estimates of the Effect of Relative Weight Status
                                 on Change in Educational Attainment from Age 17

Males                  Higher Grade Attended            Higher Grade Completed              Dropped Out
                         (1)            (2)                 (1)           (2)            (1)            (2)
Weight 0-10%            0.016         -0.034              0.019         0.023          0.017          0.006
                       (0.035)       (0.033)             (0.028)       (0.029)        (0.019)        (0.019)
Weight 11-25%           0.006         -0.005              -0.010        -0.010         -0.006         -0.011
                       (0.028)       (0.026)             (0.022)       (0.023)        (0.016)        (0.015)

Weight 76-90%            -0.027            0.001          -0.008          0.009        0.004          -0.001
                        (0.029)           (0.027)        (0.023)         (0.024)      (0.016)        (0.015)
Weight 91-100%           -0.018            0.046          -0.025          0.004        0.001          -0.009
                        (0.036)           (0.034)        (0.028)         (0.030)      (0.020)        (0.019)

Basic Model              Yes                               Yes                         Yes
Extended Model                              Yes                           Yes                         Yes

Mean Dep. Var.           0.97              0.95           1.05            1.04         0.10           0.09
Num. Obs.                2937              2577           2939            2580         2931           2570

Females                Higher Grade Attended            Higher Grade Completed              Dropped Out
                          (1)           (2)                (1)           (1)             (2)           (1)
Weight 0-10%            0.018         0.014               0.018         0.023          0.002          0.006
                       (0.035)       (0.032)             (0.028)       (0.029)        (0.017)        (0.016)
Weight 11-25%          0.057**        0.037               0.008         0.005          -0.001         0.003
                       (0.029)       (0.027)             (0.023)       (0.025)        (0.014)        (0.013)

Weight 76-90%          -0.064**           -0.047*         -0.023          -0.002      0.044**         0.021
                        (0.030)           (0.027)        (0.024)         (0.025)      (0.014)        (0.014)
Weight 91-100%           -0.051            -0.019         0.018           0.048        0.027          -0.009
                        (0.036)           (0.033)        (0.029)         (0.031)      (0.017)        (0.017)

Basic Model              Yes                               Yes                         Yes
Extended Model                              Yes                           Yes                         Yes

Mean Dep. Var.           1.00              0.99           1.09            1.08         0.06           0.06
Num. Obs.                2773              2505           2779            2508         2771           2499
  Notes: See notes to Table 4.




                                                                                                         37
                                                   Table 9
                             IV Estimates of the Effect of Relative Weight Status
                              on Change in Educational Attainment from Age 15

Males                   Higher Grade Attended        Higher Grade Completed              Dropped Out
                          (1)            (2)             (1)           (2)            (1)            (2)
Weight 0-10%             0.03           0.07            0.03          0.02           -0.00          0.02
                        (0.09)         (0.08)         (0.08)        (0.07)          (0.05)        (0.05)
Weight 11-25%            0.06           0.10           -0.11         -0.03           0.00          -0.00
                        (0.13)         (0.12)         (0.11)        (0.09)          (0.07)        (0.07)

Weight 76-90%            0.03            0.10           -0.11          -0.05          0.03          0.02
                        (0.09)         (0.09)          (0.08)         (0.07)        (0.05)         (0.05)
Weight 91-100%           -0.03          -0.03           -0.00          0.01          -0.01          0.00
                        (0.07)         (0.07)          (0.06)         (0.05)        (0.04)         (0.04)

Basic Model               Yes                           Yes                          Yes
Extended Model                          Yes                             Yes                         Yes

Mean Dep. Var.           1.33           1.32           1.28            1.27          0.05          0.05
Num. Obs.                1027           933            1032            936           1030          935

Females                 Higher Grade Attended        Higher Grade Completed               Dropped Out
                           (1)           (2)             (1)          (1)              (2)            (1)
Weight 0-10%            -0.26**       -0.37**           0.03         -0.01            0.04           0.02
                         (0.11)        (0.12)         (0.08)        (0.07)          (0.05)         (0.05)
Weight 11-25%            0.36*        0.69**           -0.05         0.01            -0.12          -0.07
                         (0.20)        (0.24)         (0.13)        (0.14)          (0.09)         (0.09)

Weight 76-90%            0.04           0.16            -0.03          -0.05          0.01           0.01
                        (0.12)         (0.14)          (0.08)         (0.08)         (0.05)        (0.05)
Weight 91-100%           -0.04          0.01            -0.03          -0.04        -0.07**         -0.05
                        (0.07)         (0.08)          (0.05)         (0.05)         (0.03)        (0.03)

Basic Model               Yes                           Yes                          Yes
Extended Model                          Yes                             Yes                         Yes

Mean Dep. Var.           1.33           1.31            1.29           1.28          0.05          0.05
Num. Obs.                919            861             924            865           924           864
  Notes: See notes to Table 4.




                                                                                                      38
                                                  Table 10
                             IV Estimates of the Effect of Relative Weight Status
                              on Change in Educational Attainment from Age 16

Males                  Higher Grade Attended         Higher Grade Completed              Dropped Out
                         (1)             (2)            (1)           (2)             (1)           (2)
Weight 0-10%           -0.15*          -0.07         -0.15**         -0.04           0.08          0.03
                       (0.08)         (0.07)          (0.07)        (0.06)          (0.06)        (0.05)
Weight 11-25%           0.07            0.10           0.09          -0.06           -0.14         -0.02
                       (0.13)         (0.11)          (0.12)        (0.10)          (0.09)        (0.08)

Weight 76-90%            0.01           -0.04           -0.02          -0.10         -0.02         0.01
                        (0.08)         (0.07)          (0.07)         (0.06)        (0.05)        (0.05)
Weight 91-100%           -0.04           0.03            0.02           0.05         -0.00         -0.02
                        (0.05)         (0.05)          (0.05)         (0.04)        (0.04)        (0.03)

Basic Model              Yes                            Yes                          Yes
Extended Model                          Yes                             Yes                        Yes

Mean Dep. Var.           1.19           1.17           1.16            1.15         0.08          0.08
Num. Obs.                1589           1442           1593            1447         1597          1449

Females                Higher Grade Attended         Higher Grade Completed              Dropped Out
                         (1)            (2)             (1)           (1)             (2)           (1)
Weight 0-10%            0.02         -0.21**           0.01         -0.11*           0.01          0.02
                       (0.08)         (0.07)          (0.07)        (0.06)          (0.05)        (0.04)
Weight 11-25%           0.10         0.24**            0.04          0.05            -0.03         -0.03
                       (0.10)         (0.09)          (0.08)        (0.07)          (0.06)        (0.05)

Weight 76-90%            -0.02          -0.02           -0.04           -0.04        0.03          0.01
                        (0.07)         (0.07)          (0.06)          (0.05)       (0.04)        (0.04)
Weight 91-100%           0.05            0.04         -0.09**         -0.12**        -0.03         -0.03
                        (0.05)         (0.05)          (0.04)          (0.04)       (0.03)        (0.03)

Basic Model              Yes                            Yes                          Yes
Extended Model                          Yes                             Yes                        Yes

Mean Dep. Var.           1.23           1.21           1.20            1.18         0.07          0.07
Num. Obs.                1464           1359           1471            1365         1462          1357
  Notes: See notes to Table 4.




                                                                                                     39
                                                  Table 11
                             IV Estimates of the Effect of Relative Weight Status
                              on Change in Educational Attainment from Age 17

Males                  Higher Grade Attended         Higher Grade Completed              Dropped Out
                          (1)           (2)             (1)            (2)            (1)           (2)
Weight 0-10%           -0.26**       -0.27**         -0.42**        -0.35**         0.18**         -0.06
                        (0.13)        (0.12)          (0.12)         (0.11)         (0.08)        (0.07)
Weight 11-25%          0.35**        0.37**           0.54**        0.51**           -0.13         0.08
                        (0.14)        (0.13)          (0.13)         (0.13)         (0.09)        (0.08)

Weight 76-90%            -0.05          -0.05           -0.01          -0.00         0.05           0.04
                        (0.08)         (0.07)          (0.07)         (0.07)        (0.05)         (0.04)
Weight 91-100%           0.06            0.05          0.10*          0.10*          -0.01          0.04
                        (0.06)         (0.05)          (0.05)         (0.05)        (0.04)         (0.03)

Basic Model              Yes                            Yes                          Yes
Extended Model                          Yes                             Yes                         Yes

Mean Dep. Var.           0.97           0.95           1.05            1.04         0.10           0.09
Num. Obs.                2119           1919           2125            1922         2122           1920

Females                Higher Grade Attended         Higher Grade Completed               Dropped Out
                         (1)             (2)             (1)           (1)             (2)            (1)
Weight 0-10%            0.04            0.08            0.02          0.02            0.02           0.03
                       (0.06)         (0.06)          (0.04)        (0.04)          (0.03)         (0.03)
Weight 11-25%           0.07           -0.03           -0.01         -0.08           -0.07          -0.02
                       (0.10)         (0.09)          (0.07)        (0.07)          (0.05)         (0.04)

Weight 76-90%            -0.01           0.01           -0.02          -0.04         -0.06          -0.05
                        (0.09)         (0.08)          (0.07)         (0.06)        (0.05)         (0.04)
Weight 91-100%          -0.10*          -0.06           -0.03          0.04           0.02           0.01
                        (0.06)         (0.06)          (0.05)         (0.05)        (0.03)         (0.03)

Basic Model              Yes                            Yes                          Yes
Extended Model                          Yes                             Yes                         Yes

Mean Dep. Var.           1.00           0.99           1.09            1.08         0.06           0.06
Num. Obs.                1979           1842           1983            1844         1975           1836
  Notes: See notes to Table 4.




                                                                                                      40
                                           Appendix Table 1
         Educational Attainment of Female Adolescents by Age and NHANES 2000 Weight Status

                                                    NHANES 2000 Relative Weight Status
                                     0-10%          11-25%     26-75%        76-90%                  91-100%
Age 14
Highest Grade Attended                8.1              7.9             8.0             8.0              8.0
Highest Grade Completed                7.2              7.0             7.2             7.1              7.1
Dropout                               0.00             0.01            0.02            0.02             0.03

Number of Observations                 35               83             642             231              209

Age 15
Highest Grade Attended                8.9              9.0             9.0              9.0             9.0
Highest Grade Completed               8.0               8.1             8.1             8.1              8.1
Dropout                              0.06*             0.02            0.02            0.03*            0.03

Number of Observations                 83              180             1037            414              319

Age 16
Highest Grade Attended                 9.9              9.9*           10.0             9.9*             9.9*
Highest Grade Completed               9.0               9.0             9.1             9.0*             9.0
Dropout                               0.04             0.03            0.04            0.05             0.04

Number of Observations                118              238             1487            538              428

Age 17
Highest Grade Attended                10.9             10.9            10.9            10.8*           10.8*
Highest Grade Completed               10.0             10.0            10.1             9.9*            9.8*
Dropout                               0.07             0.08            0.07            0.11*           0.11*

Number of Observations                187              326             1752            639              521

Notes:
1. Data drawn from survey years 1997 to 2003.
2. * indicates that the estimate is statistically different (p<0.05) from the estimate for adolescents in 26-75
    percentiles.




                                                                                                                41
                                        Appendix Table 2
   Educational Achievement (ASVAB) of Adolescents Age 14 to 17 by Gender and Relative Weight Status

                                                             Relative Weight Status
Males Age 14 to 17               0-10%             11-25%           26-75%          76-90%                 91-100%

ASVAB Percentile                  42.5               46.1              45.5               44.2              40.3*

Number of Observations             282               432               1441               397                244

Females Age 14 to 17

ASVAB Percentile                  46.9               51.5              49.2              41.9*              36.5*

Black                              0.18*            0.20                0.24              0.33*              0.43*
Hispanic                          0.17              0.15                0.18             0.22                0.22
Excellent Health                  0.72              0.78*               0.73              0.63*              0.55*
Smoke                             0.43              0.37*               0.46             0.44                0.43
Age in Months                     182.1             183.3              182.8             181.6              181.8

Mom Age at Birth                  25.9               25.9              25.6               24.5*             25.1
Mom LTHS                          0.18               0.16              0.18               0.25*             0.24*
Mom BA                            0.21               0.23              0.18               0.12*             0.07*
Two Biological Parents            0.54               0.51              0.50               0.47              0.34*

Central City Resident             0.30               0.30              0.31               0.36              0.39*

Number of Observations             247               398               1359               399                251

  Notes:
  1. Data drawn from 1997 survey year, as this is the year that ASVAB test was administered.
  2. * indicates that the estimate is statistically different from the estimate for adolescents in 26-75
      percentiles.




                                                                                                                   42
