                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           MONETARY POLICY AND THE DOLLAR

                                         Peter L. Rousseau

                                        Working Paper 14993
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14993


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2009




¸˛The author thanks Michael Bordo, Douglas Irwin, Richard Sylla, and participants at the NBER's
  conference on "Founding Choices: American Economic Policy in the 1790s" for helpful comments.
  The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Peter L. Rousseau. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Monetary Policy and the Dollar
Peter L. Rousseau
NBER Working Paper No. 14993
May 2009
JEL No. E42,E44,N11,N21

                                                ABSTRACT

In this essay I propose that the adoption of the U.S. dollar as a common currency shortly after the ratification
of the Federal Constitution and the accompanying transition from a fiat to specie standard was a pivotal
moment in the nation’s early history and marked an improvement over the monetary systems of colonial
America and under the Articles of Confederation. This is because the dollar and all that came with
it monetized the modern sector of the U.S. economy and tied the supply of money more closely to
the capital market and the provision of creditfeats that were not possible in an era when colonial legislatures
were unable to credibly commit to controlling paper money emissions. The switch to a specie standard
was at the time necessary to promote domestic and international confidence in the nascent financial
system, and paved the way for the long transition to the point when the standard was no longer required.


Peter L. Rousseau
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
VU Station B #351819
2301 Vanderbilt Place
Nashville, TN 37235-1819
and NBER
peter.l.rousseau@vanderbilt.edu
1. Introduction

       Twenty-first century Americans take for granted that a dollar is worth a dollar, meaning

that a given Federal Reserve note at a point in time carries a fixed purchasing power regardless

of who tenders it or where it is tendered. And though one may rightfully say that prices of goods

with identical physical characteristics can and do differ across localities and that a dollar may

therefore not purchase the same quantities of goods everywhere, an apple in New York is a

distinct economic good from an apple in Cleveland. This again just means that a dollar is worth a

dollar with no questions asked of its holder.

       When the United States adopted the dollar as a common currency shortly after the

ratification of the Federal Constitution in 1788, it represented the birth of the monetary system

that for the most part continues to the present day―a system that eventually led to the dollar’s

universal acceptance and rise to its position as the world’s leading currency. With it came a

central bank, a mint, the start of modern banking operations and securities markets, and a newly-

found confidence among investors in the ability of the young nation to service its financial

obligations. The new system and its specie standard represented a marked improvement over the

fiat paper money systems that had operated in the British North American colonies prior to their

independence in 1776, and an enormous improvement over the rapidly-deteriorating monetary

conditions that existed during the during the Revolutionary War (1776-1781) and under the

Articles of Confederation (1781-1788).

       During the war un-backed paper money issued by the Continental Congress gave way to

an inflationary spiral, debt depreciation, and a scarcity of real money balances. Later issues of

paper money by individual states in the 1780s fared somewhat better, but in most cases were also

unable to retain their value. The need to unify the currency and to restore public confidence in it



                                                 1
through adoption of a specie standard must have weighed heavily in the minds of the founding

fathers as they drafted a Constitution that forbade emissions of paper money by individual states.

       These men probably based the decision on their more recent experiences with the

Continental (Hammond 1957, p. 95), yet the experiments with fiat paper monies conducted in the

colonies in the eight decades prior to Independence can hardly be considered a woeful failure. At

the same time, the colonial monetary systems were vastly different from the one now used in the

United States. While the colonists did indeed exchange “pounds” for goods in many of their

transactions, they were not the British pound sterling. Rather, individual colonies issued their

own “pounds,” each with markedly different and frequently varying relative valuations from one

another and against the British pound. These variations generated uncertainty as to what the local

currency might be worth at any point in time, present or future. And though these local “pounds”

were usually employed as the unit of account in each colony, meaning that prices of all goods

were generally set in terms of them, a wide range of exchange media might be accepted in actual

payment for goods, including but not limited to a colony’s own paper pounds, those of other

colonies, and various foreign coins that traded at varying rates against the local “pound.”

       Often money did not change hands at all. Rather, those desiring goods received credit

from a shopkeeper, who would then record a debt for the local currency value of the goods

extended. Repayment might then occur in goods acceptable to the merchant and in a quantity

that would erase the debt, or in any of the monetary forms described above. Sometimes

transactions occurred by simple barter between two individuals, such as a two bushels of wheat

for eight hours of work on the farm.

       Given these conditions, it would seem that the colonists could have benefited from

standardizing at least their paper currencies, if not their coins as well. Article 1, Section 8 of the




                                                   2
Constitution speaks to this issue by granting Congress the exclusive right to “coin money [and]

regulate the value thereof.” This, in combination with the clause in Article 1, Section 10 that

“No state shall emit bills of credit,” in effect turned the United States into a common currency

area. But the fact remains that the colonial arrangements worked reasonably well most of the

time, especially in light of restrictive policies imposed by the mother country. It was only when

the supply of paper money increased to great excess that bouts of hyperinflation and depreciation

would destroy wealth and lead to public consternation. Because these events were relatively

rare, it is not immediately obvious that the founding fathers should have preferred the ban on

state currencies that eventually made its way into the Federal Constitution.

       In this essay I develop the argument that, though perhaps not an obvious decision at the

time, the ban on state-issued currencies was in retrospect a very good idea. This is because the

transition to the dollar and all that came with it succeeded in monetizing the modern sector of the

U.S. economy, a feat that was not possible in an era when colonial legislatures were unable to

commit credibly to controlling currency emissions. And though the rapid spread of banks and

banking that followed may not have been anticipated by all who debated Article 1, Section 8, its

later interpretation led to a beneficial privatization of the money creation process that linked

money more closely to the provision of credit. In making the case, I will describe how the

monetary systems of the colonial and confederation periods operated and compare these systems

with those put in place early in the nation’s Federal period and under today’s more-familiar

Federal Reserve. Some aspects of these systems, including how colonial paper monies managed

to retain their value, are ones of current academic discussion. In these instances, I review the

alternative viewpoints in the course of synthesizing an overall view of how the monetary systems

in America worked before and after the transition to the dollar.




                                                  3
2. The Economics of a Currency Union

       The property that a U.S. dollar is worth a dollar regardless of its holder, or in other

words, that the states today operate as a single currency area within a monetary union, has its

advantages. Consider the alternative of a loosely-connected group of territories, as were the

colonies, with each operating under its own monetary standard. In such a world, an agent buying

goods outside of his or her area would first need to exchange that area’s money with a currency

that was valid in the area where the purchase would occur. Either that or the purchaser’s

currency would likely be accepted at a lower value than it could command in its own area. The

discount would be taken because transporting the “foreign” currency back to the location where

it could ultimately be redeemed involved costs, and because of uncertainty regarding how much

the currency would be worth upon its return. These “deadweight” losses, as economists call

them, have to fall somewhere, and often upon the consumer. Today such a system of separate

currency areas within a single nation would likely be rejected as inefficient and trade-inhibiting,

and replaced with a system based on a common currency. Even in the case of connected yet

distinct nations seeking greater adhesion, such as the European Union, separate currencies and

exchange rates across them often give way to a common currency, as has occurred with the euro.

       One consequence of operating under a common currency is some loss in the ability of

individual areas within the union to control the amount of money available to their citizens, and

therefore to control the general level of prices in any particular area. For example, prior to the

establishment of the euro zone, if, say, the Bank of France believed that putting more francs (i.e.,

the former French currency) into circulation would keep prices stable in the midst of heightened

economic activity, the central bank could buy a bond from the government, printing francs to do

so, and the government could then use these francs to pay for some form of consumption or




                                                  4
investment. If there were enough of the government’s bonds already outstanding, the Bank

could of course also accomplish this by buying some of these bonds back from the public.

       If, on the other hand, the monetary authority believed that stabilizing the franc’s external

value with respect to other currencies was a higher priority than stabilizing prices within France,

it might instead create money only if it found the franc appreciating excessively against other

currencies. Though achieving both internal price stability and a fixed exchange rate with another

currency is generally not possible in economic theory and in practice, the fact remains that under

a national currency individual governments and their central banks have some degree of

autonomy in deciding which of their policy goals are the most important to pursue.

       Now consider a common currency, say the euro. Continuing the example, if economic

activity were to increase in France, there would be downward pressure on French prices as the

same euros would now have to suffice for purchasing a larger quantity of goods. The downward

price pressure would draw euros from other members of the European Union into France as they

sought to purchase cheaper goods, but it might take some time for prices to return to their

original level. In the meantime, if economic activity were to remain stable outside of France, the

draw of euros into France would decrease the money supply elsewhere, lowering prices in other

parts of the union. In this case, the European Central Bank (the monetary authority of the euro

zone) might attempt to stabilize prices by anticipating how much money the zone would need to

absorb the heightened activity in France and inject a commensurate amount of reserves. But the

injection might impact prices in some member countries more than others, meaning that the

monetary policy action could disadvantage some. The inability to execute independent monetary

policies may be somewhat offset by independent fiscal policies, but members of most currency

areas usually agree to limit their scope.




                                                 5
       At the same time, a common currency allows a monetary authority to keep the money

supply of the currency zone on some pre-determined long-run path, thereby controlling inflation

and maintaining the strength of the common monetary unit. A common currency also often goes

hand in hand with an integrated banking system and financial markets that reduce redundancies

and improve the efficiency with which financial transactions take place. All of this can lead to

better synchronization of business cycles across member countries, counteracting their loss of

monetary independence. Uncertainties about exchange rate fluctuations within the zone between

times of contracting for goods and paying for them are also eliminated, and could well increase

trade among the member countries. For example, Rose (2000) estimates that the volume of trade

within currency unions is three times greater than the members would conduct in the absence of

a union. Though this effect seems too large, most economists would agree that the increases in

trade are considerable. Finally, a common currency may render its members better insulated

from speculative attacks and the financial crises that can often follow in small countries with

inadequate reserves. All this said, of course, if the currency of a large region such as the euro

zone were to come under a successful attack the damages would be catastrophic.

       As timely as the issues surrounding the establishment of a monetary union may seem in

today’s financial climate, it may come as a surprise to some readers that the United States came

to grips with many of the same issues more than two centuries ago in the years that followed the

1788 adoption of the Federal Constitution. At that time the nation officially made the transition

from a loose confederation operating under a system of multiple state-issued fiat currencies to a

nation in which transactions were unified under a single unit of account.1



1
  Rolnick, Smith, and Weber (1993) contend that the colonies operated under flexible exchange
rates and that the desire to eliminate them was the main reason why the U.S. Constitution
forbade state currency emissions.


                                                 6
               Fig. 1. Bills of credit per capita, New England colonies, 1703-1749.



       The coordination problems associated with the lack of a monetary union were quite

serious in the colonies. Currencies of distant colonies did not pass in hand-to-hand transactions at

their stated values, but rather for considerably less. Currencies of nearby colonies, such as those

within New England, however, were often accepted at their stated values. Though the latter

arrangement may have some features of a monetary union, it was nonetheless problematic in that

there was no central authority to control the total supply of paper currency in the region.

       Figure 1 shows the course of the per capita supply of paper money in the New England

colonies from 1720 through 1751, with all local pounds converted into sterling equivalents to

facilitate direct comparisons. This was done by dividing the amount of outstanding paper money

by the total population of each colony, and multiplying the result by average annual sterling



                                                 7
exchange rates for Massachusetts.2 In this case, with specie (i.e., gold and silver coins)

effectively driven from the New England area by 1723, paper money represented the entire

money stock for most of the period in the figure (Brock, 1975).

       A few observations can be made at this point. First, the per capita stock of paper money

declined in Massachusetts, New Hampshire and Connecticut through the 1720s and 1730s. By

1740 it had fallen to less than £0.5 sterling in all three. Second, the behavior of Rhode Island’s

money stock was much different, following an upward trend from 1710 through 1747.

Apparently the legislature of this small state, with a population of 25,000, one-sixth that of

Massachusetts, had discovered that it could issue paper money that would depreciate only to the

extent that it undermined confidence in the money stock of the entire region. This in effect

allowed Rhode Island to levy taxes indirectly on its neighbors. The issues can be considered

taxes because they could be used to purchase goods outside of Rhode Island, thereby increasing

the usable money supply of the neighboring colonies and leading to inflation. (After all, inflation

is just a way of taxing those who hold money by eroding its value.) Finally, when the New

England colonies all began to emit larger quantities after 1745 to pay for King George’s War, the

ensuing expansion of the region’s money supply led to a rapid inflation.

       Recognizing its difficulties in managing paper money, Massachusetts reformed its

currency between 1749 and 1754, at first using most of a parliamentary grant of £183,650 that

was belated compensation for expenditures made by the colony during King George’s War to

purchase silver (and some copper) to retire its paper money. After that, Massachusetts issued



2
  The quantities of outstanding bills of credit for the New England colonies are from Brock
(1992, Table 1). Colonial populations are from U.S. Bureau of the Census (1975, p. 1168, series
Z-3, Z-6, Z-7, Z-11) and use constant growth rates to interpolate between decadal benchmarks.
Sterling exchange rates are annual averages of local pounds per 100 pounds sterling from
McCusker (1978, Table 3.1, pp. 138-45).


                                                 8
only “treasurer’s certificates,” which bore interest and were redeemable on demand in silver.

This effectively placed Massachusetts on a specie standard for the remainder of the colonial

period (Brock, 1975, pp. 244-56).

       Rhode Island’s ability to exploit the system of currency finance underscores an important

disadvantage of monetary independence in a tightly-wound regional economy―the domestic

value of one currency becomes dependent on actions taken by other members of the “union.”

The forbidding of state bills of credit, formation of a central bank, and growth of the banking

system after 1790 can be viewed as actions to reduce the possibility of these problems arising.

        This is not to say that the young United States decisively tackled the problems of

monetary control within a currency union either, but by settling upon the dollar as the monetary

standard it certainly made progress in that direction. Indeed, most of the discussion at the

Constitutional Convention of 1787 indicates that the inherent instability of multiple issues of

paper money was the main justification for establishing the currency union even though many

colonies, unlike Rhode Island, managed their currency issues responsibly. It was not until the

ratification process was underway that the father of the Constitution, James Madison, proposed a

more modern argument in Federalist Paper No. 44, stating that “Had every State a right to

regulate the value of its coin, there might be as many different currencies as States, and thus the

intercourse among them would be impeded.” It is not clear why the advantage of expanded trade

within the union was not explicitly stated earlier.

       Much of the credit for crafting the U.S. financial system is appropriate to bestow upon the

nation’s first Secretary of the Treasury, Alexander Hamilton. By establishing a federal mint in

1792, Hamilton brought order under a bi-metallic standard to the collection of foreign coins and

various local currencies that had previously comprised the nation’s money stock, and formally




                                                  9
introduced the dollar as the common unit of account. Hamilton also succeeded in building

legislative support for the charter of a national bank, the First Bank of the United States. And

though its charter was not renewed in 1811 for political reasons, the functions performed by the

First Bank as the federal government’s fiscal agent helped to demonstrate the advantages of a

common currency with centralized control over the government’s deposits and disbursements.

For one, the Bank made it easier for the government to deposit revenues in certain regions and

disburse them in entirely different ones. The Second Bank of the United States, formed in 1816

and surviving until 1836, continued along the path set by the First Bank, and with a much

expanded capitalization, was able to further the monetary and financial integration of the nation.

       Interestingly, there is little evidence that banks or banking were discussed at the

Constitutional Convention. The delegates were certainly aware of banks, bank notes, and their

monetary uses, however, given that the Bank of North America in Philadelphia had been

chartered by Congress in 1781. Hammond (1957, p. 105) suggests that banks were not included

in the Constitution or openly discussed at the Convention because the “subject was too touchy,”

with many delegates favoring their creation while the populace generally did not. Bank notes did

not seem to be of great concern either, as they were considered to be surrogates for money rather

than money itself due to their ready convertibility to specie. Thus bank notes, unlike state-issued

fiat paper money, could be interpreted as consistent with Article 1, Section 10, which prohibited

the states from making “anything but gold and silver coin a tender in payment of debts.” At the

same time, even though the Constitution did not explicitly authorize Congress to charter

corporations, the omission was interpreted by Hamilton shortly thereafter as implicitly permitting

it, which led to the active chartering of commercial banks.

       Whether initially a “touchy” issue or not, the banking system would grow rapidly over




                                                10
                       Fig. 2. The growth of state banking, 1790-1850.


the early Federal period. While only three banks were chartered in the 1780s, 28 new banks

obtained state charters in the 1790s and another 73 were chartered in the decade that followed

(Fenstermaker 1965a, p. 13). The profitability of these early banks, for which annual dividends

of more than 8 percent were common, sparked a rapid expansion in their number that reached a

high-water mark of 834 state banks by 1840. Then, after a brief decline during the depression of

the early 1840s, by 1860 the number of state banks nearly doubled again. Figure 2 shows this

evolution along with estimates of paid-in banking capital.3 Like the rise in number, the increase


3
  Total paid-in capital for state banks was constructed by extending backward the series for
1837-1850 that appears in U.S. Bureau of the Census (1975, series X587). This was done by
multiplying the paid-in capital of reporting state banks in each year from 1803 to 1837 by the
ratio of the total number of state banks to the number of reporting ones (Fenstermaker, 1965a,


                                               11
in capital (in 1860$) from $3 million in 1790 to $426 million by 1840 reflects the growing role

of banks in mobilizing resources and in providing credit and other financial services.

       The most substantive change, however, was the transfer of much of the control over the

money supply from the public to the private sector. Rather than a system in which government

officials and politicians controlled the issuance and redemption of paper―functions that placed

them at the center of a credit allocation process aimed largely at the agricultural sector― banks

were able to amass private capital and issue notes that could promote investment and foreign

trade by seeking the highest returns.

       By issuing notes, I mean that individual banks could now print their own paper money,

redeemable into specie on demand at the bank’s counter, and allow these notes to circulate

among the public over the time between issuance and redemption. At first this may seem to

represent little improvement over the colonial system, where at least there were legislators and

the crown to keep track of the quantities issued, but over-issuance of demand notes by banks

turned out to be the exception rather than the rule. One reason for this was that most banks

feared large and unpredictable presentations of paper at their counters for immediate redemption

in specie, and practiced some restraint in issuing notes for this reason. Another reason was that a

loss in bank’s reputation could lead to difficulties in raising capital. At the same time, many

banks were known to have over-issued notes, and especially in the 1830s. Yet the central bank,

at the times when one existed, could and did impose some discipline on over-issuing banks by

accumulating notes of such banks and then presenting them all at once to the issuer for

redemption. In other words, excessive note issues by a large number of soon-to-be-insolvent

pp. 66-68; Fenstermaker, 1965b, p. 406), and joining the result to the Census series. I then used
percentage changes in the authorized capital of all state banks from 1790-1802 (Fenstermaker,
1965a, p. 13) to approximate the series through 1790, and converted to 1860 dollars using the
consumer price index from David and Solar (1977, p. 16).


                                                 12
banks in one region could disrupt the economy generally if they undermined confidence in other

banks, but the excesses of a single issuer (i.e., in this case a single bank), unlike that of an entire

colony, were unlikely to disrupt the entire financial system.

       At the same time, it can be fairly said that bank money in early United States was not

homogeneous in that its value did depend on the ability of the issuing bank to make good on the

promise to redeem its own notes on demand and in specie. Indeed, uncertainty about the strength

of these promises and the costs of verifying them did cause bank notes to pass at discounts away

from their points of issue (Gorton 1996), and the use of notes of closed banks and counterfeiting

did occur (Mihm 2007). But in the end a note was always tethered to its place of issue by the

redemption option and would eventually return there, limiting the extent to which excessive

issues could disrupt prices in nearby states. So even if lacking some features of a full currency

union in the modern sense, the early United States had many of such a union’s advantages.



3. Challenges of Monetary Control

        The currencies of the colonies were essentially fiat monies, meaning that they were

deemed an acceptable means of payment by government decree. Given this, one question that

often arises is how the colonial bills of credit managed to retain their value as well as they did

amidst a wide range of monetary and real economic shocks. Indeed, why would anyone value

them at all? One could well ask the same question with regard to today’s U.S. currency, which is

also a fiat money, yet the “full faith and credit of the U.S. government” means a lot more today

than it meant 250 years ago. This is because the Federal Reserve has for some time maintained a

commitment to control the quantity of money that is available in the economy, and is equipped

with the means for doing so through interactions between the banking sector and the purchases

and sales of the government’s debt securities.


                                                  13
       For example, if the Federal Reserve Bank chooses today to increase the supply of money,

perhaps with the objective of achieving some targeted rate of interest, it purchases outstanding

government debt securities (i.e., Treasury bills, notes, bonds, or other acceptable paper) from the

public and many of the payments go into the sellers’ checking accounts where they immediately

become reserves for the banking system. Individual banks then create money by lending on the

new reserves. Since banks need only maintain a fraction of their deposits as reserves, an

additional dollar in reserves in ordinary times supports the creation of many new dollars through

the making of loans. For example, with a reserve requirement of ten percent on deposits, one

additional dollar in reserves can be multiplied into $10 of new money. This occurs because loans

are initiated by creating checking account deposits for the borrowers, and checking deposits are

part of the narrowly-defined money supply (i.e., M1). An economist would say that the

expansion had occurred through a “money multiplier” effect, with the multiplier in this case

taking a value of ten.

       To contract the money supply, possibly with the objective of making money more scarce

and thereby raising interest rates, the Federal Reserve does the opposite, selling Treasury

securities to the public, reducing the checking balances of those who buy them and draining

reserves from the banking system. A so-called “reverse money multiplier” then takes over

through which each dollar of lost reserves forces an affected bank to reduce its assets by the

multiplier. If, as in the previous example, the reserve requirement is ten percent and the

“multiplier” is therefore ten, each dollar of drained reserves forces the bank to contract deposits

by $10, a task that is sometimes accomplished by calling in loans.

       When the Federal government needs money to finance its expenditures that cannot be

acquired through taxes, it instructs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to conduct an auction




                                                 14
that sells bonds to the public on its behalf. If the debt is purchased by domestic entities and the

government spends the funds quickly, it generates only a temporary reduction in the money

supply. It is temporary because the reserves drained in the sale make their way back into the

banking system quickly as the government spends the funds and the recipients deposit them.

       If the debt is purchased by foreigners using dollar-denominated balances in banks outside

of the United States, the effective money supply would increase because the government would

spend the fresh funds and they would end up in individual checking accounts, where they would

increase domestic reserves and be subject to the multiplier effect. All else the same, this would

place downward pressure on interest rates. To hold interest rates at the target, the Federal

Reserve may therefore choose to sell some of its own inventory of securities to offset the

expansion coming from foreign sources.

       The main point here is that this system of “open market operations,” as employed in the

United States today, is more or less effective in controlling the main monetary aggregates.

       There were no such open market operations to control the money supply in the British

North American colonies. To use a modern analogy, increasing the money supply in a colony

would have been much like today’s Federal government forcing the Federal Reserve to purchase

its IOU, printing cash to do so, and the Federal Reserve choosing not to offset the resulting

increase in the money supply with its own open market sales. The fiscal authority could,

however, promise to exchange the cash at some future date for individual tax obligations and to

ultimately return these tax payments to the Federal Reserve for shredding. This would extinguish

the original IOU and remove the cash from circulation.

       If executed according to design, such a system would tax the public only once―in

advance through the monetary emission. Indeed, if the public were to maintain confidence in the




                                                 15
government’s resolve to redeem and destroy the cash according to a well-defined schedule, this

anticipation would dampen inflationary pressures associated with the emission since it would be

understood to be temporary. Interestingly, the greatest challenge of monetary control faced by

the colonies involved the timely “retrieval” of currency through later taxation.

         Of course, the individual colonies did not have central banks, nor any real banks to speak

of other than a few small, private ones operating primarily in New England, so colonial

legislatures, in conjunction with the crown, had to function as their own central bankers. When a

colonial legislature needed money (perhaps to finance skirmishes with its French, Spanish, or

Native American neighbors, or to pay its employees or make loans to farmers for land

purchases), it authorized itself, usually with the consent of the crown, to print paper money (i.e.,

write the public an IOU). It would then spend the newly-printed “bills of credit,” as they were

called, increasing the money supply of the colony and imposing an indirect tax on holders of

previously-issued bills. Inflation would sometimes ensue, the extent of which would depend on

the size of the issue, the quantity of gold and silver coins in circulation, the growth of real

activity, and most importantly the credibility of the legislature’s plans to redeem the bills.

         In the middle colonies such as Pennsylvania and New York, bills of credit were usually

issued with specific schedules for redemption in the form of the cancellation of individual tax

liabilities. The bills would be burned after collection, thereby reining the money supply back.

Some scholars believe that when the public was confident that these operations were being

carried out as planned, as they were most of the time in the middle colonies, the bills of credit

were in effect “backed”―not necessarily by gold or silver, but by their promised acceptance in

payment of future taxes (Smith 1985).4 Indeed, in a growing economy where it is known that


4
    Others disagree, most prominently Michener (1987) and McCallum (1992).



                                                  16
paper money issues will be removed from circulation in a timely manner and the emissions are

not excessive, the government’s balance sheet may be relatively unaffected and inflationary

tendencies dampened (Wallace 1981; Sargent and Smith 1987). This is because the paper issues

represent a liability for the government that is offset by a receivable, namely future tax receipts.

       In other colonies, such as those of New England in the 1740s and South Carolina before

1730, however, the commitment to collect and destroy bills of credit according to schedule was

less steadfast than in the middle colonies. After all, defending against neighboring foes was seen

as crucial to the survival of the British Empire, so the colonial legislatures met with little

resistance from the crown when emitting paper money in amounts sufficient for funding such

conflicts. But once the new money was spent, it was hard to commit to accepting it in lieu of

taxes. Even if collected, there was a temptation to recycle the bills for new expenditures rather

than destroying them. Even outright theft could and did sometimes occur.

        Thus, when the need for the new money ceased with the end of military operations, if

other sectors of the economy had not grown adequately in the meantime, there was often too

much money in circulation to hold prices steady. This was a recipe for inflation, depreciation,

and the destruction of wealth. Colonists would first try to exchange the bills for specie in the

course of everyday transactions when confidence in them fell, but the bills would quickly

depreciate. In this scenario a speculative attack was avoided only because the colonial

legislatures did not attempt to peg the bills to gold or silver, or in other words, did not commit to

maintaining fixed exchange rates between bills and specie.

       The period of the Revolutionary War and the provisional government under the Articles

of Confederation, though ending in military and political triumph for the former colonies, saw

further deterioration of monetary control. Calomiris (1988), Perkins (1994), and Michener and




                                                  17
Wright (2005), among others, describe how the Continental Congress, a political body that

lacked the power to ensure redemption of paper money by levying taxes, authorized their issue

anyway to finance the conflict. Given the history of problems that the colonies had faced in

redeeming their bills of credit even with the authority to impose taxes, it is in retrospect not

surprising that the new paper money depreciated virtually to the point of worthlessness.

          The saga of the “continental” currency is a classic example of what economists refer to as

the “time inconsistency” problem in monetary policy. The burden of financing the Revolutionary

War, which was much greater than experienced during the French and Indian War (1755-1763),

called for drastic measures. The former colonists had never experimented with a common

currency, and when debt proved difficult to sell domestically, fiat money became a viable option

for financing the Revolution. Uncertainty about the size of the new issues and perhaps even

misplaced optimism about the terms of their redemption allowed the bills to retain their value

long enough to support expenditures in the first year or two. But when the paper depreciated the

Continental Congress could not successfully turn to the device a second time. The continental

was officially devalued at 40:1 in 1781 and in the end Hamilton’s funding plan of the 1790s

provided for redemption of the remaining bills at a ratio of 100:1 (Perkins 1994, pp. 97-8).5

          The thirteen states also issued their own fiat currencies during and immediately after the

War of Independence, and rapid depreciation commenced on many of these as well. By the mid-

1780s, seven states had reissued fiat currencies that were backed by future tax collections, but

these never managed to circulate at par. Pennsylvania, for example, which is often credited with

having among the more stable of these later arrangements, saw the value of its currency value

depreciate by 20 percent against sterling between November 1780 and June 1785 (Bezanson


5
    The popular phrase “not worth a continental” has its origins in experiences with this currency.



                                                  18
1951, p. 346). At the same time, the Federal government was in default on its foreign debts,

primarily to the French government and to Dutch investors. The 1780s saw attempts by financial

leaders such as Robert Morris and Hamilton to hasten the privatization of the financial system by

establishing the nation’s first real banks in the commercial centers of Philadelphia and New York

(Perkins 1994, esp. Ch. 6). Political opposition to these banks was strong, however, and they

were at that time unable to serve as much more than a model for the changes that were to come

(Sylla 2002; Rousseau and Sylla 2005).

       In other words, the ability of the young United States to finance its military efforts in the

Revolutionary War does not imply that its monetary policies in this transitional period were

optimal or stable. After all, an ability to write-down (and effectively write-off) state and federal

obligations at pennies on the dollar can hardly be considered a desirable policy―even among a

general population that was reluctantly willing to accept the Continental issues as the taxes that

they were. Further, the depreciating currency, in the absence of a banking system or organized

and liquid securities markets, was the only domestic financial asset that could function of a store

of value. It is clear why savings and capital accumulation were stunted under such conditions.

       When the transition to the dollar occurred in the 1790s, an accompanying flurry of

activity led to the establishment of a banking system and a central bank that achieved better

control over the money supply. This is not to say, however, that a system similar to today’s

“open market operations” was achieved―this did not occur until the founding of the Federal

Reserve Bank in 1914. The main problem was that the First Bank of the United States, with its

large-for-the-time capitalization of $10 million, still lacked several features of a modern central

bank. For one, it lacked the capital and mandate to act as a lender of last resort and in effect

guarantee the notes of the banking system in times of crisis. Indeed, an expansion of its own




                                                 19
note issues in late 1791 and early 1792 and then a sharp contraction as the Bank lost reserves

probably contributed to the first financial panic of the Federal period in March-April of 1792. In

the end it was Secretary Hamilton who averted the panic by using Federal monies to purchase

bonds and inject liquidity into the New York market (Sylla, Wright, and Cowen 2009). In

addition, the First Bank lacked the span-of-control required to fine-tune the aggregate money

supply in an era when banks were not bound by reserve requirements.

       At the same time, the Bank was able to set an important example of how to handle note

issue responsibly, and a decentralized system of individual banks soon followed the lead and

issued their own demand notes backed by gold and silver coins. The backing of the paper money

supply with specie increased the confidence of foreign investors in the commitment of the United

States to make scheduled payments of interest on its public debts in hard money, encouraging

capital flows to the young nation.

       From that point until 1914, the quality of the money supply in the United States was

based upon the acceptability of bank notes. Even though banks in most states operated without

any form of reserve requirements until the 1860s, state banks realized that they would be out of

business quickly if they allowed specie balances in their vaults to get too low. Financial panics

remained an important part of the antebellum economic landscape, with notable ones occurring

in 1814, 1819, 1837, 1839, and 1857, but it is worth noting that hyperinflations such as those

experienced by the colonies and the provisional government became a thing of the past in the

United States. At the same time, banks were able to expand note issues as the needs of commerce

increased, and while contracting the supply of bank notes was still more difficult than expanding

it, the money supply saw greater elasticity in the fifty years following the Constitution than it




                                                 20
ever did beforehand (Rousseau 2006). 6 Transferring control of the money supply to a series of

quasi-public and private banks was at the time the right decision, and establishing a specie

standard was an important intermediate step that would set the stage for the fiat system that

would evolve in the latter half of the twentieth century.



4. Backing of Paper Currencies and the Potential for Economic Growth

       Thus far, I have proceeded under the premise that the acceptability of the paper money

issued by the colonies for the cancellation of future tax liabilities was among the features that

gave real economic value to these emissions. Put another way, it was the credibility of the

government’s promise that the bills would someday be usable at their nominal values to pay an

otherwise unavoidable debt that limited the extent to which the bills could depreciate before that

date. This form of “backing” was quite different from the system that existed after the adoption

of the Constitution in which it was public confidence in the readiness of convertibility to specie

that rendered a bank note as good as specie or better, at least in the vicinity of the issuing bank.

       One of the fundamental tenets of monetary economics is that the relationship between

money, output, and prices can be described, to a first approximation, by a simple identity

commonly known as the “quantity theory of money.” In its most basic form, the quantity theory

posits the following “equation of exchange”:

MV = PY                                                                                       (1)

where M is the quantity of money in circulation, V is the velocity of money, or the number of



6
 It can be argued that the bank-based monetary system had a pro-cyclical elasticity, meaning that
the money stock could be expanded during booms and contracted as business activity slowed,
and that the colonial systems were perhaps better equipped for implementing counter-cyclical
policy. But the impediments that the colonial legislatures faced in contracting money suggest
that the practical importance of such potential counter-cyclicality was small.


                                                 21
times that a typical single dollar is used in transactions over some fixed period of time, P is the

general level of prices, and Y is the extent of transactions carried on, often measured by real

output or gross domestic product. This expression shows that, assuming Y and V to be fixed in

the short term, an increase in the supply of money should be quickly reflected in an increase in

the level of prices, or put differently, that money should depreciate in value. Similarly, a

decrease in the money supply should quickly lead to a proportionate decline in prices and

increase in the value of money.

        The quantity theory is of particular interest to scholars of the colonial period because

some evidence suggests that the predicted direct and proportionate relationship between money

and prices did not always hold at that time. For example, West (1978) estimated the relationship

between the quantity of bills of credit in circulation and prices in New York, Pennsylvania and

South Carolina using a standard linear regression model and found no significant correlation

between the two, while Smith (1985) obtained similar results for Maryland and the Carolinas.

These findings ignited a discussion that has persisted for decades about whether the West-type

regressions capture a failure of the quantity theory or simply a failure of the extant data for the

colonies to reflect the quantities of interest.

        Michener (1987) develops a theoretical model of the colonies in which paper money and

specie are substitutes, meaning that emissions of paper drive specie out of circulation and

reductions generate offsetting specie inflows, thereby keeping the total money supply (i.e., paper

plus specie) on some stable long-run path. If true, failure to find the relationship between money

and prices implied by the quantity theory could just reflect the exclusion of specie from the

measured money supply. This opens up the possibility that econometric tests would support the

quantity theory if only the money supply could be measured accurately. It is also consistent with




                                                  22
the view that paper money retained its value in the face of new emissions (i.e., did not have the

expected effects on the price level) because offsetting specie outflows would leave the total

money supply unaffected. In the latter case, money would depreciate via the quantity theory

only after enough bills of credit had been issued to drive all specie out of a colony and further

emissions had begun to increase the total money supply even more. Prior to this, paper money

and specie would be exchangeable at some fixed rate. Given the observed lack of correlation

between paper money and prices, the theory is most plausible if there was a lot of specie in the

colonies most of the time to support the fixed exchange rate.7 It also requires an ability of

colonial legislatures to contract paper money quickly to keep the total supply steady in the face

of specie inflows. As stated earlier, the colonies had great difficulties in accomplishing this.

       Advocates of the backing theory, such as Smith, interpret the failed correlation between

paper money and prices not as one of measurement but rather as a direct violation of the quantity

theory. In this view, specie and paper money are not perfect substitutes, but rather complements

much of the time, so that fluctuations in the supply of paper money would indeed closely reflect

movements in the total money supply. Under these conditions, the quantity theory fails because

the public believes that new emissions of paper money will at some point be removed from

circulation, which delivers a smaller impact on current prices than the quantity theory would

predict, and possibly no impact at all.

       Formally, the backing theory as proposed by Wallace (1981) and Sargent and Smith

(1987) predicts a zero inflationary response to paper money issues only under technically

stringent conditions. In particular, the colonial legislature making the emission must commit to

raising future taxes at the same rate as it has increased the supply of money through currency


7
 Michener (1987, pp. 253-56) is careful to note that his model is expository and that exchange
rates were not fixed at all times, as the model requires, and that specie was not always abundant.


                                                 23
issues, thereby increasing the current demand for currency as an asset, and must maintain

confidence in the promise that the bills will be collected later. Another way to think of it is that

the government puts the new money into circulation by purchasing physical assets, and the future

returns to these assets are passed back to citizens through the later acceptance of the bills for

taxes. In this case, the present value of the returns from the assets must equal the value of the

new notes in order for the price level to remain undisturbed.

       Even if not operated precisely in the non-inflationary manner described, the Wallace-

Sargent-Smith mechanism would still dampen inflationary pressures in an economy where bills

of credit are perceived as tax anticipatory notes. The theory is thus consistent with West’s failure

to find statistically significant correlations between paper money quantities and prices.

       The backing theory does not imply offsetting inflows and outflows of specie as the

supply of paper money contracts and expands. It also does not imply fixed exchange rates

between paper and coins, but rather exchange rates that fluctuate with the ebbs and flows of

paper, specie, and real activity. Further, the system could work in a region where specie was

scarce, and would be consistent with the view, supported by much of what was reported in the

contemporary press, that the colonies issued paper money because they could not maintain a

supply of coins that was large and stable enough to keep prices from fluctuating excessively.

       The controversy between the backing and quantity theorists, at the end of the day, hinges

on how much specie was in the colonies. Unfortunately, scholars of the period will probably

never know the answer with certainty.

       An alternative that I have proposed in Rousseau (2007) supports the quantity theory of

money while retaining elements of the backing theory, and does not require fixed exchange rates

or an abundance of specie in the colonies. Returning to the equation of exchange, I assume




                                                 24
velocity (V) to be constant but allow monetized transactions (Y) to vary. In this arrangement,

increases in the supply of money could encourage more individuals to use it in transactions

because of its greater convenience over barter or bookkeeping entries. Indeed, economies

experiencing growth in modern sector activity (i.e., manufacturing, construction, commerce),

such as those of the colonies and the young United States might have found money to be

increasingly useful from a development perspective.

       If such a mechanism was operating in the colonies, emissions of paper money would

direct more transactions through the formal market sector of the economy, with the possible side-

effect of increasing the amount of activity occurring in the market sector itself, in either case

raising Y in the equation of exchange. Thus, increases in M on the left-hand side would be at

least partially offset by increases in Y on the right-hand side, requiring long-run prices (P) to

move less, or in the case of complete absorption of the new money, not at all.

       To work in the colonies, it would have been essential for legislatures to keep the money

supply from expanding more rapidly than it could be absorbed in newly-monetized transactions.

To the extent that the public believed that the new money would be accepted as future tax

payments, this would have helped money to retain its value as the public began to use the new

bills in a wider range of transactions, and would have allowed for lags between the actual

emissions and associated increases in modern sector activity. While fixed exchange rates are not

required, exchange rates between specie and paper money could still have remained relatively

stable over extended periods provided that the stock of specie was adequate. In other words,

since the new paper money could be absorbed in newly monetized activities and ultimately by

increases in output, it would serve as a complement to specie and therefore not drive it out of the

issuing colony. On the other hand, at times when specie was scarce, the bills of credit would still




                                                 25
be backed by future tax collections. In either case, only excessive issues would erode public

confidence in the backing and lead to inflation.

       It is important to note that the quantity theory holds under the mechanism that I propose,

yet the extent to which money could be created in the colonies, despite an excess demand for its

services, was limited by the extent to which colonists could be convinced of the colonial

legislature’s resolve to redeem the notes. This means that the colonial monetary systems could

have been growth-promoting, and certainly more so than in a system without paper money, but

that the power of this mechanism was limited by the gradual and incremental manner in which it

could be utilized. It also suggests that breaking away from the constraints on money creation

inherent in the colonial systems, as occurred early in the Federal period, could lead to improved

macroeconomic outcomes. Rearranging (1) with V held constant immediately yields


Y = F (M/P),                                                                                   (2)


a relation in which real activity in the market (i.e., modern) sector is a direct function of real

money balances. Rousseau (2007) offers support for a finance-led growth of this type for

colonial Pennsylvania and the early United States in a set of vector error correction models, with

the strongest results obtaining for the early Federal period. The mechanism is most likely to

have operated at times when the amount of specie available in the colonies was small, meaning

when they were under-monetized. The next section examines the prevalence of this condition.



5. Specie Shortages and Under-Monetization in Colonial America?

       Specie shortages seem to have been common in the colonies during the period preceding

the Revolutionary War. Shortages arose because England prohibited exports of specie in the

course of commerce from the mother country to the colonies, and prohibited the colonies from


                                                   26
minting their own coins. Though the colonists did manage to produce some copper coins on their

own in direct disobedience of the crown, the specie base in the colonies consisted mainly of the

small quantities of British coins that did make it across the Atlantic to reimburse military

expenses and to pay British soldiers stationed there and other foreign coins. The most common

foreign coin, the Spanish silver dollar, or “piece of eight,” arrived primarily from the West Indies

in the course of international trade with other countries and parts of the globe. Other coins in

common circulation included the Spanish gold pistole, and the Portuguese gold Johannes (or

“Joe” as it was called by the colonists), and the Portuguese gold moidore. It is very likely that

this collection of coins, due to their shortage as well as their minting in denominations too large

to be useful in most transactions, was inadequate to support all of the exchange activity for

which some form of money would have been desirable.

       The scholarly record also generally suggests that the supply of specie was usually

inadequate. For example, Brock (1975, p. 532) asserts that “in ordinary times, the supply of

specie was at best meager and uncertain, and was not infrequently wanting altogether.” The

second chapter of Bezanson (1951, p. 10) opens with the claim that between 1770 and 1775 only

“a minor amount of coin furnished the medium of exchange in domestic trade.” Lester (1938, p.

326) states that “gold and silver coins were a luxury in the colonies.” In terms of quantitative

estimates, McCusker and Menard (1985) place the share of specie at about 25 percent of the

money supply, and Grubb (2004) estimates that specie was used in about 20 percent of market

transactions. If these scholars are anywhere close to the mark, money would certainly have been

in insufficient supply if limited to specie alone.8



8
  This is not to say that there is universal agreement about the amount of specie in the colonies.
Using the results of Jones’s (1980) study of colonial probate records from 1774, Michener (1987,
p. 528) estimates that about two-thirds of the money supply in New York and Pennsylvania was


                                                  27
        If we are to believe, then, that specie was in short supply, it would seem unlikely for the

colonial bills of credit to have maintained fixed exchange rates against the British pound sterling.

The extant data on exchange rates also indicate that they moved around quite a bit (McCusker

1978) so that if they were indeed fixed they fluctuated within very wide bands. All of this

suggests that the notion of the colonies operating under a version of the quantity theory in which

specie need not be abundant and in which exchange rates need not be fixed is plausible.

       Despite the inefficiencies and crises that many scholars focus upon, the colonial

experience with paper money was far from a complete failure. Several colonies were able to

control the rate of depreciation of their paper money and to keep it in circulation for decades.

And even though the possibility of rapid depreciation made colonists less willing to hold

currency as a store of value, it had little effect on their willingness to use it in hand-to-hand

transactions. Thus, an actively circulating medium was able to increase wealth generally. At the

same time, the negative experiences with currency depreciation that did occur led all colonists to

place some positive weight on the possibility that their currency might one day become

worthless. This limited the volume of bills that colonial governments could issue.

       The more stable experiments with paper money in Pennsylvania, New York, and New

Jersey avoided catastrophic depreciations because issues remained manageable. It does not

follow from this, however, that these colonies had an optimal monetary arrangement. McKinnon

(1973) shows how, in the absence of a well-articulated financial system, money and capital can

be complements in a developing economy due to money’s role as a conduit for savings. This did


comprised of specie. Problems with using probate records to estimate the money stock, and most
importantly that such measures represent the specie holdings of wealthy individuals and are thus
unrepresentative of the population at large, are described in Smith (1988, p. 29) and McCusker
and Menard (1988, pp. 264-5). Smith (1988) includes a summary of other estimates of the
colonial money supplies and the conceptual problems associated with each. Michener (1987, pp.
278-9) discusses inconsistencies in McCusker and Menard’s calculation.


                                                  28
              Fig. 3. Bills of credit per capita, mid-Atlantic colonies, 1710-1775.


not occur in the colonies because of the failure of paper money as a store of value. Rather, these

colonies had great difficulty monetizing, at least if measured by the real value of paper money in

circulation. Figure 3 shows the per capita stock of paper money from 1710 to 1775 in these mid-

Atlantic “successes” after converting to sterling equivalents.9



9
  Bills of credit in circulation for Pennsylvania are from Brock (1992, Table 6). For New Jersey
they are from Brock (1975, Table VI, p. 93) for 1724-52 and Brock (1992, Table 5) for 1753-74.
The amount of outstanding bills for New York is available on an annual basis after 1747 from
Brock (1992, Table 5). For 1709-47 Brock (1975, pp. 66-73) includes records of emissions,
anticipated redemptions, and many actual redemptions, as well as a few benchmark estimates of
the overall stock of bills. Using this information and linear interpolation for missing years in the
time paths of individual issues and their retirements, I approximated the stock of bills for New
York. Colonial populations are from U.S. Bureau of the Census (1975, p. 1168, series Z-9, Z-10,
and Z-11) and use constant growth rates to interpolate between decadal observations. Sterling
exchange rates are annual averages of local currency per 100 £ sterling from McCusker (1978,


                                                 29
       It may be surprising that Pennsylvania (given by the dashed line in Figure 3), often touted

as the great example of currency finance at its best, saw its per capita stock of paper money fall

steadily from 1724 until 1755. It rose from 1755 to 1760 in the midst of the French and Indian

War, but then fell rapidly, reaching its lowest point in the pre-Independence period by 1773. In

1750, bills per capita were about £ 0.7 (14 s.) in local Pennsylvania currency or £ 0.4 in sterling

equivalent. This amount could purchase, for example, using December prices from Cole (1938,

pp. 31-2), one gallon of rum (3 s.), one bushel of wheat (4.5 s.), one bushel of corn (2.5 s.), and 2

lbs. of cotton (2 s.). In other words, the stock of paper money could have supported purchases of

staple goods if it had changed hands frequently enough. Yet any savings or other hoarding of

coin would have lowered velocity, and the colonists were faced with other cash expenses such as

building materials, capital goods, and farm maintenance costs.

       A comparison of bills of credit per capita in Pennsylvania with England’s per capita

money stock further suggests that the colonies were under-monetized. Cameron (1967) estimates

England’s M2 in 1750 at about 52 million in 1790 sterling. Since England’s population was

about 6 million in 1750 and the consumer price index (1790=1) was 0.779, real money per capita

was about £ 6.80―much more than the £ 0.4 sterling equivalent for Pennsylvania. Even allowing

for the generous possibility that specie accounted for two-thirds of Pennsylvania’s money stock,

the per capita money stock (paper money plus specie) could therefore not have exceeded £ 1.20

in sterling equivalent. If specie accounted for about 22.5 percent of the money supply― the

average of the estimates from McCusker and Menard (1985) and Grubb (2004), per capita

holdings would be closer to £ 0.52 sterling. It is true that many English citizens could use money

as a form of savings more easily than the colonists due to the presence of a still small but rapidly


Table 3.5, pp. 162-67 for New York; Table 3.6, pp. 172-73 for New Jersey; and Table 3.7, pp.
183-88 for Pennsylvania), with interpolations filling in between occasional missing observations.


                                                 30
expanding set of country banks, and that their consumption possibilities in the market economy

were wider, but it is hard to imagine that these differences would have created anywhere from a

six to thirteen-fold increase in the demand for money.

       To make another comparison, 14 Pennsylvania shillings in 1750 would be worth about

$38 U.S. at the end of 2004.10 This amount of currency would be insufficient for an individual in

the United States today to complete weekly purchases without using checks and/or credit cards

(i.e., instruments of a modern financial system), even if consumption possibilities were limited to

those available to the colonists. Indeed, the U.S. monetary base (currency and coin) now exceeds

$2,000 per person, and M1 (currency and checking deposits) exceeds $4,000 per person.

       The per capita stock of paper money in New Jersey, given by the dotted line in Figure 3,

was more variable than that of Pennsylvania but has the same downward trend from 1725 to the

start of the French and Indian War. New York, given by the solid line, was more successful in

monetizing between 1710 and 1760, but bills of credit per capita were still only £ 1.1 in sterling

equivalent by 1750. Figure 3 suggests that, given reasonable conjectures about velocity of money

and the amount of specie likely to have been in circulation, much of the middle colonies’

transactions must have occurred outside of the formal monetary system.



6. Did monetary “founding choices” jump-start the early U.S. economy?

       The U.S. economy monetized much more rapidly after 1790. Data from Temin (1969)


10
   I obtained this estimate by multiplying £ 0.4 sterling in 1750 by the 6.15 percent total increase
in English consumer prices between 1750 and 1900, converting to 1900 U.S. dollars using the
exchange rate of $4.87/£, and multiplying the result by the 18-fold increase in U.S. prices that
occurred between 1900 to 2004. I built a continuous index of English prices using U.S. Bureau
of the Census (1975) by ratio-splicing the Schumpeter-Gilboy index for 1750-1819 (Table
14.1.B, pp. 719-20, with Rousseaux’s index for 1820-45 (Table 14.3, p. 722) and the Sauerbeck-
Statist index for 1846-1900 (Table 14.4, p. 725).



                                                31
            Fig. 4. The stock of money per capita in sterling equivalents, 1790-1850.


and Rousseau and Sylla (2005) illustrated in Figure 4 indicate that the per capita money stock

grew at an average annual rate of 0.8 percent per year from 1790 to 1850. Growth was even

faster from 1790 to 1805―the first 15 years after Hamilton’s plans were enacted, reaching 1.7

percent per year, and rose rapidly after 1830. These estimates probably represent minimum

quantities of money in that they do not account for issues by private banks and other un-

denominated (i.e., unmeasured) moneys, but the latter omission holds for the colonial estimates

as well. In any event, as we measure it, with the exception of one year, the per capita stock

always exceeded its 1790 level. The mean of the series from 1790 to 1850 is £ 2.1 per person.

This is almost 50 percent above the highest level ever achieved in New York before the

Revolutionary War, even assuming that specie accounted for 40 percent of the money supply.




                                                32
       At the same time, it is clear that the per capita money stock showed its largest advances

after 1830―a time when the Second Bank of the United States lost much of its resolve to control

monetary issues of state banks as its charter was allowed to lapse. A few comments seem

appropriate here. First, the relative flatness of per capita money from 1790 to 1830 hides how

extraordinary the advancement of the total money stock was given the rapid population growth

that the nation was experiencing. For example, while per capita money was falling rapidly in the

colonies (i.e., 1720-1750), total population was growing at an annual rate of 3.1 percent, just

about the same rate achieved over the 1790-1830 period despite the much larger population base

of 3.9 million in 1790 compared to 1.2 million in 1750. The fact that the money stock could even

keep up with the population from 1790 to 1830 was quite an accomplishment in itself. Second,

the acceleration in per capita money from 1830-36 can be attributed to a number of factors

unrelated to the demise of the Second Bank, most importantly a rise in the specie stock that a

ready banking system was able to multiply (Temin 1969).

       But it was not so much growth in the amount of currency available for transactions that

promoted the modernization of the U.S. economy as it was the way in which it grew, in

particular by increasing opportunities for entrepreneurs to obtain private sector credit through the

banking system. Rather than having a system in which government officials and politicians

controlled the money supply process and the direction of credit, banks were able to amass private

capital and issue notes that could promote investment and foreign trade. This shift in emphasis to

private sector credit helped to poise the nation for industrialization by 1815, a feat that would

have been more difficult had the money supply remained under the control of state legislatures.

       Along with rapid monetization and the successful placement of public debt came the

emergence of the nation’s first securities markets. Figure 5 shows the total money stock in 1840




                                                 33
                  Fig. 5. Monetary and financial aggregates, 1790-1850.


dollars as well as the number of securities listings from Rousseau and Sylla (2005) that appeared

in the financial press of three major cities (New York, Philadelphia, and Boston) near the end of

each calendar year. Both series show evidence of a “take-off” around 1815. The average growth

rates of both series from 1790 to 1850 were about 4.5 percent per year, which is higher than the

1.9 percent average growth rate of real GDP for 1790-1850 reported by Berry (1988) or the 3.8

growth rate of the Millennial Edition GDP Series included in Carter et al. (2006), and implies

rapid financial deepening.

       Fortunately, better data are available to measure development of the “modern” sector in

the early Federal period than are available for the colonies, at least if we consider private

domestic investment and foreign trade as broadly reflective of activity in that sector. Figure 6


                                                 34
         Fig. 6. Investment and international trade (exports plus imports), 1790-1850.


shows foreign trade (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1975, series U1 and U8, pp. 865-866) and

private domestic investment (from Berry 1988) for 1790 to 1850 after converting to constant

1840 dollars. These series also indicate an acceleration beginning around 1815, which is

consistent with the rise of a modern sector at about this time. The similar rhythm of the financial

and real aggregates suggest that the financial system established in the United States during the

1790s was ready to meet the demands of financing real economic activity just as the technologies

of the First Industrial Revolution were arriving on the nation’s shores.

       Rousseau and Sylla (2005) and Rousseau (2006) explore the timing and causal direction

of links between the financial and real sectors of the early U.S. economy between 1790 and 1850

with a set of vector autoregressive statistical models. They find strong evidence of unidirectional

statistical causality from the money stock and the number of securities listings to real value of


                                                 35
investment and international trade. These results suggest that it was not so much that the

financial sector responded to real economic opportunities, but rather than it enabled these

opportunities to come to fruition.



7. Conclusion

       In this essay I advanced the proposition that the transition to the dollar and the move from

a fiat to specie standard that came with it was a pivotal moment in the nation’s early history. The

shift was a marked improvement over the monetary systems of colonial America. The earlier

systems were unable to monetize their respective regions due to an inability of colonial

legislatures to increase the money supply adequately to support the volume of transactions for

which it would have been useful. The legislatures could not do this because they feared the

depreciation that would set in if the public’s confidence in the backing were to weaken. The

possibility of rapid depreciation, which was quite real to the colonists, discouraged them from

holding paper money as a store of value and promoted the hoarding of specie when available.

Most of the time, however, the colonists simply chose to forego long-term investments that

required agglomerations of capital. This could not have been conducive to economic growth.

       The Federal Constitution of 1787 with its ban of state currency issues was a positive step

in that it established a specie standard and transferred monetary control to Congress by explicitly

giving it the power “coin money and regulate the value thereof.” Secretary Hamilton then used

an expansive interpretation of this short clause along with a “necessary and proper” clause to get

the First Bank of the United States enacted and then used the Bank as an example to promote

more state banks. These actions were important not because the states would have been unable to

administer issues of currency, but because the supply of money could then be tied more closely

to the capital market and the provision of credit. Of course this system did not share all of the


                                                 36
features of today’s monetary system, but the similarities outweigh the differences. In particular,

while the central bank now controls a money supply backed only by the faith and credit of the

United States, it is still the banks that multiply it through the provision of credit to businesses and

households. And though banks can and do sometimes become overly sanguine in their

expectations surrounding the returns from their lending activities, this is not a new phenomenon,

with the pattern of occasional setbacks followed by even greater advances repeating time and

time again in the nation’s history.

        With the credit of the United States at an all-time low in the 1780s, the switch to a specie

standard was at the time necessary to restore domestic and international confidence in the system,

and this standard served the country well during the long transition to a point when it was no

longer necessary. In this sense, it is no exaggeration to say that as the young United States

pushed forward into an era of fiscal and monetary responsibility under a common political and

monetary union spearheaded by the transition to the dollar, it embarked upon a financial

revolution that shaped the early character of the nation and continues to shape it today.



References

Berry, Thomas S. 1988. Production and population since 1789: revised GNP series in constant
        dollars. Richmond, VA: Bostwick Paper No. 6.

Bezanson, Anne. 1951. Prices and Inflation during the American Revolution: Pennsylvania
      1770-1790. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Brock, Leslie V. 1975. The Currency of the American Colonies, 1700-1764: A Study in Colonial
       Finance and Imperial Relations. New York: Arno Press.

Brock, Leslie V. 1975. The Currency of the American Colonies, 1700-1764: A Study in Colonial
       Finance and Imperial Relations. New York: Arno Press.

Brock, Leslie V. 1992. The colonial currency, prices, and exchange rates. Essays in History 34,
       http://etext.virginia.edu/journals/EH/EH34/brock34.htm.



                                                  37
Calomiris, Charles W. 1988. Institutional failure, monetary scarcity, and the depreciation of the
      continental. Journal of Economic History 48, 47-68.

Carter, Susan B., et al. 2006. Historical Statistics of the United States: Millennial Edition.
        Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Cameron, Rondo. 1967. England, 1750-1844. In Banking in the Early Stages of
      Industrialization: A Study in Comparative Economic History, ed. Rondo Cameron, Olga
      Crisp, Hugh T. Patrick, and Richard Tilly. New York: Oxford University Press.

Cole, Arthur H. 1938. Wholesale Commodity Prices in the United States, 1700-1861: Statistical
       Supplement, Actual Wholesale Prices of Various Commodities. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
       University Press.

David, Paul A., and Peter Solar. 1977. A bicentenary contribution to the history of the cost of
       living in the United States. Research in Economic History 2, 1-80.

Fenstermaker, J. Van. 1965a. The Development of American Commercial Banking: 1782-1837.
       Kent, OH: Kent State University Press.

Fenstermaker, J. Van. 1965b. The statistics of American commercial banking, 1782-1818.
       Journal of Economic History 25, 400-414.

Gorton, Gary. 1996. Reputation formation in early bank note markets. Journal of Political
       Economy 104, 346-397.

Grubb, Farley. 2004. The circulating medium of exchange in colonial Pennsylvania, 1729-1775:
       new estimates of monetary composition, performance, and economic growth.
       Explorations in Economic History 41, 329-360.

Grubb, Farley. 2007. The constitutional creation of a common currency in the U.S.: monetary
       stabilization versus merchant rent seeking. In Conflict Potentials in Monetary Unions,
       eds. Lars Jonung and Jurgen Nautz. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag, pp. 19-50.

Hammond, Bray. 1957. Banks and Politics in America: from the Revolution to the Civil War.
     Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Jones, Alice Hansen. 1980. Wealth of a Nation to Be: The American Colonies on the Eve of the
       Revolution. New York: Columbia University Press.

Lester, Richard A. 1938. Currency issues to overcome depressions in Pennsylvania, 1723 and
        1729. Journal of Political Economy 46, 324-374.

McCallum, Bennett T. 1992. Money and prices in colonial America: a new test of competing
      theories. Journal of Political Economy 100, 143-161.




                                                 38
McCusker, John J. 1978. Money and Exchange in Europe and America, 1600-1775: A
     Handbook. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.

McCusker, John J., and Russell R. Menard. 1985. The Economy of British America: 1607-1789.
     Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.

McKinnon, Ronald I. 1973. Money and Capital in Economic Development. Washington, DC:
     The Brookings Institution.

Michener, Ronald. 1987. Fixed exchange rates and the quantity theory in colonial America.
      Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 27, 233-307.

Michener, Ronald, and Robert E. Wright. 2005. State “currencies” and the transition to the
      dollar: clarifying some confusions. American Economic Review 95, 682-703.

Mihm, Stephen. 2007. A Nation of Counterfeiters: Capitalists, Con Men, and the Making of the
      United States. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Perkins, Edward J. 1994. American Public Finance and Financial Services, 1700-1815.
       Columbus, OH: Ohio State University Press.

Rolnick, Arthur J., Bruce D. Smith, and Warren E. Weber. 1993. In order to form a more perfect
       monetary union. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 17, 2-13.

Rose, Andrew K. 2000. One currency one market: estimating the effect of common currencies on
       trade. Economic Policy 15, Issue 30.

Rousseau, Peter L. 2006. A common currency: early US monetary policy and the transition to the
      dollar. Financial History Review 13, 97-122.

Rousseau, Peter L. 2007. Backing, the quantity theory, and the transition to the U.S. dollar.
      American Economic Review 97, Papers and Proceedings, 266-270.

Rousseau, Peter L., and Richard Sylla. 2005. Emerging financial markets and early U.S. growth.
      Explorations in Economic History 42, 1-26.

Sargent, Thomas J., and Bruce D. Smith. 1987. Irrelevance of open market operations in some
      economies with government currency being dominated in rate of return. American
      Economic Review 77, 78-92.

Smith, Bruce D. 1985. Some colonial evidence on two theories of money: Maryland and the
       Carolinas. Journal of Political Economy 93, 1178-1211.

Smith, Bruce D. 1988. The relationship between money and prices: some historical evidence
       reconsidered. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 12, 18-32.




                                                39
Sylla, Richard. 2002. Financial systems and economic modernization. Journal of Economic
        History 62, 277-292.

Sylla, Richard, Robert E. Wright, and David J. Cowen. 2009. Alexander Hamilton, central
        banker: crisis management during the U.S. financial panic of 1792. Business History
        Review 83, 61-86.

Temin, Peter. 1969. The Jacksonian Economy. New York: W. W. Norton and Company.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1975. Historical Statistics of the United States: from Colonial Times
       to 1970. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.

West, Roger C. 1978. Money in the Colonial American economy. Economic Inquiry 16, 1-15.




                                               40
