                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 RENT—SEEKING AND TRADE POLICY:
                     AN INDUSTRY APPROACH


                       Robert   B. Baldwin




                     Working Paper No. 1499




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ONOMiC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                         November l98




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies and project in Productivity (World
Economy) . Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper f1499
                                        November 1984




             Rent—Seeking and Trade Policy:
                  An Industry Approach



                         AB ST R ACT




    The model of rent—seeking presented in this paper is consistent

with the observation that labor and management in an industry almost

always adopt the same position concerning the desirability of import

protection versus trade liberalization. The paper also discusses the

size of the returns to rent—seeking relative to the costs of lobbying,

factors influencing the type of government assistance sought by an

industry, and ways in which the benefits and costs of protection can

be made more widely known to both the industries concerned and the

general public.




                                       Robert E. Baldwin
                                       Department of Economics
                                       University of Wisconsin
                                       Madison, WI 53706
           RENT—SEEKING AND TRADE POLICY: AN INDUSTRY
                            APPROACH


      Robert E. Baldwin, University of Wisconsin—Madison




      Trade economists have had difficulty in explaining why
labor and management in the same industry invariably share the
same view concerning the desirability of import protection versus
trade liberalization for their industry.     The standard trade
model gives the result that the economic interests of these two
groups are opposed to each other: if trade liberalization raises
the real income level of capital owners, it will lower the real
income level of workers, and vice versa. A model with sector
specific captal that is often used in analyzing short—run trade
issues demonstrates that it is possible for the real incomes of
capital and labor in the same industry to move in the same
direction but this is not a general conclusion. However, by
modifying this model to take into account an important feature
concerning the nature of labor's earnings, one is able to derive
the real world result that the short—run economic interests of
labor and mangement in any industry are in harmony rather than
conflict with regard to trade policy.

      The modification involves recognizing that not only does
the income accruing to capitalists take the form of a rent due to
the sector specificity of capital, but part of the income earned
by labor is a rent because of the industry specific nature of
labor skills. Several empirical studies tracking the earnings
profile of workers displaced by import competition indicate that
when these workers do find new Jobs their wages are often as much
as 10—25 percent lower that in their old jobs. One important
reason is that some of their skills are worthless in new
industries, and they must to some extent begin as unskilled
workers in their new Jobs.    They gradually acquire new skills
through on—the—job training but it may take several years before
their wages are comparable to workers who have spent many years
in this industry.
         Because of the rent component in their wages, workers will
accept some reduction in income in their initial jobs before
seeking new opportunities, provided wages in the Industry are
flexible. However, they will then Join with management to press
the government for import protection in order to raise the prices
of the goods they produce and regain at least part of their
rents.     When wages are rigid due, for example, to a wage
contract, the situation is more complex. However, the threat of
further Job losses from continuing import competition is likely
to cause even those who have not been displaced to Join those who
have in lobbying for import controls.
      Crude estimates of the magnitude of rental incomes at stake
in typical industries and of the costs to the private sector of
petitioning for protection under U.S. trade laws suggest that the
rate of return on these activities is very high and may account
in part for the increased protectionist activity in recent
years. The paper proposes that certain changes be made in the
procedures whereby industries are granted protection. They are
designed to make them more transparent and to provide more
information on the eflects of protection on other industries,
consumers, and the balance of trade.




                                •2..
                            RENT—SEEKING AND TRADE POLICY:
                                AN INDUSTRY APPROACH

                                  Robert E. Baldwin
                           University of Wisconsin—Madison


 I. Introduction

     In recent years economists have modeled the process by which particular

 industries and income groups seek protection against import competition through

 lobbying and bloc voting (see, for example, Baldwin [1976; 1982], Brock and

Magee [1980], Bhagwati [1980], Findlay and Wellisz [1982], and Mayer [1983]).

The earliest theoretical work on the subject is the classic paper by Stolper and

Samuelson [1941] in which the authors demonstrate that in a standard two—good,

two—factor Heckscher—Ohlin model, the factor used intensively in the import—

competing sector will gain in real income terms from protection whereas the

other factor will lose. Unfortunately, the Stolper—Samuelson theorem does not

seem to be very useful for understanding the nature of present—day protectionist

pressures. As Magee [19801 found in analyzing testimony given during the

Congressional hearings on the 1974 U.S. Trade Act, representatives of labor and

capital from the same industry almost always take the same position concerning

the desirability of granting the President the authority to undertake another

trade—liberalizing multilateral negotiation. The divergence in views on the

issue of further trade liberalization is along industry lines rather than be-

tween capital and labor.

    For earlier years, when arguments such as the need for tariffs to maintain

labor's standard of living were widely accepted (more, it seems, on grounds of

political ideology than of economic analysis), the Stolper—Samuelson rela-

tionship may be useful in interpreting tariff history. However, modern econo-

mists appear to have been reasonably successful in convincing most political

leaders of the fallacy of the pauper—labor argument   and of similar arguments
                                        2

for protection. To obtain import protection today, it seems to be necessary

(but not sufficient) for an income grdup or industrial sector to demonstrate to

the satisfaction of government officials and the public generally that the

industry is being injured due to increased imports or to unfair trade practices

by foreign suppliers, in the sense these concepts are defined in the General

Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and national legislation. Import injury

(or the threat of injury) is defined in these documents as a short—run phenomenon

resulting from such conditions as the significant idling of productive facil-

ities, significant unemployment or underemployment, and rising inventories.

Furthermore, any relief provided in the form of higher tariffs, quotas, adjust-

ment assistance, and so forth is generally specified as being only temporary.

Consequently, a short—run economic model such as the one formulated by Mayer

[1974] and Mussa [1974] seems more appropriate than the long—run Iieckscher—Ohlin

model for analyzing the particular protectionism that characterizes the nature

of recent trade policy history.1

    In the Mayer—Mussa specific—factor model, it is assumed that the stock of

capital is fixed in each of the economy's two production sectors while the third

factor, labor, is mobile between the two sectors.2 As Mussa [1974] demon-

strates, under these conditions an increase in the relative domestic price of

one of the two goods (due, for example, to an increase in the duty levied on

imports) increases the real income of the specific factor employed in this

import—competing sector and reduces the real income received by the owners of

capital in the export sector. The real rewards to the labor employed in both

sectors may increase or decrease. Since per worker relative wages increase less

than the relative price of the protected product, the real income level of labor

in both sectors declines when measured in terms of the protected commodity but
                                        3

 increases when measured in terms of the other commodity. Whether the net result

 is an increase or decrease in labor's real income depends upon the proportions

 in which the two goods are consumed.

     This impact of protection on labor is also not consistent with Magee's find-

ings concerning the position of labor and capital in each sector on the

liberalization—versus—protection issue. For example, if labor gains, both labor

and capital in the protected import—competing sector will both favor protection

but labor and capital in the export sector will disagree on the desirability of

protection.

    One model that does yield results consistent with Magee's findings is, as

Magee [1978, p. 138—39] points out, Cairnes' [1874] noncompeting—groups model in

which all productive factors are industry—specific. However, this framework is

inconsistent with what several studies of workers displaced by import com-

petition indicate, namely, that a high proportion of permanently displaced

workers do move to other industries to obtain employment. (See, for example,

Richardson [1982, p. 334].)

    What these studies also show, however, is that workers permanently displaced

from an industry due to import competition generally suffer a significant loss

in earnings, both because of the search time involved in obtaining another job
                                                               3
and because of the lower level of earnings in their new jobs.      An important

reason for this decline in earnings is that industry—specific skills acquired by

workers through learning—by—doing are worthless when the workers transfer to

another industry. Consequently, because of the threatened loss in the rents

earned on sector—specific human capital, workers in an industry facing increased

import competition join capitalists in the same industry, who also are

threatened with a loss in rents from their sector—specific physical capital, in

seeking protection against the increased import competition.
                                          4

II.    A Model of Rent—Seeking Through Protection

      This rent—seeking behavior of workers and capitalists can be analyzed with

 the following two—commodity, specific—factors, small—country model. Assume there

are fixed stocks of sector—specific physical capital, capital in sector X, and

capital in sector Z. There is also a given supply of labor, part of which has

acquired unique skills for producing commodity X and the rest of which has

acquired unique skills for producing commodity Z. Initially it will be assumed

that these two types of labor are fully employed in the sectors for which they

have special skills and that wages are equal for the two types of labor. Unlike

physical capital, labor is assumed to be mobile between the two sectors in the

short run. However, when skilled workers from either sector move to the other

sector, their productivity level is only a certain fraction of that achieved by

skilled labor.

      This situation is depicted in Figure 1, which is a modified version of

Mussa's (1974, p.1194) diagrammatic representation of the specific—factors

model. The horizontal axis indicates the total fixed labor supply for the

economy, wIth the quantity of labor employed in sector X being measured to the

right from       and the quantity employed in Z being measured to the left from 0

The vertical axis measures the value of the marginal productivity of labor in

sectors X and Y (measured from 0 and 0' respectively) in terms of units of Z
per unit of labor. At the given initial price of X in terms of Z, the curves

VMPL(P°) and VNPL        show the value of the marginal productivity of skilled labor

in sectors X and Z as successive units   of   only   this type   of   labor are employed
in   each sector. The intersection of the two curves at A indicates the assumed

initial long—run equilibrium point where OL° of labor has been employed in

sector X for sufficient time to acquire the unique skills used in producing this
                    F8    I
       4r




 1,-
1W

            V1PL                           1 I—


2U                            WI PLxc(P)
        VflPL"'5
                          -
                              Vtl   PL u
        vrir5ç                V11PL.u(F)




       Ox      L1    L°

              —L
                                         6


commodity, and the OL° of labor employed in producing Z has also been similarly

trained. Since perfect competition is assumed, the wage in each sector is equal

to the value of the marginal productivity of the skilled labor employed in each

sector. The wages of skilled labor in sector X, 0xw0
                                                   xs
                                                      , and in sector Z,

Ow0, are equal because the long—run equilibrium is one in which sufficient time

has elapsed for labor to shift from one sector to the other and acquire the

latter sector's specialized skills.4
      The curve labeled VNPL   that begins at the point C on the vertical line AL°

indicates what the value of the marginal productivity of skilled labor displaced

from sector X would be when this labor is employed as unskilled labor in sector

Z in addition to the OL° of skilled labor already employed in the Z sector.

Similarly, the curve VMPL (P°) depicts the schedule of the value of the marginal

productivity of labor displaced from sector Z and employed in sector X in addi-

tion to OL° of skilled labor employed there. Both of these curves are assumed

to be some (not necessarily equal) fraction (less than one) below the marginal

productivity schedules of skilled labor in these two sectors.5
      Now suppose the initial long—run equilibrium situation is disturbed by a

fall in the price of commodity X because of increased import competition. The

curves VMPL (P1) and VMPL      (P1) are determined by multiplying the physical

marginal productivity schedules of skilled and unskilled labor employed in sec-

tor X (in the previously described manner) by this lower price of X in terms of

Z. Since the curve VNPL (P1) intersects the vertical line AL between the points

A and C, there will not be any reallocation of labor between the two sectors;

O L of skilled labor will remain employed in sector Z and 0 L of skilled
 zo                                                          xo
labor in sector X. However, the wage of the skilled labor in X will decline

to 0 w1 as part of its rents are transferred to consumers. Similarly, the
      x xs
rents collected by capitalists in sector X will decrease from the area of the
                                                      7


 triangle above the line w °A and under the VMPL (P°) line to the area of the

 triangle above the line w'B and below the VMPL (F1) line. The skilled labor

 employed in sector Z continues to receive a wage of Ow0, while capitalists

 also continue to receive a rent on their capital equal to the area above the
           o                                      6
 line Aw        and under the VNPL        line.
           zs                        zs


     The real income of workers and capitalists in sector X measured in terms of

 commodity X remains unchanged, since their income measured in terms of good Z

 decreases by the same proportion as the price of X in terms of Z decreases.

However, since the price of Z in terms of itself is unchanged, labor and capital

 in sector X incur a reduction in their real income measured in terms of good Z.

Thus, as long as both groups consume some of commodity Z, both groups suffer an

unambiguous reduction in their real income level. Since the returns to labor

and capital in sector Z remain unchanged when measured in terms of Z, these

groups enjoy an unambiguous increase in their economic welfare, since the price

of X falls. If we think of sector X representing a particular industry and sec-

tor Z representing a composite of many industries, one can appreciate why labor

and capital in sector X are likely to lobby the government vigorously for import

protection that will raise the price of X back toward its initial level. With a

price rise they will benefit significantly from the increase in rents that will

accrue to them. On the other hand, the decrease in real income for the typical

worker or capitalist employed in the rest of the economy is likely to be too

small to warrant counter—lobbying efforts by these individuals.

    An alternative to assuming that wages are flexible in sector X is to assume

they are fixed in the short run at OW                            perhaps, to a collective bargaining
                                                          due,
contract on wages that holds throughout the time period. Consequently, in

response to the price decline in sector X, firms will lay off L L (AF) skilled
                                                                                 ol
workers in this sector. These workers will be forced to shift to sector Z and
                                         8

take jobs as unskilled workers. Their marginal productivity schedule as they

supplement the skilled workforce already employed in the Z sector Is indicated

by the VMPL      curve originating at the point C. Their wage will be

Furthermore, the possibility of firms substituting unskilled workers for skilled

workers will drive the wage of skilled workers in this sector down to 0 w
                                                                       z zs
    The skilled workers still employed in sector X gain in real income terms

since their wage in terms of Z remains unchanged when the price of commodity X

declines. The workers displaced from sector X who end up as unskilled

employees in sector Z suffer an income loss in terms of Z equal to the area

FARD. They also lose in terms of commodity X since the proportion by which

their wages decrease, that is, FD/FL1, is greater than the proportion by which

the price of X declines, that is, kB/AL°. As long as these workers continue to

belong to the labor union in sector X and there is a threat of continued price

decreases in this sector due to import competition, the workers employed in X

are likely to be willing to use part of their earnings to lobby for import pro-

tection for this sector. They will be joined by the owners of capital in sec-

tor X since their rent declines to the area above the line w0 F and below the
                                                              xs
        I
VMPL(P) curve. This decline is relatively greater than the decrease in the

price of X and thus represents an unambiguous drop in real income.

    The rental return accruing to capitalists in sector Z increases to the area

under the VMPL      curve but above the Ew1 line and to the right of the line

from A to B plus the area CRD. Since the price of X has declined, this

increase represents a real income increase measured in terms of either com-

modity. Skilled workers in sector Z lose in terms of coramodity Z since their

wage in terms of Z declines to 0 w1 and could either gain or lose in terms
                                  z zs
of commnodity X.8
                                       9

     Figure 2, which is a redrawing of the essential parts of Figure 1, shows the

 effect of a greater decline in the price of commodity X. Now the new marginal

 productivity curve for skilled workers in sector X, VMPL (P2), intersects the

marginal productivity curve for unskilled workers in sector Z at G rather than

intersecting the vertical line AL° between points A and C. This means that Gil

of skilled workers initially employed in sector X are displaced and forced to

obtain jobs as unskilled workers in sector Z at a wage equal to           Moreover,

the wage of the remaining skilled workers in sector X is also driven down to

o w2 and they lose all the rent derived from their specialized skills for this
 x xs
sector. The wage of skilled workers employed in sector Z is also driven down to
   2
Ow
 z zs
    Since the relative decline in the price of X, AK/AL   is greater than the

relative decline in wages in sector X as well as in the wages of workers form-

erly employed in sector X, AH/AL°, the real income of those still employed in X

as well as the newly employed Z workers increases in terms of commodity X but

declines in terms of commodity Z. Skilled workers in sector Z also gain in

terms of X and lose in terms of Z. In contrast, capitalists in sector X lose

in terms of both commodities whereas capitalists in Z gain in terms of both

commodities.


III. Protection—Seeking

    If capitalists and workers in industry X lose in real income terms (or fear

they will lose in the future) and are able to overcome the free—rider problem

asociated with the collective—good nature of import protection, they will organ-

ize into a common interest group, raise funds through "voluntary" contribu-

tions, and seek protection or some other form of assistance from the govern-

ment. In doing so, they will maximize their gains from these efforts by

collecting and spending funds up to the point where the additional cost of
                     /0


               F;0 u re
                 0
                          a




 0
X5




     ox
          -L
                                       11



 their protection—seeking activities equals the additional income benefits from

further protection.

     Since the tariff—seeking process involves the expenditure of real resources,

the effect of this lobbying activity on economic welfare Is of interest.

Suppose that skilled labor and physical capital in sector X (the import—

competing sector) can be used for lobbying purposes. En terms of Figure 1, the

employment of physical capital for this purpose lowers the marginal productivity

curve for labor in sector X, while the utilization of this sector's skilled

labor for lobbying shifts the origin 0 to the right and causes the marginal

productivity of labor curve to shift to the right in a parallel fashion. As

long as the equilibrium labor distribution point remains between points A and C

so that the output of Z is unchanged while the output of X declines, the

lobbying will reduce the economy's output of X and Z valued at free trade

prices. In other words, the lobbying activity will always be welfare—reducing.

    If, however, sector X's marginal productivity curve for skilled labor inter-

sects sector Z's labor productivity curve for unskilled labor in the downward—

sloping part of this curve (as in Figure 2), so that the output of Z increases

as the output of X declines, then, as Findlay and Wellisz (1982) point out, the

outcome first noted by Bhagwati and Srinavasan (1980) is possible. The output

of X and Z valued at international prices can be greater under import protection

that is gained through resource—using lobbying activities than under the same

level of protection but in a situation where no resources are expended in

obtaining this protection.


IV. The Size of the Stakes in Protection—Seeking

   In Figure 1 and 2 the area under labor's marginal productivity curve for

sector X indicates, of course, the value added by labor and capital in this
                                             12

 sector at a particular price of X and employment level in the sector. The

magnitude    of the value added by these two      productive factors in some of the

industries     that   have sought protection can be obtained from national input!

output    tables. For example, the    1972 U.S. input/output table prepared by the

U.S. Department of Commerce (1979) shows the value added by labor and property

in the motor vehicles and equipment sector to be $20.7 billion; in the apparel

sector $10.1 billion; and in footwear and other leather products $1.9 billion.

This means that if the prices of the goods produced in these sectors fall by 1

percent because of greater import competition, the short—run income of these

factors will, as previously explained, fall by 1 percent. This amounts to $207

million in motor vehicles, $101 million in apparel, and $19 million in footwear.

Value—added data for some of the smaller industries that have petitioned for

protection can sometimes be estimated from information published in reports of

the U.S. International Trade Commission (ITC) on import injury cases. For

example, 1 percent of the 1982 value added by labor and capital employed in the

stainless steel and alloy tool steel industry was approximately $9 million, in

contrast to only $145 thousand in the industry producing tubeless tire valves.

    If these are the rents that can be obtained by labor and capital with a

protection   action that raises the prices of the products supplied by these
sectors   by 1 percent, what are the costs of seeking protection? John Jackson
(1984)    estimates that the U.S. system for the regulation of imports through the

dozen or so different formal types of procedure cost the private sector about

$40 million in 1982 and the government $200 million. The number of such cases

in which government determinations were made or were pending in 1982 were:

escape clause cases, 4; preliminary and final anti—dumping decisions, 61 and 10,

respectively; preliminary and final countervailing duty decisions, 111 and 13,
                                        13

 respectively; unfair trade cases, 15; and cases alleging unfair or unreasonable

 trade practices by foreign governments, 19.

    What the comparison of these value—added and cost figures seems to indicate

 is that, even without expressing all the value—added figures in 1982 prices or

capitalizing the gains over the period for which the protection is designed to

increase value added, the possible benefits are very large compared to the costs.

As Adams and Dirlam (1984) emphasize, the cost side is favorable to protection

petitioners who utilize the established administrative channels because the

government pays most of the costs involved. Furthermore, as ITC cases indicate,

downward price pressures of 5—10 percent or more due to increased import

competition are not at all unusual.


V. Alternative Measures for Capturing Rents

    Thus far it has been assumed that the industries being considered lobby for

protection against Imports. However, this leaves open the particular form of

import protection and ignores the fact that some industries seek various forms

of government subsidization as an aid to competing in international markets.

Obviously, a general determinant of the type of assistance sought by an industry

is the nature of its balance of trade. An import—competing industry will seek

protection against imports in such forms as tariffs, while an export—oriented

sector will press for export subsidization through such means as subsidized

export financing and special export—related tax benefits. Both types of

industries will lobby the government for domestic subsidies such as access to

capital funds at below—market interest rates or an outright grant.

   Import—competing industries generally prefer quotas over tariffs on the

grounds that their effects are more predictable. A tariff increase may be off—

set by lower foreign prices as foreign suppliers accept lower profits or continue
                                        14

 tinue to lower their unit costs. Some government officials also prefer quotas

 since with orderly marketing agreements and "voluntary" export restraints, the

government can apply protection selectively and thus avoid complaints or

possible retaliation by countries whose exports to the protecting country have

not increased. Well—established foreign firms also often favor quotas over

tariffs since they usually reap most of the windfall gains and need not be as

concerned with their new or rapidly expanding domestic competitors. However,

the protected domestic industry often finds that the quotas do not have the

expected restrictive effect due to quality upgrading and increased imports from

third countries. As a result of these responses, industries often follow a pat-

tern of protection—seeking that involves progressively more restrictive means,

for example, more and more bilateral quota agreements, as in the case of tex-

tiles and apparel, or domestic content requirements, as in the case of the U.S.

automobile industry.

    Within recent years more and more U.S. import—competing industries have

sought protection under the laws dealing with such "unfair" trade practices as

foreign dumping, foreign subsidization, and market disruption. The anti—dumping,

countervailing duty, and market—disruption laws have a much weaker injury

requirement than the traditional "escape clause" route for securing protection.

Furthermore, it is easier to rally public support for protection on grounds of

unfair actions by foreign suppliers than on the basis of injury that might be

caused by inefficient management of the domestic industry. Again, the country—

specific nature of the protective response also appeals to some government

officials.

    Government subsidies directed only at an industry's exports are more dif-

ficult to obtain for an industry than import protection, due to the explicit
                                          15


 GATT ban on export subsidies. However, subsidized export credits are permitted

 provided the government is a signatory to an International undertaking on off i

 cial export credits, such as the one operated under OECD auspices. Special tax

 breaks for exporting firms are also allowed under certain conditions, although

the Domestic International Sales Corporation legislation of the U.S. was

declared to be in violation of the GATT export—subsidy rule. Consequently,

lobbying by export—oriented firms in the developed countries usually is aimed at

both of these forms of export subsidization.

    Assistance that does not distinguish between exports and output destined for

domestic consumption is sought by both export—oriented and import—competing

industries. The variety of domestic aids is also wider than the assistance to

export—oriented industries because GATT rules in this area are much less well—

defined than in the export field. This type of aid includes general loans at

below—market Interest rates, the provision of equity capital, accelerated depre-

ciation allowances, tax holidays, government financing of needed infrastructure

investment, wage subsidies, etc. While I do not know of any empirical work on

the subject, one would expect that workers prefer import protection, export sub-

sidization, and wage subsidies over capital subsidies. The modernization of

capital facilities generally associated with such subsidies is more likely to be

labor—displacing rather than labor—using.

    An alleged drawback of most forms of subsidization is that they appear as a

cost item in the budget, whereas tariff protection, for example, is actually a

revenue—producing activity. This drawback, however, does not appear to have

been very effective in restraining the extensive   subsidization that some
countries undertake. When an export—oriented industry suffers injury due to
loss of foreign markets, it is just   as difficult to refuse adjustment assistance
                                       16

in the form of subsidies than to deny tariff assistance to an injured import—

competing industry. Moreover, it is apparent to all what the adverse effects

will be from cutting off a subsidy, whereas because of its uncertain effects, it

can be argued that eliminating a tariff may not hurt an industry at all.


VI. Rent—Seeking Due to Protection

    The analysis thus far has focused on the process by which increased import

competition in an industry may lead to lobbying by the industry for import

protection. However, economists, for example, Krueger (1974) and Bhagwati and

Srinivasan (1980), have also modeled the manner in which import protection leads

to lobbying for the windfall gains or tariff revenue associated with the

protection. As Anne Krueger (1974) pointed out in her pioneering article on

rent—seeking, when there is a system of binding quantitative restrictions in

which the right to import depends on the possession of an import license,

resource—using competition is likely to arise among importers for the windfall

gains associated with the ownership of import licenses. This can range from

investment in excess capacity in order to obtain a larger share of import

licenses to lobbying or actually bribing government officials who make the

allocative decisions.

    In most instances when developed countries enter into agreements with other

countries that quantitatively limit imports from these countries, the govern-

ments of the exporting countries are given the right to allocate the quotas

among their domestic producers.9. In these cases foreign producers lobby their

governments for the rents attached to the right to export. For example, under

the Japanese voluntary export restraints on auto exports to the United States,

the smaller auto producers in Japan have lobbied their government for a larger

share of the export quotas.
                                       17



     Bhagwati and Srinivasan (1980) introduce the term, revenue—seeking, to

 describe the situation in which economic agents lobby for a slice of the tariff

 revenue resulting from the adoption of protective tariffs. This case is

 somewhat different from the rent—seeking analyzed by Krueger (1974). When quan-

 titative restrictions (QRs) are applied to all imports or just to imports of a

 single sector, the government must devise a system to allocate the rights to

import (or export) among traders and producers. Since holders of rights to

import specff led amounts of a commodity subject to QRs can earn a premium by

purchasing the commodity at a lower price than they sell it for, competition

will arise among importers for these rights to import.

    Under a tariff arrangement the allocation of imports is carried out via the

price system, with the tariff revenue usually going automatically into the

public treasury in the same way as any tax revenue. Generally, neither customs

officials nor any other government officials associated with the importation

process have the authority to allocate the tariff proceeds among particular

economic agents. The distribution of government revenues customarily involves a

decision process by the legislature and chief executive that is only loosely

related to their revenue—raising decisions. Consequently, the many different

groups lobbying for government allocative decisions favorable to their interests

usually do so without regard to any particular tax source.

    One revenue situation that is likely to intensify competitive lobbying ac—

tivity is a substantial rise in tax revenues that is unrelated to increased

government spending plans. This could come about because, for example, of an

appreciable rise in protective tariffs on most imports. As Bhagwati and

Srinavasan (1980) point out, various interest groups will then lobby government

officials for a share of these extra revenues. However, when the protective
                                      18


 tariff for only a particular industry is increased, the increment in tax revenue

is likely to be too small to trigger increased lobbying activity aimed at

obtaining a part of this extra revenue. The extra tariff proceeds tend to

become part of the country's general tax revenues, and they are spent for pur-

poses that do not require separate spending decisions by the legislature or

chief executive.

    Sometimes particular tax revenues are earmarked for specf Ic distribution pur-

poses. For example, state gasoline taxes are often regarded as user fees and

only utilized for the maintenance and expansion of the highway system. Presum-

ably, this arrangement is the consequence, at least in part, of lobbying by

groups representing truckers and private automobile users.

    Recently, Hufbauer and Rosen (1983) have proposed earmarking tariff revenues

generated by escape clause tariffs to aid the impacted domestic industry to

adjust to the changed comparative—cost conditions. Feenstra and Bhagwati (1980)

have also analyzed the effects of using tariff proceeds to increase the incomes

of workers in protected industries and thereby influence the amount of tarif f—

seeking lobbying by these groups. However, as yet there does not seem to be

much evidence that workers and capitalists in such industries have lobbied for

these revenues or for the release of other existing revenues on the grounds that

there has been a net increase in government revenues. They do, of course, often

lobby for government assistance beyond the increase in their incomes due to

increased tariffs, but this does not appear to be related to the increase in the

government's tax revenues.


VII. Controlling Rent—Seeking Behavior

   As the cost and benefit figures cited earlier indicate, the incentives for

workers and capitalists in industries faced with injurious foreign competition
                                      19



in domestic or foreign niarkets to seek import protection or subsidization are

extremely strong. Since the U.S. government bears most of the investigatory

costs, even relatively small industries find it worthwhile to petition for

import relief through the various administrative channels where such agencies as

the Interaational Trade Commission (ITC) and the Commerce Department determine

the outcome of petitions for protection on the basis of criteria established by

law or administrative regulation. Where small industries are at a distinct

disadvantage, however, is in seeking protection via the political route. This

involves bringing direct political pressure on the President and Members of

Congress so that the President will take the lead in negotiating with foreign

countries such arrangements as voluntary export restraints and orderly marketing

agreements. As Hufbauer and Rosen (1983) point out, only five U.S. industries

have been successful at this level: textiles and apparel, steel, automobiles,

meat, and sugar. Collectively, these industries account for over 25 percent of

U.S. imports.

    In considering the decisions reached in the 53 import relief cases on which

the ITC has made findings since 1975, one can only conclude, I think, that pro-

tection via this route has been kept reasonably under control. Of these 53

cases the ITC determined that serious injury had occurred as the result of

increased imports in 28 instances or 57 percent of the total number. In addi—

tion, in 3 cases the vote of the Commission was evenly split. Of these 31 cases

sent to the President for final determination, import relief was granted in only

13 of the cases. In 6 other cases the President provided adjustment assistance

to the workers, while for the remaining 12 he turned down assistance in any

form. Thus, in only 13 of 53 cases, or 25 percent of the total, did the

industries alleging serious injury receive assistance in the form of higher

tariffs or quotas.
                                         20



        The major part of the increase in protectionism in the United States has

 occurred not via administrative channels but as a consequence of industries

 exerting political pressure on elected officials, often, as in the auto case,

 after their petitions have been rejected by government agencies such as the

 ITC. Of course, no one would want to block the use of the political route,

 since the availability of this avenue of expression is essential for a

 democracy. Consequently, relying on such a solution as making lobbying too

expensive for any industry to undertake is not appropriate. However, it is

also important for a democracy that the full implications of protection on the

economy as a whole be made known to political leaders and the public generally.

At the present time the ITC considers the effects of increased imports and of

temporary import relief only on the workers and capitalists in the petitioning

industries. The real income implications of increased protection on consumers

or employment and trade in other sectors is ignored. When a case goes to the

President, an inter—agency committee considers these effects, but this is not

made available to the general public. Thus, when industries seek protection via

the political route after they fail to obtain import relief through the ITC route,

political officials and the general public tend to know about only one side of the

case.

      One suggestion for providing a more balanced economic evaluation of the

ITC's recommendations to the President for increased tariffs or quotas is to

require the Commission also to include an evaluation of the probable economic

effects of these protectionist recommendations.'° This evaluation would include

such economic effects as the likely magnitude of the price increases to final

consumers on the products covered, the increased costs to other producers using

the   products as inputs, the expected employment changes in the protected
                                      21



industry as well as in sectors using the products as inputs, and the likelihood

that the injured industry can become competitive again.

    Just as the findings of the ITC with regard to injury are widely dissemin-

ated to political officials and the public through various media channels, their

assessment of the probable economic effects would also become widely known.

This would make it easier for public officials to render political decisions

that take into account not only the welfare of workers and capitalists in the

injured industry but the welfare of others affected by import protection.
                                        22

                                   FOOTNOTES

1. Jones (1971) also developed a two—product model with two sector—specific fac-

   tors and one mobile factor but used it to analyze long—run trade issues.

   Earlier, Haberler (1936, ch. 12) outlined the effects of the existence of

   specific factors on a country's production possibilities curve.

2. Other properties of the model are that the production function for each of

   the two commodities is linear homogeneous with declining marginal physical

   products for each factor, that the aggregate supply of labor is fixed, and

   that perfect competition prevails.

3. The study in which Richardson (1982) participated found that three years

   after being permanently displaced by import competition, the average weekly

   wage of workers was only 92 per cent of their preseparation wage. Another

   study (Jacobson, 1978) indicated that between the third and sixth year after

   displacement, workers in such sectors as automobiles, steel, meat packing,

   aerospace, and women's clothing earned about 15 per cent less than prior to

   displacement. Still another study (Neumann, 1979) places the wage reduction

  at about 20 per cent.

4. However, a skilled worker who shifts from one sector to the other is assumed

   to lose the first sector's skills by the time he acquires the other sector's

  unique skills.

5. For simplicity it is assumed that skilled and unskilled labor are perfect

  substitutes for each other in production in the same fixed proportion in

  each sector, for example, 1.5 unskilled workers equal 1 skilled worker. In

  the long—run the unskilled labor productivity curves will shift up to the

  skilled labor curves for the two sectors as the unskilled labor acquires

  the unique skills through learning—by--doing.
                                               23


 6. In the long run,        as   skilled workers in both sectors retire and are replaced

      by young unskilled workers, enough new workers will go into sector Z that

      the new long—run equilibrium will be where the VNPL              curve intersects the

      new schedule of the value of the marginal productivity of labor in sector X,

      namely, the VMPL (P1) curve.

7.   Employing     L°L'   unskilled   workers in the Z   sector   in addition to the OzL°

      skilled   workers drives down the marginal productivity of skilled workers
      to   the point where it equals      the marginal productivity of the unskilled
     workers,     namely, L1D, multiplied by the assumed ratio for the productivity

     of a skilled worker compared to that of an unskilled worker, for example,

     1.5 x L1D. The curve VNPL' indicates the marginal productivity of skilled

     labor in sector z, given the employment of OL° of skilled labor and LOLl

     of unskilled labor in the sector.

8. On Figure 1 they gain in terms of X, since the proportion by which their

     wage in Z declines is less than the proportionate decline in the price of

     X. However, the reverse relationship is also possible.

9. Transferring the rents connected with the quotas to foreign governments

     serves as a form of compensation that makes it easier for these governments

     to accept quantitative limits on their exports.

10. The ITC is already required to carry out such an assessment when the

     President decides to undertake a tariff—modifying negotiation with other

     countries.
                                         24

                                     REFERENCES

 Adams, Walter and Joel Dirlam (1984), "The Trade Laws and Their Enforcement by

     the International Trade Commission," in R.E. Baldwin (ed.), Recent Issues and

    Initiatives in U.S. Trade Policy. National Bureau of Economic Research

    Conference Report.

 Baldwin, Robert E. (1976), "The Political Economy of Postwar U.S. Trade Policy,"

    The Bulletin, 1976—4, New York University Graduate School of Business

    Administration.

 Baldwin, Robert E. (1982), "The Political Economy of Protection," in J. Bhagwati

    (ed.), Import Competition and Response. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

 Bhagwati, Jagdish N. (1980), "Lobbying and Welfare," Journal of International

    Economics, 14, 355—63.

 Bhagwati, Jagdish and T.N. Srinivasan (1980), "Revenue—Seeking: A Generalization

    of the Theory of Tariffs," Journal of Political Economy, December, 1069—87.

Brock, William A. and Stephen Nagee (1980), "Tariff Formation in a Democracy,"

    in John Black and Brian Hindley (eds.), current Issues in Commercial Policy

   and Dplomacy. London: Trade Policy Research Centre, 1—9.

Cairnes, J.E. (1874), Some Leading Principles of Political Economy. London:

   Macmillan.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Jagdish N. Bhagwati (1982), "Tariff Seeking and the

   Efficient Tariff," in J.N. Bhagwati (ed.), Import Competition and Response.

   Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 245—61.

Findlay, Ronald and Stanislaw Wellisz (1982), "Endogenous Tariffs, the Political

   Economy of Trade Restriction, and Welfare," in Jagdish N. Bhagwati (ed.),

   Import Competition and Response. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 223—34.

Haberler, Gottfried (1936), The Theory of International Trade. London: William

  Hodge and Company.
                                            25




 Hufbauer, Gary C. and Howard Rosen (1983), "Managing Comparative Advantage,"

    unpublished paper.

 Jackson, John H. (1984), "Perspectives on the Jurisprudence of International

    Trade," American Economic Review, May, 277—281.

Jacobson, Louis S. (1978), "Earning Losses of Workers Displaced from

   Manufacturing Industries," in William G. Dewald (ed.), The Impact of

   International Trade and Investment on Employment. Washington, D.C.: U.S.

   Department of Labor, Bureau of International Labor Affairs.

Jones, Ronald W. (1971), "A Three—Factor Model in Theory, Trade, and History," in

   J.N. Bhagwati, R.W. Jones, R.A. Mundell, and J. Vanek (eds,), Trade, Balance

   of Payments, and Growth. New York: American Elsevier Publishing Company, 3—21.

Krueger, Anne 0. (1974), "The Political Economy of the Rent—Seeking Society,"

   American Economic Review, 64, 291—303.

Magee, Stephen P. (1930), "Three Simple Tests of the Stolper—Samulson Theorem,"

   in P. Oppenheimer (ed.), Issues in International Economics, London: Oriel

   Press, 138—53.

Mayer, Wolfgang (1974), "Short—Run and Long—Run Equilibrium for a Small Open

   Economy," Journal of Political Economy, 82, 955—68.

Mayer, Wolfgang (1983), "Endogenous Tariff Formation," University of Cincinnati.

Mussa, Michael (1974), "Tariffs and the Distribution of Income: The Importance

   of Factor Specificity, Substitutability, and Intensity in the Short and Long

  Run," Journal of Political Economy, 82, 1191—1203.

Neumann, George R. (1979), "Adjustment Assistance for Trade—Displaced Workers,"

   in David B.H. Denoon (ed.), The New International Economic Order, New York:

  New York University Press.
                                       26



Richardson, J. David (1982), "Trade Adjustment Assistance Under the Trade Act of

   1974," in J.N. Bhagwati (ed.), Import Competition and Response. Chicago:

   National Bureau of Economic Research —   University   of Chicago Press.

Stolper, Wolfgang and Paul Samuelson (1941), "Protection and Real Wages,"

  Review of Economic Studies, 9, 58—73.

U.S. Department of Commerce (1979), Survey of Current Business, 50, 4, 51—72.
