                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   CORPORATE DEBT MATURITY AND THE REAL EFFECTS OF THE 2007 CREDIT
                              CRISIS

                                           Heitor Almeida
                                          Murillo Campello
                                          Bruno Laranjeira
                                          Scott Weisbenner

                                        Working Paper 14990
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14990


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2009




We thank Jaehoon Lee for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Heitor Almeida, Murillo Campello, Bruno Laranjeira, and Scott Weisbenner. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Corporate Debt Maturity and the Real Effects of the 2007 Credit Crisis
Heitor Almeida, Murillo Campello, Bruno Laranjeira, and Scott Weisbenner
NBER Working Paper No. 14990
May 2009
JEL No. E22,E32,G31,G32

                                               ABSTRACT

We use the 2007 credit crisis to assess the effect of financial contracting on real corporate behavior.
We identify heterogeneity in financial contracting at the onset of the crisis by exploring ex-ante variation
in long-term debt maturity. Our empirical methodology uses an experiment-like design in which we
control for observed and unobserved firm heterogeneity via a differences-in-differences matching
estimator. We study whether firms with large portions of their long-term debt maturing right at the
time of the crisis observe more pronounced outcomes than otherwise similar firms that need not refinance
their debt during the crisis. Firms whose long-term debt was largely maturing right after the third quarter
of 2007 reduced investment by 2.5% more (on a quarterly basis) than otherwise similar firms whose
debt was scheduled to mature well after 2008. This relative decline in investment is statistically significant
and economically large, representing approximately one-third of pre-crisis investment levels. A number
of falsification and placebo tests confirm our inferences about the effect of credit supply shocks on
corporate policies. For example, in the absence of a credit shock ("normal times"), the maturity composition
of long-term debt has no effect on investment outcomes. Likewise, maturity composition has no impact
on investment when long-term debt is not a major source of funding for the firm.


Heitor Almeida                                        Bruno Laranjeira
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign            University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
515 East Gregory Drive, 4037 BIF                      1206 South Sixth St.
Champaign, IL, 61820                                  Champaign IL 61820
and NBER                                              laranjei@illinois.edu
halmeida@illinois.edu
                                                      Scott Weisbenner
Murillo Campello                                      University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign            Department of Finance
4039 BIF                                              340 Wohlers Hall, MC-706
515 East Gregory Drive, MC- 520                       1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820                                   Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER                                              and NBER
campello@illinois.edu                                 weisbenn@illinois.edu
1     Introduction

Do financial contracts have real implications? How do firms respond to shifts in the supply of credit?
The endogeneity of financing and investment decisions makes it diﬃcult to answer these questions.
To complicate matters, credit supply shocks often confound financial and economic factors that
aﬀect firm behavior. One common-place approach to studying the eﬀect of credit shocks on firm
behavior is to look at financing activity (e.g., loans or equity issues) that takes place over the credit
cycle. Unfortunately, this approach is compromised by the fact that observed transactions may
reflect both a shift in the supply of credit (e.g., lower supply of loans in a monetary contraction) as
well as a shift in the demand for credit (firms demand less loans if economic conditions adversely
aﬀect their investment). Likewise, it is diﬃcult to identify a causal link going from firm financing
to firm investment during a credit contraction because economic considerations (the firm’s business
fundamentals) may drive both ex-ante financial contracting and ex-post real outcomes.
    We develop a novel strategy to gauge the eﬀect of financial contracting on real corporate out-
comes following a shift in the supply of credit. We do so by using the credit crisis (or “panic”) of
August 2007. This event is unique among other credit shortage episodes in that it originated from
problems arising from non-corporate assets: housing mortgages.1 In other words, the 2007 episode
provides for a shock to the supply of external financing that was not caused by the weakening of firm
business fundamentals. We note, however, that simply exploring an event of this type is insuﬃcient
to identify a causal link between financial contracting and corporate outcomes. In particular, while
general credit conditions may exacerbate the relation between variables such as financial leverage
and investment, one cannot ascertain whether financial contracting causes firms to behave in a par-
ticular way. To establish that channel, one needs to identity a feature of financial contracts whose
variation can be considered exogenous at the time of the credit shock.
    We identify heterogeneity in financial contracting at the onset of the 2007 crisis by exploring
ex-ante variation in long-term debt maturity. In a nutshell, we examine whether firms with large
fractions of their long-term debt maturing at the time of the crisis are “forced” to adjust their behav-
ior (e.g., by cutting capital expenditures) in ways that are more pronounced than otherwise similar
firms that need not refinance their long-term obligations during the crisis. Long-term debt is typi-
cally publicly held, and diﬃcult to renegotiate on short notice during crises. If financial contracting
aﬀects real corporate outcomes, we would expect a firm’s inability to refinance its obligations to
   1
     Gorton (2008) provides a detailed analysis of the various forces leading to a sharp reduction in liquidity (further
aggravated by collateral calls) that aﬀected financial institutions dealing with subprime-based derivatives starting in
August 2007. The liquidity crisis had an immediate eﬀect on instruments that are traded among financial institutions
as well as those used to fund credit facilities used by corporations.


                                                           1
aﬀect the firm’s post-crisis policies. To the extent that these eﬀects are large, they constitute true
costs of financial distress and may provide evidence that the terms of financial contracting – in this
case, contract maturity – can cause real corporate outcomes.
       It is important that we discuss how our focus on long-term debt maturity works as an identifica-
tion tool. The literature on the determinants of debt structure has shown that the choice between
short- versus long-term debt is correlated with firm characteristics such as size, profitability, and
credit ratings (see, e.g., Barclay and Smith (1995) and Guedes and Opler (1996)). As such, in gen-
eral, the determination of debt maturity creates diﬃculties for the identification of causal eﬀects of
financial contracting on real outcomes. For example, as shown by the literature, small firms are more
likely to use short-term debt. Since small firms are also more likely be financially constrained (e.g.,
Rauh (2006)), it may not be surprising to find that firms that borrow on the short end are likely to
suﬀer the most in the event of a credit contraction. In other words, the same firm characteristics that
predict short-term borrowing may also predict how a firm will fare during a crisis. Perhaps because
of these diﬃculties, previous literature has not examined the real consequences of maturity structure.
       Rather than contrasting short- and long-term debt, we look at the proportion of long-term debt
that matures right after August 2007 to assess how firms are aﬀected by credit contractions. Because
multiple, cumulative decisions aﬀecting the maturity of a firm’s long-term debt were made several
years prior the 2007 crisis, whether the firm was scheduled to refinance a large fraction of its long-term
debt right around the crisis is plausibly exogenous to the firm’s performance following the crisis. Of
course, while the firm could in principle renegotiate its long-term debt right at the time of the crisis,
in practice, it is rather diﬃcult for a firm to instantaneously readjust the profile of its long-term
debt, especially when the firm anticipates liquidity problems (see Bolton and Scharfstein (1996)).2
       While we argue that cross-firm variation in the proportion of long-term debt that comes due
right after August of 2007 is exogenous to firm outcomes over the crisis, one might wonder if other
sources of firm heterogeneity could underlie the relations we might observe. To tackle this concern,
we use a diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences matching estimator approach that incorporates observable firm
characteristics and accounts for unobservable firm eﬀects. The goal of our empirical methodology is
to replicate an experiment-like setting in which firm financial status can be seen as a “treatment”
that is plausibly exogenous to corporate outcomes. To minimize concerns about selection, we match
firms that we expect to be more susceptible to the negative eﬀects of financial distress (i.e., those
firms that happened to have a non-trivial fraction of their long-term debt coming due when the crisis
hits) with “control” firms that we do not expect to be susceptible to distress (i.e., those firms that
   2
    We empirically verify that firms do not change the profile of their long-term debt maturity in the period leading
up to the 2007 crisis.


                                                         2
happened to have most of their long-term debt coming due many years after the shock). We match
these two groups of firms on the basis of their asset size, industry classification, credit ratings, Q,
long-term leverage ratio, cash flows, and cash holdings. This matching is meant to assure that we
are comparing otherwise similar firms, with the only salient diﬀerence between the two groups being
the composition of their long-term debt maturity. The tests we perform further account for time-
invariant firm heterogeneity by comparing within-firm changes in the outcome variables of interest
from the period that precedes the credit shock to the period that follows the shock. We perform
these tests using the Abadie and Imbens (2002) matching estimator.
   Importantly, we consider a number of alternatives to our basic empirical design. These alterna-
tive tests provide checks for the logic of our empirical design and further minimize concerns about
“hard-wiring” in our results. For example, we perform a battery of falsification tests that replicate
our matching estimator procedure in non-crisis periods. In principle, a firm whose debt matures at
a time in which credit is easily available should not display a distressed-type behavior that can be
linked to long-term debt maturity. It is only the interaction of firm debt maturity and a credit crisis
that should aﬀect investment. In addition, we re-define our treatment and control groups based on
the degree to which long-term debt is an important component of firm financing. According to the
logic of our strategy, for those firms for which long-term debt is only a small fraction of firm financing,
we should not see a strong link between investment spending and the fact that some long-term debt
is maturing during the crisis. Finally, to further assure that the assignment of firms into treatment
and control groups is exogenous to the post-2007 crisis outcomes, we also perform tests in which we
measure maturity structure several years prior to the credit crisis. Using a pre-determined fraction
of long-term debt maturity as our sorting variable allows us to rule out more subtle unobserved
heterogeneity stories, such as “smart CEOs” anticipating the August 2007 panic and refinancing
(prior to the crisis) the part of their firms’ long-term debt that is scheduled to mature in 2008.
   Our findings are as follows. We first document the existence of pronounced cross-sectional vari-
ation in the maturity structure of long-term debt at the onset of the 2007 credit crisis – variation
that stems from contracting decisions made several years prior to that credit shock. The cross-
sectional variation in long-term debt maturity is persistent across time, and we find no evidence that
it changed in the years leading up to the 2007 crisis. These results are interesting in their own right
and suggest that future researchers may use long-term debt maturity structure to gauge a plausibly
unconfounded source of heterogeneity in firm financial status. Indeed, after matching on numerous
characteristics, we are able to isolate firms with a large fraction of long-term debt maturing right
after the crisis (the treated firms ) that are virtually identical to other firms whose debt happens


                                                    3
to mature in later years (the control group). These groups of firms are identical across all aspects
we consider other than maturity structure.3 For example, the two groups of firms display similar
investment rates in the three quarters immediately leading up to the crisis (7.8% of capital on a
quarterly basis for the treatment group, and 7.3% for the control group).
       We then show that a firm’s debt maturity structure has real consequences for post-crisis out-
comes.4 For firms in the treatment group, quarterly investment rates decrease to 5.7% of capital
on average – a fall of 2.1%. In contrast, firms in the control group hardly change their investment
– quarterly investment over capital actually increases by 0.1% of capital. The estimate of the
diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences in investment behavior increases from 2.2% to 2.5% in our baseline experi-
ment after employing the Abadie and Imbens (2002) matching estimator. This drop in investment is
economically substantive as it represents a decline of approximately one-third of pre-crisis investment
levels. Confirming the logic of our strategy, the relation between maturity structure and investment
disappears when we use firms with insignificant amounts of long-term debt in the experiment. On
the flip side, that relation strengthens when we focus on firms for which long-term debt is a more
important source of financing (in this case, the drop in investment is 3.4%).
       We also find that the eﬀect of maturity structure on investment is robust to variations in the
definitions of treatment and control groups. Moreover, it holds only for the 2007 crisis. To show
this latter point, we replicate our base tests for all years between 2000 and 2006. More precisely,
over that window, we compare the changes in investment for firms with a lot of long-term debt
maturing within one year with firms for which most of the outstanding long-term debt matures well
over one year. We find that maturity structure is uncorrelated with changes in investment for these
placebo periods. This finding suggests that the negative eﬀect of debt maturity on investment that
we uncover is indeed due to firms’ inability to refinance the maturing portion of their long-term debt
in the one period in recent years when there was a pronounced credit squeeze.
       Adding to our robustness checks, we find results that are similar to those coming from our base-
line experiment when we use 2005 maturity structure information to predict which firms are likely
to have a large fraction of their long-term debt maturing in 2008 (i.e., firms for which a large frac-
tion of long-term debt was scheduled to mature in three years). These firms reduce investment in
   3
     To be precise, there are no statistically significant diﬀerences between treatment and control firms across the
dimensions of size, industry, credit ratings, Q, long-term leverage ratio, cash flows, and cash holdings. It is worth
emphasizing that using the matching estimator per se does not ensure the matching accuracy we report. The quality
of our matching stems from the choice of a likely unconfounded source of firm heterogeneity (maturity structure).
   4
     Anticipating the details of the baseline experiment, the pre-crisis period is defined as the first three quarters of
2007, and the post-crisis period is defined as the first three quarters of 2008 to control for seasonality eﬀects. The
treatment group contains firms for which the fraction of long-term debt maturing within one year is greater than 20%,
while the control group contains firms for which that fraction is lower than 20%. The maturity variables are calculated
at the end of 2007, and the experiment only includes firms whose long-term debt is greater than 5% of assets.


                                                           4
the aftermath of the crisis relative to comparable firms that are predicted (based on 2005 data) to
have most of their debt maturing well beyond 2008.5 This pre-determined maturity test helps us to
ascertain that the assignment of firms into treatment and control groups is exogenous to the 2007
crisis outcomes. In particular, it leaves little room for a story in which some firms anticipated the
credit panic and selectively refinanced their long-term debt before it happened.
       Naturally, the large eﬀect of maturing debt on investment in 2008 raises the question of whether
firms adjusted along other margins to accommodate the joint eﬀects of the credit crisis and the need
to repay a lot of debt in the short run. In particular, firms may have adjusted other real and financial
policies, such as drawing down cash balances, reducing inventory stocks, repurchasing less shares,
and cutting dividends. To provide some evidence on this point, in the last part of the paper, we
perform a simple, “back-of-the-envelope” analysis of how the treated firms responded to the crisis.
Our calculations suggest that the firms that were burdened with large amounts of maturing debt
in 2008 tapped their “least costly” sources of funds. Notably, consistent with Almeida, Campello,
and Weisbach (2004), the brunt of the shock to external funding was primarily absorbed by firms’
cash balances. Reductions in inventory were also pronounced across treated firms (consistent with
Fazzari and Petersen (1993)). Interestingly, these firms on average seemed to be more willing to cut
investment than to cut dividends, at least during the first three quarters of 2008.6
       There are only a handful of empirical papers looking at the dispersion of corporate debt maturity.
These papers consider issues other than the eﬀect of supply shocks on real corporate policies. Exam-
ples are Barclay and Smith (1995), Stohs and Mauer (1996), and Guedes and Opler (1996). Barclay
and Smith, for example, report that firms that have few growth options and are large have more long-
term debt in their capital structures. Stohs and Mauer report that asset maturity is positively related
to debt maturity. Finally, Guedes and Opler show that large firms with investment-grade credit rat-
ings typically borrow on the short end and on the long end of the maturity spectrum, while firms
with speculative-grade credit ratings borrow in the middle of the spectrum. While these papers look
at determinants of debt maturity, they do not examine the real consequences of maturity structure.
       Theory has also looked at the determinants of maturity structure (e.g., Diamond (1991, 1993,
2004) and Flannery (1986)).7 The theoretical literature often suggests that both low- and high-credit
quality firms are likely to borrow short-term, but for diﬀerent reasons. High-credit quality firms bor-
row short-term to signal that they are not concerned with the possibility of a liquidity shock that
   5
      The diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences in investment across the two groups of firms is −1.4% (significant at the 5% level).
   6
      Overall, firms did start to cut dividends at a record pace in 2009, as the economy worsened and corporate survival
became a concern. However, these dividends were not reduced or eliminated immediately after the August 2007 credit
crisis hit, with investment seeming to have been cut first in the early stages of the financial crisis.
    7
      See also Greenwood, Hanson, and Stein (2008), and Brunnermeier and Yogo (2009).


                                                           5
might trigger refinancing. Low-credit quality firms use short-term bank financing because they have
no alternative options other than debt financing with restrictive covenants and frequent renegotia-
tions. The existing theory highlights the identification problem that we tackle in this paper. For
instance, firms that use short-term bank financing are naturally more likely to be aﬀected by a credit
supply shock. As a result, one cannot measure the eﬀect of maturity structure on real outcomes
simply by relating the amount of short-term debt to post-crisis outcomes.
    Finally, our paper is related to recent studies on the eﬀects of credit supply shocks. Chava and
Purnanandam (2008) examine the eﬀects of the 1998 Brazil-Russia-LTCM crisis on corporate valu-
ation. The authors find a larger valuation impact of that crisis upon bank-dependent firms whose
main banks had greater exposure to Russia. Lemmon and Roberts (2008) examine the eﬀects of
a contraction in the supply of risky credit (junk bonds) caused by changes in regulation and the
collapse of Drexel Burnham Lambert. Their evidence suggests that risky firms’ leverage remained
constant while their investment declined as a result of changes in the junk-bond market landscape.
Our study diﬀers from these papers in that our strategy dispenses with the need to focus on (more
marginal) bank-dependent or risky firms to assess the impact of credit supply shocks. Similarly to
our paper, Duchin, Ozbas, and Sensoy (2009) focus on the impact of the current credit crisis on
corporate investment. However, their identification strategy uses firms’ cash and debt positions to
sort firms into treatment and control groups. As discussed above, long-term debt maturity structure
provides for a much cleaner identification strategy than the more basic dimensions of financial policy
that those authors adopt.
    The remainder of our paper is organized as follows. We discuss our empirical strategy in Section
2. Our baseline result that the financial contracting (debt maturity structure) aﬀects real corporate
outcomes (investment) is presented in Section 3. In Section 4, we conduct a number of additional
tests designed to check the robustness of our results. Section 5 concludes the paper.


2     Empirical Design

We start this section by describing our basic experimental design and the matching estimator method-
ology we employ in the paper. We then describe the data used in our tests.

2.1   The “Experiment”

Our basic insight is that of exploring variation in long-term debt maturity at the onset of the 2007
financial crisis as a way to identify the eﬀect of credit supply shocks on corporate policies. Of course,
the relevant question is how would the composition of long-term debt maturity aﬀect real corporate


                                                   6
policies. In a Modigliani-Miller world of frictionless capital markets, debt maturity is irrelevant
because firms can always refinance and recontract their way around the potential eﬀects of a bal-
loon debt payment. What is special about credit crises is that financial markets are arguably less
than frictionless during those times. The 2007 crisis, in particular, shut down traditional modes of
corporate financing, such as commercial paper, bond placements, bank loans, and secondary equity
issuance. In such an environment, soon-to-mature debt can eﬀectively reduce corporate investment,
as firms find it diﬃcult to substitute across alternative funding sources, while at the same time try-
ing to avoid defaulting on their debt payments. As a result, firms that are “unlucky” to have large
chunks of debt maturing around the 2007 crisis may be expected to face tighter financing constraints
than firms that do not have to finance balloon debt payments during that same period.
      To gauge the magnitude of the 2007 credit squeeze, one can consider the time series of the 3-month
LIBOR and commercial paper spreads over treasuries. These series are plotted in Figure 1.8 There is
a sharp, large shock to all of these spreads around August 2007. Spreads go up from levels lower than
0.5% between 2001 and the summer of 2007, to levels between 1% and 2% following August 2007. In
particular, in July 2007 the average 3-month LIBOR spread was 0.53%. This spread jumped to 1.31%
in the month of August, and stayed above 1% in the subsequent months. This event, which stemmed
from disruptions in the market for mortgage-back securities, represented a noticeable contraction in
the supply of credit following a long period – multiple consecutive years – of easy credit. And
importantly, it generated fears in the financial markets that additional hikes in the cost of funds
were about to come (see, e.g., Gorton (2008)). It is fair to argue that panic of August 2007 provides
us with a unique opportunity to identify the eﬀects of supply contractions on corporate policies.

                                            Figure 1 About Here

      Our identification strategy requires two conditions to be met. First, and most simply, there has
to be enough variation in debt maturity to allow for comparisons across firms. In particular, there
must exist a significant group of firms that have a spike in maturity in the period right after the
crisis. Naturally, one could expect firms to have well-diversified maturity structures, so that they
are never forced to repay or refinance significant amounts of debt in any particular year. If that was
the case, it would be harder for us to implement our proposed strategy.
      Figure 2 depicts the distribution of debt maturities for the sample of firms that we use in this
paper (the data are described in detail in Section 2.3), calculated at the onset of the financial crisis
(fiscal-year end 2007). For each firm, we have information on the amount of long-term debt that
  8
      These data are available from http://www.federalreserve.gov/datadownload/.



                                                         7
matures in each of the following five years: 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2012.9 Figure 2 reports
these amounts, as a fraction of total long-term debt. If maturity structure was well diversified, we
would expect this distribution to have a large mass around a specific value (for example, if firms
tend to regularly issue 10-year bonds we would expect to see a mass at the value of 10%). Clearly,
there is significant variation in maturity structures. Consider, for example, the fraction of long-term
debt that is due in one year (i.e., in 2008). Figure 2 suggests that there exists a significant number
of firms whose long-term debt maturity concentrates in the year of 2008. By the same token, many
firms do not have any significant amount of long-term debt maturing in 2008. Similar variation in
maturities obtains for the other individual years. For example, there are many firms with maturity
spikes occurring in 2012. These firms are similar to the ones with concentrated maturity in 2008, in
that they, too, allow their debt maturity to concentrate in a particular year; however, their maturity
is concentrated in a future year that lies far beyond the 2007 crisis.

                                         Figure 2 About Here

      Two other features of the distribution of debt maturity measured at the end of 2007 are notewor-
thy (and useful for our “experimental” design). First, the distributions of long-term debt maturing
in the individual years beyond 2008 (2009 through 2012) look fairly similar to the distribution of
long-term debt maturing in 2008. This suggests that firms may not always try to renegotiate in
advance and elongate maturities of debts that are soon to come due. Second, as depicted in Figure
3 , the distributions of the long-term debt maturity of firms for years prior to 2007 are strikingly
similar to that of 2007. In other words, there is no evidence of changes in long-term debt maturity
structure in the years leading up to the 2007 crisis.

                                         Figure 3 About Here

      The second condition that must be satisfied to validate our identification strategy is that the
variation in debt maturity at the onset of the crisis needs to be exogenous to observed post-crisis
outcomes. In particular, one might worry that the same variables that determine the pre-crisis distri-
bution of long-term debt maturity are also related to post-crisis corporate investment. For example,
suppose that firms that have high growth opportunities tend to issue debt of longer maturities.
Then, it might not be surprising to observe that these firms invest more, relative to other firms that
have shorter-maturity debt.
  9
    We also know the amount of long-term debt that matures in more than five years (starting in 2013), though we
do not have year-by-year information beyond five years.



                                                       8
   Our empirical strategy addresses this issue in several complementary ways. First, we focus on
variation in long-term debt maturity (only) rather than in short- versus long-term debt to sort firms
into treatment and control groups. This choice ensures that we are not simply comparing low-quality
firms that must issue short-term debt to firms that can – and do – issue long-term debt. Second,
we use matching estimator techniques (described in greater detail in Section 2.2) that minimize
concerns about selection. This enables us to account for the eﬀect of observables by matching firms
with long-term debt maturing right after the credit crisis to “control firms” of similar size, industry,
credit ratings, Q, long-term leverage ratio, cash flows, and cash holdings, with the key diﬀerence
between the treatment and control firms being when their long-term debt, which was contracted
long ago, happens to mature. Third, we consider a number of variations to our baseline empirical
design that allow us to further distinguish among alternative explanations for the results we obtain.
   Among other things, we perform a battery of falsification tests that replicate our matching
estimator procedure in non-crisis periods. To see the logic behind these tests, consider Figure 3 .
The 2006 distribution of long-term debt maturity shows a significant fraction of firms with a lot of
long-term debt maturing within one year’s time (in this case, 2007). These firms are similar to firms
at the end of 2007 that have a lot of long-term debt maturing within one year’s time (in this case,
2008) in that both sets of firms have fast-approaching spikes in the maturity of their long-term debt.
However, the former group of firms should not be aﬀected by the credit crisis because their debt
matures before the crisis. Our empirical tests will directly compare these two groups of firms. Figure
3 also shows a group of firms that have, as of fiscal-year end 2005, a large fraction of their long-term
debt maturing in 2008 (i.e., the third year after 2005). In one of our robustness tests, we will use this
pre-determined long-term debt maturity distribution to sort firms into treatment and control groups.
This test allows us to verify whether some managers were better able to anticipate the eﬀects of the
credit crisis and refinance their long-term debt before the credit crisis hit, we can thus check whether
unobserved managerial quality could explain the post-crisis diﬀerences in investment behavior.

2.2   Matching Estimators

The use of matching estimators is a crucial feature of our test strategy and it is important to explain
how we employ this technique. Recall, we want to test whether firms that need to refinance their long-
term financial obligations at the time of a credit crisis alter decisions related to real-side variables.
In particular, we want to determine whether re-financing constraints aﬀect real firm outcomes. Our
goal is to develop an identification strategy that is akin to a “random” experiment: the firm’s long-
term debt maturity structure and developments in the financial markets coincide such that the firm


                                                   9
is in need of refinancing a large fraction of its debt in the midst of a sharp credit contraction. If one
believed that a firm’s debt maturity was truly randomly assigned across firms, then it would suﬃce to
compare the ex-post outcomes of firms that had significant debt maturing around the time of the crisis
with those whose debt happened to mature at a later date. Our analysis, however, needs to allow for
the fact that we are not using a true laboratory experiment, but instead relying on observational data.
   Short of running a pure-randomizing experiment with the firms’ financing constraints, the econo-
metric challenge is then to gauge firms’ likely outcomes had they not been caught between a credit
crisis and the need to refinance their debt. Since we are interested on the impact of firm financing on
real outcomes, we need to carefully identify a group of firms that also face the credit crisis and are vir-
tually similar to those whose debt matures during the crisis period except for the fact that their debt
is not maturing in the crisis. That is, we need to pin down the counterfactual firm policy in 2008 –
what would the firms with debt maturing in 2008 have done if their debt had matured at a later date.
   Traditionally, researchers have dealt with this problem in the context of ordinary least squares
(OLS) estimators, where the group of interest is diﬀerentiated from other observations via an indi-
cator variable. Under this standard parametric approach, the impact of the variable of interest on
observed outcomes is measured by the coeﬃcient for the selected group’s indicator variable. The
regression specification is determined according to a set of theoretical priors about the endogenous
variable. Such models are often simpler, linear representations of the theory. In corporate finance re-
search, controls such as firm size, profitability, and leverage are customarily added to a specification
to capture additional sources of firm heterogeneity. If left unmodeled, that sort of variation could
jeopardize the OLS estimator as it could explain both a firm’s selection into the group of interest
and its observed outcomes.
   While the traditional OLS approach is perfectly valid, there are a few concerns with its imple-
mentation. First, the inclusion of control variables in the specification does nothing to address the
fact that the groups being compared may have diﬀerent distributions of the control variables (for
example, comparison groups may have vastly diﬀerent size or profitability distributions). Unfortu-
nately, OLS estimates will not alert the researcher that a poor distributional overlap might yield
an ineﬀective control set. Second, and relatedly, the OLS approach will allow for extreme outliers
in the estimation, outliers that can bias the estimates of interest substantially – OLS models are
notoriously weak in dealing with outliers. Finally, the OLS approach may place undue importance
on linear model parametrization in the estimation process. Depending on the application, one can
improve the estimation of group diﬀerences by allowing for non-linear modeling of the outcomes of
interest as well as by way of non-parametric methods.


                                                    10
       The estimation strategy that we use in this paper is less parametric and more closely related to
the notion of a randomized experiment. We use matching estimators in all of the tests performed
in this paper. The idea behind this family of estimators is that of isolating treated observations (in
our application, firms with debt maturing during the crisis) and then, from the population of non-
treated observations, look for control observations that best “match” the treated ones in a number
of dimensions (covariates). In this estimation framework, the set of counterfactuals are restricted to
the matched controls. In other words, it is assumed that the treated group would have behaved as
the control group actually did if the treated group had not been treated. The matches are carefully
made so as to ensure that treated and control observations have identical distributions along the
covariates chosen (dimensions such as firm size, profitability, long-term leverage, etc.). Inferences
about the treatment of interest (re-financing constraints) are based on comparisons of the ex-post
outcomes of treatment and control groups (outcomes such as investment spending).10 Although a
number of matching estimators are available, we employ the Abadie and Imbens (2002) estimator.11
Their non-parametric procedure most naturally fits our application.
       The Abadie-Imbens estimator allows one to match a treated firm with a control firm, with match-
ing being made with respect to both categorical and continuous variables. The estimator aims at
producing “exact” matches on categorical variables. Naturally, the matches on continuous variables
will not be exact (though they should be close). The procedure recognizes this diﬃculty and applies
a “bias-correction” component to the estimates of interest.12 In matching estimations, the specifica-
tion used is less centered around the idea of representing a model that fully explains the endogenous
variable. Instead, the focus is in ensuring that variables that might both influence the selection into
treatment and observed outcomes are appropriately accounted for in the estimation. For example,
the outcome that we are most interested in is investment spending.13 While there are numerous the-
ories on the determinants of corporate investment, we only include in our estimations covariates for
which one could make a reasonable case for simultaneity in the treatment—outcome relation. Among
the list of categorical variables we include in our matching estimations are the firm’s industrial classi-
fication (2-digit SICs) and the rating of its public bonds (either speculative grade, investment grade,
or unrated). Our non-categorical variables include the firm’s market-to-book ratio (or “Q”), cash
flow, size, and the ratio of long-term debt to total assets. Although our original quasi-randomization
  10
     In the treatment evaluation literature this diﬀerence is referred to as the average treatment eﬀect for the treated,
or ATT (see Imbens (2004) for a review).
  11
     We refer the reader to Abadie and Imbens (2002) for a detailed discussion of their matching estimator. Here we
apply the bias-corrected, heteroskedasticity-consistent estimator implemented in Abadie et al. (2004).
  12
     We will illustrate the eﬀect of this bias correction in our paper’s central table (Table 3).
  13
     In the last section of the paper, we look at other outcomes, such as cash savings, inventories, and dividend payout.



                                                           11
approach already makes it hard to tell a story under which the covariates we consider would still
predict both treatment and outcomes, it is commonly accepted that those covariates capture a lot
of otherwise unobserved firm heterogeneity.
   Lastly, we note that we model the outcomes in our experiments in a diﬀerenced form, that is, we
perform diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences estimations. To be precise, rather than only comparing the levels
of investment of the treatment and control groups after the experiment, we compare the changes
in investment across the groups. In other words, we compare the diﬀerence in behavior across the
two groups of firms after the credit crisis with the diﬀerence in their behavior before the crisis. We
do so because the investment levels of the treated and controls could be diﬀerent prior to the event
defining the experiment, and continue to be diﬀerent after that event, in which case our inferences
could be potentially biased by these uncontrolled diﬀerences (in actuality, this turns out not to be
the case, adding further reassurance to our experiment-like design).

2.3   Data Description

To conduct our empirical tests, we use data from COMPUSTAT’s North America Fundamentals
Annual, Fundamentals Quarterly, and Ratings files. Our sampling disregards observations from
financial institutions (SICs 6000—6999), not-for-profit organizations and governmental enterprises
(SICs greater than 8000), as well as ADRs. We require firms to provide valid information on their
total assets, capital expenditures, property, plant and equipment, long-term debt maturing within
one year, total long-term debt maturing in more than one year, cash holdings, and operating income.
   Our data selection criteria and variable construction approach follows that of Almeida, Campello,
and Weisbach (2004), who study the eﬀect of financing constraints on the management of internal
funds, and that of Frank and Goyal (2003), who look at external financing decisions. Similar to
Almeida, Campello, and Weisbach (2004), we discard from the raw data those firm-years for which
the value of total assets is less than $10 million, and those displaying asset growth exceeding 100%.
We further require that firm’s quarterly sales be positive and that the log of sales growth does not
exceed 100%. We also eliminate firms for which liabilities such as notes payables, bank overdrafts,
and loans payable to oﬃcers and stockholders are greater than 1% of total assets. In addition, we re-
quire firms to have long-term debt maturing beyond one year that represents more than 5 percent of
total assets. This screen ensures that firms are capable of issuing debt with longer maturities. These
debt-related restrictions help assure that the results in our paper do not come from comparisons
between “low-quality” firms that need to rely on very short-term obligations with “high-quality”
firms that can issue long-term debt.


                                                 12
       We focus on firms that have 2007 fiscal year-end months in September, October, November,
December, or January. The sample of firms with these fiscal year-end months corresponds to more
than 80% of the universe of firms in fiscal year 2007. This restriction is due to the timing of the
credit shock, which happened around August of 2007. For our benchmark specification, we want to
avoid firms that filed their 2007 annual report before the crisis. These firms could have used the time
period between filing the annual report and the credit crisis to rebalance their debt maturity. The
variables that detail the amount of long-term debt maturing within one, two, three, four, and five
years from the date of the report are only available in the annual COMPUSTAT file (they are not
available on a quarterly basis). Thus, for a December fiscal-year-end firm, we cannot use the third
quarter report to obtain a breakdown of timing of the debt maturity composition as of 9/30/2007, we
instead use the firm’s 2007 annual report to obtain the debt maturity breakdown as of 12/31/2007.
Our final (2007) sample consists of 1,067 individual firms.14
       We use the Abadie and Imbens (2002) matching estimator (described in Section 2.2) to test our
hypothesis. The outcome variable used in the matching estimator is the average change in investment
during the first 3 fiscal quarters of the year relative to the first three fiscal quarters of the previous
year (expressed on a quarterly basis). In our basic experiment, we are examining the change in the
average quarterly investment over the first three quarters of 2008 relative to the first three quarters
of 2007. Investment is defined as the ratio of quarterly capital expenditures (COMPUSTAT’s capxy)
to the lag of quarterly property, plant and equipment (ppentq). As discussed earlier, we match firms
based on Q, cash flow, size, cash holdings, and long-term leverage. Q is defined as the ratio of total
assets plus market capitalization minus common equity minus deferred taxes and investment tax
credit (atq + prccq×cshoq — ceqq — txditcq) to total assets (atq). Cash flow is defined as the ratio
of net income plus depreciation and amortization (ibq + dpq) to the lag of quarterly property, plant
and equipment. Size is defined as the log of total assets. Cash holdings are defined as the ratio of
cash and short-term investments (cheq) to total assets. Long-term leverage is defined as the ratio of
total long-term debt (dd1+dltt) to total assets. For the matching procedure, we use averages in the
first 3 quarters of 2007 for all of these variables as covariates.
       We also match firms both on industry and credit ratings categories. Industry categories are given
by firms’ two-digit SIC codes. Our credit ratings categories follow the index system used by S&P
and are defined as: investment grade rating (COMPUSTAT’s splticrm from AAA to BBB—), spec-
  14
    Complete data on accounting and financial variables is currently available from COMPUSTAT only up to the
third quarter of 2008. Importantly, we note that the time window we currently explore naturally fits our proposed
experiment. Among other considerations, it is diﬃcult to ascertain whether data from the fourth quarter of 2007 belongs
to the treatment window, and whether the realization of real-side variables (outcomes) in the fourth quarter of 2008
confound the credit shock with the eﬀects of the fiscal and monetary policies put in place to address the original crisis.


                                                           13
ulative rating (splticrm from SD to BB+), and unrated (splticrm is missing). Matching treatment
and control firms within the same industry and within the same debt ratings categories assures that
diﬀerences in firms’ underlying business activity (e.g., product demand) and credit quality may not
explain our results.
    We construct treatment and control groups based on firms’ long-term debt maturity schedule.
COMPUSTAT’s items dd1, dd2, dd3, dd4, and dd5 represent, respectively, the dollar amount of
long-term debt maturing during the first year after the annual report (long-term debt maturing
in 2008 for firms with a December 2007 fiscal year-end), during the second year after the report
(long-term debt maturing in 2009 for firms with a December 2007 fiscal year-end), during the third
year after the report, and so on. We note that COMPUSTAT’s dltt represents the dollar amount
of long-term debt that matures in more than one year. Accordingly, a firm’s total long-term debt
is calculated as dd1+dltt. In our benchmark specification, the treatment variable is defined by the
ratio of long-term debt maturing within one year (dd1 ) to total long-term debt (dd1+dltt). Firms
for which this ratio is greater than 20% (alternatively, less than or equal to 20%) are candidates
for treatment (alternatively, control) assignments. In Section 4.4, we experiment with alternative
definitions of treatment and control groups.


3     Results

We start by providing summary statistics on our samples of treated, control, and non-treated firms.
Our initial goal is to show that our procedure does a good job of matching treatment to control
firms along observable dimensions. We then present our baseline empirical results.

3.1   Summary Statistics

Table 1 reports the (pre-crisis) median values for our matching variables (the covariates), and also for
investment normalized by capital. Our data selection procedure yields a group of 86 treated firms.
Panel A of Table 1 compares the characteristics of the treated sample with those of the remaining
981 firms that do not make it into the treated group. Firms in the treatment group have similar
pre-crisis investment levels to non-treated firms. However, the median values for the other variables
diﬀer significantly across these two groups of firms. The treated firms have higher median Q, cash
flows, and cash holdings. Treated firms are also smaller and have a lower median leverage ratios. As
discussed above, these sample diﬀerences are expected, given that we are relying on observational
data rather than running a true laboratory experiment. The goal of matching estimator techniques
is to precisely control for these distributional diﬀerences that can aﬀect both the selection into the


                                                  14
treatment group and the post-crisis outcomes.

                                             Table 1 About Here

    Panel B compares median values for treated and control firms. The Abadie-Imbens estimator
identifies a match firm for each firm in the treatment group (thus, we have 86 firms in both the
treated and control groups). Notably, there are no statistical diﬀerences in the median values of the
covariates we consider across treated and control firms.15
    Table 2 compares the entire distributions – rather than just the median – of the various match-
ing covariates across the various groups. The results mirror those reported in Table 1. Panel A shows
that treated firms diﬀer significantly from non-treated firms. In particular, the Kolmogorov-Smirnov
tests of diﬀerences in distribution produce statistically significant diﬀerences in distribution for all
of the matching covariates (again, there is no diﬀerence in the pre-crisis level of investment across
the two groups of firms). As in Table 1, these diﬀerences vanish when we compare the treated firms
to the sample of closely-matched control firms – Panel B of Table 2 highlights that there are no
statistical diﬀerences in the distributions of the various matching covariates across the treated and
control firms. This evidence supports the assertion that the matching estimator moves our “exper-
iment” much closer to a true randomization in which treatment and control groups diﬀer only with
respect to when their long-term debt happens to mature.

                                             Table 2 About Here

3.2    The 2007 Credit Crisis

We now examine the investment behavior of our treated and control firms around the 2007 credit
crisis. Panel A of Table 3 shows that prior to the crisis, both the treated and control firms were
investing at similar levels. The average investment-to-capital ratio in the three first quarters of 2007
(the pre-crisis period) is 7.8% for the treated firms, and 7.3% for the control firms. The diﬀerence is
statistically insignificant, as indicated in the last row of the table. The fact that both groups of firms
have statistically indistinguishable investment levels in the pre-crisis period is consistent with the
statistics reported in Tables 1 and 2. It provides additional evidence that our matching procedure
produces groups of firms that are virtually identical in terms of covariates that could be associated
with firm investment behavior.
                                             Table 3 About Here
  15
     We use the Continuity Corrected Pearson χ2 statistic to test for diﬀerences in the medians of the covariates across
the two groups.



                                                          15
   Panel A of Table 3 also shows the investment levels in the first three quarters of 2008 (the post-
crisis period). Notice that the investment policies of the treated and control firms are no longer
similar. For firms in the treatment group, the average investment drops to 5.7% of capital (a fall of
2.1%). In contrast, for firms in the control group, investment remains virtually unchanged (increas-
ing by a statistically insignificant 0.1%). These figures suggest that investment decreased by 2.2%
more for firms that happened to have a lot of long-term debt maturing right after the credit crisis
hit, relative to otherwise similar firms whose long-term debt did not come due so soon.
   Panel A also reports the diﬀerential change in investment that is produced by the Abadie-Imbens
matching estimator (the average treatment eﬀect, or ATT). The ATT diﬀerence is equal to 2.5%.
That estimate would equal 2.2% (the simple average diﬀerence eﬀect) if it were not for the “bias-
correction” that is embedded in the estimator that helps dealing with the issue of matching on contin-
uous variables (see Section 2.2). The fact that the estimated diﬀerence increases from 2.2% to 2.5%
after the bias-correction suggests that the inability to match firms perfectly in terms of continuous
variables creates a small downward bias in the observed cross-group diﬀerences in investment growth.
   The results in Panel A support the notion that the financing constraints that were generated
by firms’ debt maturity structures created frictions in the corporate sector following the 2007 crisis,
frictions that manifested themselves in the form of lower corporate investment rates. Our estimates
imply that investment for the treated firms during the first three quarters of 2008 fell by about
one-third of their pre-crisis investment levels. Given the similarity between firms in the treatment
and control groups, the evidence presented is already highly suggestive of a true eﬀect of debt ma-
turity on investment. In order to further strengthen the interpretation of the results, however, we
replicate exactly the same “experiment” that we run for the crisis period around a placebo period
one-year earlier. That is, we use 2006 maturity information to sort firms into treatment and non-
treated groups and 2006 covariates to produce a matched group of firms. Then, we examine firms’
investment behavior during the first three quarters of 2007. This placebo test can help us rule out al-
ternative explanations for the results reported in Panel A. For example, there could be unobservable
characteristics that predict both decreases in investment and a short-maturity profile for long-term
debt, and which are not captured by the matching estimator procedure described in Section 2.2.
However, if this is the case, then maturity structure and investment should be correlated in 2006 as
well, and not just in the crisis period.
   The results from this placebo test are shown in Panel B of Table 3. As in Panel A, treated and
control firms have virtually identical investment behavior in 2006. Firms with more than 20% of
their long-term debt maturing in 2007 (the treatment group) have investment representing 7.3% of


                                                  16
capital, on average, in the first three quarters of 2006, while their control group counterparts invest
7.2%. Strikingly, there is no diﬀerence in investment behavior across these two groups of firms in
2007, despite the diﬀerent maturity profiles of long-term debt (both invest 6.9% on average in the
first three quarters of 2007). The average treatment eﬀect (ATT) in this case is virtually zero, and
statistically insignificant. The diﬀerences between the ATTs in Panels A and B provide further
evidence that maturing long-term debt had a causal negative eﬀect on investment in the aftermath
of the 2007 credit crisis.


4     Extensions and Robustness Tests

In this section, we test additional implications of our basic argument, provide evidence that the
benchmark results are robust to variations in the empirical specification we use, and show that the
2007 crisis results (reported in Table 3) do not obtain in non-crisis periods. We also provide a
“back-of-the-envelope” calculation that shows how firms with balloon debt payments in 2008 – the
treated firms – responded to the credit crisis along other dimensions besides investment policy.

4.1     Evidence from Non-Crisis Periods

Our identification strategy relies on the assumption that firms with maturing long-term debt find
it diﬃcult to refinance their obligations by tapping other financing sources (e.g., long-term debt or
equity). The 2007 credit crisis provides us with an ideal setting in which this assumption is likely
to hold. By the same token, the assumption is unlikely to hold in periods of easier credit. If our
identification strategy is correct, we would then expect not to find the same eﬀects of maturity
structure on investment during non-crisis periods. Panel B of Table 3 verifies whether this is true
for the year of 2006 (one year before the August 2007 credit event). Here, we extend these placebo
tests for years prior to 2006, reporting results on a year-by-year basis as well as pooled over the
pre-crisis 2000-2006 period.16 To replicate our testing strategy for years prior to 2006, we sort firms
into treatment and non-treatment groups considering maturity structures measured in 2000 to 2005,
using previous years’ covariates to construct control groups. We then examine the diﬀerential change
in investment for treated and control firms. We perform this test for each individual non-crisis year,
using the same sampling criteria and definitions of treatment and control groups that we used for
the credit crisis period.
    The results are depicted in Table 4, which also reports the results for 2006 and 2007 for quick
  16
     We start in 2000 because it is diﬃcult classify the late 1990’s as a non-crisis period in light of episodes such as the
LTCM debacle and the Asian crisis. In addition, information on debt maturity in COMPUSTAT thins out before 2000.



                                                            17
reference. The estimated diﬀerence in investment changes across treatment and control groups is
economically small and statistically insignificant for all years between 2000 and 2006. The pooled
estimate between 2000 and 2006 is 0.3%, which is insignificantly diﬀerent from zero. These re-
sults strongly support our assertion that debt maturity aﬀects investment through a (re-)financing
constraint channel in the aftermath of the financial crisis.

                                            Table 4 About Here

4.2      Changing Long-Term Leverage Cutoﬀs

Long-term debt maturity should matter only for firms that have significant amounts of long-term
debt in their capital structures. Accordingly, in our benchmark specification we considered only those
firms for which the ratio of long-term debt maturing in more than one year to total assets was higher
than 5%. This screen also ensures that firms are capable of issuing debt with longer maturities.
       In Table 5, we experiment with diﬀerent inclusion rules that are designed to check the logic
behind our strategy. Provided that the sample remains large enough, increasing the cutoﬀ for the
fraction of long-term debt in firms’ capital structures should result in larger post-crisis eﬀects of
maturity on investment. By the same token, including firms that do not have significant long-term
debt should weaken our estimated eﬀects.
       Table 5 shows evidence that is consistent with these hypotheses. In the first column, we report
the changes in investment for treatment and control groups (from 2007 to 2008) that are constructed
using the entire sample of firms; that is, also including those firms whose long-term debt is less than
or equal to 5% of assets. Consistent with expectations, the estimated diﬀerences between treatment
and control groups disappears after this change. The simple diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences estimate is
0.0% while the ATT is now positive at 0.2% (both are statistically insignificant).17 This contrasts
with our benchmark result, which is reported in the second column of the table. In the third col-
umn, we perform an alternative experiment that only includes firms whose long-term debt is greater
than 10% of assets. Now, the diﬀerential change in investment across treatment and control groups
increases to 3.4% of capital. This evidence is consistent with the hypothesis that treated firms found
it diﬃcult to refinance their maturing long-term debt in the post-crisis period, and thus were forced
to substantially cut their investment spending.

                                            Table 5 About Here
  17
     Notice that in this case investment decreases by 1.1% for both samples (treated and control). In particular, the
fall in investment for the control group is consistent with the notion that the credit crisis had an overall negative
eﬀect on investment, possibly due to a combination of credit supply and investment demand eﬀects. Duchin, Ozbas,
and Sensoy (2009) also report a reduction in 2008 investment.


                                                         18
4.3   Pre-Determined Maturity Tests

Our baseline experiment uses maturity variables measured at the end of 2007, just a few months
following the August credit panic. As explained in Section 2.3, we made this choice to make sure that
we capture the extent to which firms are constrained by debt maturity in the aftermath of the crisis.
This requirement should increase the power of our tests. However, it raises the concern that measured
variation in maturity reflects the anticipated eﬀects of the crisis. A particularly problematic alterna-
tive explanation is the following. Suppose that higher quality managers were more likely to anticipate
the eﬀects of the credit crisis either in 2006 or early in 2007. Then, it is possible that unobservable
managerial quality could explain both longer maturity profile and superior firm performance in the af-
termath of the crisis. In other words, such refinancing in anticipation of the financial crisis by “smart
CEOs,” would leave only the “dumb CEOs” with long-term debt maturing in 2008, and these “dumb
CEOs” may be forced to cut investment for non-maturity-related reasons after the credit crisis hits.
The placebo tests of Section 4.1 do not address this challenge, because this is a crisis-specific story.
   A simple way to ensure that the anticipation of the crisis by “smart CEOs” does not drive our
results is to use maturity variables measured in years prior to the end of 2006 and the end of 2007. For
example, we can examine firms’ maturity profiles at the end of 2005 – over a full year before the crisis
– and identify a group of firms that had a large fraction of their long-term debt maturing in three
years (i.e., in 2008). Since it is unlikely that even the best manager could have anticipated the 2007
credit crisis back in 2005, such a modification of our basic specification can address the unobservable
managerial quality story. For robustness, we also experiment with using a maturity profile measured
an additional two years earlier, fiscal-year end 2003, which is the earliest we can go back given that
COMPUSTAT only provides the maturity structure of long-term debt on a yearly basis for the next
five years. Naturally, as we go back to earlier years to measure maturity, the eﬀect of this pre-
determined maturity structure on 2008 investment should decrease in magnitude (since the maturity
information might become stale as we go back further in time). For both earlier snapshots (2003 and
2005), the treatment group again includes firms that have more than 20% of their long-term debt
at the time maturing in 2008. Indeed, other than using pre-determined maturity profiles to assign
treatment and non-treatment groups, all other components of the experiment remain unchanged.
Accordingly, the outcome variables are defined identically to those in Panel A of Table 3, that is,
changes in investment between the first three quarters of 2008 and the first three quarters of 2007.
   The results (untabulated) suggest that the pre-determined maturity profiles also help predict
changes in investment around the credit crisis. As expected, the eﬀects of maturity on investment
(−1.4% when using the 2005 maturity structure and −0.6% when using the 2003 maturity structure)


                                                   19
are somewhat smaller than those estimated in Table 3, nonetheless, they are still economically sub-
stantive.18 These results suggest that the managerial quality hypothesis cannot explain the relation
between debt maturity and investment that we report in Table 3.

4.4    Diﬀerent Specifications for the Matching Estimator

We have also experimented with several variations in our procedure to construct treatment and
control groups, and with the set of matching covariates. To illustrate the robustness of our results,
we report two of these exercises in this section.
    Our benchmark specification defines the treatment group as all firms for which the ratio of long-
term debt maturing within one year to total long-term debt is greater than 20%. The non-treated
group contains all the other firms that satisfy the sampling restrictions (in particular, a minimum
level of long-term debt over assets as discussed in Section 4.2). We also considered a control group
that includes only firms that have more than 20% of their long-term debt maturing in exactly five
years (that is, in 2012). These firms are similar to those in the treatment group in that they allow
their maturity structures to be poorly diversified across maturities. However, they happen to have
concentrated their maturity in a time period that lies far in the future.19 The estimated diﬀer-
ence in investment changes (the matching estimator ATT) remains negative, equal to −1.6%, and
statistically significant (standard error of 0.9) after this change in definition.
    Our benchmark specification includes matching covariates that are potentially associated with
both investment and maturity structure. We have also experimented with including the 2007 invest-
ment level among the set of matching covariates to ensure that we are comparing firms that were at
the same starting point of investment before the crisis. The matching estimator’s average treatment
eﬀect is virtually unchanged after this modification in the set of covariates; point estimate of −2.3%,
with a standard error of 0.9.

4.5    How Did the Treated Firms Respond to the Credit Crisis?

The evidence so far suggests that firms with large amounts of debt maturing in 2008 (the treatment
group) were forced to decrease investment in order to be able to repay their maturing debt. However,
investment is not the only policy variable that these firms could have adjusted in the aftermath of
the crisis. Here, we examine post-crisis changes in other policy variables that the treated firms could
have used to absorb the eﬀect of the credit squeeze. Even if it was diﬃcult or impossible for firms
  18
     The diﬀerence in investment using the end-of-year 2005 debt maturity is significant at the 5 percent level. The
diﬀerence in investment using the end-of-year 2003 debt maturity is statistically insignificant (t-statistic equal to 1.0).
  19
     We choose five years because this is the maximum one-year fraction that is available in COMPUSTAT. As
mentioned earlier, for debt maturing in more than five years, we have no information on the specific year of maturity.


                                                            20
to respond to the crisis by issuing additional external finance, they can potentially make up for the
debt payment by adjusting other variables, such as drawing down cash reserves, reducing stocks of
inventory, repurchasing less shares, and/or cutting dividends. If the treated firms found it necessary
to cut investment (which is a costly measure), we would also expect them to adjust, for example,
the amount of share repurchase activities that they undertake in the aftermath of the crisis.20 In
addition, we would expect firms to draw down on their cash balances and reduce inventories. The
literature suggests that cash balances are held in part to hedge against negative shocks such as the
2007 crisis (see, e.g., Almeida, Campello, and Weisbach (2004)). In addition, there is evidence that
firms use inventories to smooth out the eﬀects of fluctuations in the availability of internal funds
(Fazzari and Petersen (1993)). Finally, firms can cut dividends to help finance debt repayments and
mitigate investment reductions.
       To provide some evidence on these additional policies, we provide a crude, “back-of-the-envelope”
analysis of how the treated firms in our experiment responded to the credit crisis. Across our treated
firms, we calculated the average amount of long-term debt due in 2008, as well as the amount of
“cuts” conducted elsewhere to help pay oﬀ this debt (besides investment reductions) – inventories,
share repurchases, dividends, and cash holdings. These variables were present for 77 of our 86 treated
firms. We thus use these firms in the subsequent analysis.
       For this sample of 77 firms, we compute the average changes in all of the policy variables above,
between the first three quarters of 2007 and the first three quarters of 2008. For our two stock vari-
ables (cash holdings and inventories), we just take the diﬀerences in the average value of their levels
in the first three quarters of 2008 relative to the first three quarters of 2007. For the quarterly flow
variables (investment, share repurchases, and dividends), we convert the diﬀerences in the average
quarterly flow to an annual flow basis for ease of comparison with the stock variables. For example,
the quarterly reduction of investment (normalized by capital) of 2.1% for the treated firms reported
in the first row of Panel A Table 3, represents an annual decline of 8.4%. To facilitate comparisons
with our estimate of the fall in investment, we normalize all the other variables by the value of the
capital stock as well. We then take the averages across all 77 of our treated firms to see how much
they drew down their cash reserves, cut dividends, etc. We then compare that to the average amount
of debt they had coming due in 2008.
       Figure 4 provides a visual illustration of the treated firms’ response to the credit crisis. In this
figure, we report the average changes in the policy variables as a fraction of the total amount of
long-term debt maturing in 2008 for the treated firms. The decline in investment spending in 2008
  20
     The survey evidence in Brav, Graham, Harvey, and Michaely (2005) suggests that share repurchases are the
residual after the investment and dividend decisions have been made.


                                                     21
represents about one-eighth of the amount of long-term debt these firms had coming due in 2008.
By comparison, the treated firms drew down their cash reserves in amounts that represented about
two-fifths of the amount of debt due in 2008. These firms reduced share repurchases (relative to
2007 levels) by an amount representing about one-tenth of the debt due. And reductions in their
inventories accounted for another 7% of the 2008-maturing debt. Given executives’ strong aversion
to cutting dividends (see Brav, Graham, Harvey, and Michaely (2005)), it is perhaps not surprising
that dividend cuts during 2008 accounted for only 1% of the amount of debt due for the treated
firms, with the remaining 30% to be explained by other factors (such as reductions in R&D, labor
costs, and asset sales).21
         While admittedly done solely for purposes of providing a crude calculation for how the treated
firms responded overall to the financial crisis, the set of numbers depicted in Figure 4 fits our eco-
nomic intuition very well. In particular, the figure suggests that firms that were burdened with large
amounts of maturing debt in 2008 tapped their least costly sources of funds (such as cash holdings)
in order to mitigate the eﬀects of maturing debt, but had to ultimately cut back on real activities,
such as investment spending.
                                          Figure 4 About Here


5         Concluding Remarks

We use the August 2007 credit panic to assess the eﬀect of financial contracting on real corporate
policies. In particular, we test whether firms with large fractions of their long-term debt maturing
at the time of the crisis observe more pronounced negative outcomes than otherwise similar firms
whose debt structure is such that they do not need to refinance their obligations during the crisis.
Our empirical methodology aims at replicating an experiment-like design in which we control for
observed and unobserved firm heterogeneity via a diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences matching estimator.
         We find evidence that long-term financial contracting has a sizeable eﬀect on firms’ real and
financial policies when the firms face a credit supply shock. Firms whose long-term debt was largely
maturing right after the third quarter of 2007 reduce investment (normalized by capital and mea-
sured on a quarterly basis) by 2.5% more than otherwise similar firms whose debt matures well after
the crisis. This relative decrease in investment for firms with short maturity structures is statistically
significant and economically large (approximately one-third of the pre-crisis level of investment for
these firms). A number of falsification and placebo tests confirm our inferences about the eﬀect of
    21
    Campello, Graham, and Harvey (2009) survey 574 U.S. CFOs at the end of 2008. These managers report cuts
of 11% in their firms’ R&D expenditures and another 4% in their work force. Moreover, nearly 50% of the CFOs
surveyed say that they sold assets in 2008 to cope with the credit squeeze.


                                                     22
credit supply shocks on corporate policies.
   Our results contribute to the literature in a number of ways. First, our unique identification
strategy reveals a novel link between debt maturity structure and corporate investment. In partic-
ular, our results point out to the importance of maturity structure for corporate financial flexibility.
Second, our results provide evidence that the 2007 credit crisis had real eﬀects on corporate be-
havior in 2008. Third, our evidence suggests that debt maturity structure is an important variable
in understanding how credit supply shocks spread through the corporate sector. Undoubtedly, un-
derstanding the eﬀects of credit cycles (and credit crises in particular) is not only of interest for
corporate finance researchers, but also for economic policymakers. More broadly, our findings –
obtained from an experiment-like framework – provide new evidence that financial contracting has
causal eﬀects on real corporate outcomes.




                                                  23
                                       References
Abadie, A., and G. Imbens, 2002, “Simple and Bias-Corrected Matching Estimators for Average
   Treatment Eﬀects,” NBER Technical Working Paper #0283.

Abadie, A., D. Drukker, J. Herr, and G. Imbens, 2004, “Implementing Matching Estimators for
   Average Treatment Eﬀects in Stata,” Stata Journal 4, 290-311.

Almeida, H., M. Campello, and M. Weisbach, 2004, “The Cash Flow Sensitivity of Cash.” Journal
   of Finance 59, 1777-1804.

Barclay, M., and C. Smith Jr., 1995, “The Maturity Structure of Corporate Debt,” Journal of
    Finance 50, 609-631.

Bolton, P., and D. Scharfstein, 1996, “Optimal Debt Structure and the Number of Creditors,”
    Journal of Political Economy 104, 1-25.

Brav, A., J. Graham, C. Harvey, and R. Michaely, 2005, “Payout Policy In The 21st Century,”
    Journal of Financial Economics 77, 483-527.

Brunnermeier, M., and M. Yogo, 2009, “A Note on Liquidity Risk Management,” NBER Working
    Paper #14727.

Campello, M., J. Graham, and C. Harvey, 2009, “The Real Eﬀects of Financial Constraints: Evi-
   dence from a Financial Crisis,” Working Paper, University of Illinois and Duke University.

Chava, S., and A. Purnanandam, 2008, “The Eﬀects of Banking Crisis on Bank-Dependent Bor-
    rowers,” Working Paper, University of Michigan.

Diamond, D., 1991, “Debt Maturity Structure and Liquidity Risk,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
    106, 709-737.

Diamond, D., 1993, “Seniority and Maturity of Debt Contracts,” Journal of Financial Economics
    33, 341-368.

Diamond, D., 2004, “Presidential Address: Committing to Commit Short-Term Debt When En-
    forcement is Costly,” Journal of Finance 59, 1447-1479.

Duchin, R., O. Ozbas, and B. Sensoy, 2009, “Costly External Finance, Corporate Investment, and
   the Subprime Mortgage Credit Crisis,” Working Paper, University of Southern California.

Fazzari, S., and B. Petersen, 1993, “Working Capital and Fixed Investment: New Evidence on
    Financing Constrains”, RAND Journal of Economics 24, 328-342.

Flannery, M., 1986, “Asymmetric Information and Risky Debt Maturity Choice,” Journal of Fi-
    nance 41, 19-37.

Frank, M., and V. Goyal, 2003, “Testing the Pecking Order Theory of Capital Structure,” Journal
    of Financial Economics 67, 217-248.


                                             24
Gorton, G., 2008, “The Panic of 2007,” NBER Working Paper #14358.

Greenwood, R., S. Hanson, and J. Stein, 2008, “A Gap-Filling Theory of Corporate Debt Maturity
    Choice,” Working Paper, Harvard University.

Guedes, J., and T. Opler, 1996, “The Determinants of the Maturity of Corporate Debt Issues,”
   Journal of Finance 51, 1809-1833.

Imbens, G., 2004, “Nonparametric Estimation of Average Treatment Eﬀects under Exogeneity: A
    Review,” Review of Economics and Statistics 86, 4-29.

Lemmon, M., and M. Roberts, 2008, “The Response of Corporate Financing and Investment to
   Changes in the Supply of Credit,” forthcoming, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis.

Rauh, J., 2006, “Investment and Financing Constraints: Evidence from the Funding of Corporate
   Pension Plans,” Journal of Finance 61, 33-71.

Stohs, M., and D. Mauer, 1996, “The Determinants of Corporate Debt Maturity Structure,” Journal
    of Business 69, 279-312.




                                              25
Table 1: Characteristics of Treated, Non-Treated, and Control Firms at
         the end of 2007: Median Test
The sample of firms is defined as those that have a long-term leverage ratio greater than 0.05 at the
end of 2007 (i.e., long-term debt represents more than 5 percent of total assets). The 1,067 sample
firms are split into treated and non-treated groups. The treated firms are defined as those for which
the percentage of long-term debt maturing within one year (i.e., 2008) is greater than 20 percent
and non-treated firms are defined as those for which the percentage of long-term debt maturing
within one year is less than or equal to 20 percent. Control firms are a subset of the non-treated
firms selected as the closest match to the treated firms based on a set of firm characteristics: Q,
cash flow, size, cash holdings, long-term debt normalized by assets, 2-digit SIC industry, and credit
ratings. There are 86 treated firms and 86 control firms. The medians of Q, cash flow, size, cash
holdings, and long-term leverage are displayed for the three samples of firms (treated, non-treated,
and controls). The average quarterly investment-to-capital ratio over the first three quarters of 2007
is also displayed. See text for further variable definitions. The test for a difference in the medians of
a firm characteristic across two groups is conducted by calculating the Continuity Corrected Pearson
χ2 statistic, with the p-values of this test reported at the bottom row of each panel.

                             Q        Cash Flow          Size         Cash       LT Leverage   Investment

                    Panel A: Medians for Treated and Non-Treated Firms in 2007
       Treated              1.728         0.076          5.870        0.080           0.244     0.047
    Non-Treated             1.499         0.056          6.784        0.045           0.294     0.047
      Difference            0.229         0.020         –0.914        0.035          –0.050     0.000
    Median Test
                            0.005         0.009          0.005        0.005           0.093     0.918
      p-value

                       Panel B: Medians for Treated and Control Firms in 2007
       Treated              1.728         0.076          5.870        0.080           0.244     0.047
       Control              1.599         0.070          6.266        0.063           0.233     0.051
      Difference            0.129         0.006         –0.396        0.017           0.011    –0.003
    Median Test
                            0.286         0.446          0.286        0.879           0.647     0.879
      p-value

***, **, * indicate significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.
Table 2: Distributional Tests of Treated, Non-Treated, and Control Firms
         at the end of 2007
The sample of firms is defined as those that have a long-term leverage ratio greater than 0.05 at the end
of 2007 (i.e., long-term debt represents more than 5 percent of total assets). The 1,067 sample firms are
split into treated and non-treated groups. The treated firms are defined as those for which the percentage
of long-term debt maturing within one year (i.e., 2008) is greater than 20 percent and non-treated firms are
defined as those for which the percentage of long-term debt maturing within one year is less than or equal to
20 percent. Control firms are a subset of the non-treated firms selected as the closest match to the treated
firms based on a set of firm characteristics: Q, cash flow, size, cash holdings, long-term debt normalized
by assets, 2-digit SIC industry, and credit ratings. There are 86 treated firms and 86 control firms. The
medians of Q, cash flow, size, cash holdings, and long-term leverage are displayed for the three samples of
firms (treated, non-treated, and controls). The average quarterly investment-to-capital ratio over the first
three quarters of 2007 is also displayed. See text for further variable definitions. The 25th percentile, median,
and 75th percentile are reported for each firm characteristic. The test for a difference in the distribution of
a firm characteristic across two groups is conducted by calculating the Corrected Kolmogorov-Smirnov D
statistic, with the p-values of this test reported in the rightmost column.

                                                                                      Kolmogorov-Smirnov
                                             25th %        Median         75th %
                                                                                         Test p-value

                 Panel A: Characteristics of Treated vs. Non-Treated Firms in 2007
          Q                Treated            1.341         1.728          2.305               0.006
                         Non-Treated          1.185         1.499          2.081
     Cash Flow             Treated            0.033         0.076          0.150               0.013
                         Non-Treated          0.026         0.056          0.116
         Size              Treated            4.320         5.870          7.640               0.000
                         Non-Treated          5.730         6.784          7.883
         Cash              Treated            0.021         0.080          0.184               0.005
                         Non-Treated          0.017         0.045          0.126
    LT Leverage            Treated            0.159         0.244          0.356               0.096
                         Non-Treated          0.186         0.294          0.427
     Investment            Treated            0.027         0.047          0.095               0.365
                         Non-Treated          0.027         0.047          0.082

                    Panel B: Characteristics of Treated vs. Control Firms in 2007
          Q                 Treated           1.341         1.728          2.305               0.160
                            Control           1.263         1.599          2.063
     Cash Flow              Treated           0.033         0.076          0.150               0.676
                            Control           0.043         0.070          0.124
         Size               Treated           4.320         5.870          7.640               0.676
                            Control           4.549         6.266          7.237
         Cash               Treated           0.021         0.080          0.184               0.416
                            Control           0.019         0.063          0.161
    LT Leverage             Treated           0.159         0.244          0.356               0.977
                            Control           0.154         0.233          0.341
     Investment             Treated           0.027         0.047          0.095               0.915
                            Control           0.028         0.051          0.091
Table 3: Differences-in-Differences of Firm Investment Before and After
         the Fall 2007 Credit Crisis with a Placebo Test Conducted a
         Year Before the Credit Crisis
Panel A of this table presents an estimate of the change in average quarterly investment rates from the first
three quarters of 2007 to the first three quarters of 2008 (before and after the fall 2007 credit crisis). Panel
B presents an estimate of the change in investment from the first three quarters of 2006 to the first three
quarters of 2007 (a placebo test conducted before the credit crisis). In Panel A, the average of quarterly
investment during the first three quarters of 2008 and the first three quarters of 2007 is calculated for the
treated firms and control firms, as well as the difference in the difference between the two groups of firms
over the two years. The average quarterly investment is normalized by the capital stock at the preceding
quarter; that is, by lagged property, plant, and equipment. The treated firms are defined as those for which
the percentage of long-term debt maturing within one year (i.e., 2008) is greater than 20 percent and control
firms are defined as those for which the percentage of long-term debt maturing within one year is less than
or equal to 20 percent. Control firms are a subset of the non-treated firms selected as the closest match to
the treated firms based on a set of firm characteristics: Q, cash flow, size, cash holdings, long-term debt
normalized by assets, 2-digit SIC industry, and credit ratings. There are 86 treated firms and 86 control
firms in Panel A. Panel B is constructed analogously, but the tests are conducted one year earlier (before the
credit crisis). There are 113 treated firms and 113 control firms in Panel B. ATT is the Abadie-Imbens bias-
corrected average treated effect matching estimator (Matching Estimator). Heteroskedasticity-consistent
standard errors are in parentheses.

                            Average Quarterly Investment / Capital Stock
                                      (in percentage points)
                                      2008                        2007                     Difference

                  Panel A: Investment Before and After the Fall 2007 Credit Crisis
                  Investment in 2008 (Q1 to Q3) vs. Investment in 2007 (Q1 to Q3)

    Treated Firms                     5.7***                       7.8***                     –2.1**
                                     (0.5)                        (0.9)                       (0.8)
    Control Firms                     7.3***                       7.3***                      0.1
                                     (0.6)                        (0.7)                       (0.7)
       Difference                    –1.6***                       0.6                        –2.2**
                                     (0.6)                        (1.0)                       (1.0)
 Matching Estimator                                                                           –2.5**
       (ATT)                                                                                  (1.1)

                                     Panel B: The Placebo Test
                  Investment in 2007 (Q1 to Q3) vs. Investment in 2006 (Q1 to Q3)

    Treated Firms                     6.9***                       7.3***                     –0.4
                                     (0.7)                        (0.6)                       (0.7)
    Control Firms                     6.9***                       7.2***                     –0.3
                                     (0.7)                        (0.8)                       (0.8)
       Difference                     0.0                          0.1                        –0.1
                                     (0.8)                        (0.8)                       (1.0)
 Matching Estimator                                                                            0.0
       (ATT)                                                                                  (1.1)

***, **, * indicate significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.
Table 4: Differences-in-Differences of Firm Investment from One Year to
         the Next: 2000 through 2007
This table presents an estimate of the change in investment from the first three quarters of a given year to
the first three quarters of the next year. The first row replicates the Differences-in-Differences and Matching
Estimator (ATT) from Panel A of Table 3 and the second row replicates the Differences-in-Differences and
Matching Estimator (ATT) from Panel B of Table 3. Analogous results are then presented for the other
years. The treated firms are defined as those for which the percentage of long-term debt maturing within one
year (i.e., 2008) is greater than 20 percent and control firms are defined as those for which the percentage
of long-term debt maturing within one year is less than or equal to 20 percent. Control firms are the closest
matches to the treated firms based on a set of firm characteristics (please see the description in Table 3
for details). ATT is the Abadie-Imbens bias-corrected average treated effect matching estimator (Matching
Estimator). Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are in parentheses.


                                          Difference in the change in
       Investment Change                 investment between treated            Matching Estimator (ATT)
                                               and control firms

           2008 – 2007                               –2.2**                               –2.5**
                                                     (1.0)                                (1.1)
           2007 – 2006                               –0.1                                  0.0
                                                     (1.0)                                (1.1)
           2006 – 2005                                 0.2                                 0.2
                                                      (1.0)                               (1.0)
            2005 –2004                               –0.7                                 –0.5
                                                     (0.5)                                (0.5)
           2004 – 2003                                 0.3                                 0.2
                                                      (0.5)                               (0.5)
           2003 – 2002                                 0.2                                 0.3
                                                      (0.5)                               (0.5)
           2002 – 2001                                 0.2                                 0.6
                                                      (0.9)                               (0.9)
           2001 – 2000                                 0.7                                 1.3
                                                      (0.9)                               (1.0)
  Pooled Analysis: All Years                           0.1                                 0.2
 Before Fall 2007 Credit Crisis                       (0.3)                               (0.3)

***, **, * indicate significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.
Table 5: Differences-in-Differences of Firm Investment Before and After
         the Fall 2007 Credit Crisis: Different Leverage Cutoffs
This table presents an estimate of the change in investment from the first three quarters of 2007
to the first three quarters of 2008 (before and after the fall 2007 credit crisis) for various long-term
leverage cutoffs: leverage ratio of more than 0%, leverage ratio of more than 5%, and leverage ratio
of more than 10%) The leverage ratio cutoff of 5% presented in the middle column (i.e., long-term
debt represents more than 5 percent of assets) reproduces the results presented in Panel A of Table 3
for ease of comparison. The treated firms are defined as those for which the percentage of long-term
debt maturing within one year (i.e., 2008) is greater than 20 percent of total assets and control
firms are defined as those for which the percentage of long-term debt maturing within one year is
less than or equal to 20 percent of total assets. Control firms are the closest matches to the treated
firms based on a set of firm characteristics (please see the description in Table 3 for details). ATT is
the Abadie-Imbens bias-corrected average treated effect matching estimator (Matching Estimator).
Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are in parentheses.


                                     Long-Term                    Long-Term            Long-Term
                                   Leverage > 0%                Leverage > 5%        Leverage > 10%

 Change in Investment                    –1.1*                        –2.1**               –2.7**
  for Treated Firms                      (0.6)                        (0.8)                (1.2)
 Change in Investment                    –1.1*                         0.1                 –0.5
  for Control Firms                      (0.5)                        (0.7)                (1.0)
         Difference                       0.0                         –2.2**               –2.2
                                         (0.7)                        (1.0)                (1.5)
  Matching Estimator                      0.2                         –2.5**               –3.4**
        (ATT)                            (0.8)                        (1.1)                (1.3)

***, **, * indicate significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.
         Figure 1: Historical LIBOR and Commecial Paper Spreads
This figure displays the 3-month LIBOR and commercial paper (CP) spreads over treasuries, for the
period of January 2001 to June 2008. The data is from http://www.federalreserve.gov/datadown
load/.
 Figure 2: Composition of Long-Term Debt Maturity at the end of 2007
This figure displays the amount of long-term debt maturing in the years of 2008 to 2012, as a
fraction of total long-term debt, for the sample of firms described in Section 2.3. Maturity structure
is measured at the end of the 2007 fiscal year.
    Figure 3: Composition of Long-Term Debt Maturity: 1999 to 2006
This figure displays the amount of long-term debt maturing in one to five years away from an initial
year t, as a fraction of total long-term debt, for the sample of firms described in Section 2.3. Maturity
structure is measured at the end of fiscal year t, with t varying from 1999 to 2006.
             Figure 4: How did Treated Firms Pay Off Their Debt?
This figure displays changes in policy variables from the first three quarters of 2007 to the first three
quarters of 2008, as a fraction of the amount of long-term debt maturing in 2008, for the sample
of 77 treated firms for which we have complete data on investment, cash holdings, cash dividends,
inventories, and share repurchases. Treated firms are those which have more than 20% of their
long-term debt maturing in 2008.
