                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    SUBSIDIES TO INDUSTRY AND THE ENVIRONMENT

                                               David Kelly

                                         Working Paper 14999
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14999


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2009




I would like to thank seminar participants at Carnegie Mellon University, the Ninth Occasional Workshop
on Environmental and Natural Resource Economics, and the University of Miami for comments and
suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by David Kelly. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Subsidies to Industry and the Environment
David Kelly
NBER Working Paper No. 14999
May 2009
JEL No. H23,H25,Q28,Q5,Q53,Q56

                                              ABSTRACT

Governments support particular firms or sectors by granting low interest financing, reduced regulation,
tax relief, price supports, monopoly rights, and a variety of other subsidies. Previous work in partial
equilibrium shows that subsidies to environmentally sensitive industries increases output and pollution
emissions. We examine the environmental effects of subsidies in general equilibrium. Since all resources
are used, whether or not subsidies increase emissions depends on the relative emissions intensity and
incentives to emit of the subsidized industry versus the emissions intensity and the incentives to emit
of the industry which would otherwise use the resources. Since subsidies must move resources to a
less productive use, the economy wide marginal product of emissions falls with an increase in any
subsidy, tending to decrease emissions. On the other hand, subsidies tend to move resources to more
emissions intensive industries. Thus, subsidies increase pollution emissions if resources are moved
to an industry for which emissions intensity is high enough to overcome the reduction in emissions
caused by lower overall marginal product of emissions. We show that, under general conditions, subsidies
also increase the interest rate, thus causing the economy to over-accumulate capital. Steady state emissions
then rise, even if emissions fall in the short run. We also derive an optimal second best environmental
policy given industrial subsidies. The results indicate that, under reasonable conditions, subsidies raise
the opportunity cost of environmental quality in the long run. Finally, we examine the relationship
between growth and the environment with subsidies. Under more restrictive conditions, reducing some
subsidies may offer a path to sustainable development by raising income and at the same time improving
the environment.


David Kelly
Department of Economics
University of Miami
Box 248126
Coral Gables, FL 33124
dkelly@miami.edu
1   Introduction

Nearly all governments support particular firms or sectors by granting low interest financing,
reduced regulation, tax relief, price supports, monopoly rights, and a variety of other subsi-
dies. Firms do not receive minimally distorting lump sum payments. Instead, firms receive
a complex set of subsides and hidden regulatory relief with significant distortions and off-
setting effects. What is the effect of such subsidies on the quality of the environment? This
paper develops a model in which one sector receives a variety of subsidies: price supports
or output subsides, reduced regulation, low interest financing, and direct cash payments.
The other sector, hereafter the private sector, receives no subsidies. We prove the existence
of an equilibrium in which the subsidies cause the subsidized sector to grow overly large
and unproductive. We show first that subsidies increase the economy wide average pollution
emissions intensity if subsidized firms are more emissions intensive. On the other hand, since
subsidies must move resources to a less productive use, subsidies reduce the economy wide
marginal product of emissions under general conditions. Thus, subsidies increase pollution
emissions if resources are moved to an industry for which emissions intensity is high enough
to overcome the reduction in emissions caused by lower economy wide average marginal
product of emissions. We show that, under general conditions, subsidies also increase the
rental rate of capital, thus causing the economy to over-accumulate capital. Subsidies cause
steady state emissions to rise, even if emissions fall in the current period, due to the over
accumulation of emissions causing capital.
    We also derive an optimal second best environmental policy given subsidies. The results
indicate that since subsidies lower total factor productivity (TFP) and increase the interest
rate, which increases the incentive to save, subsidies reduces resources available for consump-
tion and environmental quality. Thus subsidies raise the opportunity cost of environmental
quality causing optimal steady state emissions to rise. Finally, we examine the relationship
between growth and the environment with subsidies. Under more restrictive conditions, re-
ducing direct cash payments may offer a path to sustainable development by raising income
and at the same time improving the environment.
   A small literature measures the extent of subsidies in environmentally sensitive industries.
Table 1 reports some results from Barde and Honkatukia (2004), based largely on OECD
data. Table 1 indicates agriculture, fishing, energy (especially coal), manufacturing, trans-
port, and water are all environmentally sensitive industries which are heavily subsidized. In
many developing countries, subsidies are a significant fraction of GDP. For example Brandt
and Zhu (2000) report that subsidies in China amount to 6.8% of GDP in 1993. Further,
van Beers and van den Bergh (2001) estimate world wide subsidies to be 3.6% of world GDP


                                              1
in the mid 1990s.
    The literature on the effects of subsidies to industry on the environment consists of just
a few papers. Barde and Honkatukia (2004) discuss a few channels by which subsidies may
affect the quality of the environment. Input and output subsidies, especially in environmen-
tally sensitive industries, encourage the over use of dirty inputs. Bailouts, tax relief, and
other cash subsidies prevent the exit from the market of the least efficient producers, which
are likely to be the most emissions intensive, which they call a technology lock-in effect.
Subsidies in the form of regulatory relief include exemptions from environmental regulation,
which directly increase the incentive to emit. Still, their analysis is largely informal. Indeed,
they note that “A thorough assessment would require a complex set of general equilibrium
analysis (to evaluate the rebound effect on the economy).” This paper provides such a
general equilibrium analysis, including all of the above channels.
   Subsidies can also be used to protect favored industries against foreign competition.
Indeed many trade agreements explicitly call for a reduction in subsidies. For example,
subsidies to exporting industries violate WTO rules.1 Bajona and Kelly (2006) examine
the effect on the environment of eliminating the subsidies required for China to enter the
WTO and find that elimination of subsidies reduces steady state emissions of three of four
pollutants studied. van Beers and van den Bergh (2001) show in a static, partial equilibrium
setting how subsidies increase output and therefore emissions in a small open economy. For
example, if subsidies are sufficiently large, a country may move from importing to export-
ing an environmentally sensitive good. The increase in output in turn increases emissions.
Further, subsidies worsen the market failure in that subsidies reduce marginal costs below
marginal private costs, which are in turn below marginal private plus social costs.
   A literature exists on agricultural subsidies and the environment (see for example Antle,
Lekakis, and Zanias 1998, Pasour and Rucker 2005). Clearly, price supports and output
and input subsidies encourage the use of dirty inputs such as fertilizer and pesticides, and
encourage marginal land to be converted from conservation to farming. On the other hand,
the USDA in 2003 had over 17 agricultural subsidy programs ($1.9 billion) designed in part
to improve environmental quality, primarily by paying farmers to remove environmentally
sensitive land from production (Pasour and Rucker 2005). However, such restrictions have an
ambiguous effect on erosion and fertilizer and pesticide use, since such restrictions encourage
farmers to farmer the remaining land more intensively (Pasour and Rucker 2005, page 110).
This effect is magnified by other subsidies, such as output subsidies. It is therefore important
to analyze all subsidies together, as they can have offsetting or magnifying effects.
  1
    Bagwell and Staiger (2006) argue the criteria for challenging domestic subsidies in the WTO is weak
enough so that governments can in principle challenge any positive subsidy.



                                                  2
   A related empirical literature exists on heavily subsidized state-owned enterprises (SOEs)
and the environment. Wang and Jin (2002) find SOEs in China are up to ten times more
emissions intensive than private firms. Gupta and Saksena (2002) find that SOEs in India
are monitored for environmental compliance less often than private firms. Wang, Mamingi,
Laplante, and Dasgupta (2002) find that SOEs in China enjoy more bargaining power over
environmental compliance than private firms. Pargal and Wheeler (1996) find SOEs in
Indonesia are more polluting than private firms, even after controlling for age, size, and
efficiency. Hettige, Huq, and Pargal (1996) survey studies with similar results. Galiani,
Gertler, and Schargrodsky (2005) find that privatization of water services in Argentina im-
proved health outcomes. However, Earnhart and Lizal (2002) find an inverse relationship
between emissions intensity and percentage of state ownership among recently partially pri-
vatized firms in the Czech Republic in their preferred model. The latter two studies focus
on a change in ownership, which does not necessarily imply a change in subsidies.2
   Previous work, then, has provided an important first step in identifying the extent of
subsidies and likely channels by which they effect the environment. Still, the previous liter-
ature, with the exception of Bajona and Kelly (2006), does not account for dynamic effects,
general equilibrium effects, the effect of multiple subsidies introduced together, and takes en-
vironmental policy as exogenous. Further, Bajona and Kelly (2006) consider only two kinds
of subsidies, cash payments and interest subsidies, and take environmental policy as exoge-
nous. Since a typical industry receives many subsidies, each of which causing intra-period
and dynamic distortions, and since subsidies are uneven across industries, these effects are
likely to be important.
    To understand emissions in such a setting requires a theory of firms and industry structure
with subsidies. Bajona and Kelly (2006) provide a model where private and subsidized firms
coexist. Subsidized firms have restrictions on the number of people they can lay off (Yin
2001), which they model as a minimum labor requirement. In exchange, subsidized firms
receive low interest loans from the government or state owned banks (modeled as an interest
rate subsidy) and receive direct subsidies to cover the negative profits that result from the
excess use of labor. Finally, subsidized firms have lower TFP relative to private sector
firms. They prove the existence of an equilibrium in which subsidized firms and private
firms co-exist with the share of production of subsidized firms determined endogenously by
the subsidies, labor requirement, and technology difference. We extend their framework by
considering as well output subsidies and regulatory relief. Our model also has endogenous
emissions intensity and environmental policy.
   2
    It is well known that recently privatized SOEs retain a close relationship to the state and thus possibly
their subsidies. Here we examine changes in subsidies, rather than changes in ownership.



                                                     3
   We show subsidies affect emissions through three main mechanisms. The first mecha-
nism, the resource reallocation effect, is the (static) effect of the reallocation of capital and
labor from private to subsidized sectors that subsidies cause. All subsidies cause capital to
flow from private to subsidized firms, causing output to become more concentrated in the
subsidized sector. In addition, direct cash subsidies cause labor to move from the private to
the subsidized sector, further concentrating output in the subsidized sector.3 Since emissions
is a complementary input to labor and capital, emissions rise in the subsidized sector and
fall in the private sector. If subsidized firms are more emissions intensive (either because
they use a more emissions intensive technology or because they face reduced environmen-
tal regulation), aggregate emissions (total emissions of both sectors) tend to rise. On the
other hand, subsidies concentrate production in the low productivity subsidized sector. Thus
moving a unit of capital from the private sector to the subsidized sector cause the marginal
product of emissions to increase less in the subsidized sector than it falls in the private sector
(the economy wide marginal product of emissions falls). We derive necessary and sufficient
conditions on parameter values for which the rise in emissions intensity more than offsets
the fall in the marginal product of emissions.4
   Subsidies differ in their effect on the marginal product of emissions, thus we derive a
ranking of subsidies from most to least harmful to the environment. Output subsidies or price
supports are more harmful than interest subsidies, for example, because interest subsidies
induce firms to over use capital, which reduces the marginal product of emissions. In contrast,
with output subsidies, firms maintain an optimal balance between inputs. Thus output
subsidies cause a smaller fall in the marginal product of emissions than interest subsidies
(emissions are more productive when firms use inputs in the correct proportion).
    A second mechanism, the capital accumulation effect, is dynamic in nature and affects
intertemporal decisions. On one hand, subsidies to firms directly increase economy-wide
average demand for capital. On the other hand, the decline in economy-wide average pro-
ductivity caused by the concentration of capital in the subsidized sector tends to reduce
demand for capital. We show that the former effect is stronger so the return to capital rises,
causing the economy to over-accumulate capital, which causes emissions to rise over time
with subsidies. The capital accumulation effect is stronger than resource reallocation effect:
we show that output subsidies, interest subsidies, and emissions subsidies all cause emissions
   3
    Other subsidies do not cause labor to move because subsidized firms already use excess labor.
   4
    Note that the technology lock-in effect is incorporated here since, absent subsidies, subsidized firms (who
use a low TFP and emissions intensive technology) would exit the market. The effects of overuse of dirty
inputs by, and higher emissions intensity of, the subsidized sector is also clearly incorporated. Subsidies do
not trivially increase emissions because we also consider general equilibrium effects of the reduction in the
use of dirty inputs by the private sector.



                                                      4
to rise in the steady state, even if the resource reallocation effect caused emissions to fall in
the short run. With direct subsidies, both labor and capital move to the subsidized sector,
thus the effect on the interest rate is weaker. Nonetheless, we derive necessary and sufficient
conditions for steady state emissions to rise with an increase in direct subsidies.5
   Our third mechanism, not previously analyzed in the literature, is how subsidies affect
the marginal opportunity costs and marginal benefits of environmental quality. All subsi-
dies decrease aggregate resources available and increase the interest rate holding emissions
fixed, thus raising the opportunity cost of environmental quality (foregone consumption or
saving). Under reasonable conditions, the higher interest rate causes savings to rise to the
point where steady state consumption falls, reducing the marginal benefits of environmental
quality if environmental quality and consumption are complements. Subsidies do reduce
the productivity of emissions, which makes environmental quality more attractive, but this
effect is outweighed by the higher opportunity cost of environmental quality for a reasonable
risk aversion coefficient. Thus, for reasonable parameter values, subsidies put pressure on
governments to relax environmental regulation.
    Section 2 posits a theory of emissions and industry with subsidies and Section 3 proves
existence of an equilibrium. Section 4 derives the reallocation effects and Section 5 derives
the capital accumulation effects. Section 6 shows how subsidies affect environmental policy
and Section 7 concludes.


2       A Theory of Emissions and Subsidies

In this Section we derive a competitive equilibrium in which subsidized and private firms co-
exist, taking environmental policy as given. The environmental policy is a tax on emissions
which is constant over time. In Section 6, we allow the government to vary the tax rate in
response to changes in income, but still take the subsidies as given.

2.1      Firms

If subsidized and non-subsidized firms co-exist, some cost to receiving subsidies must exist.
These costs may include hiring lobbyists, campaign contributions, and/or locating plants or
hiring labor in key districts. Following Bajona and Kelly (2006), we model this process in a
very simple way. Specifically, subsidized firms have lower TFP than private firms and must
hire excess labor to receive subsidies.
    Productivity differences are taken as exogenous, with subsidized firms having TFP equal
    5
    The capital accumulation effect was first noted by Bajona and Kelly (2005). However, we extend their
results to other subsidies, with endogenous emissions.



                                                   5
to aG < 1, while private firms have TFP normalized to one. Although we take TFP differ-
ences as given, our model is consistent with several possible ideas as to why low TFP firms
receive subsidies. For example, the TFP difference between the two firms can be thought of
as a function of the fraction of the workforce diverted to lobbying activities. Alternatively,
the TFP difference could be the result of choosing plant location based on political consid-
erations. Finally, it may simply be that a negative productivity shock (and thus the threat
of bankruptcy) is required to receive subsidies.
    We assume employment at subsidized firms is constrained to be greater than or equal
to a minimum labor constraint, lG , established by the government. In exchange for using
lG fraction of the total hours per person, the government covers any losses through direct
subsidies (cash payments). If the labor constraint binds, the marginal product of labor in
subsidized firms falls below the wage rate, causing subsidized firms to earn negative profits.
Subsidized and private firms then co-exist if subsidized firms receive enough direct subsidies
from the government to earn zero profits.6 Therefore, let S = −πG be the direct subsidy,
where πG are the (negative) profits of subsidized firms excluding the direct subsidy and
ΠG = πG + S = 0 are the profits including the direct subsidy. To save on notation, we
suppress the time t subscripts where no confusion is possible.
   Both private and subsidized firms have access to a Cobb-Douglas technology F that
produces output Y from capital K, emissions E, and labor l:7

       Yi = F (Ki , Ei , li ) = Kiθ Ei li1−θ− i = G, P.                                             (2.1)

Here KG and KP denote the fraction of the aggregate per capita capital stock K allocated to
the subsidized and private sectors, respectively. We define li and Ei analogously. Hence in
equilibrium K = KG + KP is the economy wide per capita capital stock and E = EP + EG is
aggregate emissions. The representative household is endowed with one unit of labor every
period, which is supplied inelastically. Therefore, in equilibrium lG + lP = 1.
   Subsidized firms may receive a second subsidy, a discount on their rental rate of capital,
which we call an interest subsidy. Let r be the rental rate of capital for private firms,
then subsidized firms have rental rate (1 − γ)r, where γ is the subsidy rate. This subsidy
can be interpreted as either the government guaranteeing repayment of funds borrowed by
   6
    In the absence of subsidies, in a competitive equilibrium only the firm with the highest TFP operates.
   7
    It is straightforward to derive a Cobb-Douglas production function with emissions as input to production
from a model where emissions can be reduced via a costly abatement technology. See for example Bartz and
Kelly (2006). Bartz and Kelly (2006) also calibrate a Cobb-Douglas production function with emissions as
an input to production and find the emissions share to be generally less than one percent, and the capital
share nearly identical (about 0.4) to a production function without emissions. With a few trivial changes,
E can also be thought of as a dirty input.



                                                     6
subsidized firms, SOEs borrowing at the government’s rate of interest, or as the government
steering household deposits at state owned banks to subsidized firms at reduced interest
rates.8
   Subsidized firms may also receive an output subsidy of λ per unit of output produced
from the government. Let the price of output be normalized to one. The output subsidy
can then also be interpreted as a price support, where subsidized firms receive a total price
of 1 + λ for their output.
   Finally, subsidized firms may also receive relief from environmental regulation. Let τ be
the tax rate per unit of emissions.9 Then subsidized firms pay (1 − µ) τ per unit of emissions,
where µ is the subsidy rate. One can think of 1 − µ as the fraction of emissions by subsidized
firms that are reported, or the fraction of emissions that are monitored by the regulators. 10
    Both private and subsidized firms are competitive price takers. The objective of both
private and subsidized firms is to maximize profits taking prices and government policies as
given. Subsidized firms therefore maximize:

       πG = max (1 + λ) aG F (KG , EG , lG ) − (1 − γ) rKG − (1 − µ) τ EG − wlG .                   (2.2)
             KG ,EG


Let subscripts on functions denote partial derivatives and let AG ≡ (1 + λ) aG . The first
order condition which determines the part of the capital stock allocated to the subsidized
sector is:

       (1 − γ) r = AG Fk (KG , EG , lG ) .                                                          (2.3)

The first order condition which determines emissions by the subsidized sector is:

       (1 − µ) τ = AG FE (KG , EG , lG ) .                                                          (2.4)

The problem for private firms is:

       πP = max F (KP , EP , lP ) − rKP − τ EP − wlP .                                              (2.5)
             KP ,EP ,lP

   8
     The latter interpretation is more reasonable for developing countries. All three interpretations are
consistent with households renting capital.
   9
     One could also think of τ as the price of a tradeable permit allowing one unit of emissions. However,
the total permits would have to vary over time in a way that keeps the price constant.
  10
     As noted in the introduction, heavily subsidized SOEs in India are monitored less often (Gupta and
Saksena 2002) and enjoy more bargaining power over environmental compliance (Wang, Mamingi, Laplante,
and Dasgupta 2002).




                                                    7
The equilibrium rental rate, price of emissions, and wage rate, w are:

       r = Fk (KP , EP , lP ) ,                                                           (2.6)


       τ = FE (KP , EP , lP ) ,                                                           (2.7)


       w = Fl (KP , EP , lP ) .                                                           (2.8)

  The subsidies drive wedges between the marginal products of each input in each sector.
Many of the conditions derived later depend on the size of the wedges. Let M Pji denote the
marginal product of input j in sector i, then the wedge ηj between the marginal products
are:
       M PkP   1+λ
           G
             =     ≡ ηk ,                                                                 (2.9)
       M Pk    1−γ


       M PEP   1+λ
           G
             =     ≡ ηE .                                                               (2.10)
       M PE    1−µ

   The labor constraint is binding (subsidized firms hire more labor than is efficient) if and
only if w > AG Fl (KG , EG , lG ). In turn, the wage is greater than the marginal product of
labor in the subsidized sector if and only if:

       AG < (1 − γ)θ (1 − µ) .                                                         (2.11)

Thus direct subsidies are consistent with the co-existence of subsidized and non-subsidized
firms if and only the TFP of subsidized firms is sufficiently less than private firms. If
AG > (1 − γ)θ (1 − µ) , then either only subsidized firms exist or the subsidy is a tax. Since
this case is not interesting, we assume condition (2.11) holds.
   Equations (2.3), (2.4), (2.6), (2.7), and (2.8) have a unique solution:

               1
       KG =       K,                                                                    (2.12)
              1+Ω

            1 − lG          1−                  −1
                                                         1 − lG
       Ω≡          (1 − γ) 1−θ− (1 − µ) 1−θ− AG1−θ− ≡        α,                      (2.13)
              lG                                           lG

                          θ                                1
             ΩK                                      
                       1−                         
                                               θ          1−
                                           1− 1−
       EP =                    (1 − lG )                        ,                       (2.14)
            1+Ω                                      τ

                                                                8
                        θ                              !    1
            K                 1− θ       AG               1−
                     1−
      EG =                   lG 1−                              ,                          (2.15)
           1+Ω                        (1 − µ) τ

                                 θ            
                                    −1  
            K      Ω                   
                              1−
                                             1−
      r=θ                                          ,                                        (2.16)
          1 − lG 1 + Ω                 τ

                                              θ             
                        K      Ω                       
                                           1−
                                                             1−
      w = (1 − θ − )                                                .                      (2.17)
                      1 − lG 1 + Ω                     τ

   Here Ω is the ratio of capital in the two sectors (KP /KG ) and α is the ratio of capital to
labor ratios in the two sectors. The subsidies, labor constraint, environmental policy, and
productivity differences determine the share of capital in the subsidized sector and emissions
in each sector. An increase in any subsidy (γ, λ, µ, or S through an increase in lG ) raises the
after-subsidy marginal product of capital in the subsidized sector. To maintain equilibrium
the subsidized sector increases in size, causing the after-subsidy marginal product of capital
to fall, and the marginal product of capital in the private sector to rise, until the after-subsidy
marginal products are equalized. Thus subsidies cause the subsidized sector to grow larger
and become more inefficient in that the marginal product of capital absent the subsidies
falls.
    In turn, because capital moves from the private sector to the subsidized sector with an
increase in any subsidy, emissions in the private sector fall and emissions in the subsidized
sector increase with an increase in any subsidy. Similarly, an increase in subsidies γ, λ, or
µ increase the after-subsidy marginal product of capital in the subsidized sector and thus
increase the economy wide average demand for capital and the interest rate. Thus even
though the economy-wide TFP falls as γ, λ, or µ rise, the interest rate rises because this
effect is outweighed by the increase in demand for capital by the subsidized sector. When
capital falls in the private sector, demand for labor falls, but the the supply of labor is
inelastic. Hence the wage falls with an increase in γ, λ, or µ. With an increase in direct
subsidies, both labor and capital move from the private sector to the subsidized sector.
Thus the overall effect on the wage rate and interest rate depend on whether or not more
labor moves than capital. The interest rate is increasing in direct subsidies and the wage is
decreasing in direct subsidies if and only if:

      AG > (1 − γ)1− (1 − µ) .                                                            (2.18)

Condition (2.18) holds if and only if the private sector has a smaller capital to labor ratio.



                                                             9
2.2     Households

Households enjoy consumption of an aggregate good c, produced by both subsidized and
non-subsidized firms, and environmental quality Q. Let u (c, Q) denote the per period util-
ity, which we assume is strictly increasing and concave in each input, twice-continuously
differentiable, and satisfies the Inada conditions in c. The objective of households is:
              ∞
                    β t u (ct , Qt ) .
              X
        max                                                                                 (2.19)
              t=0

Let T Rt denote lump sum transfers (which may be negative and correspond to a tax) and
kt denote the part of the capital stock held by an individual. The maximization is subject
to a budget constraint:

        rt kt + wt + T Rt = ct + kt+1 − (1 − δ) kt .                                        (2.20)

Environmental quality is a strictly decreasing function Q (E) of aggregate emissions E,
where:

        E ≡ E P + EG .                                                                      (2.21)

2.3     Government

The the government budget constraint sets total subsidy costs plus lump sum transfers T R
equal to emissions tax revenue.

        γrKG + λYG + S + T R = (1 − µ) τ EG + τ EP .                                        (2.22)

Total direct subsidies equal total wage payments of the subsidized sector less the total prod-
uct of labor of the subsidized sector, that is, direct subsidies equal the total cost of the hiring
constraint. Hence:

        γrKG + λYG + (w − AG Fh (KG , EG , lG )) lG = −T R + (1 − µ) τ EG + τ EP .          (2.23)

The aggregate resource constraint is:

        Yt ≡ YP,t + YG,t = Ct + Kt+1 − (1 − δ) Kt .                                         (2.24)

      Let primes denote next period’s value, then the recursive version of the household problem




                                                  10
is:
                             ( "
       v (k, K) = max
                   0
                      u r (K; γ; λ; µ; lG) k + w (K; γ; λ; µ; lG ) + T R (K; γ; λ; µ; lG ) −
                         k
                                                              #              )
                        k 0 + (1 − δ) k, Q (K; γ; λ; µ; lG ) + βv (k 0 , K 0 ) .                    (2.25)


3     Equilibrium

We characterize the model by establishing the existence and properties of the equilibrium.

Definition 1 A Recursive Competitive Equilibrium given individual and aggregate capital
stocks k and K and government policies {γ, λ, µ, lG , τ } is a set of individual household
decisions {c, k 0 }, prices {r, w}, aggregate household decisions {C, K 0 }, an input decision
by subsidized firms KG , input decisions by private firms {KP , lP }, government variables
{S, T R}, and a value function v such that the household’s and producers’ (private and
subsidized) problems are satisfied, all markets clear, subsidized firms earn zero profits, the
government budget constraint is satisfied, and the consistency conditions (k = K implies
c = C and k 0 = K 0 ) are satisfied.

Note that an alternative definition of equilibrium is to take the direct subsidy S as given
and let lG be determined in equilibrium. These definitions are equivalent, so we do not
distinguish between them, but will occasionally think of S as the given government policy.
    Capital accumulation is then determined from the equilibrium first order condition and
envelope equation:

       uc (C (K; γ; λ; µ; lG ) , Q (K; γ; λ; µ; lG )) = βvk (K 0 , K 0 ) ,                           (3.1)


       vk (K, K) = uc (C (K; γ; λ; µ; lG ) , Q (K; γ; λ; µ; lG )) (r (K; γ; λ; µ; lG ) + 1 − δ) ,    (3.2)


       C (K; γ; λ; µ; lG ) = Y (K; γ; λ; µ; lG ) − K 0 (K; γ; λ; µ; lG) + (1 − δ) K,                 (3.3)


       Y (K; γ; λ; µ; lG) = F (K − KG (K; γ; λ; µ; lG ) , EP (K; γ; λ; µ; lG) , 1 − lG )
                             + aG F (KG (K; γ; λ; µ; lG) , EG (K; γ; λ; µ; lG ) , lG ) .             (3.4)

   Our strategy is to establish some basic properties of the competitive equilibrium, and
then use these properties to derive the more complicated results on how emissions changes
with changes in subsidies.

                                                      11
THEOREM 1 Suppose u and F are as described above. Let:
      1
         > θ − (1 − θ) Ω,                                                                (3.5)
      ηk


     −uc (C, Q (E (K))) − ι (Y (K) + (1 − δ) K) and                                     (3.6a)
         uc (Y (K) + (1 − δ) K, Q (E (K))) be decreasing in K.                         (3.6b)

Here ι is a constant defined in the proof. Then a unique competitive equilibrium exists.
Further, the equilibrium gross investment function K 0 = H (K) is such that:

  1. HK (K) ≥ 0,

  2. CK (K) ≥ 0,

  3. uc (H (K) , Q (E (K))) is decreasing in K,

  4. H (K) satisfies the Euler equation derived from (3.1) and (3.2), and

  5. H (K) is concave.

All proofs are in the Appendix. Assumption (3.5) requires the subsidies not to be so large
that taxes exhaust household wages. If so, households would be forced to reduce savings
to pay taxes, perhaps unraveling the equilibrium if the capital stock was low enough. As-
sumption (3.6a) ensures that an increase in the capital stock, which lowers the quality of the
environment, does not increase the marginal utility of consumption so much that investment
becomes less attractive, despite the extra income (ie. condition 3.6a ensures that hK > 0).
Similarly, assumption (3.6b) ensures that an increase in the capital stock, which lowers the
quality of the environment, does not decrease the marginal utility of consumption so much
that consumption becomes less attractive, despite the extra income (ie. condition 3.6a en-
sures that cK > 0). Assumptions (3.6a) and (3.6b) define an interval of acceptable values
for ucQ for each K. The interval contains the seperable case where ucQ = 0.
    Although a complex network of subsidies exists at the household level, the model reduces
to a standard capital accumulation problem if the subsidies are not too large. Further, the
economy grows at a decreasing rate and capital converges monotonically to the steady state.
Hence a change in subsidies affects aggregate emissions within the current period, as capital
is reallocated across sectors and dynamically over time as the change in subsidies affects the
path of capital accumulation. The former effects we call reallocation effects and the later
effect we call the capital accumulation effect.



                                             12
4    Reallocation Effects

A small increase in a particular subsidy has two effects. First, some capital moves from the
private sector to the subsidized sector. Thus the marginal product of emissions rises in the
subsidized sector and falls in the private sector. Because capital and labor are less productive
in the subsidized sector, the rise in the marginal product of emissions in the subsidized sector
is less than the fall in the private sector. Thus, ignoring emissions subsidies, the decrease
in emissions in the private sector exceeds the increase in emissions in the subsidized sector.
In addition, a second effect exists in that because of the emissions subsidy, the subsidized
sector over uses emissions and is more emissions intensive. Thus an increase in the size of
the subsidized sector increases economy-wide average emissions intensity, tending to increase
aggregate emissions. The overall effect of subsidies on emissions depends on which of these
two effects is greater.
   To formalize this argument, let σi denote the emissions intensity of output in sector i,
then:
               Ei     
        σi =       =                                                                       (4.1)
               Y i   M PEi


        σG   1+λ
           =     = ηE                                                                      (4.2)
        σP   1−µ

We then have:

PROPOSITION 2 Let F and u be as described above, then:

    1. aggregate emissions are increasing in µ if and only if:

               σG             θΩ
                  >                           ηk .                                         (4.3)
               σP   θΩ + (1 − θ − ) (1 + Ω)

    2. aggregate emissions are increasing in λ if and only if:

               σG             θΩ
                  >                          ηk .                                          (4.4)
               σP   θΩ + (1 − θ − ) (1 + Ω)


    3. aggregate emissions are increasing in S if and only if:

               σG    θ + (1 − θ − ) (1 + Ω) lG
                  >                               ηk .                                     (4.5)
               σP   θ + (1 − θ − ) (1 + Ω) lG /α


                                                 13
  4. aggregate emissions are increasing in γ if and only if:

            σG
               > ηk .                                                                       (4.6)
            σP


  Proposition 2 implies a ranking of subsidies from most to least harmful to the environ-
ment. Emissions subsidies are the most environmentally harmful (the right hand side of
condition 4.3 is smaller than that of 4.4-4.6), since emissions subsidies directly increase the
incentive to emit. Surprisingly, allowing subsidized firms to evade environmental regulation
can benefit the environment, if the emissions subsidy is not too large. This is because subsi-
dized firms will grow in size and take resources from the highly productive private sector. If
the resulting drop in the marginal product of emissions is large enough, aggregate emissions
may fall even though emissions intensity rises. Proposition 2 indicates output subsidies are
more harmful to the environment than either interest subsidies or direct subsidies. An in-
crease in output subsidies does not further distort the relative input use, so the fall in the
marginal product of emissions is relatively small, making the increase in emissions intensity
more likely to dominate. Proposition 2 indicates direct subsidies are more harmful to the
environment than interest subsidies if and only if condition (2.18) is satisfied, or if and only
if an increase in direct subsidies increases the return to capital. In that case, the marginal
product of emissions falls less with an increase in direct subsidies. Thus the increase in
emissions intensity is more likely to dominate. If direct subsidies decrease the return to
capital (condition 2.18 does not hold), then direct subsidies worsen the capital to labor ratio
and so result in a larger decrease in the marginal product of emissions. In this case, interest
subsidies are more environmentally harmful than direct subsidies.
   All subsidies increase emissions if and only if:
                                                    !
      σG           θ + (1 − θ − ) (1 + Ω) lG
         > max 1,                               ηk .                                        (4.7)
      σP          θ + (1 − θ − ) (1 + Ω) lG /α

If α < 1, then we need only (4.6) to hold, which in turn holds if and only if µ > s, if the
emissions subsidy exceeds the interest subsidy. This illustrates the importance of accounting
for all subsidies together, as they have significant interaction effects.
    Previous work (e.g. van Beers and van den Bergh 2001) show how subsidies increase
output and thus emissions in the subsidized sector. Here, the results are more complicated
because we consider the general equilibrium effects on other sectors as well. Even though
output in the subsidized sector always rises with the subsidies, aggregate emissions might
still fall if emissions fall enough in the sector which would otherwise use the resources (ie. if
conditions of Proposition 2 do not hold).

                                               14
    Aggregate output falls as emissions subsidies rise if and only if:

                  (1 − θ − ) 1 + Ω
       ηk > 1 +                     .                                                      (4.8)
                       θ        Ω
Aggregate output falls as output subsidies rise if and only if:

                   (1 − θ − ) 1 + Ω
       ηk > 1 +                       .                                                    (4.9)
                        θ         Ω
Although capital and labor resources move to the low productivity subsidized sector, emis-
sions is not a fixed resource. Output or emissions subsidies may increase output if firms
increase emissions enough to compensate for using capital and labor in a less productive
manner.
    Combining the above with the results of Proposition 2, in some cases subsidies may
increase emissions even though aggregate output falls.

COROLLARY 3 Suppose the conditions of Proposition 2 hold. Then current output falls
and emissions rise:

    1. with an increase in direct subsidies,

    2. with an increase in interest subsidies,

    3. with an increase in emissions subsidies if in addition condition (4.9) holds.

    4. with an increase in output subsidies if in addition condition (4.8) holds.

Further, if current output rises with any subsidy, emissions rise as well.

The size of aggregate output and emissions intensity determine overall emissions. All sub-
sidies increase emissions intensity by moving resources to the emissions intensive subsidized
firm. If subsidies also increase output, emissions must rise. However, if subsidies reduce
output, the size and intensity effects offset, which allows for the possibility that emissions
may fall.


5    The Capital Accumulation Effect

An increase in γ, λ, or µ raises the rate of return to capital, causing the economy to over
accumulate capital. An increase in S raises the return to capital if and only if condition
(2.18) holds. When the economy over accumulates capital, output and emissions rise, which
we call the capital accumulation effect. From Theorem 1, the economy follows a standard
path of capital accumulation in that capital increases at a decreasing rate as it transitions to

                                                 15
a steady state. Thus, starting at time 0 at the steady state capital stock, K̄, an increase in
any subsidy causes capital to increase at decreasing rate to a new steady state capital stock.
Since emissions are increasing in the capital stock, emissions will also increase from the
previous steady state Ē to a new steady state. If the reallocation effect was positive (that is,
if the conditions in Proposition 2 are satisfied), then emissions are above the initial level for
all t ≥ t0 . If the reallocation effect is negative, then emissions initially fall but then increase
for all t > t0 . The next proposition gives conditions for which emissions eventually rise above
their initial drop so that the new steady state emissions exceeds the initial emissions.

PROPOSITION 4 Let F and u be as described above, let conditions (3.5) and (3.6) hold,
and let K0 = K̄. Then:

  1. if µ is increased at time 0, then if condition (4.3) holds, Et > Ē for all t ≥ 0. If
     condition (4.6) does not hold, then Et > Ē for all t ≥ t∗ for some finite t∗ .

  2. if λ is increased at time 0, then if condition (4.4) holds, Et > Ē for all t ≥ 0. If
     condition (4.6) does not hold, then Et > Ē for all t ≥ t∗ for some finite t∗ .

  3. if γ is increased at time 0, then if condition (4.6) holds, Et > Ē for all t ≥ 0. If
      condition (4.6) does not hold, then Et > Ē for all t ≥ t∗ for some finite t∗ .

  4. if S is increased at time 0, then if condition (4.5) holds, Et > Ē for all t ≥ 0. If
      condition (4.6) does not hold, then Et > Ē for all t ≥ t∗ for some finite t∗ if and only
      if AG > (1 − γ)θ (1 − µ)1−θ .


   Hence subsidies γ, λ, and µ raise emissions in the long run regardless of the ratio of
emissions intensities. Even if no emissions subsidy exists and both the private and subsidized
firms have identical emissions intensities, the over accumulation of emissions causing capital
raises emissions enough to offset the fall in emissions caused by moving resources to the less
productive subsidized sector. For an increase in direct subsidies, whether or not steady state
emissions rise depends on whether or not the interest rate and output rise.
    Figures 1 and 2 show the possible dynamic paths of capital and emissions after an increase
in interest subsidies (emissions and output subsidies are analogous). It is interesting to note
that if the conditions of Proposition 2 do not hold, then increases in subsidies γ, λ, and µ
temporarily decrease emissions, only to see emissions rise eventually as capital accumulates.
   Steady state output rises with an increase in γ, λ, or µ. However, steady state output
falls with an increase in direct subsidies. Thus for direct subsidies conditions arise for which
reducing subsidies may enable a government to increase output and reduce emissions.

                                                16
COROLLARY 5 Let F and u be as described above, let conditions (3.5) and (3.6) hold,
and let K0 = K̄. Then if S falls at time 0 and if AG > (1 − γ)θ (1 − µ)1−θ , steady state
output rises and steady state emissions fall.
Thus reducing direct subsidies may create a path for sustainable development. A developing
country, by reducing direct payments to firms, can increase output and decrease emissions
in the long run.

6        Optimal Policy

We next consider optimal second best emissions tax policy given subsidies. Here we follow
a large literature which takes some sub-optimal policies as given and then determines the
optimal environmental policy.11 We give conditions below for which subsidies decrease the
optimal tax on emissions and increase optimal emissions.
   A valid criticism of this analysis and this literature is that it is unlikely that a government
which cannot implement the optimal policy in one dimension would be able to implement
the optimal policy in another dimension. Here it is unlikely that a government which,
due to political/institutional constraints, gives welfare decreasing subsidies would face no
political/institutional constraints in designing environmental policy. However, we argue
that an increase in subsidies is likely to lower the tax rate on emissions even in a world with
environmental policy political/institutional constraints. Subsidies reduce resources available
for consumption and environmental quality and governments must at some level take into
account available resources, irrespective of the exact mechanism that determines policy.
   To determine the optimal second best emissions policy, we create a set of constraints such
that, given the constraints, prices and policies exist which are consistent with the competitive
equilibrium. The planner then need only maximize utility subject to the constraints. From
equilibrium equations (2.4) and (2.7):

                    1−γ 1
          EG = Ep                                                                             (6.1)
                    1−µΩ

Since E = E G + E P , emissions of each sector are a constant fraction of aggregate emissions:
                       1−γ
          EG =                     E,                                                         (6.2)
                 1 − γ + Ω (1 − µ)


                     Ω (1 − µ)
          EP =                     E.                                                         (6.3)
                 1 − γ + Ω (1 − µ)
    11
    For example, Bovenberg and Goulder (1996) and Parry (1997) calculate optimal environmental taxes
taking other distorting taxes as given.

                                                17
Next, given equation (2.12) aggregate income as a function of aggregate emissions is:

       Y = ψK θ E  ,                                                                    (6.4)

                                           1−θ−
                   aG ((1 + λ) Ω + 1 − γ) lG
       ψ≡                                             .                                  (6.5)
             (Ω (1 − µ) + 1 − γ) (1 + Ω)θ (1 − γ)1−

Here aG ≤ ψ ≤ 1 is a weighted average of the TFP in the subsidized sector (aG ) and the
private sector (1). The weights reflect the amount of each input allocated to each sector,
which is determined by the subsidies. It follows that the resource constraint is:

       C = ψK θ E  + (1 − δ) K − K 0 .                                                  (6.6)

Thus the subsidies affect the resources the planner has available for consumption, invest-
ment, environmental quality. However, subsidies generally raises the interest rate above the
economy wide marginal product of capital (θψK θ−1 E  ). The most straightforward way to
account for this is to create a planning problem with a discount factor closer to one, so
the planner is induced to save in a way which is consistent with the high interest rate in
the competitive equilibrium. Since the planner determines optimal emissions, we henceforth
assume Q is weakly concave and u satisfies the Inada conditions in Q (uQ (c, 0) = ∞ and
        
uQ c, Ê = 0, where Ê is the maximum sustainable emissions). Consider the following
planning problem:
                        ( "                               #            )
                                  θ                 0             0
       ν (K) = max
                0
                   u ψK E + (1 − δ) K − K , Q (E) + φβν (K ) ,                           (6.7)
                 K ,E



              1+Ω
       φ≡            .                                                                   (6.8)
             Ω + 1−γ
                 1+λ

The first order conditions and envelope equations are:

       uc (C, Q) = φβνk (K 0 ) ,                                                         (6.9)


       uc (C, Q) ψK θ E −1 = −uQ (C, Q) QE (E) ,                                      (6.10)

                                               
       νk (K) = uc (C, Q) θψK θ−1 E  + 1 − δ .                                         (6.11)

We then have:


                                                18
PROPOSITION 6 Let F and u be as described above, and let conditions (3.5) and (3.6)
hold. Then any competitive equilibrium satisfies (6.6). Conversely, assume also either γ =
λ = 0 or δ = 1. Then, there exists prices and policies such that the allocations given by (6.6)
and (6.9)-(6.11) are a competitive equilibrium.

Recall that the interest rate net of depreciation is subsidized; households receives no subsidy
for nondepreciating capital. Thus the competitive equilibrium yields identical allocations as
a planning problem with a larger discount factor only if all capital depreciates. Alternatively,
if no interest or output subsidies exists, then the interest rate will equate with the economy
wide marginal product of capital.
   The properties of the optimal environmental policy E ∗ follow from (6.6) and (6.9)-(6.11).

PROPOSITION 7 Let the assumptions of Proposition 6 hold, and in addition let u cQ ≥ 0
      
and R C̄ ≥ 1, where R is the relative risk aversion at the steady state consumption C̄.
Then for the case γ = λ = 0, the optimal second best steady state state environmental policy
Ē ∗ is increasing in µ and S. Alternatively, for the δ = 1 case, if β (1 − ) > (1 − γ) / (1 + λ),
then the optimal second best steady state state environmental policy Ē ∗ is increasing in µ, γ,
and λ.

The change in optimal emissions given a decrease in resources and an increased incentive to
save is a complicated mixture of offsetting effects. First, an increase in any subsidy decreases
aggregate resources available and thus raises the opportunity cost of environmental quality.
An increase in any subsidy decreases steady state consumption holding emissions fixed,
since with β sufficiently large, the reduction in consumption caused by increased savings
outweighs the increase in steady state resources caused by higher savings. Subsidies do
reduce productivity and thus the marginal product of emissions, which makes emissions less
                    
attractive. For R C̄ ≥ 1, however, this income effect is outweighed by the increase in the
marginal utility of consumption caused by the decrease in aggregate resources. Finally, the
decrease in steady state consumption causes marginal utility of environmental quality to fall
for ucQ > 0.
    Proposition 7 requires a number of assumptions, but they are probably not to restrictive.
For example, taking  = .01, as is the case in the U.S. (see Bartz and Kelly 2007), and
γ = 0.58 from Bajona and Kelly (2006), we require only β > .6. Since most studies find
R to be between one and three, the proposition amounts to assuming consumption and
environmental quality are not too seperable or too complementary with consumption.
   Viewing the problem as one in which investment is chosen for fixed emissions and then
choosing emissions is instructive. With emissions fixed, an increase in any subsidy decreases
aggregate resources available for current consumption and raises the effective discount factor.

                                                19
Hence the cases in the previous sections in which increasing subsidies increase output or
decrease interest rates depended solely on increasing emissions.


7   Conclusions

We have derived conditions under which subsidies increase emissions in the short run and in
the steady state. In the short run, we show that subsidies can be ranked from most to least
harmful to the environment. Emissions subsidies directly increase the incentive to emit and
are thus most harmful. Output subsidies allow the firm to use an optimal balance of inputs,
so the marginal product of emissions falls very little. Thus emissions are likely to rise because
output subsidies move production to the more emissions intensive subsidized sector. Interest
subsidies and direct subsidies are less harmful, because they distort individual inputs, thus
reducing the marginal product of emissions.
   Regardless of the short run effect, emissions, output, and interest subsidies all increase
emissions in the steady state. We have also shown that direct payments can increase emis-
sions in the steady state even if emissions fall in the short run. Thus we have shown the
capital accumulation effect is the most important channel by which subsidies affect emissions,
although it has not received much attention in the literature.
    Finally, we have shown that if the emissions policy is endogenous, subsidies increase
the opportunity cost of environmental quality and thus put pressure on governments to
weaken environmental policy. Although our result depends on the fictional assumption that
governments can choose an optimal environmental policy but not an optimal subsidy policy,
at some level our results are likely to be qualitatively relevant since regardless of political
constraints governments must pay some attention to the cost of environmental policy.
   Thus, allowing for general equilibrium, dynamic, and policy effects, subsidies tend to
reduce environmental quality in the long run, even if the short run effect depends on the
parameters and the size of the subsidies. Thus subsidies are welfare reducing and reduce the
quality of the environment. It is not clear if subsidies can be easily reduced, as they create a
few vocal winners and have diverse costs. Perhaps free trade agreements, which create new
sets of winners and losers, can change the political dynamic (see for example Bajona and
Kelly 2005). Perhaps the environmental lobby can bring new political incentives to reduce
subsidies. Regardless of whether or not subsidies are easily reduced, it is important for policy
makers and other stakeholders to understand their negative consequences.




                                               20
8     Appendix: Proof of theorems

For many of the results of the paper, it is useful to derive aggregate emissions and output.
From equations (2.14) and (2.15):

       E = E P + EG
                                                 1    "                                                                     #
                                                                                            1
                                                                                                    1− θ
                                       
                                −θ              1−                       θ         θ                                 −1           θ
                                                                      1− 1−                1−
               = (1 + Ω)        1−                       (1 − lG )            Ω   1−   + AG      lG 1−   (1 − µ)   1−       K 1− . (8.1)
                                          τ

The definition of Ω implies:
                                       1                                         "                      #
                                              1− θ     1
                                                                                      1   Ω
                                
                         −θ           1−                                   −                  θ
       E = (1 + Ω)       1−                  lG 1− AG1−       (1 − µ)   1−          +    K 1− .                                   (8.2)
                                τ                                                    1−µ 1−γ

For output, substituting equations (2.12)-(2.14) into (3.4) and again using the definition of
Ω gives:
                                                                                                  "                        #
                                                                 1− θ     1
                                                                                                        1   Ω
                                                     
                                              −θ           1−                                −                  θ
       Y = YP + YG = (1 + Ω)                  1−                lG 1− AG1−      (1 − µ)   1−          +    K 1−                   (8.3)
                                                      τ                                                1+λ 1−γ

              θ
       ≡ ΓK 1− .                                                                                                                      (8.4)

8.1    Proof of Theorem 1

The proof follows closely the logic of Datta, Mirman, and Reffett (2002), hereafter DMR, to
which the reader should refer for details not provided here. Two differences exist between
our framework and their framework with environmental quality replacing leisure. First, in
our model the price of emissions τ is given while in their model the wage is determined from
equilibrium. Thus, in their model, leisure depends on the consumption decision, where in
our model environmental quality does not depend on the consumption decision. The second
difference is that DMR considers only taxes on interest income, whereas in our model interest
income may be either taxed or subsidized, depending on the parameter values.
   To begin, note that, from equation (8.4), the maximum sustainable income Ŷ occurs
when all subsidies are zero, so that KG = 0, and K = K̂:
                                     
                           
                            
                    θ               1−         θ
       Ŷ = Γ̂K̂   1−   =                K̂ 1− .                                                                                     (8.5)
                           τ




                                                                      21
Now from equation (3.3):
                     1−
                  ! 1−θ−
             Γ̂
      K̂ =                  ,                                                              (8.6)
             δ

and so the maximum sustainable capital stock is finite.
                      h         i
   Next, let S = 0, K̂ be the space of feasible capital stocks, and define a space of con-
sumption functions C as:

      C = {c : S → S | c continuous, uc [c (K) , Q (E (K))] decreasing in K} .             (8.7)

Next, define an operator B (c) : C → C implicitly as:
                
                 c̃ : z (c, c̃, K) = 0 c > 0
      B (c) =                                 ,                                            (8.8)
                 0                     c=0


      z (c, c̃, K) = uc (c̃, Q (E (K))) − D (x; c) ,                                       (8.9)


      D (x; c) = βuc (c (x) , Q (E (x))) r (x) ,                                         (8.10)


      x (K) = G (K) − c̃,                                                                (8.11)


      G (K) = Y (K) + (1 − δ) K.                                                         (8.12)

   The strategy is to show that B is a monotonic operator that maps C into itself and has
a non-zero fixed point, which solves the Euler equation given by equations (3.1) and (3.2),
and is thus the equilibrium. We derive this lengthy result by proving a series of claims.
   First, we claim that for all K and for all c ∈ C, there exists a unique c̃ (K) ∈ (0, G (K)).
To prove this claim, note first that c ∈ C implies uc (c (x) , Q (E (x))) is decreasing in x and
from equation (2.16), r (x) is decreasing in x. Therefore D is decreasing in x and thus D
is increasing in c̃. Since u is concave, z is then decreasing in c̃. The Inada conditions on
u further imply that z (c, 0, K) = ∞ and equation (2.16) implies z (c, G (K) , K) = −∞.
Finally, since c ∈ C, z is continuous in c̃. Combining the above four facts implies there exists
a unique c̃ ∈ (0, G (K)).
  We can thus interpret B as an operator on a subset of the space of continuous functions.
We next claim that B maps C into itself. To prove this claim, note that the first claim
                                    h   i
showed c̃ ∈ (0, G (K)) ⊂ 0, K̂ . Thus c̃ maps S into itself. Further, continuity of z and c,

                                                   22
and monotonicity of z implies via the implicit function theorem that c̃ is continuous. Next,
let K2 ≥ K1 , with c̃i = c̃ (Ki ), xi = G (Ki ) − c̃i , Gi = G (Ki ), and ∆G = G2 − G1 and note
that by assumption (3.6b):

      uc (G (K2 ) − x1 , Q (E (K2 ))) ≤ uc (G (K1 ) − x1 , Q (E (K1 ))) = D (x1 ) ,     (8.13)

which implies:

      uc (c̃1 + ∆G, Q (E (K2 ))) ≤ D (G (K1 ) − c̃1 ) = D (G2 − (c̃1 + ∆G)) ,           (8.14)


      z (c, c̃1 + ∆G, K2 ) ≤ 0.                                                         (8.15)

Note the first claim implies z is decreasing in c̃, so:

      c̃2 ≤ c̃1 + ∆G → x2 ≥ x1 .                                                        (8.16)

But then since D is decreasing:

      D (x2 ; c) ≤ D (x1 ; c) ,                                                         (8.17)

which implies:

      uc (c̃2 , Q (E (K2 ))) ≤ uc (c̃1 , Q (E (K1 ))) .                                 (8.18)

Thus uc (c̃ (K) , Q (E (K))) is decreasing in K. Thus c̃ ∈ C and so B maps C into itself.
   We next claim that B is a monotone operator: let c2 ≥ c1 , where ≥ represents the
pointwise partial order. Then, concavity of u implies:

      D (x; c2 ) ≤ D (x; c1 ) ,                                                         (8.19)

which implies:

      uc [c̃, Q (E (K))] − D (x; c1 ) ≤ uc [c̃, Q (E (K))] − D (x, c2 ) ,               (8.20)


      z (c1 , c̃, K) ≤ z (c2 , c̃, K) .                                                 (8.21)

Since z is decreasing in c̃, we thus have c̃2 ≥ c̃1 . Thus B is a monotone operator.
   We next claim that c̃ is increasing in K. To see this, rewrite z using gross investment x:

      z (c, x, K) = uc (G (K) − x, Q (E (K))) − D (x; c) .                              (8.22)


                                                     23
Next, we have:

      uc [G (K2 ) − (x1 + ∆G) , Q (E (K2 ))] = uc [G (K1 ) − x1 , Q (E (K2 ))]       (8.23)


      ≥ uc [G (K1 ) − x1 , Q (E (K1 ))] − ι∆G.                                       (8.24)

Hence:

      uc [G (K2 ) − (x1 + ∆G) , Q (E (K2 ))] − D (x1 + ∆G) ≥                         (8.25)
           D (x1 ) − D (x1 + ∆G) − ι∆G                                               (8.26)


      z (c, x1 + ∆G, K2 ) ≥ D (x1 ) − D (x1 + ∆G) − ι∆G                              (8.27)

We next show the right hand side is non-negative. If ucQ ≤ 0, we can define ι = 0, in which
case the right hand side is non-negative since D is a decreasing function. If ucQ > 0, then
the intermediate value theorem implies there exists an ω ∈ [0, 1] such that:

      D (x1 + ∆G) = D (x1 ) + Dx (x1 + ω∆G) ∆G.                                      (8.28)

Hence the right hand side of (8.27) equals

      (−Dx (x1 + ω∆G) − ι) ∆G.                                                       (8.29)

Term (8.29) is non-negative for ι ≤ −Dx (x1 + ω∆G). We need term (8.29) to be non-
negative regardless of x1 , so we define ι ≡ − maxx Dx (x). The maximum exists since Dx is
negative, and hence ι is a positive term bounded below by zero. Returning now to (8.27),
we see that, given our definition of ι,

      z (c, x1 + ∆G, K2 ) ≥ 0.                                                       (8.30)

The first claim implies z is decreasing in c̃ or increasing in x, thus:

      x1 + ∆G ≥ x2 .                                                                 (8.31)

Using the definition of x, we have:

      G1 − c̃1 + G2 − G1 ≥ G2 − c̃2 ,                                                (8.32)


      c̃2 ≥ c̃1 .                                                                    (8.33)

                                                 24
Thus c̃ is increasing in K.
  We now claim that B maps the space C¯ into itself, where:

     C¯ = C ∩ {c̃ : |G (K2 ) − G (K1 )| ≥ |c̃2 − c̃1 | ∀ K2 ≥ K1 } .                    (8.34)

To see this, note that from equation (8.16),

     G2 − c̃2 ≥ G1 − c̃1 ,                                                              (8.35)


     G (K2 ) − G (K1 ) ≥ c̃2 − c̃1 .                                                    (8.36)

Since G is increasing, the left hand side of equation (8.36) is positive. Further, since c̃ is
increasing the right hand side of equation (8.36) is also positive. Thus the result follows
from taking the absolute value of both sides.
   We are now in a position to apply the main theorems of DMR.

LEMMA A There exists a maximum fixed point c∗ = B (c∗ ) such that
     ¯ limn→∞ B n (G (K)) = c∗ , and c∗ > 0.
c∗ ∈ C,

The proof is identical to DMR, Proposition 2.

LEMMA B The fixed point c∗ is the unique equilibrium.

The proof is identical to DMR, theorem 4. The above lemmas establishes existence and
uniqueness of the aggregate equilibrium, respectively. Given the equilibrium functions c∗
and x∗ we can construct the remaining equilibrium variables r, w, T R, S, KG , and KP
using equations (2.16), (2.17), (2.23), S = −πG , (2.12), and KP = K − KG , respectively.
Household decisions are then constructed from equation (2.20) and the household first order
condition. Note that construction of household decisions requires w > −T R, otherwise for k
sufficiently small k 0 and/or c must be negative, which would violate equilibrium. However,
it is straightforward to see that condition (3.5) implies w > −T R. Since the equilibrium
      ¯ we know c∗ satisfies the first four properties given in Theorem 1.
c∗ ∈ C,
   It remains to show that c∗ satisfies the fifth property of the theorem, that H (K) is
concave. First, note that since c∗ ∈ C,¯ we know that uc (c∗ (K) , Q (E (K))) is decreas-
ing in K. Further, from equation (2.16), r (K) is decreasing in K. Hence vk (K, K) =
uc (c∗ (K) , Q (K)) r (K) is decreasing in K. Therefore for all K, K 0 ∈ S:

     (vk (K, K) − vk (K 0 , K 0 )) (K − K 0 ) ≤ 0.                                      (8.37)



                                                 25
Hence, using equations (3.1) and (3.2):
                                                            !
               ∗                      uc (c∗ (K) , Q (E (K)))
       uc (c (K) , Q (E (K))) r (K) −                         (K − K 0 ) ≤ 0,         (8.38)
                                                 β


      (βr (K) − 1) (K − K 0 ) ≤ 0.                                                    (8.39)
                                                   
Further, the steady state, K̄, satisfies βr K̄ = 1 and K 0 is an increasing function. There-
fore, K 0 > K if and only if K < K̄, and so K 0 (K) is concave in K.

8.2   Proof of Proposition 2

We will prove part (1), since parts (2)-(4) are analogous. After taking the derivative of
equation (8.2) with respect to µ, we see that the derivative of aggregate emissions with
respect to µ is positive if and only if:
         "                    #                 "                           #
                                        1−γ
      −θ 1 − γ + Ω (1 − µ) Ωu + (1 + Ω)     + Ω − Ωu (1 − ) (1 − µ) > 0.            (8.40)
                                        1−µ

Equation (2.12) implies:

                        Ω
      Ωu = −                .                                                         (8.41)
                   1−θ−1−µ

Hence, the above condition reduces to:
      1−γ
          (θΩ + (1 − θ − ) (1 + Ω)) − θΩ > 0.                                      (8.42)
      1−µ

Next, equations (2.9) and (2.10) imply:

      ηE   1−γ
         =     .                                                                      (8.43)
      ηk   1−µ

Hence the above condition becomes:
      σG             θΩ
         >                           ηk ,                                             (8.44)
      σP   θΩ + (1 − θ − ) (1 + Ω)

as required.

8.3   Proof of Corollary 3

We will prove part (1), since parts (2)-(4) are analogous. Recall from the definition of
equilibrium that we can treat either S or lG as the given direct subsidy parameter, with the


                                                    26
other determined from the zero profit condition in the subsidized sector. Hence, taking the
derivative of equation (8.3) with respect to lG implies that the derivative of aggregate output
with respect to lG is negative if and only if:
                    1−γ
                                
          − θlG            + Ω ΩlG + (1 + Ω) (1 − ) lG ΩlG +
                    1+λ
                                     1−γ
                                           
               (1 − θ − ) (1 + Ω)       + Ω < 0.                                       (8.45)
                                     1+λ
Equation (2.12) implies:

                    −Ω
      Ω lG =                 .                                                          (8.46)
                lG (1 − lG )

Hence the above condition reduces to:
               1−γ                           1−γ
                                                             
      θΩ           + Ω + (1 − θ − ) (1 + Ω)     + Ω (1 − lG ) < (1 − ) (1 + Ω) Ω. (8.47)
               1+λ                           1+λ
Since 1 − γ < 1 + λ, it is sufficient to show:
                                       1−γ
                                                           
      θΩ (1 + Ω) + (1 − θ − ) (1 + Ω)     + Ω (1 − lG ) < (1 − ) (1 + Ω) Ω,           (8.48)
                                       1+λ
which holds if and only if:
          1−γ
                      
              + Ω (1 − lG ) < Ω                                                         (8.49)
          1+λ

      1−γ     lG
          <        Ω.                                                                   (8.50)
      1+λ   1 − lG

Now from equation (2.12):
                                                 1
                       (1 − γ)1− (1 − µ)
                                             ! 1−θ−
        lG
             Ω=                                        >1                               (8.51)
      1 − lG                   AG

Here the inequality follows from condition (2.11). Hence the right hand side of (8.50) is
greater than one, which implies immediately that condition (8.50) holds. Hence aggregate
output is decreasing in the level direct subsidies. From Proposition 2, aggregate output
decreases and emissions rise with an increase in direct subsidies if and only if the condition
(4.5) holds.




                                                       27
8.4   Proof of Proposition 4

Proposition 4 and Corollary 5 require calculation of the steady state emissions. Evaluating
equations (3.1) and (3.2) at the steady state capital stock K̄ implies:
                                   
      1 = β r K̄ + 1 − δ .                                                               (8.52)

            1
Let β =    1+ρ
               ,   then:
            
      r K̄ − δ = ρ,                                                                      (8.53)

which is the modified golden rule for this economy. Equation (2.16) implies:
                              1−
                         !                   
                    θ        1−θ−
                                                  1+Ω
                                      
                                           1−θ−
      K̄ =                                             (1 − lG ) .                       (8.54)
                   ρ+δ                τ             Ω

Substituting equation (8.54) into equation (8.3) gives the steady state output:
                               θ
                         !                   
                  θ          1−θ−
                                                                  1−γ 1
                                                                        
                                           1−θ−
      Ȳ =                                         (1 − lG )             +1 .            (8.55)
                 ρ+δ                  τ                            1+λΩ

Substituting equation (8.54) into equation (8.2) gives the steady state emissions:
                         !     θ            1−θ                            !
                  θ          1−θ−
                                                            1−γ 1
                                      
                                           1−θ−
      Ē =                                         (1 − lG )       +1 .                  (8.56)
                 ρ+δ                  τ                      1−µΩ

    We will prove part (1), since parts (2)-(4) are analogous. It is immediate from equation
(8.56) and (2.12) that Ē is an increasing function of µ. Further, from Proposition 2, period 0
emissions rise if and only if condition (4.3) holds. For periods between 0 and the steady state,
note that from equation (8.54), K̄ is an increasing function of µ. Further, from Theorem 1,
H (K) is strictly increasing and concave in K. Hence, K will converge monotonically from
K0 = K̄ to a new steady state K̄ ¯ from below. Given that emissions are an increasing in the
                                                                                 ¯ > Ē. If
capital stock, emissions will also increase monotonically to a new steady state Ē
                                                                ¯ > Ē, and E is converging
condition (4.3) does not hold, then we have shown that E < Ē, Ē          0     t

monotonically to Ē¯ . Hence there exists a t∗ such that for all t ≥ t∗ , E > Ē. If condition
                                                                           t

(4.3) holds, then it is immediate that Et > Ē for all t since E0 > Ē and Et is monotonically
increasing.




                                                                   28
8.5     Proof of Corollary 5

Taking the derivative of (8.56) with respect to lG implies steady state emissions is increasing
in S if and only if:

        1 − γ 1 − lG
                     − 1 > 0.                                                                  (8.57)
        1 − µ lG Ω

Using the definition of Ω from equation (2.12) results in:

        1−γ            1−                  −1
            > (1 − γ) 1−θ− (1 − µ) 1−θ− AG1−θ− .                                            (8.58)
        1−µ

Simplifying then gives

        AG > (1 − γ)θ (1 − µ)1−θ ,                                                             (8.59)

as required. Hence Ē is increasing in S if and only if condition (8.59) holds.
    Taking the derivative of (8.55) with respect to lG implies steady state output is decreasing
in S if and only if:

        1 − γ 1 − lG
                     −1<0                                                                      (8.60)
        1 + λ lG Ω


        1−γ    lG Ω
            <        ,                                                                         (8.61)
        1+λ   1 − lG

which we have shown holds in Section 8.3. Hence Ȳ is decreasing in S.
      Combining the results for Ē and Ȳ establishes the Corollary.

8.6     Proof of Proposition 6

For the first part, let conditions (3.5) and (3.6) hold so that an equilibrium exists. Sub-
stituting equilibrium conditions (2.4)-(2.8), and transfers (2.23) into the budget constraint
gives:

        c + k 0 − (1 − δ) k = Fk (KP , EP , lP ) k + Fl (KP , EP , lP ) + FE (KP , EP , lP ) EP +
                                AG FE (KG , EG , lG ) EG − rγKG −
                                lG (Fl (KP , EP , lP ) − AG Fl (KG , EG , lG )) − λYG .        (8.62)

Evaluating at k = K and using K = KG + KP results in:

        C + K 0 − (1 − δ) K = Fk (KP , EP , lP ) KP + Fl (KP , EP , lP ) + FE (KP , EP , lP ) EP +

                                                  29
                                         AG FE (KG , EG , lG ) EG + r (1 − γ) KG −
                                         lG (Fl (KP , EP , lP ) − AG Fl (KG , EG , lG )) − λYG .   (8.63)

Exploiting constant returns to scale and equation (2.12) results in:

      C + K 0 − (1 − δ) K = YP + YG = Y.                                                           (8.64)

Now we have shown in Section 6 that in equilibrium Y = ψK θ E  and hence equation (8.64)
is equivalent to the resource constraint (6.6).
    For the second part, consider any solution to the planning problem E and K 0 given
K. Let EG and EP be given by equations (6.2) and (6.3), respectively. Note that EG +
                                    1                ΩK
EP = E. Further, let KG = 1+Ω         K and KP = 1+Ω    , noting also that KP + KG = K.
Given these allocations, let r, τ , and w be defined according to equations (2.6)-(2.8). Let
S = lG (w − AG Fl (KG , EG , lG )). For equation (2.3), the above definitions of r, EG , EP , KG ,
and KP imply:
                                  θ−1                           !
                      KΩ                      Ω (1 − µ) E
                       
           (1 − γ) θ                                                  (1 − lG )1−θ− =
                     1+Ω                   1 − γ + Ω (1 − µ)
                           θ−1                           !
                 K                      (1 − γ) E
                   
                                                                1−θ−
           AG θ                                                lG     .                            (8.65)
                1+Ω                 1 − γ + Ω (1 − µ)

After canceling, we see that the above equation holds. It is easy to see that equation (2.4)
also holds given the above allocations. Thus the allocations of the planning problem are
consistent with firm maximization and zero profits in the subsidized sector, as required
by the competitive equilibrium. Further, let T R be defined by equation (2.23), then the
government budget constraint is also satisfied.
   It remains to show that the allocations are consistent with household maximization.
First, using the definitions of ψ and the allocations for K and E imply:
                                                    1−θ−                                 θ
                            aG ((1 + λ) Ω + 1 − γ) lG                            1+Ω
                                                                             
           θ   
      ψK E         =                                                                 KP        ·
                     (Ω (1 − µ) + 1 − γ)1− (1 + Ω)θ (1 − γ)1−                   Ω
                                            !
                      1 − γ + Ω (1 − µ)
                                         EP                                                        (8.66)
                           Ω (1 − µ)

                                  1−θ−
          aG ((1 + λ) Ω + 1 − γ) lG
      =                                 KPθ EP                                                    (8.67)
            (1 − γ)1− Ωθ+ (1 − µ)




                                                        30
               1−θ− 1−θ−
          A G lG    Ω          θ     aG (1 − γ) θ  1−θ−
     =                       K  E  +              K E l     .                                     (8.68)
         (1 − γ)1− (1 − µ)
                               P P
                                     Ωθ+ (1 − µ) P P G

Using the definition of Ω, equation (6.1), and that KG Ω = KP :
                                                                                !
                               1−θ−      aG (1 − γ)          θ Ω (1 − µ)            1−θ−
     =   KPθ EP   (1 − lG )            + θ+          (ΩKG )             EG        lG           (8.69)
                                         Ω (1 − µ)                 1−γ


     = KPθ EP (1 − lG )1−θ− + aG KGθ EG lG
                                            1−θ−
                                                  = Y.                                            (8.70)

Hence, given the allocations, production of the planning problem equals income in the com-
petitive equilibrium. Applying constant returns to scale and the above price and policy
definitions to the resource constraint then yields the budget constraint.
    Finally, combining equations (6.9) and (6.11) gives the Euler equation for the planning
problem:
                                                            
     uc (C, Q) = φβuc (C 0 , Q0 ) θψK θ−1 E  + 1 − δ .                                           (8.71)

Substituting in the definition of φ from equation (6.8) and ψ from (6.5) results in:

                          1+Ω          0   0
     uc (C, Q) =             1−γ βuc (C , Q ) ·
                         Ω + 1+λ
                                                           1−θ−
                                                                                              !
                                  aG ((1 + λ) Ω + 1 − γ) lG            θ−1 
                          θ                             θ       1− K    E +1−δ .                (8.72)
                            (Ω (1 − µ) + 1 − γ) (1 + Ω) (1 − γ)

Given either δ = 1 or γ = λ = 0, we have:

                                     AG (1 + Ω)1−θ lG1−θ−
                                                                                              !
     uc (C, Q) = βuc (C , Q ) θ 0   0
                                                                K θ−1 E  + 1 − δ .               (8.73)
                                (Ω (1 − µ) + 1 − γ) (1 − γ)1−

Inspection of equations (8.70), (6.6), and (8.73), which define the allocations of the planning
problem, and equations (3.1), (3.2), and (3.3), which define the aggregate allocations of
the competitive equilibrium, reveals that the planning problem is consistent with household
maximization in the competitive equilibrium if and only if:

              AG (1 + Ω)1−θ lG1−θ−
     r=θ                                 K θ−1 E  .                                              (8.74)
         (Ω (1 − µ) + 1 − γ) (1 − γ)1−

Using equation (6.2), we see that the above relation holds if and only if:

             AG (1 + Ω)1−θ lG
                            1−θ−
                                    θ−1 
     r=θ                   1−  K    EP .                                                       (8.75)
            (1 − µ) (1 − γ) Ω


                                                       31
Using equation (2.12), the above holds if and only if:
                      1−θ− 1−θ−
                 A G lG    Ω         θ−1 
        r=θ                    1− KP EP .                                                     (8.76)
                (1 − µ) (1 − γ)

The above equation holds by the definition of Ω and equation (2.6). Hence the allocations of
the planning problem are consistent with household maximization in the competitive equi-
librium and thus the allocations of the planning problem can be supported by a competitive
equilibrium.

8.7     Proof of Proposition 7

Imposing K 0 = K = K̄ on the Euler equation (8.71) and resource constraint (6.6), using
that either δ = 1 or γ = λ = 0 results in:
                                                  
        1 = β θψφK̄ θ−1 Ē  + 1 − δ                                                            (8.77)


                          !       1
                    φψθ          1−θ
                                                          
        K̄ =                           Ē 1−θ ≡ ζ Ē 1−θ                                        (8.78)
                    ρ+δ


        C̄ = ψ K̄ θ Ē  − δ K̄                                                                 (8.79)

                         !    θ                                    !    1
           φψθ               1−θ
                                                 φψθ                  1−θ
                                                                                 
        =ψ                         Ē   1−θ    −δ                            Ē 1−θ             (8.80)
           ρ+δ                                    ρ+δ

                1            θ
            ψ 1−θ (θφ) 1−θ (ρ + δ (1 − φθ))                                          
        =                                1                     Ē 1−θ ≡ ξ Ē 1−θ .              (8.81)
                         (ρ + δ)        1−θ



      Imposing the steady state conditions on equation (6.10) implies:
                                                                            
        uc C̄, Q̄ ψ K̄ θ Ē −1 = −uQ C̄, Q̄ QE Ē .                                           (8.82)

Using the values of C̄ and K̄ gives a single equation which determines Ē:
                                                                            −(1−θ−)
                                                       
        0 =  (ρ + δ) uc ξ Ē 1−θ , Q Ē                           ξ Ē        1−θ        +
                                                               
                                                                                       
                    (ρ + δ (1 − φθ)) uQ ξ Ē 1−θ , Q Ē                              QE Ē .    (8.83)

It is easy to see that the derivative of the right hand side of equation (8.83) with respect to


                                                                              32
Ē is negative given the assumptions. Hence an increase in any subsidy increases Ē if and
only if the derivative of the right hand side of equation (8.83) with respect to the subsidy is
positive.
   Recall that any subsidy s impacts equation (8.83) only through φ and ψ. Thus:

      ∂r.h.s.                                    1−−θ                             1−−θ
              =  (ρ + δ) ξ Ē 1−θ ucc (., .) Ē − 1−θ ξs +  (ρ + δ) uc (., .) Ē − 1−θ ξs +
        ∂s
                                                      
                                                                                    
                (ρ + δ (1 − φθ)) ucQ (., .) ξs Ē 1−θ QE Ē − δθuQ (., .) QE Ē φs .            (8.84)

From equation (8.83) and the definition of relative risk aversion, the above equation is positive
if and only if:
           "                                                  #
        ξs         ξ χs ucQ (., .)      
      −     R C̄ − 1 +      −            QE Ē Ēχ > 0,                                         (8.85)
        ξ              ξs χ   uc (., .)


      χ ≡ 1 − βθφ.                                                                              (8.86)

It is straightforward to establish that φ is increasing in all subsidies λ, µ, S, and γ, and
thus χ is decreasing in all subsidies. Therefore, given the assumptions, a sufficient condition
for the above inequality is ξs < 0: that subsidies decrease steady state consumption. Using
equation (8.81), it is tedious but straightforward to establish ξs < 0 given the conditions on
β and using equation (2.11). We have therefore established that the derivative of Ē with
respect to any subsidy is positive.


9   Appendix: Tables and Figures


 Industry           total OECD Subsidies        Year    Source
 Agriculture                  $318 Billion      2002    OECD (2003)
 Fishing                        $6 Billion      1999    OECD (2001)
 Energy                     $20-30 Billion      1999    Barde and Honkatukia (2004)
 Manufacturing               $43.7 Billion      1993    OECD (1998b)
 Transport                     $40 Billion      1998    Nash, Bickel, Rainer, Link, and Steward (2002)
 Water                         $10 Billion       n.a.   Barde and Honkatukia (2004)


Table 1: Total OECD subsidies in environmentally sensitive industries, in the most recent
year available, as reported in Table 7.2 and text of Barde and Honkatukia (2004).




                                                  33
                            Change in Capital Accumulation Following an Increase in Interest Subsidies

                 Kt+1




                                                    H(K;γ2), γ2>γ1

                                                                              Time path: Kt




                                                                           H(K;γ1)




                                                       K0                                                  Kt




     Figure 1: Dynamics of capital following an increase in subsidies γ, λ, or µ.


                                      Effect of an increase in interest subsidies on emissions
                  Et


                                                                                σG/σP > ηk




                  E0


                                                                                σG/σP < ηk



                  E




                  E0




                        0                t*
                                                                                                         time




Figure 2: Possible dynamics of emissions following an increase in subsidies γ, λ, or µ.




                                                             34
References

Antle, J., J. Lekakis, and G. Zanias (eds.), 1998, Agriculture, Trade and the Environment: The
  Imapct of Liberalization on Sustainable Development, Elgar, Northhampton, MA.

Bagwell, K., and R. W. Staiger, 2006, “Will International Rules on Subsidies Disrupt the World
  Trading System?,” American Economic Review, 96, 877–95.

Bajona, C., and D. L. Kelly, 2005, “Trade and the Environment With Pre-Existing Subsidies,”
  University of Miami working paper.

Bajona, C., and D. L. Kelly, 2006, “Trade and the Environment with Pre-Existing Subsidies: A
  Dynamic General Equilibrium Analysis,” University of Miami Department of Economics Working
  Paper.

Barde, J.-P., and O. Honkatukia, 2004, “Environmentally Harmful Subsidies,” in Tom Tietenberg,
  and Henk Folmer (ed.), The International Yearbook of Environmental and Resource Economics
  2004/2005 . chap. 7, pp. 254–288, Edward Elgar, Northampton, MA.

Bartz, S., and D. L. Kelly, 2006, “Economic Growth and the Environment: Theory and Facts,”
  Discussion Paper 2006-1, University of Miami, Department of Economics Working Paper.

Bartz, S., and D. L. Kelly, 2007, “Economic Growth and the Environment: Theory and Facts,”
  Resource and Energy Economics, forthcoming.

Bovenberg, A., and L. H. Goulder, 1996, “Optimal Environmental Taxation in the Presence of
  Other Taxes: General-Equilibrium Analyses,” American Economic Review, 86, 985–1000.

Brandt, L., and Z. Zhu, 2000, “Redistribution in a Decentralized Economy: Growth and Inflation
  in China Under Reform,” Journal of Political Economy, 108, 422–439.

Datta, M., L. Mirman, and K. Reffett, 2002, “Existence and Uniqueness of Equilibrium in Distorted
  Dynamic Economies With Capital and Labor,” Journal of Economic Theory, 103, 377–410.

Earnhart, D., and L. Lizal, 2002, “Effects of Ownership and Financial Status on Corporate Envi-
  ronmental Performance,” Discussion Paper 3557, Center for Economic Policy Research, CEPR
  Discussion Paper.

Galiani, S., P. Gertler, and E. Schargrodsky, 2005, “Water for Life: The Impact of the Privization
  of Water Services on Child Mortality,” Journal of Political Economy, 113, 83–120.

Gupta, S., and S. Saksena, 2002, “Enforcement of Pollution Control Laws and Firm Level Compli-
  ance: A Study of Punjab, India,” paper presented at 2nd World Congress of Environmental and
  Resource Economics, Monterey CA.


                                               35
Hettige, H., M. Huq, and S. Pargal, 1996, “Determinants of Pollution Abatement in Developing
  Countries: Evidence from South and Southeast Asia,” World Development, 24, 1891–1904.

Nash, C., P. Bickel, F. Rainer, H. Link, and L. Steward, 2002, “The Environmental Impact of
  Transport Subsidies,” OECD Workshop on Environmentally Harmful Subsidies, 7-8 November.

OECD, 1998b, Spotlight on Public Support to Industry, OECD, Paris.

OECD, 2001, Review of Fisheries in OECD Countries: Issues and Strategies, OECD, Paris.

OECD, 2003, Agricultural Policies in OECD Countries, Monitoring and Evaluation, OECD, Paris.

Pargal, S., and D. Wheeler, 1996, “Informal Regulation of Industrial Pollution in Developing Coun-
  tries: Evidence from Indonesia,” Journal of Political Economy, 104, 1314–27.

Parry, I. W. H., 1997, “Environmental Taxes and Quotas in the Presence of Distorting Taxes in
  Factor Markets,” Resource and Energy Economics, 19, 203–220.

Pasour, E. C. J., and R. R. Rucker, 2005, Plowshares and Pork Barrels: The Political Economy of
  Agriculture, The Independent Institute, Oakland, CA.

van Beers, C., and J. C. van den Bergh, 2001, “Perseverance of Perverse Subsidies and their Impact
  on Trade and Environment,” Ecological Economics, 36, 475–86.

Wang, H., and Y. Jin, 2002, “Industrial Ownership and Environmental Performance: Evidence
  from China,” Discussion Paper 2936, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper.

Wang, H., N. Mamingi, B. Laplante, and S. Dasgupta, 2002, “Incomplete Enforcement of Pollution
  Regulation: Bargaining Power of Chinese Factories,” World Bank working paper.

Yin, X., 2001, “A Dynamic Analysis of Overstaff in China’s State-Owned Enterprises,” Journal of
  Development Economics, 66, 87–99.




                                               36
