                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           COMPLEXITY AND FINANCIAL PANICS

                                        Ricardo J. Caballero
                                            Alp Simsek

                                       Working Paper 14997
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14997


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2009




We thank Mathias Dewatripont, Pablo Kurlat, Guido Lorenzoni, Juan Ocampo and seminar participants
at Cornell and MIT for their comments, and the NSF for financial support. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Ricardo J. Caballero and Alp Simsek. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Complexity and Financial Panics
Ricardo J. Caballero and Alp Simsek
NBER Working Paper No. 14997
May 2009, June 2009
JEL No. D8,E0,E5,G1

                                                 ABSTRACT

During extreme financial crises, all of a sudden, the financial world that was once rife with profit opportunities
for financial institutions (banks, for short) becomes exceedingly complex. Confusion and uncertainty
follow, ravaging financial markets and triggering massive flight-to-quality episodes. In this paper we
propose a model of this phenomenon. In our model, banks normally collect information about their
trading partners which assures them of the soundness of these relationships. However, when acute
financial distress emerges in parts of the financial network, it is not enough to be informed about these
partners, as it also becomes important to learn about the health of their trading partners. As conditions
continue to deteriorate, banks must learn about the health of the trading partners of the trading partners
of the trading partners, and so on. At some point, the cost of information gathering becomes too unmanageable
for banks, uncertainty spikes, and they have no option but to withdraw from loan commitments and
illiquid positions. A flight-to-quality ensues, and the financial crisis spreads.


Ricardo J. Caballero
MIT
Department of Economics
Room E52-373a
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
caball@mit.edu

Alp Simsek
MIT
alpstein@MIT.EDU
1    Introduction
The dramatic rise in investors’ and banks’ perceived uncertainty is at the core of the
2007-2009 U.S. …nancial crisis. All of a sudden, a …nancial world that was once rife
with pro…t opportunities for …nancial institutions (banks, for short), was perceived to be
exceedingly complex. Although the subprime shock was small relative to the …nancial
institutions’capital, banks acted as if most of their counterparties were severely exposed
to the shock (see Figure 1). Confusion and uncertainty followed, triggering the worst case
of ‡ight-to-quality that we have seen in the U.S. since the Great Depression.




Figure 1: The line corresponds to the TED spread in basis points (source: Bloomberg),
the interest rate di¤erence between the interbank loans (3 month LIBOR) and the US
government debt (3 month Treasury bills). An increase in the TED spread typically
re‡ects a higher perceived risk of default on interbank loans, that is, an increase in the
banks’perceptions of counterparty risk.


    In this paper we present a model of the sudden rise in complexity, followed by wide-
spread panic in the …nancial sector. In the model, banks normally collect information
about their direct trading partners which serves to assure them of the soundness of these
relationships. However, when acute …nancial distress emerges in parts of the …nancial
network, it is not enough to be informed about these partners, but it also becomes impor-
tant for the banks to learn about the health of their trading partners. And as conditions
continue to deteriorate, banks must learn about the health of the trading partners of the
trading partners, of their trading partners, and so on. At some point, the cost of informa-
tion gathering becomes too large and banks, now facing enormous uncertainty, choose to
withdraw from loan commitments and illiquid positions. A ‡ight-to-quality ensues, and
the …nancial crisis spreads.

                                            1
    The starting point of our framework is a standard liquidity model where banks (rep-
resenting …nancial institutions more broadly) have bilateral linkages in order to insure
against local liquidity shocks. The whole …nancial system is a complex network of link-
ages which functions smoothly in the environments that it is designed to handle, even
though no bank knows with certainty all the many possible connections within the net-
work (that is, each bank knows the identities of the other banks but not their exposures).
However, these linkages may also be the source of contagion when an unexpected event
of …nancial distress arises somewhere in the network. Our point of departure with the
literature is that we use this contagion mechanism not as the main object of study but
as the source of confusion and …nancial panic. During normal times, banks only need to
understand the …nancial health of their neighbors, which they can learn at low cost. In
contrast, when a signi…cant problem arises in parts of the network and the possibility of
cascades arises, the number of nodes to be audited by each bank rises since it is possible
that the shock may spread to the bank’s counterparties. Eventually the problem becomes
too complex for them to fully …gure out, which means that banks now face signi…cant
uncertainty and they react to it by retrenching into liquidity-conservation mode.
    This paper is related to several strands of literature. There is an extensive literature
that highlights the possibility of network failures and contagion in …nancial markets.
An incomplete list includes Allen and Gale (2000), Laguno¤ and Schreft (2000), Rochet
and Tirole (1996), Freixas, Parigi and Rochet (2000), Leitner (2005), Eisenberg and Noe
(2001), Cifuentes, Ferucci and Shin (2005) (see Allen and Babus (2008) for a recent
survey). These papers focus mainly on the mechanisms by which solvency and liquidity
shocks may cascade through the …nancial network. In contrast, we take these phenomena
as the reason for the rise in the complexity of the environment in which banks make
their decisions, and focus on the e¤ect of this complexity on banks’ prudential actions.
In this sense, our paper is related to the literature on ‡ight-to-quality and Knightian
uncertainty in …nancial markets, as in Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2008), Routledge
and Zin (2004) and Easley and O’Hara (2005); and also to the related literature that
investigates the e¤ect of new events and innovations in …nancial markets, e.g. Liu, Pan,
and Wang (2005), Brock and Manski (2008) and Simsek (2009). Our contribution relative
to this literature is in endogenizing the rise in uncertainty from the behavior of the …nancial
network itself. More broadly, this paper belongs to an extensive literature on ‡ight-to-
quality and …nancial crises that highlights the connection between panics and a decline in
the …nancial system’s ability to channel resources to the real economy (see, e.g., Caballero
and Kurlat (2008), for a survey).
    We build our argument in several steps. In Section 2 we …rst characterize the …nancial

                                              2
network and describe a rare event as a perturbation to the structure of banks’ shocks.
Speci…cally, one bank su¤ers an unfamiliar liquidity shock for which it was unprepared. We
next show that if banks can costlessly gather information about the network structure, the
spreading of this shock into precautionary responses by other banks is typically contained.
This scenario with no network uncertainty is the benchmark for our main results and is
similar (although with an interior equilibrium) to Allen and Gale (2000).
    Our main contribution is in Section 3, where we make information gathering costly. In
this context, if the cascade is small, either because the liquidity shock is limited or because
banks’bu¤ers are signi…cant, banks are able to gather the information they need about
their indirect exposure to the liquidity shock and we are back to the full information results
of Section 2. However, once cascades are large enough, banks are unable to collect the
information they need to rule out a severe indirect hit. Their response to this uncertainty
is to hoard liquidity and to retrench on their lending, which triggers a credit crunch. In
Section 4 we show that under certain conditions, the response in Section 3 can be so
extreme, that the entire …nancial system can collapse as a result of the ‡ight to quality.
The paper concludes with a …nal remarks section and several appendices.


2     The Environment and a Free-Information Bench-
      mark
In this section we …rst introduce the environment and the characteristics of the …nancial
network along with a shock which was unanticipated at the network formation stage (i.e.
the …nancial network was not designed to deal with this shock). We next characterize
the equilibrium for a benchmark case in which information gathering is free so that the
market participants know the …nancial network.


2.1    The Environment
There are three dates f0; 1; 2g. There is a single good (one dollar) that serves as numeraire,
which can be kept in liquid reserves or it can be loaned to production …rms. If kept in
liquid reserves, a unit of the good yields one unit in the next date. Instead, if a unit
is loaned to …rms at date 0, it then yields R > 1 units at date 2 if it is not unloaded
before this date. At date 1, the lender can unload the loan (e.g. by settling it with the
borrower at a discount) and receive r < 1 units. To simplify the notation, we assume
r 0 throughout this paper.


                                              3
Banks and Their Liquidity Needs
                                                                              2n
The economy has 2n continuums of banks denoted by fbj gj=1 . Each of these continuums
is composed of identical banks and, for simplicity, we refer to each continuum bj as bank
bj , which is our unit of analysis.1 Each bank bj has initial assets which consist of y units
of liquid reserves set aside for liquidity payments, y0 1 y units of ‡exible reserves set
aside for making new loans at date 0 (but which can also be hoarded as liquid reserves)
and 1 y y0 units of loans. The bank’s liabilities consist of a measure one of demand
deposit contracts. A demand deposit contract pays l1 > 1 at date 1 if the depositor is
hit by a liquidity shock and l2 > l1 at date 2 if the depositor is not hit by a liquidity
shock. Let ! j 2 [0; 1] be the measure of liquidity-driven depositors of bank bj (i.e. the
size of the liquidity shock experienced by the bank), which takes one of the three values
in f!; !L ; !H g with !H > !L and ! (!H + !L ) =2, and suppose

                               y = l1 !         and            (1       y) R = l2 !.

Note that, if the size of the liquidity shock is !, the bank that loans all of its ‡exible
reserves y0 at date 0 has assets just enough to pay l1 (resp. l2 ) to early (resp. late)
depositors. The central trade-o¤ in this economy will be whether the bank will loan its
‡exible reserves y0 (which it set aside for this purpose) or whether it will hoard some of
this liquidity as a precautionary response to a rare event that we describe below.

The Financial Network

The liquidity needs at date 1 may not be evenly distributed among banks, which highlights
one of the (many) reasons for an interlinked …nancial network. Moreover, the main source
of complexity later on will be confusion about the linkages between di¤erent banks. To
capture this possibility we let i 2 f1; ::; 2ng denote slots in a …nancial network and consider
a permutation : f1; ::; 2ng ! f1; ::; 2ng that assigns bank b (i) to slot i. We consider a
…nancial network denoted by:

                                   (1)        (2)        (3)                 (2n)        (1)
                      b( ) = b           !b         !b         ! :::: ! b           !b         ,   (1)

where the arc ! denotes that the bank in slot i (i.e., bank b (i) ) has a demand deposit in
the bank in the subsequent slot i + 1 (i.e., bank b (i+1) ) equal to

                                               z = (!          !L ) ;                              (2)
  1
      The only reason for the continuum is for banks to take other banks’decisions as given.


                                                         4
where we use modulo 2n arithmetic for the slot index i.2 We refer to bank b (i+1) as the
forward neighbor of bank b (i) (and similarly, to bank b (i) as the backward neighbor of
bank b (i+1) ). The possibility of confusion arises later on from banks knowing the identity
of other banks but not their particular linkages (i.e., the actual permutation ).
    As we formally describe in Appendix A.1 (and similar to Allen-Gale (2000)), in the
normal environment, the …nancial network facilitates liquidity insurance and enables liq-
uidity to ‡ow from banks that experience a low liquidity shock (!L ) to the banks that
experience a high liquidity shock (!H ), even when the …nancial network b ( ) is unknown
to the banks. Our focus is on the e¤ect of the …nancial interlinkages in case of an unan-
ticipated shock for which the …nancial network is not necessarily designed for, which we
describe next.

A Rare Event

At date 0 the banks learn that all banks will experience the average liquidity shock ! at
date 1, however, they also learn that one bank, bj , becomes distressed and loses    y of its
                                                                                    j
liquid assets. As we formally demonstrate below, the losses in the distressed bank b might
spill over to the other banks via the …nancial network b ( ), thus the banks’knowledge of
the …nancial network is potentially payo¤ relevant. In particular, this knowledge in‡uences
whether the banks use the ‡exible reserves y0 to make new loans or to hoard liquidity. We
are thus lead to describe the central feature of our model: the banks’ uncertainty about
the …nancial network b ( ).

Network Uncertainty and Auditing Technology

We let
                 B = fb ( ) j      : f1; ::; 2ng ! f1; ::; 2ng is a permutationg ,                  (3)

denote the set of possible …nancial networks. Each bank bj observes its slot i = 1 (j)
and the identities of the banks in its neighboring slots i 1 and i + 1. This information
narrows down the potential networks to the set:
                    8            2                     3                                 9
                    >
                    <              ~ (i 1) = (i 1)                                       >
                                                                                         =
                                 6                     7
           B j ( ) = b (~) 2 B j 4      ~ (i) = (i)    5 , where i =
                                                                                    1
                                                                                      (j) .
                    >
                    :                                                                    >
                                                                                         ;
                                   ~ (i + 1) = (i + 1)
   2
    In particular, i represents the slot with index i0 2 f1; ::; 2ng that is the modulo 2n equivalent of
integer i. For example, i = 2n + 1 represents the slot with index 1.




                                                   5
                    i= 4                         i= 4                         i= 4
                     b5                           b3                           b4

            i= 3            i= 5     i= 3                       i= 5   i= 3          i= 5
             b4              b3       b5                         b4     b5            b3




            i= 2            i= 6     i= 2                       i= 6   i= 2          i= 6
             b2              b6       b2                         b6     b2            b6

                    i= 1                         i= 1                         i= 1
                     b1                           b1                           b1


                    i= 4                         i= 4                         i= 4
                     b4                           b5                           b3

            i= 3            i= 5     i= 3                       i= 5   i= 3          i= 5
             b3              b5       b3                         b4     b4            b5




            i= 2            i= 6     i= 2                       i= 6   i= 2          i= 6
             b2              b6       b2                         b6     b2            b6

                    i= 1                         i= 1                         i= 1
                     b1                           b1                           b1



Figure 2: The …nancial network and uncertainty. The bottom-left box displays the
actual …nancial network. Each circle corresponds to a slot in the …nancial network, and in
this realization of the network, each slot i contains bank bi (i.e. (i) = i). The remaining
boxes show the other networks that bank b1 …nds plausible after observing its neighbors
(i.e. the set B 1 ( )). Bank b1 cannot tell how the banks fb3 ; b4 ; b5 g are ordered in slots
f3; 4; 5g.


Note that the bank bj does not know how the remaining banks (bj )j 2f  = (i 1); (i); (i+1)g are
assigned to the remaining slots (see Figure 2). In particular, each bank bj =    6 bj knows
that the bank bj is distressed, but it does not necessarily know the slot

                                                      1
                                            {=            (j)

of the distressed bank. This is key, since it means that a bank bj 6= bj does not necessarily
know how far removed it is from the distressed bank.
    Each bank bj can acquire more information about the …nancial network through an
auditing technology. At date 0, a bank bj in slot i (i.e. with j = (i)) can exert e¤ort
to audit its forward neighbor b (i+1) in order to learn the identity of this bank’s forward
neighbor b (i+2) . Continuing this way, a bank bj that audits a number, aj , of balance
sheets learns the identity of its aj + 1 forward neighbors and narrows the set of potential




                                                  6
…nancial networks to:
               8           2                                   3                         9
               >
               <                        ~ (i  1) = (i 1)                                 >
                                                                                         =
                           6                                   7
  Bj    j aj = b (~) 2 B j 4                     :::           5 , where i =
                                                                                    1
                                                                                      (j) .
               >
               :                                                                         >
                                                                                         ;
                                           j             j
                                   ~ (i + a + 1) = (i + a + 1)

We denote the posterior beliefs of bank bj with f j (: j ; aj ) which has support equal to
B j ( ; aj ) given assumption:
Assumption (FS). Each bank has a prior belief f j (:) over B with full support.
     In the example illustrated in Figure 2, if bank b1 audits one balance sheet, then it would
learn that bank b3 is assigned to slot 3 and it would narrow down the set of networks to
the two boxes at the left hand side of the bottom row in Figure 2.

Bank Preferences and Equilibrium

Consider a bank bj and denote the bank’s actual payments to early and late depositors
by q1j and q2j (which may in principle be di¤erent than the contracted values l1 and
l2 ). Because banks are in…nitesimal, they make decisions taking the payments of the
other banks as given. The bank makes the audit and liquidity hoarding decisions, aj 2
f0; 1:; ::; 2n 3g and y0j 2 [0; y0 ], at date 0 (equivalently, y0 y0j 2 [0; y0 ] denotes the
number of new loans the bank makes at date 0). At date 1, the bank chooses to withdraw
some of its deposits in the neighbor bank, which we denote by z j 2 [0; z], and it may also
unload some of its outstanding loans. The bank makes these decisions to maximize q1j
until it can meet its liquidity obligations to depositors, that is, until q1j = l1 . Increasing
q1j beyond l1 has no bene…t for the bank, thus once it satis…es its liquidity obligations, it
then tries to maximize the return to the late depositors q2j .
     We capture this behavior with the following objective function

                        v 1 q1j    l1 q1j + 1 q1j    l1 q2j    d aj ,                      (4)

where v : R+ ! R++ is a strictly concave and strictly increasing function and d (:) is an
increasing and convex function which captures the bank’s non-monetary disutility from
auditing. When the bank bj is making a decision that would lead to an uncertain outcome
for q1j ; q2j (which will be the case in Section 3), then it maximizes the expectation of the
expression in (4) given its posterior beliefs f j (: j ; aj ).
    Suppose that the depositors’ early/late liquidity shocks are observable, and a bank
which is able to pay its late depositors at least l1 at date 2 can refuse to pay the late


                                               7
                                   Figure 3: Timeline of events.


depositors if they arrive early.3 With this assumption, the continuation equilibrium for
bank bj at date 1 takes one of two forms. Either there is a no-liquidation equilibrium in
which the bank is solvent and pays

                                           q1j = l1 ; q2j   l1 ,                                     (5)

while the late depositors withdraw at date 2; or there is a liquidation equilibrium in which
the bank is insolvent, unloads all outstanding loans, and pays

                                           q1j < l1 ; q2j = 0,                                       (6)

while all depositors (including the late depositors) draw their deposits at date 1.
    Figure 3 recaps the timeline of events in this economy. We formally de…ne the equi-
librium as follows.

De…nition 1. The equilibrium is ahcollection of bank auditing, liquidity ihoarding, deposit
withdrawal, and payment decisions aj ( ) ; y0j ( ) ; z j ( ) ; q1j ( ) ; q2j ( ) j such that,
                                                                                      b( )2B
given the realization of the …nancial network b ( ) and the rare event, each bank bj maxi-
   3
    Without this assumption, there could be multiple equilibria for late depositors’early/late withdrawal
decisions. In cases with multiple equilibria, this assumption selects the equilibrium in which no late
depositor withdraws.


                                                     8
mizes expected utility in (4) according to its prior belief f j (:) over B, the insolvent banks
(with q1j ( ) < l1 ) unload all of their outstanding loans at date 1 and the late depositors
withdraw deposits early if and only if q2j ( ) < l1 (cf. Eqs. (5) and (6)).

   We next turn to the characterization of equilibrium. Note that for each …nancial
network b ( ) and for each bank bj , there exists a unique k 2 f0; ::; 2n 1g such that

                                           j = ({    k) ,

which we de…ne as the distance of bank bj from the distressed bank. As we will see,
the distance k will be the payo¤ relevant information for a bank bj that decides how
much liquidity to hoard at date 0 since it will determine whether or not the crisis that
originates at the distressed bank bj will cascade to bank bj . The banks b ({ 1) ; b ({) ; b ({+1) ,
respectively with distances 1; 0 and 2n 1, know their distances, but the remaining banks
(with distances k 2 f2; ::; 2n 2g) do not have this information a priori and they assign a
positive probability to each k~ 2 f2; ::; 2n 2g (they rule out k~ 2 f1; 2n 1g by observing
their forward and backwards neighbors). Note, however, that the bank bj can use the
auditing technology to learn about the …nancial network and, in particular, about its
distance from the distressed bank. A bank b ({ k) (with distance k) that audits aj               1
                                             j                            j
banks either learns its distance k (if k a + 1) or it learns that k a + 2.
    In the remaining half of this section, we characterize the equilibrium in a benchmark
case in which auditing is free so each bank learns its distance from the distressed bank.
In subsequent sections, we characterize the equilibrium with costly audit and compare it
with the free-information benchmark.


2.2     Free-Information Benchmark
We …rst describe a benchmark case in which auditing is free so each bank b ({ k) chooses
full auditing a ({ k) = 2n 3. In this context banks learn the whole …nancial network
b ( ) and, in particular, their distances.
    At date 0 all banks anticipate receiving a liquidity shock, !, at date 1 and have liquid
reserves equal to y = !l1 (plus y0 of ‡exible reserves), except for bank bj = b ({) which has
liquid reserves y     . At date 1, the distressed bank b ({) withdraws its deposits from the
forward neighbor bank. As we show in Appendix A.2, this triggers further withdrawals
until, in equilibrium, all cross deposits are withdrawn. That is

                                  zj = z      8 j 2 f1; ::; 2ng .                               (7)

                                                 9
In particular, bank b ( ) tries, but cannot, obtain any net liquidity through cross with-
drawals. The bank also cannot obtain any liquidity by unloading the loans at date 1, since
each unit of unloaded loan yields r       0. Anticipating that it will not be able to obtain
additional liquidity at date 1, the distressed bank b ({) hoards some its ‡exible reserves y0
by cutting new loans at date 0 in order to meet its liquidity demand at date 1.
   In order to promise late depositors at least l1 , a bank with no liquid reserves left at
the end of date 1 must have at least

                                                      (1    !) l1
                                   1   y     y0n =                                             (8)
                                                           R

units of loans. The level y0n is a natural limit on a bank’s liquidity hoarding (which plans
to deplete all of its liquidity at date 1) since any choice above this would make the bank
necessarily insolvent. If the amount of ‡exible reserves y0 is greater than y0n , then the bank
can hoard at most y0n of the ‡exible reserves while remaining solvent; or else it can hoard
all of the ‡exible reserves y0 . Combining the two cases, a bank’s bu¤er is given by

                                        = min fy0 ; y0n g .

A bank can accommodate losses in liquid reserves up to the bu¤er , but becomes insolvent
when losses are beyond . It follows that the distressed bank b ( ) will be insolvent
whenever
                                           > ;                                       (9)

that is, whenever its losses in liquid reserves are greater than its bu¤er. Suppose this is
the case so bank b ( ) is insolvent. Anticipating insolvency, this bank will hoard as much
                      ()                             ({)
liquidity as it can y0 = y0 (since it maximizes q1 ) and unloads all remaining loans at
date 1. Since the bank is insolvent, all depositors (including late depositors) arrive early
and the bank pays
                                                      ( +1)
                                ()   y + y0     + zq1
                              q1 =                          < l1 ,                      (10)
                                             1+z
                    ( +1)                   ( +1)
where recall that q1       denotes bank b           ’s payment to early depositors (which is equal
to l1 if bank b ( +1) is solvent).

Partial Cascades. Since bank b ({) is insolvent, its backward neighbor bank b ({ 1) will
experience losses in its cross deposit holdings, which, if severe enough, may cause bank
b ({ 1) ’s insolvency. Once the crisis cascades to bank b ({ 1) , it may then similarly cascade
to bank b ({ 2) , continuing its cascade through the network in this fashion.


                                                10
     We conjecture that, under appropriate parametric conditions, there exists a threshold
K 2 f1; ::; 2n 2g such that all banks with distance k K 1 are insolvent (there are
K such banks) while the banks with distance k K remain solvent. In other words, the
crisis will partially cascade through the network but will be contained after K 2n 2
banks have failed. We refer to K as the cascade size.
     Under this conjecture, bank b ( +1) , which has a distance 2n 1, is solvent. Therefore
   ( +1)             ()
q1       = l1 and q1 in Eq. (10) can be calculated explicitly. Consider now the bank
b ( 1) with distance 1 from the distressed bank. To remain solvent, this bank needs to
                                                             ()
pay l1 on its deposits to bank b ( 2) but it receives only q1 < l1 on its deposits from the
                                             ()
distressed bank b ( ) , so it loses z l1 q1      in cross-deposits. Hence, bank b ( 1) will
also go bankrupt if and only if its losses from cross-deposits are greater than its bu¤er,
           ()
z l1 q1        > , which can be rewritten as

                                                     ()
                                                q1        < l1          .                                  (11)
                                                                    z

If this condition fails, then the only insolvent bank is the original distressed bank and the
cascade size is K = 1. If this condition holds, then bank b ( 1) anticipates insolvency, it
                                                ( 1)
will hoard as much liquidity as it can, i.e. y0      = y0 and it will pay all depositors

                                                                                         ()
                                    (   1)            ()           y + y0 + zq
                               q1            = f q1                                           .            (12)
                                                                       1+z
                                                                                                           (i k)
   From this point onwards, a pattern emerges. The payment by an insolvent bank b
(with k 1) is given by
                                   ( k)        ( (k 1))
                                q1      = f q1
                                                                                                  (   k)
and this bank’s backward neighbor b (i (k+1)) is also insolvent if and only if q1 < l1 z .
Hence, the payments of the insolvent banks converge to the …xed point of the function
f (:) given by y + y0 , and if4
                                               y + y0 > l1                  ,                              (13)
                                                                        z
   4                                                      (   k)                (   (k 1))
    If condition (13) fails, then the sequence q1        = f q1               always remains below l1         z,
                                                                            k
and it can be checked that there is a full cascade, i.e. all banks are insolvent.




                                                              11
then (under Eq. (11)) there exists a unique K                        2 such that

                                       (   k)
                                  q1            < l1            for each k 2 f0; ::; K   2g   (14)
                                                        z
                              (   (K 1))
                     and q1                       l1        .
                                                        z

If 2n   2 is greater than the solution, K, to this equation, i.e. if

                                                   2n       2      K;                         (15)

then, Eq. (14) shows that (in addition to the trigger-distressed bank b ({) ) all banks
b ( k) with distance k 2 f1; ::; K 1g are insolvent since their losses from cross de-
posits are greater than their corresponding bu¤ers. In contrast, bank b ({ K) (that re-
          ( (K 1))
ceives q1             from its forward neighbor) is solvent, since it can meet its losses from
cross deposits by hoarding some liquidity while still promising the late depositors at
                     ( K)
least l1 (i.e. q2             l1 ). Since bank b ({ K) is solvent, all banks b ( k) with dis-
tance k 2 fK + 1; ::; 2n 1g are also solvent since they do not incur losses in cross-
                                                                     ( k)
deposits. Hence these banks do not hoard any liquidity, y0                 = 0, and they pay
     ( k)           ( k)
  q1      = l1 ; q2      = l2 , verifying our conjecture for a partial cascade of size K under
conditions (13) and (15).
     Since our goal is to study the role of network uncertainty in generating a credit crunch,
we take the partial cascades as the benchmark. The next proposition summarizes the
above discussion and also characterizes the aggregate level of liquidity hoarding, which
we use as a benchmark in subsequent sections.
Proposition 1. Suppose the …nancial network is realized as b ( ), auditing is free, and
conditions (9), (13) and (15) hold. For a given …nancial network b ( ), let { = 1 (j)
denote the slot of the distressed bank.
     (i) For the continuation equilibrium (at date 1): The banks’ equilibrium payments
     ( k)      ( k)
  q1      ; q2      are (weakly) increasing with respect to their distance k from the distressed
bank and there is a partial cascade of size K        2n 2 where K is de…ned by Eq. (14).
                                 K  1
In particular, banks b ( k) k=0 (with distance from the distressed bank k K 1) are
                                                 2n 1
insolvent while the remaining banks b ( k) k=K (with distance k K) are solvent.
                                                                    K 1
     (ii) For the ex-ante equilibrium (at date 0): Banks b ( k) k=0 hoard as much liquidity
                                                                                          2n 1
as they can and unload all of their existing loans at date 1, while banks b ( k) k=K+1
do not hoard any liquidity or unload any loans. Bank b ( K) hoards a level of liquidity
   ({ K)               ({ (K 1))
y0        = z l1 q1               which is just enough to meet its losses from cross deposits
(and does not unload any loans).

                                                            12
                      5
                      4
                      3
                      2
                      1
                      0
                           0    0.1        0.2        0.3            0.4   0.5

                     0.8

                     0.6

                     0.4

                     0.2

                      0
                           0    0.1        0.2        0.3            0.4   0.5




Figure 4: The free-information benchmark. The top …gure plots the cascade size
K as a function of the losses in the originating bank , for di¤erent levels of the ‡exible
reserves y0 . The bottom …gure plots the aggregate level of liquidity hoarding, F, for the
same set of fy0 g.


   The aggregate level of liquidity hoarding is:
                                      X                     (   K)
                                F         y0j = K y0 + y0            .                   (16)
                                      j


Discussion. Proposition 1 shows that, under appropriate parametric conditions, the
equilibrium features a partial cascade and the aggregate level of liquidity hoarding, F,
is roughly linear in the size of the cascade K (and is roughly continuous in ). Figure 4
demonstrates this result for particular parameterization of the model.
    The top panel of the …gure plots the cascade size K as a function of the losses in
the originating bank for di¤erent levels of the ‡exible reserves y0 . This plot shows
that the cascade size is increasing in the level of losses and decreasing in the level of
‡exible reserves y0 . Intuitively, with a higher and a lower y0 , there are more losses to
be contained and the banks have less emergency reserves to counter these losses, thus
increasing the spread of insolvency.
    The bottom panel plots the aggregate level of liquidity hoarding F, which is a measure
of the severity of the credit crunch, as a function of . This plot shows that F also increases
with and falls with y0 . This is an intuitive result: In the free-information benchmark
only the insolvent banks (and one transition bank) hoard liquidity, thus the more banks
are insolvent (i.e. the greater K) the more liquidity is hoarded in the aggregate. Note

                                                 13
also that F increases “smoothly”with .
    These results o¤er a benchmark for the next sections. There we show that once audit-
ing becomes costly, both K and F may be non-monotonic in y0 and, more importantly,
can jump with small increases in .


3     Endogenous Complexity and the Credit Crunch
We have now laid out the foundation for our main result. In this section we add the
realistic assumption that auditing is costly and demonstrate that a massive credit crunch
can arise in response to an endogenous increase in complexity once a bank in the network
is su¢ ciently distressed. In other words, when K is large, it becomes too costly for banks
to …gure out their indirect exposure. This means that their perceived uncertainty rises
and they eventually respond by hoarding liquidity as a precautionary measure (i.e., F
spikes).
    Note that, unlike in Section 2.2, we cannot simplify the analysis by solving the equilib-
rium for a particular …nancial network b ( ) in isolation, since, even when the realization
of the …nancial network is b ( ), each bank also assigns a positive probability to other
…nancial networks b (~) 2 B. As such, for a consistent analysis we must describe the
equilibrium for any realization of the …nancial network b ( ) 2 B (cf. De…nition 1).
    Solving this problem in full generality is cumbersome but we make assumptions on
the form of the adjustment cost function, the banks’objective function, and on the level
of ‡exible reserves, that help simplify the exposition. First, we consider a convex and
increasing cost function d (:) that satis…es

                     d (1) = 0       and      d (2) > v (l1 + l2 )   v (0) .               (17)

This means that banks can audit one balance sheet for free but it is very costly to audit
the second balance sheet. In particular, given the bank’s preferences in (4), the bank will
never choose toh audit the second
                             i     balance sheet and thus each bank audits exactly one
balance sheet, faj ( ) = 1gj        . Given these audit decisions and the actual …nancial
                                 b( )2B
network b ( ), a bank bj has a posterior belief f j (:j ;1) with support B j ( ;1), which is
the set of …nancial networks in which the bank j knows the identities of its neighbors
and its second forward neighbor. In particular, the bank b ( 2) learns its distance from
the distressed bank b ( ) (in addition to banks b ( 1) ; b ( ) ; b ( +1) which already have this
information from the outset). We denote the set of banks that know the slot of the



                                              14
distressed bank (and thus their distance from this bank) by

                            B know ( ) = b     (    2)
                                                         ;b       (   1)
                                                                           ;b   ()
                                                                                     ;b   ( +1)
                                                                                                  .

On the other hand, each bank b ( k) with k 2 f3; ::; 2n 2g learns that its distance
is at least 3 (i.e. k~  3), but otherwise assigns a probability in (0; 1) to all distances
k~ 2 f3; ::; 2n 2g. We denote the set of banks that are uncertain about their distance by

                         B uncertain ( ) = b   (        3)
                                                             ;b   (   4)
                                                                           ; :::; b   ({ (2n 2))
                                                                                                      .

    Second, we assume that the preference function v (:) in (4) is Leontie¤ v (x) =
(x1     1) = (1  ) with ! 1, so that the bank’s objective is:

             min
               j
                         1 q1j (~)   l1 q1j (~) + 1 q1j (~)                          l1 q2j (~)           d aj ( ) .   (18)
          b(~)2B ( ;1)


This means that banks evaluate their decisions according to the worst possible network
realization, b (~), which they …nd plausible.
    The third and last assumption is that

                                                   y0         y0n :                                                    (19)

That is, the bank has less ‡exible reserves than the natural limit on liquidity hoarding
de…ned in Eq. (8) (which also implies that the bu¤er is given by = y0 ). This condition
ensures that, in the continuation equilibrium at date 1, the banks that have enough
liquidity are also solvent (since, no matter how much of their ‡exible reserves they hoard,
they have enough loans to pay the late depositors at least l1 at date 2). We drop this
condition in the next section.
    We next turn to the characterization of the equilibrium under these simplifying as-
sumptions. The banks make their liquidity hoarding decision at date 0 and deposit with-
drawal decision at date 1 under uncertainty (before their date 1 losses from cross-deposits
are realized). At date 1 the distressed bank b ({) withdraws its deposits from the forward
neighbor which leads to the withdrawal of all cross deposits (see Eq. (7) and Appendix
A.2) as in the free-information benchmark. Thus, for any distressed bank, the only way
to obtain additional liquidity at date 1 is through hoarding liquidity at date 0, which we
characterize next.




                                                        15
A Su¢ cient Statistic for Liquidity Hoarding. Consider a bank b ({ k) other than
the original distressed bank (i.e., k > 0). A su¢ cient statistic for this bank to make
                                          ({ (k 1))
the liquidity hoarding decision is q1               (~)   l1 , which is the amount it receives in
equilibrium from its forward neighbor. In other words, to decide how much of its ‡exible
reserves to hoard, this bank only needs to know whether (and how much) it will lose in
                                                                         ({ (k 1))
cross-deposits. For example, if it knows with certainty that q1                    (~) = l1 (i.e. its
                                                                       ({ k)
forward neighbor is solvent), then it hoards no liquidity, i.e. y0            = 0. If it knows with
                  ({ (k 1))
certainty that q1           (~) < l1     =z (i.e. its forward neighbor will pay so little that this
                                                                                          ({ k)
bank will also be insolvent), then it hoards as much liquidity as it can, i.e. y0               = y0 .
More generally, if the bank b ({ k) hoards some y00 2 [0; y0 ] at date 0 and its forward
                        ({ (k 1))
neighbor pays x q1                (~) at date 1, then this bank’s payment can be written as

                          ({ k)                                                   ({ k)
                     q1           (~) = q1 [y00 ; x]             and         q2           (~) = q2 [y00 ; x] ,              (20)

where the functions q1 [y00 ; x] and q2 [y00 ; x] are characterized in Eqs. (26) and (27) in
                                                                            ({ (k 1))
Appendix A.2. At date 0, the bank does not necessarily know x = q1                    (~) and it
has to choose the level of liquidity hoarding under uncertainty.
    The characterization in Appendix A.2 also shows that q1 [y00 ; x] and q2 [y00 ; x] are
(weakly) increasing in x for any given y00 . That is, the bank’s payment is increasing
in the amount it receives from its forward neighbor regardless of the ex-ante liquidity
hoarding decision. Using this observation along with Eq. (20), the bank’s objective value
in (18) can be simpli…ed and its optimization problem can be written as

            max (1 fq1 [y00 ; xm ] l1 g q1 [y00 ; xm ] + 1 fq1 [y00 ; xm ]                         l1 g q2 [y00 ; xm ]) ,   (21)
           y00 2[0;y0 ]
                   n                                                   o
            m                     ({ (k 1))                   j
      s.t. x = min x j x = q1               (~) ; b (~) 2 B ( ;1) .

In words, a bank b ({ k) (with k > 0) hoards liquidity as if it will receive from its forward
neighbor the lowest possible payment xm .

Distance Based and Monotonic Equilibrium. Next we de…ne two equilibrium al-
location notions that are useful for further characterization. First, we say that the equi-
librium allocation is distance based if the bank’s equilibrium payment can be written only
as a function of its distance k from the distressed bank, that is, if there exists payment
functions Q1 ; Q2 : f0; ::; 2n 1g ! R such that

                                          (i k)              (i k)
                                     q1           ( ) ; q2           ( ) = (Q1 [k] ; Q2 [k])

                                                                     16
for all b ( ) 2 B and k 2 f0; ::; 2n 1g. Second, we say that a distance based equilibrium
is monotonic if the payment functions Q1 [k] ; Q2 [k] are (weakly) increasing in k. In words,
in a distance based and monotonic equilibrium, the banks that are further away from the
distressed bank yield (weakly) higher payments.
    We next conjecture that the equilibrium is distance based and monotonic (which we
verify below). Then, a bank b ({ k) ’s uncertainty about the forward neighbor’s payment
        ({ (k 1))
x = q1            (~) = Q1 [k 1] reduces to its uncertainty about the forward neighbor’s
distance k 1, which is equal to one less than its own distance k. Hence, the problem
                                                            (i (k 1))
in (21) can further be simpli…ed by substituting q1                     (~) = Q1 [k 1]. In particular,
since a bank b (i k) 2 B know ( ) (for k > 0) knows its distance k, it solves problem (21)
with xm = Q1 [k 1].
    On the other hand, a bank b (i k) 2 B uncertain ( ) assigns a positive probability to all
distances k~ 2 f3; :::; 2n h 2g. iMoreover, since the equilibrium is monotonic, its forward
neighbor’s payment Q1 k~ 1 is minimal for the distance k~ = 3, hence a bank b (i) 2
B uncertain ( ) solves problem (21) with xm = Q1 [2].
    We are now in a position to state the main result of this section, which shows that all
banks that are uncertain about their distances to the distressed bank hoard liquidity as if
they are closer to the distressed bank than they actually are.
    More speci…cally, all banks in B uncertain ( ) hoard the level of liquidity that the bank
with distance k~ = 3 would hoard in the free-information benchmark. When the cascade
size is su¢ ciently large (i.e. K       3) so that the bank with distance k~ = 3 in the free-
information benchmark would hoard extensive liquidity, all banks in B uncertain ( ) with
actual distances k > K also hoard large amounts of , even though they end up not needing
it.
                                  j             j              j
    To state the result, we let y0;f ree ( ) ; q1;f ree ( ) ; q2;f ree ( ) j denote the liquidity hoard-
ing decisions and payments of banks in the free-information benchmark for each …nancial
network b ( ) 2 B (characterized in Proposition 1).

Proposition 2. Suppose assumptions (FS), (17), and (18) are satis…ed and conditions
(9), (13), (15), and (19) hold. For a given …nancial network b ( ), let { = 1 (j) denote
the slot of the distressed bank.
    (i) For the continuation equilibrium (at date 1): The equilibrium allocation is distance
based and monotonic. The cascade size in the continuation equilibrium is the same as in
                                                                    K 1
the free-information benchmark, that is, at date 1, banks b ({ k) k=0 are insolvent while
                2n 1
banks b ({ k) k=K are solvent where K is de…ned in Eq. (14).
    (ii) For the ex-ante equilibrium (at date 0): Each bank bj 2 B know ( ) hoards the same


                                                  17
level of liquidity y0j ( ) = y0;f
                              j
                                  ree ( ) as in the free-information benchmark, while each bank
 j       uncertain              j            ( 3)
b 2 B              ( ) hoards y0 ( ) = y0;f ree ( ), which is the level of liquidity bank b ({ 3)
would hoard in the free-information benchmark.
    For the aggregate level of liquidity hoarding, there are three cases depending on the
cascade size K:
    If K        2, then the crisis in the free-information benchmark would not cascade to
         ({ 3)                                               ({ 3)
bank b         , which would hoard no liquidity, i.e. y0;f ree ( ) = 0. Thus, each bank bj 2
B uncertain ( ) hoards no liquidity and the aggregate level of liquidity hoarding is equal to
the benchmark Eq. (16).
    If K = 3, then the crisis in the free-information benchmark would cascade to and stop
                                                                               ({ 3)
at bank b ({ 3) , which would hoard an intermediate level of liquidity y0;f ree ( ) 2 [0; y0 ].
                                                      ({ 3)
Thus, each bank bj 2 B uncertain ( ) hoards y0;f ree ( ) and the aggregate level of liquidity
hoarding is:
                                      X j                          ( 3)
                               F=         y0 = 3y0 + (2n 4) y0;f ree .                      (22)
                                   j

    If K       4, then in the free-information benchmark bank b ({ 3) would be insolvent
                                                           ({ 3)
and would hoard as much liquidity as it can, i.e. y0f ree = y0 . Thus, each bank bj 2
B uncertain ( ) hoards as much liquidity as it can and the aggregate level of liquidity hoarding
is:
                                        X j
                                  F=        y0 = (2n 1) y0 .                                (23)
                                         j

    The proof of this result is relegated to Appendix A.2 since most of the intuition is
provided in the discussion preceding the proposition. Among other features, the proof
veri…es that the equilibrium allocation at date 1 is distance based and monotonic, and
that the cascade size is the same as in the free-information benchmark. The date 0
liquidity hoarding decisions are characterized as in part (ii) since the payments Q1 [k 1]
for k 2 f1; 2; 2n 1g (that a bank b ({ k) 2 B know ( ) with k > 0 expects to receive) and
the payment Q1 [2] (that the banks in B uncertain ( ) e¤ectively expect to receive) are the
same as their counterparts in the free-information benchmark.

Discussion. The plots in Figure 5 are the equivalent to those in the free-information
case portrayed in Figure 4. The top panel plots the cascade size K as a function of
the losses in the originating bank . The parameters satisfy condition (19) so that the
cascade size in this case is the same as the cascade size in the free-information benchmark
characterized in Proposition 1, and both …gures coincide.
   The key di¤erences are in the bottom panel, which plots the aggregate level of liquidity

                                               18
                     5
                     4
                     3
                     2
                     1
                     0
                         0     0.1       0.2        0.3      0.4      0.5


                     6


                     4


                     2


                     0
                         0     0.1       0.2        0.3      0.4      0.5




Figure 5: The costly-audit equilibrium. The top panel plots the cacade size K as a
function of the losses in the originating bank for di¤erent levels of the ‡exible reserves
y0 . The bottom panel plots aggregate level of liquidity hoarding F for the same set of
fy0 g. The dashed lines in the bottom panel reproduce the free-information benchmark in
Figure 4 for comparison.


hoarding F as a function of . The solid lines correspond to the costly audit equilibrium
characterized in Proposition 2, while the dashed lines reproduce the free-information
benchmark also plotted in Figure 4. These plots demonstrate that, for low levels of K (i.e.
for K < 3), the aggregate level of liquidity hoarding with costly-auditing is the same as the
free-information benchmark, in particular, it increases roughly continuously with . As
K switches from below 3 to above 3, the liquidity hoarding in the costly audit equilibrium
make a very large and discontinuous jump. That is, when the losses (measuring the
severity of the initial shock) are beyond a threshold, the cascade size becomes so large
that banks are unable to tell whether they are connected to the distressed bank. All
uncertain banks act as if they are closer to the distressed bank than they actually are,
hoarding much more liquidity than in the free-information benchmark and leading to a
severe credit crunch episode. This is our main result.
    Note also that the aggregate level of liquidity hoarding (and the severity of the credit
crunch) is not necessarily monotonic in the level of ‡exible reserves y0 . For example,
when = 0:5, Figure 5 shows that providing more ‡exibility to the banks by increasing
y0 actually increases the level of aggregate liquidity hoarding. That is, at low levels of
 , an increase in ‡exibility stabilizes the system but the opposite may take place when
the shock is su¢ ciently large. Intuitively, if the increase in ‡exibility is not su¢ cient


                                               19
to contain the …nancial panic (by reducing the cascade size to manageable levels), more
‡exibility back…res since it enables banks to hoard more liquidity and therefore exacerbate
the credit crunch.


4     The Collapse of the Financial System
Until now, the uncertainty that arises from endogenous complexity a¤ects the extent of
the credit crunch but not the number of banks that are insolvent, K. In this section we
show that if banks have “too much”‡exibility, in the sense that condition (19) no longer
holds and
                                     y0 2 (y0n ; 1 y]                               (24)

(which also implies = y0n ), then the rise in uncertainty itself can increase the number of
insolvent banks.
    The reason is that a large precautionary liquidity hoarding compromises banks’long
run pro…tability by giving up high return R for low return 1. In this context, even if the
worst outcome anticipated by a bank does not materialize, it may still become insolvent
if su¢ ciently close (but farther than K) from the distressed bank. In other words, a
bank’s large precautionary reaction improves its liquidation outcome when very close to
the distressed bank but it does so at the cost of raising its vulnerability with respect to
more benign scenarios. Since ex-post a large number of banks may …nd themselves in the
latter situation, there can be a signi…cant rise in the number of insolvencies as a result of
the additional ‡exibility.
    The analysis is very similar to that in the previous section. In particular, a bank’s
payment still depends on its choice y00 2 [0; y0 ] at date 0 and its forward neighbor’s
                 ({ (k 1))
payment x q1               (~) at date 1. That is:

                           ({ k)                               ({ k)
                      q1           (~) = q1 [y00 ; x] and q2           (~) = q2 [y00 ; x]

for some functions q1 [y00 ; x] and q2 [y00 ; x]. However, the characterization of the piecewise
functions q1 [y00 ; x] and q2 [y00 ; x] changes a little when condition (19) is not satis…ed. In
particular, these functions are identical to those in (26) and (27) in Appendix A.2 (as in
Section 3) but now there is an additional insolvency region:

                                           y00 > y0u [(l1    x) z] :

The critical new element is the bound y0u [(l1              x) z]. This is a function of the losses from

                                                     20
cross-deposits and is calculated as the level of liquidity hoarding above which the bank’s
loans and liquid reserves (net of losses) would not be su¢ cient to pay the late depositors
at least l1 . That is, y0u [(l1 x) z] is the solution to

                R (1     y         y0u [(l1       x) z]) + y0u [(l1          x) z]     (l1      x) z = l1 (1   !) .

    We refer to scenarios where y00 > y0u [(l1 x) z] as, for lack of a better jargon, scenarios
of precautionary insolvency.
    The functions q1 [y00 ; x] and q2 [y00 ; x] remain (weakly) increasing in x. Moreover, we
conjecture as before that the equilibrium is monotonic and distance based (which we
verify below), so the banks’liquidity hoarding decisions still solve problem (21). It can
be veri…ed that all banks (except potentially bank b ({+1) ) hoard the level of liquidity
characterized in part (ii) of Proposition 2. In particular, all banks bj 2 B uncertain ( )
hoard the level of liquidity that the bank with distance k~ = 3 would hoard in the free-
information benchmark. However, part (i) of the proposition, which characterizes the
equilibrium at date 1, changes once y0 exceeds y0n .
    We divide the cases by the cascade size: K             2; K = 3, and K       4. In the …rst
two of these cases there is no additional panic relative to the case where banks’‡exibility
is limited. If K      2, each bank bj 2 B uncertain ( ) hoards y0j = 0. The date 1 equilib-
rium in this case is as described in part (i) of Proposition 2, in particular, there are no
precautionary insolvencies and the cascade size is equal to K. Similarly, if K = 3, each
                                              ({ 3)
bank bj 2 B uncertain ( ) hoards y0j = y0;f ree      y0n (where the inequality follows since the
transition bank b ({ 3) is solvent in the free-information benchmark). Since y0j           y0n , it
can be seen that y0j y0u [(l1 x) z], so the banks in B uncertain ( ) are solvent.5 It follows
that there are no precautionary insolvencies and the equilibrium is again as described in
part (i) of Proposition 2, with a cascade size equal to K = 3.
    The new scenarios arise when K 4. In this case, each bank bj 2 B uncertain ( ) hoards
y0j = y0 > y0n , and may experience a precautionary insolvency depending on its losses from
   5
       To see this, …rst note that y0j            y0n , which implies

                                   (R    1) y0j      Ry0n   y0j = (1         y) R     (1     !) l1   y0j ,

where the equality follows from Eq. (8). Combining this inequality with the inequality y0j                            (l1   x) z
(since K 3, the banks in B uncertain ( ) have su¢ cient liquid reserves at date 1) leads to

                                        (1    y) R     (1 !) l1        (l1     x) z
                             y0j                                                      = y0u [(l1     x) z] :
                                                         R 1

  Note also that condition (19) implies y0j                 y0     y0n and thus rules out precautionary insolvencies by
the above steps.


                                                                  21
cross-deposits. To analyze this case, …rst note that the bound y0u [(l1 x) z] is decreasing
in (l1 x) z, and thus increasing in x. That is, the more a bank receives from its forward
neighbor, the higher the bound above which it will experience a precautionary insolvency.
Second, note the inequality, y0u [0] < 1 y (which follows from some algebra and using
l2 =l1 < R). Then, there are two subcases to consider depending on whether or not the
level of ‡exible reserves y0 is greater than y0u [0] (which is the highest value of the bound
y0u [(l1 x) z]).
     Subcase 1. If y0 is in the interval (y0u [0] ; 1 y], then y0 is always greater than the
upper bound y0u [(l1 x) z] and a bank bj experiences a precautionary insolvency regard-
less of the amount x it receives from its forward neighbor. In particular, all banks in
  b ({) ; :::; b ({ (2n 2)) are insolvent. It can be veri…ed that the informed bank b ({+1) averts
                                       ({+1)
insolvency by hoarding some y0                   y0n (see Appendix A.2).
     Subcase 2. If y0 2 (y0n ; y0u [0]), then there exists a unique x [y0 ] 2 (l1     =z; l1 ) that
solves
                                         y0u [(l1 x [y0 ]) z] = y0 .                           (25)

In this case, a bank bj that hoards y0 of liquidity is insolvent if and only if it receives
from its forward neighbor x < x [y0 ] (so that y0u [(l1 x) z] < y0 ). By a similar analysis to
that in Section 2.2 for the partial cascades (which we carry out in Appendixn         A.2), it can
                                                                                                 o
                                                                                           ^
be checked that there exists K 2 [K; 2n 1] such that the banks b ; ::; b ({ (K 1))
                               ^                                                ({)
                                n                            o
                                    (  ^)
                                     { K          ({ (2n 1))
are insolvent while the banks b           ; ::; b              are solvent. In other words, there
is a partial cascade which is at least as large as (and potentially greater than) the partial
cascade in the free-information benchmark.
    We summarize our …ndings in the following proposition.6

Proposition 3. Suppose assumptions (FS), (17) and (18) are satis…ed and conditions
(9), (13), (15) hold. Suppose also that condition (24) (which is the opposite of condition
   6
       Given the possibility of precautionary insolvencies, one may also wonder whether there could be
multiple equilibria due to banks’coordination failures. Suppose, for example, K = 3, so that the crisis is
contained after 3 banks fail. Could there also be a bad equilibrium in which all banks hoard the maximum
level of liquidity, and their liquidity hoarding decisions are justi…ed since their forward neighbors also
hoard the maximum level of liquidity and experience a precautionary insolvency (thus paying a small
q1j )?
    This kind of coordination failure is not possible in our setup, precisely because of conditions (13)
and (15). These conditions ensure that bank b ({+1) is always solvent, even if all other banks hoard the
maximum level of liquidity and experience precautionary insolvencies. To see this, note that the losses
from cross-deposits decrease as we move away from the distressed bank and eventually q ({+2) l1        =z.
Since bank b ({+1) expects to receive at least l1    =z from its forward neighbor, it can avoid insolvency
by hoarding an intermediate level of liquidity. Hence, it is never optimal for bank b ({+1) to undergo a
precautionary insolvency. But once we …x q ({+1) = l1 , the rest of the equilibrium is uniquely determined
as described above, that is, there is no coordination failure among banks.

                                                   22
(19)) holds. For a given …nancial network b ( ), let { = 1 (j) denote the slot of the
distressed bank.
    (i) For the ex-ante equilibrium (at date 0): Each bank bj 2 b ({) ; b ({ 1) ; b ({ 2)
B know ( ) hoards the same level of liquidity y0j ( ) = y0;f     j
                                                                    ree ( ) that it would hoard in the
                                                                                               ( 3)
free-information benchmark, while each bank b 2 B      j      uncertain
                                                                        ( ) hoards y0j ( ) = y0;f ree ( ),
which is the level of liquidity the bank b ({ 3) would hoard in the free-information bench-
                                              ({+1)
mark. The bank bj 2 b ({+1) hoards y0               ( )    y0n which is just enough to avert insol-
vency.
    (ii) For the continuation equilibrium (at date 1): The equilibrium allocation is dis-
tance     based and monotonic.        There exists a unique       K^ 2 [K; 2n 1] such that banks
n                         o                              n                          o
                    ^                                            ^
  b ({) ; ::; b ({ (K 1)) are insolvent while banks b ({ K ) ; ::; b ({ (2n 1)) are solvent. The
cascade size K     ^ is potentially larger than the cascade size K in the free-information bench-
mark. In particular, there are two cases:
    If K     3, then each bank bj 2 B uncertain ( ) hoards some y0j ( )             y0n , and avoids a
precautionary insolvency. The cascade size in this case is identical to the free-information
benchmark, i.e. K  ^ = K.
    If K     4, then each bank bj 2 B uncertain ( ) hoards y0j ( ) = y0 > y0n , which may lead
to a precautionary insolvency. There are two sub-cases:
         If y0 2 (y0u [0] ; 1 y], all banks bj 2 B uncertain ( ) are insolvent and the cascade
size is given by K^ = 2n 1 > K 4.
         If y0 2 (y0n ; y0u [0]], there exists a unique x [y0 ] 2 (l1   =z; l1 ) characterized by Eq.
                           j       uncertain
(25) such that bank b 2 B                    ( ) is insolvent if and only if its forward neighbor’s
payment is below x [y0 ]. The cascade size is an intermediate level K        ^ 2 [K; 2n 1].


Discussion. Figure 6 plots the cascade size K      ^ as a function of , for di¤erent levels of
the ‡exible reserves y0 . For comparison, the dashed lines plot the cascade size K in the
free-information benchmark for the same parameters. The top panel corresponds to the
case in which y0       y0n , i.e. when condition (19) holds. By Proposition 2, in this case
there are no precautionary insolvencies and the cascade size is the same as the cascade
size in the free-information benchmark. The second panel corresponds to a higher level
of y0 that satis…es y0 > y0n . In this case, precautionary insolvencies are possible, and for
su¢ ciently large more banks are insolvent in the costly audit benchmark than in the
free-information benchmark, i.e. K     ^ > K. The third panel shows that, as we increase
y0 , a su¢ ciently large shock may trigger a collapse of the whole …nancial system (i.e.,
K^ = 2n 1).
     The bottom panel in Figure 6 shows that as y0 continues to rise, then at some point the

                                                   23
                       6

                       4

                       2

                       0
                           0   0.1   0.2   0.3    0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8

                       6

                       4

                       2

                       0
                           0   0.1   0.2   0.3    0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8

                      60

                      40

                      20

                       0
                           0   0.1   0.2   0.3    0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8

                       3

                       2

                       1

                       0
                           0   0.1   0.2   0.3    0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8




Figure 6: The costly-audit equilibrium with precautionary insolvencies. Each
one of the four panels plots the cascade size K^ as a function of for a di¤erent level of
the ‡exible reserves y0 (in increasing order of y0 from top to bottom). The dashed lines
plot the cascade size K in the free-information benchmark.


ampli…cation disappears and again K    ^ = K. That is, the e¤ect of the ‡exible reserves y0
on the size of the cascade K ^ is non-monotonic: The whole …nancial system collapses with
an intermediate level of y0 , but the health of the …nancial system is restored (and, in fact,
is stronger) with su¢ ciently high levels of y0 . The intuition for this non-monotonicity is
the same as the intuition for the non-monotonic e¤ect of y0 on F. Increasing the level of
‡exible reserves y0 reduces the cascade size K in the free-information benchmark. If this
increase in ‡exibility is not su¢ ciently large, K does not fall to manageable levels and the
…nancial panic remains. As long as there is a …nancial panic, the increase in y0 back…res
and, in the current case, it also ampli…es the cascade by generating more precautionary
insolvencies. However, if the increase in y0 is su¢ ciently large, it may end the …nancial
panic and restore the health of the …nancial system.


5     Final Remarks
Our model captures what appears to be a central feature of …nancial panics: During
severe …nancial crises the complexity of the environment rises dramatically, and this in
itself causes confusion and …nancial retrenchment. The perception of counterparty risk
arises even in transactions among apparently sound …nancial institutions engaged in long


                                                 24
term relationships. All of a sudden, economic agents are faced with massive uncertainty
as things are no longer business-as-usual. The collapse of Lehman Brothers during the
current …nancial crisis is one such instance, which froze essentially all private credit mar-
kets and triggered massive run downs of credit lines and withdrawals even from the safest
money market funds.
    In the model we capture the complexity of the environment with the size of the partial
cascades. When these cascades are small, banks only need to understand the …nancial
health of their immediate neighbors to make their decisions. In contrast, when …nancial
conditions worsen and cascades grow, banks need to understand and be informed about a
larger share of the network. At some point, this is simply too costly and banks withdraw
from intermediation rather than risk exposure to enormous uncertainty, which triggers a
‡ight to quality.
    We also showed that banks’ ‡exibility, de…ned as their ability to hoard liquidity by
not extending new loans or by selling illiquid assets while in distress, makes it harder
for large cascades to develop, but if they do develop they can trigger more severe credit
crunches and even a collapse in the …nancial system. Intuitively, a gain in ‡exibility is
very useful if it succeeds in containing panic, but it can be counterproductive if it does
not as it facilitates banks’withdrawal from intermediation.
    An aspect we did not explore in this paper but one which we are currently pursuing
in a related work, is that of secondary markets for loans at date 0. Our preliminary
…ndings point to yet another ampli…cation aspect of the mechanism we highlight in this
paper: With full information, the distant banks (i.e., the banks with k > K) are the
natural buyers of the loans sold by the distressed banks. However, once distant banks
face uncertainty and become worried that they may be too close to the distressed bank,
they cease to buy loans from these banks as they would rather hoard their liquidity, which
exacerbates the network’s distress.
    There are some obvious policy conclusions that emerge from our framework. For ex-
ample, there is clearly scope for having banks hold a larger bu¤er than they would be
privately inclined to do. Also, transparency measures, by reducing the cost of gathering
information, increase the resilience of the system to a lengthening in potential cascades.
There is even an argument to limit banks’ ‡exibility to cut loan commitments. How-
ever, we are interested in going beyond these observations, and in particular in exploring
the impact of policies that modify the structure of the network. For example, there is
an emerging consensus that the prevalence of bilateral OTC markets for CDS transac-
tions compounded the confusion and complexity of the current …nancial crisis, and that
it is imperative to organize these transactions in well capitalized exchanges to prevent

                                             25
a recurrence. Our framework can help with the formal analysis of this type of policy
considerations. We leave this analysis for future research.


A      Appendix
A.1     The Normal Environment
The analysis in the text characterizes the equilibrium following a rare event for which the
…nancial network is not prepared. In this Appendix, we describe the functioning of the
…nancial network in the normal environment. In particular, we show that the …nancial
network enables the banks to insure against heterogenous liquidity shocks and facilitates
the ‡ow of liquidity across banks, even if the banks are uncertain about the network
structure.
    In the normal environment, there are three aggregate states of the world, denoted by
s (0), s (r) and s (g), revealed at date 0. In state s (0) all banks expect to receive at date 1
the same liquidity shock !. The states s (r) and s (g) are realized with equal probability
and the liquidity shocks in these states are heterogeneous across banks. More speci…cally,
the banks are divided half and half between two types: red and green. In state s (r) (resp.
s (g)), the banks with red type (resp. green type) expect to receive a high liquidity shock,
!H , and the other banks expect to receive a low liquidity shock, !L . This means that in
states s (r) and s (g) there is enough aggregate liquidity but there is a need to transfer
liquidity across banks.
    To transfer liquidity in states s (r) and s (g), the banks form the …nancial network of
bilateral deposits in (1). We say that the …nancial network is consistent if all odd slots
(resp. all even slots) contain banks of the same type, which means that red and green
type banks alternate around the …nancial circle. We restrict the set of feasible networks
to consistent ones (as opposed to, for example, any circular network in which banks may
be arbitrarily ordered around the circle), since these networks ensure that each bank that
needs liquidity has deposits on a bank with excess liquidity, facilitating bilateral liquidity
insurance (see below) with the minimally required level of cross-deposits z in (2).
    Banks’ types and the …nancial network are realized as follows: First the types of
banks are realized at random (half of the banks become red type and the other half green
type); then a particular consistent …nancial network b ( ) (with respect to these types) is
realized. Banks’types are their private information, thus the set B in (3) represents the
set of consistent …nancial networks from an ex-ante point of view (i.e. before the types
of the banks are realized). This shock structure ensures that the actual realization of the

                                              26
   Figure 7: Timeline of events, for both the normal environment and the rare event.


…nancial network is always consistent while the banks’ uncertainty about the …nancial
network is still described as in the rare event case. In particular, a bank bj observes the
slots of its neighbors (and since the network is consistent, it also indirectly learns the
types of its neighbors), but it does not know the slots (or the types) of the remaining
banks (bj )j 2f                                                  j
               = (i 1); (i); (i+1)g (see Figure 2). By auditing a balance sheets, the bank can
further narrow down the set of possible networks to B j ( j aj ).
    Figure 7 recaps the timeline of events in this economy both for the normal environment
and the rare event analyzed in the main text. Note that the rare event analyzed in the
main text is characterized by an unanticipated aggregate state sj (0) which is very similar
to one of the states in the normal environment (i.e. the state s (0)) except for the fact
that one bank, bj , becomes distressed and loses of its liquid reserves.
    The equilibrium in the normal environment is a collection of bank
auditing,
h               liquidity hoarding, deposit      i    withdrawal, and payment decisions
             j                  j        j
   aj ( ) ; y0 ( ) ; z j ( ) ; q1 ( ) ; q2 ( ) j     such that, for each realization of the
                                        b( )2B
…nancial network b ( ) and the aggregate state in fs (0) ; s (r) ; s (g)g, each bank bj makes
decisions that maximize the preferences in (4), and the late depositors withdraw deposits
early if and only if q2j < l1 (cf. Eqs. (5) and (6)). We next characterize this equilibrium.

The Normal Functioning of the Financial Network. We claim that, in the normal
environment, the …nancial network facilitates liquidity ‡ow and enables each bank bj to
pay the contracted values q1j = l1 ; q2j = l2 in each state of the world. Suppose that a

                                             27
consistent …nancial network, b ( ) and state s (r) is realized, and suppose without loss
of generality that red type banks are assigned to odd slots (the case in which red type
banks are assigned to even slots is symmetric). It su¢ ces to prove the statement for this
case since the case in which s (g) is realized is symmetric to the s (r) case, and the case
in which s (0) is realized is trivial.
    We conjecture (and verify below) that each bank bj chooses not to audit (for any
positive audit costs d (:) > 0) and hoards no liquidity, i.e. aj = 0 and y0j = 0. Consider
the equilibrium at date 1. A red type bank, b (2i 1) , (which is assigned to an odd slot by
assumption) needs liquidity so it draws its deposits from the forward neighbor bank, i.e.
chooses z (2i 1) = z. For each green type bank, b (2i) , regardless of the …nancial network
in B (2i) ( ), drawing z (2i) 2 [0; z] deposits leads to the payments q (2i) = l1 and

                                                        (2i)           (2i)
                             (2i)       (1   y) R + z     l1 + z   z          l2
                        q2          =                                              .
                                                        1 !L

Since l2 > l1 and the preferences are given by (4), the green type banks do not draw their
deposits regardless of their beliefs f (2i) (: j ), i.e. they choose z (2i) = 0. It follows that
liquidity ‡ows through the network at date 1 even though each bank is uncertain about the
network structure. In particular, each bank bj pays the contracted values q1j = l1 ; q2j = l2
in state s (r) (and similarly in states s (g) and s (0)).
    We next consider the equilibrium at date 0 and verify our conjecture that the banks
choose not to audit and not to hoard any liquidity. First note that a bank b (i) in need of
liquidity at date 1 is able to obtain it by withdrawing its deposits in the forward neighbor
at a cost of l2 =l1 units at date 2 for each unit of liquidity. The bank could also obtain
liquidity by hoarding ‡exible reserves at date 0 but this would cost R > l2 =l1 units for
each unit of liquidity (since R > l2 > l1 > 1). Therefore, each bank b (i) optimally chooses
not to hoard any liquidity at date 0. Second note that a bank’s, b (i) , optimal actions (for
liquidity hoarding at date 0 and deposit withdrawal at date 1) only depend on its slot i
(and only on its parity), and in particular, it is independent of the …nancial network in
B (i) ( ). Thus the bank does not bene…t from auditing and optimally chooses not to audit,
a (i) = 0 (whenever d (:) > 0), thus verifying our conjecture. This completes the proof of
our claim that, in the normal environment, the …nancial network facilitates liquidity ‡ow
across banks and enables each bank bj to pay the contracted values q1j = l1 ; q2j = l2 in
each aggregate state.




                                                    28
A.2      Proofs Omitted in the Main Text
Proof of Eq. (7) for Sections 2.2 and 3. We claim that all cross-deposits are
fully withdrawn, i.e. Eq. (7) holds, in both the free-information benchmark analyzed
in Section 2.2 and the costly audit model analyzed in Section 3. By condition (9), the
original distressed bank, b ({) , is insolvent thus it withdraws all of its deposits, i.e. z ({) = z.
Suppose that, for some k 2 f0; ::; 2n 1g, bank b ({ (k+1)) withdraws all of its deposits in
bank b ({ k) . We claim that bank b ({ k) also withdraws deposits, i.e. z ({ k) = z, which
proves Eq. (7) by induction.
     To prove the claim, we …rst consider the free-information benchmark and analyze two
cases in turn. As the …rst case, suppose that the forward neighbor of bank b ({ k) is
                            (i (k 1))             (i (k 1))
insolvent (i.e. it pays q1            < l1 and q2            = 0). Recall that bank b ({ k) is small
and takes the payment of its forward neighbor as given (see footnote 1), in particular,
it cannot potentially bail out its forward neighbor by withdrawing less than z. This
further implies that the bank withdraws all of its deposits from its forward neighbor, i.e.
z ({ k) = z. As the second case, suppose that the forward neighbor bank, b ({ (k 1)) , is
                 ({ (k 1))
solvent, i.e. q1           = l1 . In this case, bank b ({ k) needs liquidity z (to pay its backward
neighbor) and it can obtain this liquidity either by withdrawing its deposits, which costs
l2 =l1 units at date 2 per unit of liquidity, or by hoarding ‡exible reserves at date 0, which
costs R > l2 =l1 units per unit of liquidity. Since the former is a cheaper way to obtain
liquidity, bank b ({ k) withdraws all of its deposits from its forward neighbor, proving our
claim that z ({ k) = z.
     Next consider the costly audit model of Section 3. Recall that bank b ({ k) makes
the deposit withdrawal decision before the resolution of uncertainty for cross-deposits
(see Figure 3). As the …rst case, suppose that bank b ({ k) assigns a positive probability
                                                   (i (k 1))
to a network structure b (~) such that q1                    (~) < l1 (that is, suppose the bank
assigns a positive probability that its forward neighbor will be insolvent). Since the bank
takes the payment of its forward neighbor as given and its preferences are given by the
Leontie¤ form in (18), in this case the bank necessarily withdraws all of its deposits, i.e.
                                                                (i (k 1))
z ({ k) = z. Next suppose bank b ({ k) believes that q1                   (~) = l1 with probability 1
(that is, the bank knows that its forward neighbor is solvent). In this case, as in the free-
information benchmark, the bank withdraws z ({ k) = z to meet its liquidity obligations
to its backward neighbor. This completes the proof of the claim and proves Eq. (7) by
induction.

Proof of Proposition 1. Contained in the discussion preceding the proposition.


                                                 29
Characterization of Banks’Payment Functions q1 [y00 ; x] and q2 [y00 ; x] in Section
3. If bank b ({ k) hoards a level of liquidity y00 2 [0; y0 ] at date 0, and its forward neighbor
            ({ (k 1))
pays x = q1           (~) at date 1 (and if condition (19) holds), then this bank’s payment
is given by functions q1 [y00 ; x] and q2 [y00 ; x] which are characterized as follows:
    Case 1. If x 2 [l1     =z; l1 ] and y00      (l1 x) z, then

                                          y00    (l1     x) z + (1    y      y00 ) R
                   q1 = l1 and q2 =                                                    l1 .          (26)
                                                            1 !

   Case 2. If x < l1           =z or y00 < (l1    x) z, then

                                         y + y00 + zx
                                  q1 =                      l1 and q2 = 0.                           (27)
                                            1+z

    The …rst case characterizes the payment when the bank’s losses from cross-deposits
do not exceed its bu¤er and the bank has hoarded enough ‡exible reserves to counter
these losses. In this case, the bank is solvent and pays according to (26). The second case
characterizes the payment when the bank’s losses from cross-deposits exceed its bu¤er,
or when the losses do not exceed the bu¤er but the bank has not hoarded enough ‡exible
reserves to counter these losses. In this case, the bank is insolvent and pays according to
(27).

Proof of Proposition 2. First consider part (i) taking as given the characterization
of the liquidity hoarding decisions in part (ii). Note that the liquidity hoarding decision
of each bank depends only on its distance from the distressed bank, which implies that
the payments of banks in the continuation equilibrium can be written as a function of
their distances, i.e. that the equilibrium is distance based. The characterization in part
(ii) shows that each bank b ({ k) 2 b ({) ; b ({ 1) ; ::; b ({ (K 1)) that would be insolvent in
the free-information benchmark hoards y0j = y0 , and thus it pays the same allocation it
would pay in the free-information benchmark:

                  ({ k)                                  ({ k)
      Q1 [k]    q1;f ree ( )      l1 and Q2 [k]        q2;f ree ( ) = 0 for k 2 f0; ::; K     1g .   (28)

The bank b ({ K) hoards at least as much liquidity as it would hoard in the free-information
benchmark, thus it is solvent given condition (19) (which ensures that hoarding too much
liquidity does not cause insolvency) and pays (cf. Eq. (26)):

                                     Q1 [K] = l1 and Q2 [K]           l1 .                           (29)


                                                       30
               ({ k)         ({ (K+1))          ({ (K+2))             ({ (2n 1))
The banks b            2 b                 ;b               ; ::; b                  are solvent and thus pay (cf.
Eq. (26)):

                                   ({ k)                          ({ k)
                              y0           + 1        y      y0           R
 Q1 [k] = l1 and Q2 [k] =                                                          l1 , for k 2 fK + 1; ::; 2n   1g .
                                                  1   !
                                                                                                (30)
In particular, the size of the cascade is K as it is in the free-information benchmark.
        (i k)                                                    ({ k)
Since q1;f ree ( ) is increasing in k (see Proposition 1) and y0       is decreasing in k (given
the liquidity hoarding decisions in part (ii)), the characterization in (28) through (30)
also implies that the payments, Q1 [k] and Q2 [k], are increasing in k and proves that the
distance based equilibrium is monotonic.
    We next turn to the liquidity hoarding decisions at date 0 and prove that the choices
prescribed in part (ii) are optimal. Consider …rst the banks in B know ( ). Comparing the
characterization of the continuation equilibrium in (28) through (30) to the characteriza-
tion in Proposition 1, each bank bj 2 B know ( ) expects to receive the same payment from
its forward neighbor compared to what it would receive in the free-information bench-
                                                                           ({ (k 1))
mark (i.e. each bank bj 2 B know( ) solves problem (21) with xm = q1;f ree           ). Thus it also
hoards the same level of liquidity that it would hoard in the free-information benchmark.
    Next we consider a bank bj 2 B uncertain ( ) which solves problem (21) with xm = Q1 [2].
                                                                                           (2)
We claim that Q1 [2] characterized in Eqs. (28) through (30) is equal to q1;f ree (the
payment of the forward neighbor of bank b ({ 3) in the free-information benchmark), which
                                                                          ({ 3)
in turn proves that the bank bj hoards the same level of liquidity y0;f ree that b ({ 3) would
                                                                                          (2)
hoard in the free-information benchmark. To prove the claim that Q1 [2] = q1;f ree , …rst
suppose that K 2. Note that in this case Q1 [2] is given by Eq. (29) or Eq. (30) and in
                                                           (2)
either case Q1 [2] = l1 . Note that by Proposition 1, q1;f ree = l1 when K 2, proving the
claim in this case. Next suppose K 3 and note that in this case Q1 [2] is given by Eq.
                                ({ 2)
(28) which shows Q1 [2] = q1;f ree ( ), completing the proof of part (ii).
    The characterization for the aggregate level of liquidity hoarding for the cases K
2; K = 3 and K 4 then trivially follow from part (ii) and Proposition 1, thus completing
the proof.

Proof of Proposition 3. Most of the proof is contained in the discussion preceding
the proposition. Here, we consider in turn the subcases 1 and 2 (for case K 4) and we
verify the claims in the main text. We also verify the conjecture that the equilibrium is
distance based and monotonic.



                                                          31
    Subcase 1. If y0 2 (y0u [0] ; 1         y], then

                                       y0 > y0u [0]           y0u [(l1   x) z]

for any x 2 [0; l1 ]. This implies that all banks in b ({) ; :::; b ({ (2n 2)) are insolvent since
they hoard a level of liquidity greater than their corresponding upper limits. These banks’
payments are characterized by the system of equations

                          (   k)            (       (k 1))
                     q1            = f q1                    for each k 2 f1; ::; 2n   2g ,          (31)

                                                                                 ({)
where f (:) is de…ned in Eq. (12) and the initial condition q1 is given by Eq. (10) (after
                   ({+1)
plugging in q1             = l1 ).
     By condition (13), the solution to the above system is increasing (and converges to
the …xed point y + y0 1 < l1 ), verifying our conjecture that the equilibrium is distance
                                                                                            ({ (2n 2))
based and monotonic. By condition (15), we have K 2n 2, which implies q1                               >
   ({ (K 1))          ({ (K 1))                        ({ K)
q1               = q1;f ree      . Then, since bank b         in the free-information benchmark is
                                                          ({ K)
able to avert insolvency by hoarding the level y0;f ree            y0n , the informed bank b ({+1) in
                                                            ({+1)
this case can also avert insolvency by hoarding y0                   y0n . It follows that the cascade
size is K   ^ = 2n 1, which is greater than the free-information cascade size K (under
condition (15)), completing the characterization of the date 1 equilibrium in this case.
     Subcase 2. If y0 2 (y0n ; y0u [0]), there exists a unique x [y0 ] 2 (l1 y0n =z; l1 ), character-
ized in Eq. (25) and increasing in y0 , such that a bank bj 2 B uncertain ( ) is insolvent
if and only if receives from its forward neighbor x < x [y0 ]. Using the conjecture that
the
n equilibrium is distance   o       based and monotonic, we    n further conjecture thato the banks
                    ^                                                  ^
  b ({) ; ::; b ( (
                 { K    1 )) are insolvent while the banks b ( ) ; ::; b ({ (2n 1)) are solvent.
                                                                   {  K
                                       n                    o
                                                      ^
The payments of the banks in b ({) ; ::; b ({ (K 1)) are characterized by

                                                                         n              o
                          (   k)            (       (k 1))                       ^
                     q1            = f q1                    for each k 2 1; ::; K     1 ,           (32)

                                                                                        ({ (2n 2))
which is an increasing sequence (by condition (13)). Then, either q1                 < x [y0 ] and
                                 ^                                         ^
we are back to subcase 1 (i.e. K = 2n 1), or there exists a unique K 2 [K; 2n 1] such
that
                               ({ (K^ 2))              ({ (K^ 1))
                            q1            < x [y0 ] q1            .                           (33)
                                     n                       o
                                                      ^
In the latter case, the banks in b ({ K) ; ::; b ({ (K 1))          B uncertain ( ) are insolvent
                                                                                                ^
(since they receive less than x [y ] from their forward neighbor) but the bank b ({ K )
                                                0



                                                             32
is
n solvent since it receives        o at least x [y0 ] from its forward neighbor. The banks in
     (   ^
      { (K+1 ))         ({ (2n 2))
   b            ; ::; b              are also solvent since they receive l1 x [y0 ] from their for-
ward neighbors. The informed bank b ({+1) is also solvent as in subcase 1. Finally, this
analysis implies that the equilibrium is distance based and monotonic, completing the
characterization of the date 1 equilibrium in this case.




                                                33
References
 [1] Allen, F. and A. Babus (2008). “Networks in Finance,” working paper, Wharton
     Financial Institutions Center, University of Pennsylvania.

 [2] Allen, F., and D. Gale (2000). “Financial Contagion,”Journal of Political Economy,
     108, p.1-33.

 [3] Brock W. A. and C. F. Manski.(2008). “Competitive Lending with Partial Knowledge
     of Loan Repayment,”working paper, University of Wisconsin.

 [4] Caballero, R. J. and A. Krishnamurthy (2008). “Collective Risk Management in a
     Flight to Quality Episode,”Journal of Finance, 63(5), p.2195-2230.

 [5] Caballero, R. J. and P. Kurlat (2008). “Flight to Quality and Bailouts: Policy Re-
     marks and a Literature Review,” <http://econ-www.mit.edu/…les/3390>, October
     2008.

 [6] Cifuentes, R., G. Ferrucci, and H.S. Shin (2005). “Liquidity Risk and Conta-
     gion,”Journal of European Economic Association, 3, p.556-566.

 [7] Diamond D., and P. Dybvig (1983). “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance and Liquidity,”
     Journal of Political Economy, 91, p.401-419.

 [8] Easley, D., and M. O’Hara (2005). “Regulation and Return: The Role of Ambiguity,”
     working paper, Cornell University.

 [9] Eisenberg L. and T. Noe (2001). “Systemic Risk in Financial Systems,”Management
     Science, 47, p.236-249

[10] Freixas, X., B. Parigi, and J.C. Rochet (2000). “Systemic Risk, Interbank Relations
     and Liquidity Provision by the Central Bank,”Journal of Money, Credit and Bank-
     ing, 32, p.611-638.

[11] Laguno¤, R., and L. Schreft (2001). “A Model of Financial Fragility,” Journal of
     Economic Theory, 99, p.220-264.

[12] Leitner, Y. (2005): “Financial Networks: Contagion, Commitment, and Private Sec-
     tor Bailouts,”Journal of Finance, 60(6), p.2925-2953.

[13] Liu J., Pan J. and T. Wang (2005) “An Equilibrium Model of Rare-Event Premia and
     Its Implication for Option Smirks,”Review of Financial Studies, 18(1), p.131-164.

                                          34
[14] Rochet, J. C., J. Tirole (1996). “Interbank Lending and Systemic Risk,” Journal of
     Money, Credit, and Banking, 28, p.733-762.

[15] Routledge, B. and S. Zin (2004). “Model Uncertainty and Liquidity,”working paper,
     Carnegie Mellon University.

[16] Simsek A. (2009) “Speculation and Risk Sharing with New Financial Assets,”working
     paper, MIT.




                                          35
