                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND LABOR INCOME RISK IN THE UNITED STATES

                                          Pravin Krishna
                                        Mine Zeynep Senses

                                        Working Paper 14992
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14992


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2009




For helpful comments and suggestions, we are grateful to Julian DiGiovanni, Andrei Levchenko, Nina
Pavcnik, Jennifer Poole, Matthew Slaughter and workshop participants at the University of British
Columbia, Columbia University, Georgetown University, George Washington University, Inter-American
Development Bank, Johns Hopkins University, the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Middle
East Technical University, University of Virginia, and the World Bank Research Department as well
as to participants at the annual conferences on Empirical Issues in International Trade and Empirical
Issues in International Economics, and the annual meetings of the American Economic Association
and the European Economic Association. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Pravin Krishna and Mine Zeynep Senses. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
International Trade and Labor Income Risk in the United States
Pravin Krishna and Mine Zeynep Senses
NBER Working Paper No. 14992
May 2009
JEL No. F1,F16,F4

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper studies empirically the links between international trade and labor income risk faced by
workers in the United States. We use longitudinal data on workers to estimate time-varying individual
income risk at the industry level. We then combine our estimates of persistent labor income risk with
measures of exposure to international trade to analyze the relationship between trade and labor income
risk. Importantly, by contrasting estimates from various sub-samples of workers, such as those who
switched to a different industry (or sector) with those who remained in the same industry throughout
the sample, we study the relative importance of the different channels through which international
trade affects individual income risk. Finally, we use these estimates to conduct a welfare analysis evaluating
the benefits or costs of trade through the income risk channel. We find import penetration to have
a statistically significant association with labor income risk in the United States, with economically
significant welfare effects.


Pravin Krishna
Johns Hopkins University
1740 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
and NBER
Pravin_Krishna@jhu.edu

Mine Zeynep Senses
Johns Hopkins University
1740 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
msenses@jhu.edu
I.      Introduction


A vast empirical literature has examined the effects that globalization may have on
workers in the domestic economy with particular focus on the important question of
how trade might affect, on average, the wages of workers in different human capital
or occupational categories.1 This impressive literature has uncovered many interesting
findings regarding the “mean” effects of globalization on labor markets. However, for
the most part, this literature has not addressed a broadly expressed public concern
regarding another possible channel through which globalization might affect labor
markets: Openness to international trade may expose workers to riskier economic
environments causing greater volatility (variance) in their incomes.2


How might trade openness affect labor income volatility? The theoretical literature
has suggested various channels through which exposure to international trade may
increase labor income risk. One possibility derives from the fact that openness may
expose import-competing sectors to a variable international economic environment.
Here, changing international patterns of comparative advantage will induce
reallocations of capital and labor across firms within and between sectors. To the
extent that similar workers experience different outcomes during this reallocation
process, openness will raise individual labor income risk. Another link between trade
and income volatility has been argued by Rodrik (1997). Here, increased foreign
competition, which increases the elasticity of the demand for goods, also raises the
elasticity of the derived labor demand. This, in turn implies that shocks to labor
demand may result in larger variations in wages and employment, and hence increase

1
  Well-known papers in this literature include Lawrence and Slaughter (1993), Leamer (1996) and
Feenstra and Hanson (1999) and Goldberg and Pavcnik (2005). Davidson and Matusz (2004), Feenstra
and Hanson (2002), Goldberg and Pavcnik (2007) and Harrison (2007) provide excellent survey
treatments. Recent analyses have emphasized the role of firm heterogeneity (as in Melitz (2003)),
worker heterogeneity and labor market frictions in studying the labor market effects of globalization.
Amiti and Davis (2008), Davis and Harrigan (2007), Egger and Kreickemeier (2006), explore labor
market reallocation with trade openness in heterogeneous firm models, Davidson, Matusz and
Shevchenko (2008) and Mitra and Ranjan (2009) study the employment impact of trade and offshoring
(respectively) in the presence of labor market (search) frictions, Ohnsorge and Trefler (2007) explore
the consequences of worker heterogeneity for trade and the domestic distribution of income and
Helpman, Itskhoki and Redding (2008) combine firm heterogeneity and worker heterogeneity with
labor market frictions to study the effects of trade openness on unemployment and inequality.
2
  Exceptions include Krebs, Krishna, and Maloney (2008), which studies Mexico, diGiovanni and
Levchenko (2007), which provides interesting cross-country evidence regarding the links between
trade and sectoral output volatility, and McLaren and Newman (2002), which studies how globalization
may weaken domestic institutions for risk-sharing.


                                                  2
the volatility in the labor market. On the other hand, it has also been suggested that
the world economy, by aggregating shocks across countries, may be less volatile than
the economy of any single country, opening up the possibility that greater openness
may reduce the variance in individual incomes. Thus, theoretically, the openness-
volatility relationship is ambiguous; that is, the theoretical literature does not offer a
strong prior on the sign or magnitude of this relationship. The question is an empirical
one.


This paper undertakes a detailed empirical analysis of the association between trade
and labor income risk in the United States. We use longitudinal data on workers to
estimate idiosyncratic individual income risk and to study the role of trade in
explaining the variation in this risk across workers employed in different industries.3
To estimate labor income risk (defined as the variance of unpredictable changes in
earnings), we employ specifications of the labor income process that account for
shocks to labor income that workers receive and that distinguish between transitory
and persistent shocks to income. This distinction between transitory and persistent
shocks is important. Workers can effectively “self-insure” against transitory shocks
through borrowing or own savings, and the welfare effects of such shocks are quite
small (Heaton and Lucas (1996), Levine and Zame (2002)). In contrast, highly
persistent or permanent income shocks have a substantial effect on the present value
of future earnings and therefore lead to significant changes in consumption. Thus,
from a welfare point of view, it is the persistent income shocks that matter the most
and it is on these shocks that we focus our attention.


In our analysis, we combine industry-level, time-varying estimates of the persistent
component of labor income risk with measures of industry exposure to international
trade to estimate the relationship between labor income risk and trade. Importantly,
we then repeat this analysis for different sub-samples of workers, such as those who
switched to a different industry or sector, or those who remained in the same industry
throughout the sample. This allows us to identify these separate components of risk
faced by individuals and to evaluate the relative importance of the different channels

3
 We use the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) in our analysis. SIPP contains
longitudinal panels on individuals (and households), with each panel ranging roughly three years in
duration. We use data from 3 SIPP panels—the 1993–1995, 1996–1998 and 2001–2003 panels—in our
study.


                                                3
through which international trade can affect individual income risk. One strength of
our methodological approach is that we are able to use these estimates to conduct a
welfare analysis to evaluate benefits or costs of trade through the income risk
channel.4


Our empirical results for the United States can be summarized as follows. First, we
find those workers who switched industries (moving to a different manufacturing
industry or to the non-manufacturing sector) experience higher income risk compared
to those who stayed in the same manufacturing industry throughout the sample.
Estimated risk for those who switched to the non-manufacturing sector is higher than
those who switched within manufacturing. Second, we find that within-industry
changes in income risk are strongly related to changes in import penetration over the
corresponding time-periods. This relationship holds for the full sample of workers as
well as various sub-samples we consider and is robust to controlling for other time
varying industry specific factors (such as exports, skill-biased technological change,
offshoring, unionization, productivity) that are potentially correlated with both
income risk and import penetration. We also consider the implications of sample-
selection in estimating this relationship but find no evidence of any selection in the
data that could bias the estimates in our favor. Quantitatively, estimates from our
preferred specification suggest that an increase in import penetration by ten percent is
associated with an increase in the standard deviation of persistent income shocks of
about 20 to 25 percent for the full sample of workers.5 Our welfare calculations
suggest that these effects are economically significant: Under standard parameter
values for the inter-temporal discount rate ( β = 0.98) and the coefficient of relative
risk aversion ( γ = 2), the increase in persistent income risk is (certainty) equivalent to


4
  In our study, we follow the methodological approach taken by Krebs, Krishna, and Maloney (2008) –
with some important differences. First, SIPP panels have a much longer longitudinal dimension than
the Mexican data used by Krebs, Krishna, and Maloney (2008). This allows for methodological
improvements in the estimation of risk with more precise estimates of the magnitude of persistent
shocks to income. Second, our data set is large enough to allow us to estimate risk separately for
various sub-samples of workers such as those who switched to a different industry or those who
remained in the same industry throughout. This allows us to evaluate the relative importance of the
different channels through which international trade can affect individual income risk. Furthermore, as
our study is based in the United States, data on a variety of industry characteristics ia available which
we use as controls in our econometric exercises, as discussed later in the paper.
5
  The same increase in import penetration is associated with an increase in income risk of about 30
percent and 20 percent for workers who remained in the same manufacturing industry throughout and
those who switched, respectively.


                                                   4
a reduction by roughly 4 % to 11 % percent of lifetime consumption.


We should emphasize that our analysis focuses exclusively on the link between trade
and individual income risk. Hence, our results should be taken together with the
findings of a large literature on international trade exploring the many ways in which
trade may affect the economy positively, through improved resource allocation,
access to greater varieties of intermediate and final goods, greater exploitation of
external economies and by possibly raising growth rates, inter alia. Specifically, the
results presented here should not be interpreted as suggesting that exposure to trade
results in welfare reduction, but instead as evidence that the costs of increased labor
income risk ought to be taken into account when evaluating the total costs and
benefits of trade and trade policy reform.


II.        Labor Income Risk


The first stage of our analysis concerns the estimation of individual income risk and
its separation into transitory and persistent components. As we have discussed earlier,
it is this focus on income risk that separates our analysis from much of the earlier
literature that has examined instead the “mean” effect of trade on wages of workers in
different skill and occupational categories. Figures I and II present heuristic
illustrations to clarify this difference further.


Figure I depicts income paths for an ex-ante identical group of workers whose
incomes in time period t are identical and equal to yt. In time period t+1, we see that
the average income for this group of workers drops to y t+1. However, around this
mean drop in incomes there is a variance in individual outcomes. To the extent that
individual outcomes are unpredictable ex-ante, the process is risky and risk-averse
workers would find this to be costly. It is this variance around yt+1 that we are
interested in – while the prior literature has largely examined the mean income gap (yt
– y t+1).6


6
    Note that under the expected utility hypothesis, the variance in outcomes would, in of itself, be seen
as costly even if the mean income y t+1 was higher than the income in the earlier period (and even if all
workers saw an increase in incomes in t+1). In our welfare calculations, we do not explore attitudes


                                                     5
Figure II illustrates the difference between transitory and persistent income shocks for
a group consisting of two ex-ante identical individuals whose incomes in time period t
are identical and equal to yt. At t+1, they experience shocks to income (some part
transitory and some part persistent) that separate their incomes as indicated. By t+2,
the transitory components of the income changes they experienced at t+1 expire and
incomes for both workers move closer to their initial levels and stay at these levels for
the rest of time. In this case, the magnitude of the variance of the persistent shock
experienced at t+1 is measured by the spread in incomes at t+2 (and beyond). The
spread in incomes at t+1 measures the sum of the variance of the transitory shock as
well as the permanent shock experienced at t+1.


The separation between transitory and persistent shocks is essential for multiple
reasons. First, consumption smoothing through borrowing or own savings works well
for transitory income shocks (Aiyagari (1994), Heaton and Lucas (1996), Levine and
Zame (2002)), but not when income shocks are highly persistent or permanent
(Constantinides and Duffie (1996) and Krebs (2004). Thus, highly persistent income
shocks have a large effect on consumption volatility and welfare, whereas the effect
of transitory shocks is relatively small. Second, the transitory term in our econometric
specification of the income process will absorb the measurement error in individual
income. For these reasons, we will focus on persistent shocks and their relation to
trade exposure.       Our estimation strategy itself follows earlier approaches in the
literature estimating US labor income risk (Carroll and Samwick (1997), Gourinchas
and Parker (2002), Meghir and Pistaferri (2004)) with some important differences to
account for the structure of our data that we discuss in detail below.


II.1. Data


In this paper, we use longitudinal data on individuals from the 1993–1995, 1996–
1999 and 2001–2003 panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation




towards risk that deviate from the expected utility hypothesis. Alternative preference specifications that
treat variance in gains asymmetrically from variance in losses are outside of the scope of the present
analysis.


                                                    6
(SIPP). 7 Each panel of the SIPP is designed to be a nationally representative sample
of the US population and surveys thousands of workers. The interviews are conducted
at four-month intervals over a period of three years for the 1993 panel, four years for
the 1996 panel and three years again for the 2001 panel.8 At each interview, data on
earnings and labor force activity are collected for each of the preceding four months.


SIPP has several advantages over other commonly used individual-level datasets in
that it includes monthly information on earnings and employment over a long panel
period for a large sample. Although the Current Population Survey (CPS) provides a
larger sample, individuals are only sampled for 8 months over a two-year period in
comparison to 33 months in the SIPP. While the Panel Study of Income Dynamics
(PSID) provides a much longer longitudinal panel, it has a significantly smaller
sample size compared to the SIPP and therefore does not support the estimation of
risk at the industry level.


In our analysis, we restrict the SIPP sample to respondents of age 16 to 65 who were
not enrolled in school during a given month. Following previous literature, we
exclude all observations for individuals whose earnings in any month were less than
5% or higher than 195% of the individual’s average monthly earnings.9 Table I
presents a summary description of the workers surveyed in each panel. The summary
statistics calculated for the first month of each panel are reported separately for the
whole sample and for the manufacturing sector only. Workers earnings represent
amounts actually received in wages and salary and/or from self-employment, before
deductions for income and payroll taxes, union dues, Medicare premiums, etc.




7
  For the estimation of individual income risk, longitudinal data capturing individual income changes is
desirable. It is generally not sufficient to have information on changes in the aggregate distribution of
income to make inferences about the extent of income risk faced by individuals (although this is still
possible under specific assumptions). For instance, the aggregate distribution of income may stay the
same across different time periods but there may be stochastic (risky) transitions taking place
underneath - with some individuals at the top of the distribution exchanging places with others at the
bottom end of the distribution. To capture the risk in incomes faced by these individuals, longitudinal
data tracking these individual transitions is therefore useful to have.
8
  We limit our main analysis to data from the first three years of the 1996 panel to ensure comparability
of our risk estimates with the other two panels. As we discuss later, we do exploit the additional year of
data in the 1996 panel in our analysis of robustness.
9
  This results in the omission of approximately 13% of the respondents of each panel from our sample.


                                                    7
II.2. Specification


Our survey data provide us with earnings (wage rate times number of hours worked)
of individuals. As in previous empirical work, we assume that the log of labor income
of individual i employed in industry j in time period (month) t , log yijt , is given by:


         log yijt = α jt + βt ⋅ xijt + uijt .    (1)

In (1) α jt and βt denote time-varying coefficients, xijt is a vector of observable

characteristics (such as age, age-squared, education, marital status, occupation, race,
gender and industry), and uijt is the stochastic component of earnings. Changes in the

stochastic component uijt represents individual income changes that are not due to

changes in the return to observable worker characteristics. For example, income
changes that are caused by an increase in the skill (education) premium are not
contained in changes in uijt . In this sense, changes in uijt over time measure the

unpredictable part of changes in individual income. 10


We assume that the stochastic term is the sum of two (unobserved) components, a
permanent component ωijt and a transitory component ηijt :

         uijt = ωijt + ηijt .              (2)


Permanent shocks to income are fully persistent in the sense that the permanent
component follows a random walk:
         ωij ,t +1 = ωijt + ε ij ,t +1 ,   (3)

where the innovation terms, {ε ijt } , are independently distributed over time and

identically distributed across individuals, ε ijt ~ N (0, σ ε2 js ) , where s denotes the SIPP

panel (i.e., one of the 1993–1995, 1996–1998 or 2001–2003 panels). In this basic
specification, transitory shocks have no persistence, that is, the random variables


10
  Since income risk is calculated as the variance of unpredictable changes in earnings, it is understood
that any time-invariant individual specific component of earnings will be purged out from our risk
estimates. As such, inclusion of individual-fixed effects to specification (1) should not alter our risk
estimates. Indeed, we find this to be the case when we pool all months in a panel and estimate the
Mincer regression with month- and individual-fixed effects.


                                                       8
{ηijt } are independently distributed over time and identically distributed across

individuals, η ijt ~ N (0, σ η2 js ) . Note that the parameters describing the magnitude of

both transitory and persistent shocks are assumed to depend on the sector j and the
SIPP panel s, but do not depend on t. That is to say, they are assumed to be constant
within a SIPP panel, but allowed to vary across panels. Estimation of σ ε2 js and

σ η2 js will therefore give us industry specific, time varying estimates of transitory and
permanent income risk faced by individuals.


Notice that in (1), we allow the fixed effects α jt to vary across sectors, but that the

coefficient βt is restricted to be equal across sectors. The latter assumption is made in

order to ensure that the number of observations is large compared to the number of
parameters to be estimated. However, in addition to specification (1), we also conduct
our analysis using alternate specifications. As we have just discussed, (1) takes out
any changes to income that may have occurred due to changes in returns to
observable characteristics. Another possibility is to treat these changes as
unpredictable by requiring the coefficients β to be time-invariant within a panel. In
this case, estimated income risk will include any changes in the returns to observable
characteristics that take place in reality. Which set of estimates to use will depend on
whether we think of changes in the coefficients on observable worker characteristics
to be predictable or not. While this an interesting conceptual issue, in practice,
estimates of the parameters representing income risk do not seem to depend very
much on whether the changes in returns to observable characteristics are accounted
for by allowing β to be time varying, or not, in estimating (1).


Notice also that the inclusion of industry dummies in (1) filters out mean income
changes in an industry but also filters out from our measure of individual risk any
volatility in the changes of the mean industry earnings. Our risk estimates therefore
measure idiosyncratic income risk (effectively individual variation around the
industry mean, conditional on the other covariates in (1)) experienced by
individuals.11

11
  While it is possible that trade may additionally affect workers (positively or negatively) by affecting
the volatility of mean income growth in industries, in our analysis of the association between the


                                                   9
II.2.1 Filtering out Shocks of Short Duration


Our specification of the labor income process (Equations (1)–(3)) describes shocks to
income to be either purely transitory or purely persistent and is in accordance with
other empirical work on US labor income risk.12 However, this specification does not
capture shocks that have duration greater than one period (i.e., are not purely
transitory) but that are also not permanent (i.e., last for a finite amount of time).
Estimation of permanent income risk in this case requires us to filter out such shocks
of longer duration (See Meghir and Pistaferri (2004)). To achieve this, we admit into
the specification some moving average terms:
              K
uijt = ωijt + ∑ ηijt − k ,        (2’)
             k =0




with K indicating the number of moving average terms. In addition to the benchmark
specification where transitory shocks have no persistence (K=0), we consider two
alternative specifications of the labor income process that allow for transitory shocks
that last up to six months (K=6) and, separately, up to a year (K=12). We denote the
corresponding parameters estimating permanent income risk by σ ε2, k =0 , σ ε2,k =6 and

σ ε2,k =12 , respectively. Note that we expect the estimates of permanent income risk to
be smaller in magnitude when shocks of shorter duration have been filtered out; that
is, we expect σ ε2,k =0 > σ ε2,k =6 > σ ε2,k =12 (See Meghir and Pistaferri (2004)).


While we report our results obtained for each value of K, we place greater emphasis
on results from specification (2’) with K=12. σ ε2,k =12 is our preferred risk estimate

because we are interested in permanent income risk and this specification of the labor
income process allows us to filter out transitory shocks of greater duration than the
other two estimates do.




variance of changes in mean industry earnings and import penetration, we do not find evidence of any
relationship between these two variables.
12
   For example, Carroll and Samwick (1997) and Gourinchas and Parker (2002) use the same
specification that we do. Hubbard, Skinner and Zeldes (1994) and Storesletten, Telmer and Yaron
(2004) assume that the permanent component is an AR(1) process, but estimate an autocorrelation
coefficient close to one (the random walk case).


                                                10
Our intention is to estimate parameters measuring income risk and see how changes
in these parameters over time (i.e., across panels) may be related to international
trade. In order to do this, we first estimate the income risk parameters at the industry
level separately for each panel (for each of the cases with K=0, K=6 and K=12).
Estimation of the income process parameters is discussed next.13


II.3. Estimation


Consider the change in the residual of income of individual i between period t and
t + n (we drop the subscript s for notational convenience; it is understood that the
estimation exercises are conducted separately for each panel):
        Δ nuijt = uij ,t + n − uijt = ε ij ,t +1 + …+ ε ij ,t + n + ηij ,t + n − ηijt .   (4)


We have the following expression for the variance of these income changes:
        var[Δ n uijt ] = σ ε2 j ,t +1 + …σ ε2 j ,t + n + σ η2 jt + σ η2 j ,t + n .        (5)


As noted earlier, the parameters σ ε2 j and σ η2 j are assumed to be constant within the

period covered by a single SIPP panel (i.e., within each of the 1993–1995, 1996–1998
and 2001–2003 panels).


Given this constancy, (5) can be written as:
        var[Δ n uijt ] = 2σ η2 j + n σ ε2 j                                               (6)


Thus, the variance of observed n -period income changes is a linear function of n ,
where the slope coefficient is equal to σ ε2 j . This insight, that the random walk

component in income implies a linearly increasing income dispersion over time, is the
basis of the estimation method used by several authors. Following Carroll and
Samwick (1997), we estimate the parameters in (6) by regressing individual measures
of var[Δ n uijt ] , the square of the individual deviation from mean income difference


13
   We discuss below the estimation of the parameters of (2) and (3). The estimation of income risk
parameters when K>0 as in (2’) is entirely analogous.



                                                                 11
over the n periods, on n . (6) is estimated separately for each industry and panel. As is
well recognized in the literature, the transitory term in the specification of the income
process will absorb the measurement error in individual income. Given this and the
fact that the welfare effects of transitory shocks to income are much smaller (as we
have discussed), we will focus on persistent shocks and their relation to trade.


II.4. Data and Implementation of Estimation Methodology with the SIPP data


Since trade data is only available for the manufacturing sector, we restrict our sample
to those workers employed in the manufacturing sector during the first month of each
panel. We assign individuals to those industries in which they were initially observed,
and maintain this industry assignment throughout.


The risk estimates from this sample account for both the shocks to workers who
experience income changes due to changes in their wage rates or the number of hours
in a given job and the shocks to workers who change jobs within or between
industries, allowing for intermediate periods of unemployment.14 Specifically, the
sample analogs to var[Δ n uijt ] are formed by considering income differences for

workers between time periods t and t+n regardless of their employment status in any
intermediate period. While losing a worker from the data set due to unemployment in
intermediate periods between t and t+n will bias the estimate of transitory income
shocks, it will not bias our estimate of the magnitude of permanent income risk as
long as the individual does not remain unemployed for the remainder of the duration
of the panel. In the event that individuals are simply lost from the data set because of
unemployment, we would indeed underestimate the magnitude of shocks to income.
However, this is not a severe problem here since less that 2% of the individuals in our
sample are unemployed as of the last month they were surveyed and the average
duration of unemployment for our sample is less than 2 months in all three panels.15

14
   One issue that arises from assigning industries the way we described in constructing our baseline
sample above is that individuals may experience shocks to income due to some changes in trade
exposure in the subsequent industry of employment, but this income change will be included in
estimation of income risk in the initial industry of employment instead. However, the vast majority of
displacements in our sample are within the same industry or to the non-manufacturing sector. This is
consistent with the well-known findings of Davis, Haltiwanger and Schuh (1996) that most job creation
and destruction in the United States takes place within industries.
15
   We also find that the change in attrition rates between panels is not correlated with change in import


                                                  12
II.5. Results


The preceding section provided a detailed description of the general econometric
methodology that we use to estimate income risk given longitudinal data on
individual incomes. Using this methodology, we estimate the risk parameters, σε2 and
σ η2 , separately for the three SIPP panels and 18 manufacturing industries in the
United States.16 In this section, we report these risk estimates and note some
additional issues that arise in applying this methodology to our data.


Table II describes the estimates obtained using our benchmark specification, where
transitory shocks are purely transitory and have no persistence at all ( σ ε2,k =0 ) as well

as when we allow for transitory shocks of longer duration ( σ ε2, k =6 and σ ε2,k =12 ). As

indicated earlier, σ ε2,k =12 , obtained after we filter out shocks lasting up to a year, is our

preferred estimate. 17,18


As indicated in Table II, the mean value of the monthly variance of the persistent
shock, σ ε2, k =0 , for the 1993 panel is estimated to be 0.0033 (or 0.0396 annualized). For

the 1996 and 2001 panels, the corresponding estimates for monthly σ ε2, k =0 are 0.0043

(or 0.0516 annualized) and 0.0052 (or 0.0624 annualized), respectively. The
corresponding annualized standard deviations of permanent income growth
(calculated as (12* σ ε2,k =0 )1/2) are 0.20, 0.23 and 0.25 for the 1993, 1996 and 2001

panels, respectively. Clearly, income risk is rising over time: On average, σ ε2,k =0 rose

by 30 percent between the 1993 and 1996 panels and by a further 20 percent between

penetration in our sample. This suggests that attrition due to non-response or to unemployment is not
likely to bias our main results on the relationship between income risk and import penetration.
16
   Tobacco Products (SIC 21) and Petroleum Refining (SIC 29) are omitted from our analysis due to an
insufficient number of observations on individuals within these industries.
17
   We also use the additional year of data for the 1996 panel to explore the implications of filtering out
shocks of even longer duration (18 months and 24 months) from our estimates of income risk. We find
that the estimates are relatively stable after K=12 and do not decrease as much when we filter out
shocks of longer durations, suggesting that shocks that last up to a year are mostly permanent.
18
   As described in Section II.2, an alternative to specification (1) is to estimate income risk by treating
the changes in returns to observable worker characteristics as unpredictable. We explore this
alternative by pooling all months, and estimating the Mincer regression for each panel with month-
fixed effects. We also estimate specification (1) by including individual fixed effects. The risk
estimates from these two time invariant Mincer specifications differ very little from those reported in
Table II.


                                                   13
the 1996 and 2001 panels.


Table II also reports the summary statistics for the estimates of σ ε2, k =6 and σ ε2,k =12 . As

expected, allowing for shocks of greater duration, but which are not permanent,
lowers our estimates of risk: The mean estimate of the monthly value of σ ε2,k =12 is

0.0014, 0.0025 and 0.0031 for the 1993, the 1996 and the 2001 panels (with
corresponding annualized values of 0.0168, 0.03 and 0.0372), respectively. The
annualized standard deviations of the reported estimates of σ ε2,k =12 are 0.13, 0.17 and

0.19 for the 1993, 1996 and 2001 panels, respectively.


Since our estimates for σ ε2,k =6 are simply intermediate in magnitude to the estimates

of σ ε2, k =0 and σ ε2, k =12 , we simply focus on this latter sets of estimates throughout the

rest of the paper. Greater detail on σ ε2, k =0 and σ ε2,k =12 is provided in Table III, which

lists the industry level estimates of these parameters for each of the three SIPP panels.


It is informative to compare our estimates of the permanent component of income
risk, σ ε2 , with the estimates obtained by the extensive empirical literature on US labor
market risk using annual income data drawn from the PSID. Most of these studies
find an average value of around 0.0225 for the annual variance σ ε2 (Carroll and

Samwick (1997), Gourinchas and Parker (2002), Hubbard, Skinner and Zeldes
(1994), and Storesletten, Telmer and Yaron (2004)), with a value of σ ε2 = .0324 being

the upper bound (Meghir and Pistaferri, 2004). Thus, the average values of our
estimates of permanent income risk, especially those that allow for transitory shocks
of longer duration, are in line with the estimates that have been obtained by the
previous literature on US labor market risk. Note that our results are obtained using
SIPP, a three-year panel for the United States, instead of the PSID data with a panel
dimension of many years used in previous literature. The similarity of the estimates
from the two datasets suggests that most income shocks we label “permanent” in this
paper indeed persist for a very long time.




                                              14
II.6. Income Risk in Sub-Samples


Our dataset is sufficiently large enough to identify separate components of risk faced
by different sub-samples of workers, allowing us to evaluate the relative importance
of different channels through which international trade can affect individual income
risk. In this section, we provide a description of our income risk estimates for these
different sub-samples with particular emphasis on the type of risk we account for.


Our first sub-sample is constructed by including only the individuals who were
employed in the same manufacturing industry each month they were employed (and
surveyed). 19 This sample (denoted STAY-IND) includes workers who remained in
the same job as well as those who switched jobs within the same industry (thereby
possibly losing returns to firm or occupation specific human capital). Displaced
workers who move to a different manufacturing or non-manufacturing industry are
excluded from this sample and are instead grouped together in a different sample
(SWITCH-ALL).


We then analyze further the importance of switching industries on income risk using
two additional sub-samples. First, we construct a sample that includes individuals
who stayed in the manufacturing sector throughout, but may have worked in a
different industry within manufacturing than their original industry at some point
(STAY-MANUF). Second, we consider those individuals who switched to the non-
manufacturing sector for at least one period in the panel (SWITCH-NON-MANUF).
Comparing income risk experienced by workers in these four different sub-samples
(STAY-IND, STAY-MANUF, SWITCH-ALL and SWITCH-NON-MANUF) will
allow us to study the costs of switching industries both within and outside
manufacturing.


Table IV provides a summary description of our estimates of income risk for the sub-
samples described above for each panel.20 As Table IV indicates, σ ε2, k =0 continues to


19
   In constructing these sub-samples, an industry is defined according to the Census of Population
Industry Classification System, which includes 235 industry categories, 82 of which are in the
manufacturing scctor.
20
   Due to sample size restrictions, income risk for these sub-samples are estimated at the 2-digit SIC


                                                 15
be greater than σ ε2,k =12 in each of the sub-samples. Note that income risk for those who

stayed in the same manufacturing industry throughout the sample (STAY-IND) is the
lowest, as these workers continue to earn returns on their industry-specific skills
(even if they switch jobs within the sector). The mean estimate of the monthly value
of σ ε2,k =12 for this sub-sample increases from 0.0008 to 0.0021 between the 1993 and

1996 panels, and then rises to 0.0025 in the 2001 panel. The corresponding
annualized standard deviations are 0.098, 0.159 and 0.173 for the 1993, 1996 and
2001 panels, respectively. The risk faced by workers in STAY-MANUF, who stay
within manufacturing throughout but may have switched from one industry to a
different industry at some point in time, are close to (but in almost all cases smaller
than) the risk faced by workers in STAY-IND. Workers in SWITCH-ALL who have
switched to jobs in either a different industry within the manufacturing sector or to the
non-manufacturing sector, face higher levels of risk. As Table IV indicates, the
monthly variances for this group are 0.0029, 0.0030 and 0.0033 (with corresponding
annualized standard deviations of 0.187, 0.19 and 0.199) for the 1993, 1996 and 2001
panels, respectively. Finally, the group with the highest risk are workers in SWITCH-
NON-MANUF who switch out of the manufacturing sector altogether.21


III.     Trade and Income Risk


The procedure outlined in the previous section provides us with estimates of
individual income risk, σ ε2 js , for each industry j and SIPP panel s . We now use these

time-varying, industry-specific estimates in conjunction with observations on trade
exposure to examine the relationship between income risk, σ ε2 js , and import

penetration, M js .22 In Figures III-A. and III-B, we plot the changes in estimated

permanent income risk, Δσ ε2,k =0 and Δσ ε2,k =12 , against changes in import penetration

calculated at the beginning of each panel. More specifically, we plot differences in
risk and import penetration between the 1993 and 1996 panels and between the 1996
and 2001 panels. In each case, for both K=0 and K=12, the relationship appears to be


level which is more aggregated than the Census classification used in constructing the sub-samples.
21
   This is true for all the specifications and panels except for the K=12 specification for the 1993 panel.
22
   Import penetration is defined as Imports/(Shipments - Exports + Imports).


                                                    16
strongly positive, suggesting that an increase in import penetration is associated with
an increase in income risk for the workers in that industry.


III.1. Specification


More formally, we examine the relationship between income risk, σ ε2 js , and import

penetration, M js , using a linear regression specification that includes industry fixed

effects and time fixed effects:


        σ ε2 js = α s + α j + α M M js +ν js .        (7)


In (7), the inclusion of industry dummies, α j , in the specification allows us to control

for any time invariant industry-specific factors that may affect the level of riskiness of
income in that industry. Similarly, the time dummy, α s , controls for any changes in

macroeconomic conditions that affect the level of income risk. While this ensures that
our estimation results are not driven by changes in macroeconomic conditions (such
as business cycle effects and/or long-run structural changes) unrelated to trade, it also
means that identification of the relationship between σ ε2 js and M js will have to be

based on the differential rate of change in import penetration across sectors over time.
This, however, does not pose problems for our estimation since changes in import
penetration over time do in fact exhibit substantial cross-sectional variation. For
instance, the change in import penetration between 1993 and 1996 (1996 and 2001)
varies between -0.03 and 0.08 (0.004 and 0.09), with a standard deviation of 0.025
(0.0026).


The estimates from (7) for our baseline sample reflect the impact of trade exposure on
risk faced by individuals in the manufacturing sector. By repeating this analysis for
various sub-samples described in Section II.6, we will be able to evaluate the relative
magnitudes of the different channels through which international trade could affect
individual income risk.




                                                 17
III.2. Endogeneity and Selection Bias


One potential concern with our estimation of equation (7), which relates trade to
income risk, is that import penetration may not be fully exogenous to income risk.
One possible reason for this is the endogenous choice of trade policies. While the
large theoretical and empirical literature on the political economy of trade policy has
not directly studied income risk as a determinant of cross-sectional variation in trade
policy,23 it is possible that trade policy, which affects import penetration, may itself
be endogenously determined by income risk in the sector. Consider an “equity”
minded government that uses trade policy to reach its goal of equalizing welfare
across individuals in this economy. This government will choose high (low)
protection levels for those industries with intrinsically high (low) levels of income
risk, in order to say, increase (decrease) the mean level of wages in these industries.
Nevertheless, our fixed-effects estimates of α M , identified by within-industry

variation, will not be biased due to such cross-sectional variation in the determinants
of trade policy. But it is also plausible that this government could increase (decrease)
protection and lower (raise) import penetration in industries that experience an
increase (decrease) in income risk. If this is the case, such endogeneity of policy will
bias our estimates of the relationship between income risk and import penetration
( α M ) downwards (i.e., towards not finding a positive relationship between trade and
risk) and therefore strengthen the results presented in this paper.


Another potential concern relates to the possibility that workers of different types may
self-select into particular industries. Suppose, for example, that industries with high
levels of import penetration are also industries with high job destruction rates.
Suppose further that there are two types of workers, Type I and Type II, and that Type
I workers quickly find a new job in the event of job displacement, but Type II
workers do not. Other things being equal, we would expect Type II workers to move
to low import penetration industries (or, over time, to industries in which import
penetration has increased to a smaller extent relative to other industries). This type of
self-selection, if present, would again bias our results against finding a positive

23
   See however, Davidson, Magee and Matusz (2005) for an interesting study of how the trade policy
preferences of different economic groups within an industry may be shaped by the extent of job
turnover rates in that industry.


                                               18
association between income risk and import penetration. Nevertheless, we consider
the importance of such selection and find that this concern is greatly mitigated for the
following reasons. First, we examine industries over time, so any fixed differences
across industries in worker characteristics are taken into account by our fixed effects
estimation. Furthermore, we test whether the distribution of workers within an
industry is related to change in import penetration in our data. We find that changes in
the share of each education, occupation, age, gender or race group within a sector are
completely uncorrelated with changes in import penetration across the span of the
three SIPP panels. Finally, we examine the possibility that selection is based on
unobserved ability differences across workers that are uncorrelated with educational
attainment. In this case, we would expect selection to be reflected in unexplained
wage differentials across sectors, as long as high-ability workers are paid higher
wages. Our data suggests that such unobserved ‘ability’ differentials (that are
uncorrelated with observable characteristics) across industries are small: About 80%
of the cross-sectional variation in mean earnings across industries is explained by
educational attainment alone. Moreover, we find no evidence of workers with
different unobserved abilities selecting into sectors of different trade exposure. In our
data, changes in unexplained portion of industry average wages are uncorrelated with
changes in import penetration, further mitigating our concern regarding selection bias
of this nature. In any event, we must note that a selection of the nature we have
discussed would again bias our results against finding a positive relationship between
exposure to trade and income risk (and thus would only strengthen our results
reported below).24


III.3. Results: Full Sample


The results estimated for our full sample of workers using the specification described
above are reported in Table V. We estimate two separate regressions described by (7),
including, separately, import penetration at the beginning of each panel (i.e., for 1993,
1996 and 2001) and import penetration lagged one year (i.e., for 1992, 1995 and
2000). For each specification, the dependent variable is income risk measured either

24
   Another source of endogeneity in equation (7) is the omission of any time varying industry specific
factors that are correlated with both income risk and import penetration simultaneously. We will
explore this possibility in detail in Section III.5.


                                                 19
by filtering out purely transitory shocks ( σ ε2, k =0 ) or by filtering out transitory shocks

that last up to a year ( σ ε2,k =12 ). Since the dependent variable is estimated, we adjust the

standard errors for heteroscedasticity using a White correction.25


We find that import penetration is significantly associated with income risk in each of
the specifications we examine. When only purely transitory shocks are filtered out,
the coefficient on import penetration (measured at the beginning of each panel) is
estimated to be αˆ M = 0.022. This estimate indicates that an increase in import

penetration by 10% of its initial (1993) level would raise σ ε , k =0 by a little over 5%. In

our preferred specification, when transitory shocks of duration up to a year are filtered
out, the coefficient estimate is larger, αˆ M = 0.045. This corresponds to an increase in

σ ε ,k =12 by about 23%. Our estimates change very little when we instead include lagged
values of import penetration as the independent variable.26


III.4. Results: Sub-Samples


In order to evaluate the effects of international trade on workers in different sub-
groups, we next repeat the analysis described above for various sub-samples
described in Section II.5. We estimate specification (7) separately for each sub-
sample and as before, we include import penetration both as of the beginning of each
panel and one year lagged. The results from specifications with σ ε2,k =0 and σ ε2,k =12 as

the dependent variable are reported in Table VI-A and Table VI-B, respectively.


The first two columns of Table VI-A report the results using income risk estimates
σ ε2,k =0 for the sub-sample STAY-IND as the dependent variable. When values of
import penetration at the beginning of the panel are used as the explanatory variable,
our estimates suggest that for workers who stayed in the same industry throughout,

25
   We also use weighted least squares (WLS) to correct for a heteroscedastic error structure, as
suggested by Saxonhouse (1976). This correction has little effect on the magnitude or the significance
of the coefficients on import penetration reported here.
26
   The coefficient on import penetration remains significant and positive with little change in its
magnitude, when the dependent variable in specification (7) is replaced with the risk estimates from the
Mincer specifications with time invariant coefficients described earlier.



                                                  20
σ ε ,k =0 would increase by 5% as a result of a 10% increase in import penetration over

its initial value. When σ ε2, k =12 is the dependent variable, we find that the same increase

in import penetration would result in an increase in σ ε , k =12 of about 27% percent. The

next two columns in Table VI report results for workers in the sub-sample STAY-
MANUF, which includes workers who stay within the manufacturing sector (in the
same industry or moving to another industry within manufacturing). Our estimates
suggest that for this group, a 10% increase in import penetration is associated with an
increase in σ ε ,k =0 and σ ε ,k =12 by about 5% and 22%, respectively.


Next, we focus exclusively on workers who switch industries. For the two sub-
samples we consider here (SWITCH-ALL and SWITCH-NON-MANUF), the
estimated coefficient on import penetration is positive in each specification but
significant only when σ ε2,k =12 is the dependent variable.27 The finding that We find that

a 10% increase in import penetration leads to an increase in σ ε ,k =12 of 18% for

workers who switch sectors (either within or outside the manufacturing sector) and of
22% for workers who switch to the non-manufacturing sector.


III.5. Robustness


All the specifications reported in Tables V and VI include both industry and year
fixed effects in addition to import penetration (measured at the beginning of each
panel and one-year lagged). These estimates will be biased if there are time varying
industry specific factors that are correlated with both income risk and import
penetration simultaneously. In the analysis that follows, we include additional
explanatory variables to explore this possibility.


Specifically, we explore the following possibilities. First, we include share of exports
27
   Here, we are, in effect, asking whether workers who switch from sectors with bigger increases in
import penetration face higher income risk. Since we are examining income risk “conditional on
switching”, we do not have a strong prior that the coefficient on import penetration should be different
from zero – even taking as given the result that greater import penetration is associated with higher
income risk for the full sample of workers. The positive coefficient on import penetration that we
obtain implies that risk is indeed higher when switching from sectors with higher increases in import
penetration – possibly because congestion with larger number of workers with similar skills leaving the
industry at the same time leads to a greater variance in outcomes.


                                                  21
in total sales. If the risk faced by individuals employed in the export sector is lower,
and exporting industries face lower import competition, then omission of this variable
could lead to an overestimation of the coefficient on import competition. A second
concern is that industries with high levels of final good imports tend to import high
levels of intermediate inputs. Increased imports of intermediate inputs could lead to
an increase in income risk due to an increased elasticity of labor demand (Rodrik,
1997). On the other hand, off-shoring could insulate domestic workers from output
volatility by shifting the non-core activities of an industry abroad and hence
decreasing risk for those who remain (Bergin, Feenstra and Hanson, 2009). To
address this issue, we include share of imported intermediate inputs as a measure of
off-shoring. Third, if industries respond to increased import competition by investing
in information and communication technologies (ICT) and if such technology
increases the risk faced by workers (for example, by increasing their substitutability
with machines), this would lead to an upward bias in our coefficient of interest.
Fourth, we include labor productivity against the possibility that a negative
productivity shock in an industry could simultaneously lead to an increase in both
import penetration and in income risk. Finally, omission of union density could bias
our estimates if union density changes in response to increased import competition
and if higher unionization rates are associated with lower levels of risk. In Table VII,
we report the summary statistics for each of these variables calculated at the
beginning of each panel.


We report our estimation results in Table VIII. As before, each specification reported
includes industry and year fixed effects. All explanatory variables are measured as of
the first year of each panel (columns 7-11) and in one-year lags (columns 1-6). For
brevity, we report the results with our preferred income risk estimates (allowing for
transitory shocks that last up to a year) as the dependent variable. In columns (2) and
(8), we include share of exports in addition to share of imports. The coefficient of
import penetration remains significant and positive with little change in its magnitude.
The coefficient of exports is insignificant. Inclusion of offshoring leads to an increase
in the coefficient of import penetration. In the specifications reported here, the
offshoring variable is significant and negative, suggesting that an increase in
offshoring in an industry is associated with a decline in income risk in that industry.
Inclusion of ICT, labor productivity and union density does not affect the coefficient


                                           22
on import penetration. 28 29


Another robustness check we consider is to allow income risk to vary by individual
characteristics within an industry. More specifically, we estimate risk separately for
each age group and education level within an industry for each panel and estimate
equation (7) by including dummy variables for age and education in addition to
import penetration and time and industry fixed effects. In both cases, the coefficient
on import penetration remains significant and positive, with little change in its
magnitude.30


IV.      Welfare


The preceding sections have focused on estimating the relationship between trade
exposure and income risk. We now turn to the analysis of the link between income
risk and welfare using a simple dynamic model with incomplete markets and
(exclusively) permanent income shocks, developed by Krebs (2004) and implemented
in Krebs, Krishna and Maloney (2008). The model is tractable enough to permit
closed-form solutions for equilibrium consumption and welfare, yet rich enough to
provide a tight link to the empirical analysis we have outlined. Clearly, our goal here
is not to provide a complete assessment of the effects of international trade on
welfare, taking into account all possible channels, but rather to obtain suggestive
estimates of welfare change exclusively through the income risk channel. 31




28
   In specifications not reported here, we also consider the effect of including the share of foreign
multinationals (MNE) in total industry employment. Exclusion of this variable could lead to an upward
bias in the magnitude of the coefficient of import competition if an increase in MNE share is associated
with a decrease in imports in that industry and if employment in such firms is more stable than that of
domestic firms. Since the MNE measure comparable across time is available until 1996, we check the
robustness of our results to the inclusion of this variable for only the 1993 and 1996 panels. We find
that the coefficient on import penetration remains positive and significant, while the coefficient on
MNE share is insignificant.
29
   We also estimate Equation (7) by including each additional explanatory variable one-by-one along
with import penetration. In each of these specifications, the coefficient on import penetration remains
significant with little or no change in its magnitude.
30
   These results are available from the authors upon request.
31
   While our focus in this paper is on the welfare effects of international trade solely through the
income risk channel, we have also explored the relationship between mean growth rates of (residual)
income and import penetration (using econometric specifications like (7) – with income growth on the
left hand side rather than income risk). However, we do not find any consistent relationship between
mean growth rates of (residual) income and import penetration.


                                                  23
The specific thought experiment that the theoretical structure allows us to answer is
the following one (Krebs (2004)): Imagine a group of ex-ante identical workers with
Constant Relative Risk Aversion (CRRA) preferences facing an income process with
variance of permanent income risk σ s2 . Assume that workers are unable to insure

themselves       against     permanent        shocks      to    their    labor     income        (market
                    32
incompleteness),         and that they can only use their own savings to smooth
consumption. Consider now an increase in permanent income risk measured by Δ σ ,

so that σ s2' = (1 + Δσ )σ s2 is now the risk to income that they face forever going
forward. What is the welfare effect of this increase in risk, in compensating variation
terms?


It can be shown (Krebs (2004)) that the percent change in consumption Δ c , in each

period and each state of the world, required to compensate the individual for the
change in risk Δ σ is given by:33
                                                                    1
              ⎛ 1 − β (1 + μ )1−γ exp(.5γ (γ − 1)(1 + Δσ )σ ε2 ) ⎞1−γ
         Δc = ⎜                                                  ⎟ − 1, if γ ≠ 1
              ⎝ 1 − β (1 + μ ) exp(0.5γ (γ − 1)σ ε ) ⎠
                                  1−γ                   2



              ⎛ β Δσ σ ε2 ) ⎞
and      Δc = ⎜         2 ⎟
                              − 1, if γ = 1                                                (9)
              ⎝ (1 − β ) 2 ⎠


where β is the pure discount factor, γ the coefficient of relative risk aversion, μ the

mean growth rate of income and σ ε2 the estimated variance of the permanent

component of labor income shocks.


The welfare expression (9) has standard properties. With γ > 0, individuals are risk
averse and risk is costly. That is, an increase in risk, Δσ > 0, requires positive

compensation, Δ c > 0, for the individual to be just as well off as before. The


32
   We should note that not allowing insurance against permanent labor income shocks is not
particularly restrictive. As a practical matter, direct insurance against labor income shocks is generally
not available to workers. More importantly, our results concerning either the estimates of permanent
income risk or its links with trade do not change in the slightest when total income (including any
capital earnings and transfers) instead of labor earnings are used as our income measure.
33
   The interested reader is referred to Krebs, Krishna and Maloney (2008) for a detailed derivation and
discussion.


                                                   24
magnitude of this compensation is increasing in the degree of risk aversion, γ . Using
(9) along with estimates of change in risk associated with trade, Δσ (from Sections

III.3 and III.4), and standard values for the parameters β and γ , we could obtain
suggestive estimates of the benefits or costs of trade through the income risk channel.


The welfare expression (9) is derived under the assumption that increase in permanent
income risk, Δσ , associated with the increase in import penetration lasts forever.

Similarly, specification (7) is a “long-run” specification associating the level of
import penetration with the level of income risk.34 However, since our data spans only
a 10 year period (between 1993-2003), our estimates, strictly speaking, do not allow
us to reject the hypothesis that changes in income risk associated with changes in
import penetration do not last longer than 10 years. We therefore conduct the
quantitative welfare analysis by allowing for income risk to be higher with higher
import penetration for a period of T = 10 years, while also reporting calculations for T
= 5 (shorter duration) and 15 years (longer duration).35


The welfare change corresponding to a change in the variance of the permanent
income shocks (income risk) for T years is given by (Krebs (2004)):


Δc = [(1 − x)(1 − x 'T +1 ) /(1 − x ') + xx 'T ]1/(γ −1) − 1 , if γ ≠ 1           and               (10)

     ⎛ β (1 − β T )Δσ σ ε2 ) ⎞
Δc = ⎜                       ⎟ − 1, if γ = 1 where,
     ⎝     (1 − β ) 2 2      ⎠
                  1−γ
 x = β (1 + μ )            exp(0.5γ (γ − 1)σ ε ) and
                                              2




                    1− γ
 x ' = β (1 + μ )          exp(0.5γ (γ − 1)(1 + Δ σ )σ ε )
                                                       2




34
   To ensure that the increases in income risk we estimate in (7) are indeed “long-run” changes, we have
also estimated variants of specification (7) by including changes in import penetration in preceding
periods on the right hand side. We find that while the coefficient on the level of import penetration
remains unchanged, the lagged (1 and 2 year) changes in import penetration, capturing purely “short-
run” effects, are not significant.
35
   Note that even when the increase in permanent income risk with greater import penetration lasts only
for a temporary period of T years, any shocks to worker incomes ε ij ,t have permanent effects.
Specifically, when permanent income risk rises for a duration of time T, workers draw their permanent
income innovation terms ε ij ,t in (3) from a bin with greater variance σ ε ' than before, for duration T,
                                                                           2



before returning to a bin with the original level of σ ε .
                                                             2




                                                           25
Table IX provides welfare calculations using our preferred income risk estimates,
σ ε2,k =12 as well as results when income risk is estimated assuming K=0 ( σ ε2,k =0 ).
Results are provided separately for parameter values for the coefficient of risk
aversion at γ = 1 and γ = 2 and for durations of T = 5, 10 and 15 years. All of the
calculations use a discount factor β = 0.98. With γ = 2, for our central set of risk
estimates with K=12, the increase in persistent income risk associated with a 10%
increase in import penetration is certainty equivalent to a reduction in lifetime
consumption in the range of 4% to 11%. On the other hand, with γ = 2 and K=0, the
welfare cost is estimated instead to be between 2% and 6% reduction in lifetime
consumption. In Table IX, we also report welfare estimates corresponding to a lower
level of risk aversion, γ = 1. As expected, welfare costs are smaller when individuals
are less risk averse. However, in both cases, the welfare costs associated with the
income risk channel are economically quite significant.


We emphasize here again that our analysis has focused exclusively on the link
between trade and income risk. Our results should be considered alongside the
findings of a large literature on international trade, which has explored the many ways
in which exposure to trade may positively affect the economy. Our finding of
economically significant negative effects through the income risk channel does not
suggest that the gains from trade are negative overall. It indicates instead that the
income risk channel should be considered seriously in exercises evaluating the gains
from trade.


V.     Conclusions


This paper studies the links between international trade and individual income risk
using longitudinal earnings data on workers in the United States. We find increased
import penetration to have a statistically and economically significant effect on labor
income risk in US manufacturing. We find evidence of increased income risk for
workers who stayed within the same manufacturing industry throughout as well as for
those who either change manufacturing industries or move out of manufacturing
altogether. The welfare effects of the increased income risk are economically


                                          26
significant. For our central set of estimates, the welfare cost of the increase in risk
associated with a 10 percent increase in import penetration is in the range of 4 % to
11 % of lifetime consumption. Our analysis has focused exclusively on the links
between trade exposure and income risk. Our finding of economically significant
negative effects through the income risk channel does not suggest that the gains from
trade are negative overall. It indicates instead that the income risk channel should be
considered seriously in exercises evaluating the overall gains from trade.




                                          27
References

Aiyagari, R., 1994, “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 109: 659-84.

Amiti, M., and Davis, D., 2008, “Trade, Firms and Wages: Theory and Evidence”, NBER
Working Paper, Number 14106.

Bergin, P., Feenstra, R. and Gordon, H., 2009. ‘Offshoring and Volatility: Evidence from
Mexico’s Maquiladora Industry,” American Economic Review, Forthcoming.

Caroll, C., and Samwick, A., 1997, ‘The Nature of Precautionary Wealth,’ Journal of
Monetary Economics, vol. 40, pp. 41-71.

Constantinides, G., and Duffie, D., 1996, “Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous Consumers,"
Journal of Political Economy 104: 219-240.

Davidson, C., and Matusz, S., 2004, International Trade and Labor Markets: Theory
Evidence and Policy Implications, W. E. Upjohn Institute For Employment Research

Davidson, C., Magee, C., and Matusz, S. 2005, Trade, Turnover and Tithing, Journal of
International Economics, 66(1): 157-176

Davidson, C., Matusz, S. and Shevchenko, A., 2008, Globalization and Firm Level
Adjustment with Imperfect Labor Markets, Journal of International Economics, 75(2): 295-
309.

Davis, S., Haltiwanger, J., and Schuh, S., 1996. Job Creation and Destruction. The MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.

Davis, D., and Harrigan, J., 2007, “Good Jobs, Bad Jobs and Trade Liberalization”, NBER
Working Paper, Number 13139.

Di Giovanni, J., and Levchenko, A., 2007, “Trade Openness and Volatility”, Review of
Economics and Statistics, Forthcoming.

Egger, H., and Kreickemeier, U., 2009, Firm Heterogeneity and the Labor Market Effects of
Trade Liberalization, International Economic Review, 50(1): 187-216

Feenstra, R. and Hanson, G., 1999, “The Impact of Outsourcing and High-Technology
Capital on Wages: Estimates for the U.S., 1979-1990,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
August 1999, 114(3), 907-940.

Feenstra, R., and Hanson, G., 2002, “Global Production and Inequality: A Survey of Trade
and Wages,” in Choi and Harrigan eds., Handbook of International Trade, Basil Blackwell.

Fernandez, R., and Rodrik, D., 1991, “Resistance to Reform: Status Quo Bias in the Presence
of Individual-Specific Uncertainty," American Economic Review, Vol. 81 (5) pp. 1146-55.

Goldberg, P. and Pavcnik, N., 2005, “Trade Protection and Wages: Evidence from the
Colombian Trade Reforms”, Journal of International Economics, 66 (1), 75-105.

Goldberg, P. and Pavcnik, N., 2007, “Distributional Effects of Globalization in Developing
Countries,” Journal of Economic Literature, 45 (1), 39-82.



                                            28
Gourinchas, P., and Parker, J., 2002, “Consumption over the Life-Cycle", Econometrica 70:
47-89.

Harrison, A., 2007, Globalization and Poverty, University of Chicago Press

Heaton, J., and D. Lucas, 1996, “Evaluation of the Effects of Incomplete Markets on Risk
Sharing and Asset Pricing,” Journal of Political Economy 104: 443-487.

Helpman, E., Itskhoki, O., and Redding, S., 2008, “Inequality and Unemployment in a Global
Economy,” NBER Working Paper, Number 14478.

Hirschs, B. and Macpherson, D., 2003, “Union Membership and Coverage Database from the
Current Population Survey: Note,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 56 (2): 349-54.

Hubbard, G., Skinner, J., and S. Zeldes, 1994, “The Importance of Precautionary Motives in
Explaining Individual and Aggregate Savings," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy 40: 59-126.

Krebs, T., 2004, “Consumption-Based Asset Pricing Models with Incomplete Markets,"
Journal of Mathematical Economics 40: 191-206.

Krebs, T., Krishna, P., and Maloney, W., 2008, “Trade Policy, Income Risk and Welfare,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, Forthcoming.

Lawrence, R., and Slaughter, M., 1993, “International Trade and American Wages in the
1980s: Giant Sucking Sound or Small Hiccup?" in Martin Neil Baily and Clifford Winston
eds., Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics 2, 1993, pp. 161-211.

Levine, D. and Zame, W., 2002, “Does Market Incompleteness Matter?” Econometrica, 71:
1695-1725.

Meghir, C. and Pistaferri, L., 2004, “Income Variance Dynamics and Heterogeneity,"
Econometrica 72: 1-32.

McLaren, J., and Newman, A., 2002, “Globalization and Insecurity,” University College
London, Department of Economics Discussion Paper #02-06.

Mitra, D., and Ranjan, P., 2007, Offshoring and Unemployment: The Role of Search Frictions
and Labor Mobility, IZA Working Paper, Number 4136

Melitz, M., 2003, “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity," Econometrica, 71: 1695-1726.

Ohnsorge, F., and Trefler, D., 2007, "Sorting it out: International Trade and Protection With
Heterogeneous Workers," Journal of Political Economy, 115(5): 868-892

Rodrik, D., 1997, Has Globalization Gone Too Far?, Institute for International Economics,
Washington, DC.

Storesletten, K., Telmer, C., and A. Yaron, 2004, “Cyclical Dynamics in Idiosyncratic Labor
Market Risk," Journal of Political Economy, 112 (3): 695-717.




                                             29
    Table I. Summary Statistics


                       1993                              1996                              2001
Variable               Mean (All)      Mean (Manuf.)     Mean (All)      Mean (Manuf)      Mean (All)      Mean (Manuf)
Log (Real Earnings)    7.34            7.64              7.37            7.61              7.46            7.67
Age                    35.39           37.51             36.62           37.97             37.40           39.34

Variable               Percent (All)   Percent (Manuf)   Percent (All)   Percent (Manuf)   Percent (All)   Percent (Manuf)
High school drop out   17.53           19.55             11.49           14.77             11.55           13.78
High school graduate   38.1            43.86             36.37           43.51             33.87           41.07
Some college           21.92           19.26             29.76           26.07             30.11           27.06
College graduate       12.73           10.96             15.51           11.77             16.69           13.25
More than college      9.72            6.37              6.87            3.88              7.79            4.85
Female                 48.32           32.72             49.04           35.63             48.68           32.76
Married                56.99           64.35             57.75           62.87             56.32           62.44
White                  78.37           78.35             73.05           73.33             69.72           69.97
N                      24,998          4,471             41,008          7,270             37,579          5,647




    Table II. Risk Estimates


                          M ean               M edian                 Std. Dev.
     1993-1995
   σ ε2,k= 0              0.0033              0.0031                  0.0016
   σ ε2,k= 6              0.0018              0.0015                  0.0016
   σε2,k=12               0.0014              0.0014                  0.0019
   1996-1998
   σ ε2,k= 0              0.0043              0.0042                  0.0013
   σ ε2,k= 6              0.0024              0.0023                  0.0014
   σ ε2,k=12              0.0025              0.0026                  0.0018
   2001-2003
   σ ε2,k= 0              0.0052              0.0051                  0.0016
   σ ε2,k= 6              0.0033              0.0034                  0.0019
   σ ε2,k=12              0.0031              0.0032                  0.0025
    Reported mean, median and standard deviations are calculated across point estimates
    for eighteen 2-digit SIC industries.




                                                             30
Table III Risk Estimates by Industry for each Panel ( σ ε2,k=0 and σ ε2,k=12 )

                        σε2,k= 0                                       σε2,k=12
SIC
        1993-1995      1996-1998      2001-2003      1993-1996      1996-1998      2001-2003
       0.004***        0.004***       0.005***       0.003***       0.000          0.004***
  20
       (0.0002)        (0.0001)       (0.0002)       (0.0005)       (0.0004)       (0.0005)
       0.006***        0.003***       0.004***       0.005***       -0.000         0.004***
  22
       (0.0003)        (0.0002)       (0.0003)       (0.0008)       (0.0006)       (0.0009)
       0.003***        0.005***       0.009***       0.001**        0.004***       0.010***
  23
       (0.0002)        (0.0002)       (0.0004)       (0.0006)       (0.0007)       (0.0011)
       0.004***        0.005***       0.004***       0.003***       0.006***       0.002***
  24
       (0.0003)        (0.0003)       (0.0002)       (0.0008)       (0.0008)       (0.0006)
       0.003***        0.003***       0.002***       -0.000         0.001          0.002***
  25
       (0.0003)        (0.0003)       (0.0003)       (0.0010)       (0.0008)       (0.0007)
       0.003***        0.004***       0.005***       0.001**        0.004***       -0.000
  26
       (0.0002)        (0.0002)       (0.0003)       (0.0006)       (0.0006)       (0.0008)
       0.005***        0.004***       0.005***       0.002***       0.003***       0.001
  27
       (0.0002)        (0.0002)       (0.0002)       (0.0005)       (0.0005)       (0.0006)
       0.003***        0.004***       0.006***       0.001*         0.001**        0.003***
  28
       (0.0002)        (0.0002)       (0.0002)       (0.0005)       (0.0005)       (0.0005)
       0.002***        0.003***       0.007***       -0.002***      0.000          0.006***
  30
       (0.0003)        (0.0002)       (0.0003)       (0.0007)       (0.0005)       (0.0008)
       -0.000          0.003***       0.004***       -0.001         0.003**        0.006***
  31
       (0.0007)        (0.0005)       (0.0004)       (0.0016)       (0.0012)       (0.0010)
       0.005***        0.004***       0.006***       0.004***       0.003***       0.004***
  32
       (0.0003)        (0.0002)       (0.0003)       (0.0010)       (0.0007)       (0.0009)
       0.002***        0.004***       0.005***       -0.001***      0.001**        -0.001
  33
       (0.0002)        (0.0002)       (0.0003)       (0.0006)       (0.0005)       (0.0008)
       0.004***        0.003***       0.004***       0.003***       0.002***       0.001**
  34
       (0.0001)        (0.0001)       (0.0002)       (0.0004)       (0.0004)       (0.0004)
       0.002***        0.004***       0.005***       0.001***       0.002***       0.002***
  35
       (0.0001)        (0.0001)       (0.0001)       (0.0003)       (0.0004)       (0.0005)
       0.003***        0.003***       0.005***       0.002***       0.002***       0.002***
  36
       (0.0001)        (0.0001)       (0.0002)       (0.0003)       (0.0003)       (0.0005)
       0.003***        0.005***       0.005***       0.002***       0.003***       0.003***
  37
       (0.0001)        (0.0001)       (0.0001)       (0.0004)       (0.0004)       (0.0004)
       0.002***        0.005***       0.006***       0.001**        0.005***       0.003***
  38
       (0.0002)        (0.0002)       (0.0003)       (0.0006)       (0.0006)       (0.0008)
       0.006***        0.008***       0.007***       0.001          0.005***       0.005***
  39
       (0.0004)        (0.0004)       (0.0004)       (0.0014)       (0.0012)       (0.0012)
Robust standard errors in parantheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                   31
Table IV. Income Risk in Sub-Samples

                                                  σε2,k= 0              σε2,k=12
1993-1995                                Mean      Std. Dev Mean         Std. Dev.
SWITCH_NON-MANUF                         0.0063    0.0033 0.0026         0.0053
SWITCH_ALL                               0.0059    0.0029 0.0029         0.0050
STAY_MANUF                               0.0027    0.0014 0.0011         0.0019
STAY_IND                                 0.0024    0.0012 0.0008         0.0016
1996-1998
SWITCH_NON-MANUF                         0.0082    0.0031     0.0036     0.0055
SWITCH_ALL                               0.0067    0.0026     0.0030     0.0043
STAY_MANUF                               0.0033    0.0010     0.0021     0.0017
STAY_IND                                 0.0031    0.0008     0.0021     0.0015
2001-2003
SWITCH_NON-MANUF                         0.0090    0.0032     0.0039     0.0057
SWITCH_ALL                               0.0081    0.0026     0.0033     0.0036
STAY_MANUF                               0.0039    0.0017     0.0024     0.0023
STAY_IND                                 0.0037    0.0017     0.0025     0.0025
Reported mean, median and standard deviations are calculated across point estimates
for eighteen 2-digit SIC industries.




Table V. International Trade and Income Risk: Full Sample

                                  σε2,k= 0                   σε2,k=12
 Import penetration       0.023**                  0.042***
 (Lagged)                 (0.009)                  (0.014)
 Import penetration                0.022**                       0.045***
                                   (0.010)                       (0.013)
 Constant                 0.003*** 0.003***        0.001         0.001
                          (0.000)  (0.000)         (0.001)       (0.001)
 R-squared                0.71     0.70            0.58          0.60
 N                        54       54              54            54
Robust standard errors in parantheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                   32
   Table VI-A International Trade and Income Risk: Sub-Samples ( σ ε2, k =0 )

                             STAY IND             STAY MANUF             SWITCH ALL         SWITCH NON-MANUF
Import Penetration   0.017**                0.019*                 0.028*                  0.023
(Lagged)             (0.0084)               (0.0097)               (0.0157)                (0.0201)
Import Penetration               0.015*                0.017*                 0.027                 0.024
                                 (0.0089)              (0.010)                (0.0169)              (0.0218)
Constant             0.002***    0.002***   0.002***   0.002***    0.007***   0.007***     0.008*** 0.008***
                     (0.0002)    (0.0003)   (0.0003)   (0.0007)    (0.001)    (0.0011)     (0.001)  (0.0014)
R-squared            0.59        0.58       0.62       0.61        0.61       0.61         0.55     0.55
N                    54          54         54         54          54         54           54       54
   Robust standard errors in parantheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




   Table VI-B International Trade and Income Risk: Sub-Samples ( σ ε2,k =12 )

                             STAY IND             STAY MANUF             SWITCH ALL         SWITCH NON-MANUF
Import Penetration   0.028*                 0.031*                 0.070***                0.081**
(Lagged)             (0.0158)               (0.0159)               (0.0240)                (0.0330)
Import Penetration               0.031*                0.034**                0.070***              0.081**
                                 (0.0157)              (0.0157)               (0.0251)              (0.0344)
Constant             0.000       0.000      0.001      0.000       0.003      0.003        0.002    0.002
                     (0.0008)    (0.0009)   (0.0008)   (0.0009)    (0.0027)   (0.0028)     (0.0033) (0.0034)
R-squared            0.50        0.51       0.51       0.53        0.50       0.49         0.42     0.42
N                    54          54         54         54          54         54           54       54
   Robust standard errors in parantheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                       33
Table VII Summary Statistics: Explanatory Variables

Variable                    Mean            Std. Dev.       Min                Max
1993
Import Penetration          0.169           0.140           0.014              0.561
Share of Exports            0.101           0.063           0.022              0.235
Offshoring                  0.148           0.082           0.039              0.324
Share of ICT                0.080           0.058           0.029              0.225
(Labor Productivity)t-1     1.098           0.112           0.981              1.474
Union Density               0.188           0.105           0.072              0.398
1996
Import Penetration          0.192           0.158           0.015              0.638
Share of Exports            0.122           0.080           0.022              0.282
Offshoring                  0.160           0.080           0.047              0.352
Share of ICT                0.082           0.057           0.028              0.219
(Labor Productivity)t-1     1.232           0.343           0.963              2.464
Union Density               0.171           0.105           0.036              0.391
2001
Import Penetration          0.234           0.178           0.019              0.717
Share of Exports            0.138           0.092           0.023              0.320
Offshoring                  0.192           0.097           0.054              0.393
Share of ICT                0.082           0.057           0.024              0.222
(Labor Productivity)t-1     1.769           1.519           1.076              7.464
Union Density               0.148           0.085           0.043              0.317
These summary statistics are calculated at the beginning of each panel, except labor productivity. Since
this variable is not available after 2000, summary statistics for one year lags are reported.
Import Penetration=Imports/Shipments-exports+imports
Share of Exports=Exports/Shipments
               ⎡       purchases of input j by industry i at time t       ⎤ ⎡        imports of input j at time t                ⎤
Offshoring = ∑ ⎢                                                          ⎥* ⎢                                                   ⎥
             j ⎣ total non − energy inputs used by industry i at time   t ⎦ ⎢⎣ production j + imports j − exports j at time   t ⎥⎦
Source: Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Share of ICT= (Software+Computers and peripheral equipment+Communication equipment +
Photocopy and related equipment+Instruments)/K. Source: BEA, NIPA
Labor productivity=Output/Hours. Base year: 1987. Aggregated to 2-digit SIC using employment
shares as of 1992 as weights. Source: BLS
Union Density= (Union Members)/Employment. Source: Hirsch and Macpherson (2003)




                                                    34
                Table VIII Robustness ( σ ε2, k =12 )

Full Sample                   (1)      (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)        (9)         (10)      (11)
Import Penetration        0.042*** 0.044**    0.050**    0.049**    0.050**    0.053***
(lagged)                  (0.014)  (0.020)    (0.019)    (0.020)    (0.019)    (0.019)
Share of exports                   -0.005     -0.002     -0.001     0.004      -0.009
(lagged)                           (0.018)    (0.019)    (0.020)    (0.022)    (0.023)
Offshoring                                    -0.023*    -0.022*    -0.024*    -0.021
(lagged)                                      (0.011)    (0.012)    (0.013)    (0.013)
Share of ICT                                             0.020      -0.014     -0.038
(lagged)                                                 (0.036)    (0.040)    (0.046)
Labor Productivity                                                  -0.001     0.000
(lagged)                                                            (0.000)    (0.000)
Union Density                                                                  0.027
(lagged)                                                                       (0.016)
Import Penetration                                                                        0.045*** 0.045**     0.057***     0.056**    0.055**
                                                                                          (0.013)  (0.019)     (0.020)      (0.021)    (0.020)
Share of exports                                                                                   0.000       0.001        0.004      0.001
                                                                                                   (0.016)     (0.017)      (0.017)    (0.017)
Offshoring                                                                                                     -0.044**     -0.043**   -0.039*
                                                                                                               (0.018)      (0.019)    (0.021)
Share of ICT                                                                                                                0.031      0.023
                                                                                                                            (0.034)    (0.038)
Union Density                                                                                                                          0.013
                                                                                                                                       (0.014)
Constant                  0.001     0.001     0.001      0.000      0.002      -0.003     0.001     0.001      0.002        0.000      -0.003
                          (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)      (0.002)    (0.004)
R-squared                 0.58      0.58      0.61       0.61       0.62       0.66       0.60      0.60       0.63         0.64       0.65
N                         54        54        54         54         54         54         54        54         54           54         54
                Robust standard errors in parantheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
                Since comparable data for labor productivity is not available after 2000, the estimates from the
                specification including productivity as of the beginning of the panel are not included in this table.




                                                                   35
Table IX. Welfare Effects (Percent of Lifetime Consumption)


                    T=5       T=10        T=15
          γ =1      1.06      2.02        2.90
K=0
          γ =2      2.19      4.32        6.39
          γ =1      2.18      4.18        6.03
K=12
          γ =2      4.24      8.00        11.34




                                     36
Figure I. Variance in Wage outcomes




Figure II. Transitory versus Permanent Shocks




                                       37
Figure III. Changes in Permanent Income Risk and Changes in Import Penetration
A. " !2,k =0




B. " !2,k =12




                                      38
