NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHILD CARE SUBSIDIES AND CHILDHOOD OBESITY
Chris M. Herbst
Erdal Tekin
Working Paper 15007
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15007

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2009

The authors would like to thank the participants at the 2009 Meetings of the Population Association
of America for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Chris M. Herbst and Erdal Tekin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Child Care Subsidies and Childhood Obesity
Chris M. Herbst and Erdal Tekin
NBER Working Paper No. 15007
May 2009
JEL No. I12,I18,J13
ABSTRACT
Child care subsidies play a critical role in facilitating the transition of disadvantaged mothers from
welfare to work. However, little is known about the influence of these policies on children’s health
and well-being. In this paper, we study the impact of subsidy receipt on low-income children’s weight
outcomes in the fall and spring of kindergarten. The goals of our empirical analysis are twofold. We
first utilize standard OLS and fixed effects methods to explore body mass index as well as measures
of overweight and obesity. We then turn to quantile regression to address the possibility that subsidy
receipt has heterogeneous effects on children’s weight at different points in the BMI distribution. Results
suggest that subsidy receipt is associated with increases in BMI and a greater likelihood of being overweight
and obese. We also find substantial variation in subsidy effects across the BMI distribution. In particular,
child care subsidies have no effect on BMI at the lower end of the distribution, inconsistent effects
in the middle of the distribution, and large effects at the top of the distribution. Our results point to
the use of non-parental child care, particularly centerbased services, as the key mechanism through
which subsidies influence children’s weight outcomes.

Chris M. Herbst
School of Public Affairs
Arizona State University
Mail Code 3720
411 N. Central Ave., Ste. 450
Phoenix, AZ 85004-0687
chris.herbst@asu.edu
Erdal Tekin
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER
tekin@gsu.edu

I. Introduction
Over the past three decades, obesity rates among children increased dramatically. Data from
the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) indicate that, since the mid1970s, the prevalence of obesity grew from five to 12 percent among children ages two to five and
from seven to 17 percent among children ages six to 11.2 This alarming trend generates concern
among health care officials for a number of reasons. Obesity during childhood is highly correlated
with weight problems throughout adulthood, and obese children are substantially more likely to
develop health problems such as high blood pressure and Type 2 diabetes as early as adolescence
(Whitaker et al., 1997; Serdula et al., 1993; Freedman et al., 1999; 2007). Moreover, obesity among
children and teenagers is associated with a number of long-term psychological and labor market
outcomes ranging from poor self-esteem and depression to discrimination and lower wages (Daniels,
2006; Mocan & Tekin, forthcoming; Dietz, 1998; Strauss, 2000). Many of these problems impose a
substantial burden on the health care system. For example, Guijing and Dietz (2002) estimate that
hospital expenditures related to childhood obesity rose from $35 million in the late-1980s to $127
million (in 2001 constant dollars) in the late-1990s.
Much of the current policy response to the obesity epidemic focuses on children in
elementary and middle school, thereby neglecting the 13 million preschool-age children who spend a
considerable number of hours each year in non-parental child care arrangements (National Center for
Education Statistics, 1996).3 Indeed, about 41 percent of such children attend child care for at least
35 hours each week, and another 25 percent are in care for 15 to 34 hours (Capizzano & Adams,

2

See http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpa/obesity/childhood/index.htm. See Anderson and Butcher (2006) for a review of trends.
Indeed, childhood obesity has been identified as one of the most pressing health problems facing the U.S. (U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, 2001) and there are a large number of policy efforts underway to stop or reverse this trend among school-age
children. For example, the Child Nutrition and Women Infants and Children (WIC) Reauthorization Act of 2004 requires that all local
education agencies participating in the National School Lunch Program create local wellness policies no later than July 2006. The Kids
Walk-to-School program developed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) aims to increase opportunities for daily
physical activity by encouraging children to walk to and from school in groups accompanied by adults. An increasing number of schools
are limiting access to foods high in fats and sugars by banning soda machines and snack bars in cafeterias and school stores. The School
Breakfast and the National School Lunch Programs are two federal entitlement programs that provide nutritionally balanced, low-cost or
free breakfasts and lunches to millions of children each school day.
3

3

2000). Much of this care now occurs in increasingly formal arrangements. For example, the
enrollment of three-year-olds in center-based care increased from eight percent in 1968 to 39 percent
in 2000, while the enrollment of four-year-olds increased from 23 to 65 percent (Bainbridge et al.,
2005). Today, the predominant child care setting for preschool-aged children is center care (32
percent), followed by relatives (24 percent) and family child care homes (16 percent) (Smolensky &
Gootman, 2003).4
The growing use of non-parental care has raised awareness among health officials of the
critical role that child care settings play in shaping children’s eating and activity habits. In particular,
given that young children spend considerable time away from their parents, child care providers lay
the foundation for food consumption and exercise patterns. Structural and process features of the
child care environment can dictate the types of physical activities in which children are engaged
(e.g., structured or free-play), the number of hours per day in which children are performing these
activities, and whether these activities occur primarily in indoor or outdoor spaces. In addition, menu
options in child care settings expose children to a variety of new foods and flavors, which can
influence food preferences at home and school (Deckelbaum & Williams, 2001).

Child care

providers can also serve as a powerful bridge to aid parents in making healthy food choices in other
contexts (Story, Kaphingst, & French, 2006).
An array of federal and state child care policies can further shape children’s weight
outcomes. The Child Care and Development Fund (CCDF), which provides employment-based
subsidies targeted at current and former welfare recipients, allows parents to purchase virtually any
legally-operating child care service at a reduced price.5

Subsidies can influence low-income

children’s weight outcomes through a number of channels. First, insofar as participation in formal
4
Participation rates in formal child care settings among low-income children now rival those of high-income children (49 percent
compared to 53 percent) (Magnuson et al., 2007).
5
The CCDF was created by the 1996 welfare reform legislation, which consolidated four preexisting subsidy programs into a single
block grant, increased funding for child care funding substantially, and gave individual states greater flexibility in program design and
administration (Herbst & Tekin, 2008). In 2006, states spent approximately $9.3 billion on child care assistance and served more than
1.7 million children in an average month (Child Care Bureau, 2006).

4

care influences children’s weight, one might expect to observe a link between child care subsidies
and weight outcomes given that this policy encourages mothers to shift from informal to formal child
care modes (Tekin, 2005). In particular, child care subsidies reduce the amount of time children
spend in parent and relative care while increasing participation in center- and family-based services.
However, the extent to which subsidy-induced changes in child care utilization are associated with
children’s weight outcomes depends on the relative quality of subsidized child care. Second, the
CCDF stipulates that mothers must be employed to qualify for a subsidy. A number of recent studies
find that children of working mothers are more likely to be overweight and obese, raising concerns
about the subsidy system’s current emphasis on employment (Anderson et al., 2003; Ruhm, 2008;
Classen & Hokayem, 2005; Fertig et al., forthcoming; Phipps et al., 2006; Courtemanche, 2007;
Cawley & Liu, 2007). Finally, by defraying expenses associated with child care, subsidies increase
disposable income that, in principle, can be spent on healthy foods and extracurricular activities.
However, it is unclear whether families spend the additional income on goods that enhance child
quality or whether these resources increase the demand for fast food and sedentary activities such as
video games.
Despite the potential role for child care subsidies in shaping preschool children’s weight
outcomes, no previous research focuses on this topic. The purpose of this paper, therefore, is to
examine the impact of subsidy receipt in the year before kindergarten on several measures of
children’s weight during the fall and spring of kindergarten. Using a sample of children living with
unmarried women drawn from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study (ECLS-K), our empirical
analysis proceeds in two steps. We begin by estimating standard OLS and fixed effects models of
body mass index (BMI) and indicators of overweight and obesity status. Next, we use quantile
regression techniques to address the possibility that subsidy receipt has heterogeneous effects on
children’s weight at different points in the distribution of BMI. This method permits us to analyze
whether the impact of child care subsidies is relatively stable throughout the BMI distribution, or
5

whether subsidy receipt is associated with greater changes in BMI in some parts of the distribution.
In both cases, we pay careful attention to the role of maternal employment and child care utilization
in meditating the relationship between subsidy receipt and children’s weight outcomes.
Our main results can be summarized as follows. Child care subsidy receipt is associated with
increases in BMI and a greater likelihood of being overweight and obese. We also find substantial
heterogeneity in response to child care subsidies. Subsidies have no effect on BMI at the lower end
of the distribution, inconsistent effects in the middle of the distribution, and large positive effects at
the top of the distribution. Interestingly, center-based care is associated with large and stable
increases in BMI throughout the distribution, while the impact of the other non-parental
arrangements appears to be concentrated at the tails of the distribution. We provide evidence that the
use of non-parental child care, rather than maternal employment, is the key mechanism through
which the subsidy effects operate. Indeed, our results indicate that subsidy receipt continues to be
associated with children’s weight after accounting for mothers’ work history, but this relationship
disappears when child care arrangements are added to the models.
II. Background
Much of what has been written on childhood obesity focuses on school-aged children and
school-based programs, rather than preschool-age children and child care arrangements (Story, 1999;
Gortmaker et al., 1999; Veugelers & Fitzgerald, 2005; Story, Kaphingst, & French, 2006). This
literature generally concludes that school-based programs play a positive role in reducing the
prevalence of childhood obesity.

However, many of these programs do not explicitly target

economically disadvantaged children, who are at a higher risk of obesity (Frizvold, 2007). To our
knowledge, this is the first study to focus on the role of child care subsidies in influencing lowincome children’s weight outcomes.
Frizvold (2007) examines the impact of Head Start participation on childhood obesity using
data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. He finds that participation in Head Start reduces the
6

risk of obesity in late-childhood among black children. Both Head Start and child care subsidies are
means-tested, but unlike subsidies, Head Start places substantial emphasis on quality through the
provision of comprehensive child development services. In addition, many Head Start classrooms
focus explicitly on children’s health through nutritional screening, offering healthy and nutritionally
balanced meals, and engaging in parental outreach and education (Frizvold, 2007).
Hubbard (2008) studies the impact of maternal employment and child care decisions on
childhood obesity in a dynamic framework using data from the ECLS-K. She finds that any maternal
employment decreases the likelihood of obesity while using non-parental child care increases it. She
also finds that working full-time and using non-maternal care increases children’s risk of being
obese. However, her measure of child care utilization is based on the total number of hours children
spend in three types of settings (informal care from a relative, informal care from a baby-sitter, and
center care). Using this information, she creates a single binary indicator for whether child care was
utilized for more than five hours per week in these settings. Furthermore, this paper does not focus
on any dimension of early care and education policy, including child care subsidies.
A number of descriptive studies assess the nutritional quality of foods offered in child care
settings.6 A review of these studies suggests that the quality of foods offered in center-based care, in
particular, typically falls short of the standards recommended by The Dietary Guidelines for
Americans.7 For example, Padget and Briley (2005) compare the dietary intake of children attending
center-based care with the recommendations of the Food Guide Pyramid for Young Children.8 The
authors find that such children generally do not receive an adequate diet, and the intake at home does
not compensate for the insufficient consumption of fresh fruits, vegetables, and grains during the
time spent in child care. Furthermore, a number of studies show that preschool-age children in
6

Story, Kaphingst, and French (2006) provide a comprehensive summary of these studies.
A publication put forth every five years by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the The Dietary Guidelines for
Americans provide authoritative advice for people ages two and over about the relationship between increased healthy dietary habits and
the reduction in the risk of major chronic diseases. This publication also serves as the basis for Federal food and nutrition education
programs. Additional information may be found here: http://www.health.gov/DietaryGuidelines/.
8
Information on the revised pyramid can be found here: http://www.cnpp.usda.gov/FGP4Children.htm.
7

7

various non-parental child care settings do not meet the recommended guidelines for physical activity
(Story, Kaphingst, & French, 2006).9 However, research suggests that preschools implementing
practices aimed at increasing quality in general and physical activity in particular can be successful at
reaching this goal. For example, in a study of 266 preschoolers, Dowda et al. (2004) find that
children in high-quality preschools, as measured by child-staff ratios, teacher education, and
structural attributes of the facility, participate in greater amounts of moderate to vigorous physical
activity.
Motivated by the coincident rise in women’s employment and childhood obesity, a number of
studies examine the effect of early maternal employment on obesity. Findings from this research
generally point to negative effects of maternal employment on children’s weight outcomes (Ruhm,
2008; Courtemanche, 2007; Anderson et al., 2003; Fertig, et al., forthcoming).

For example,

Anderson et al. (2003) find that increases in hours of maternal work are associated with increases in
the likelihood of childhood obesity. They also find greater effects among children of white mothers,
of mothers with more education, and of mothers at higher income levels. Fertig et al. (forthcoming)
examine the mechanisms through which maternal employment influences children’s weight
outcomes. Cawley and Liu (2007) find that employed women spend significantly less time eating
and playing with their children and are more likely to purchase prepared foods.
Also relevant to the current study is previous research on the impact of child care subsidies
and arrangements on other dimensions of child well-being, including cognitive and behavioral
development. Using the ECLS-K, a recent study by Herbst & Tekin (2008) find that child care
subsidy receipt in the year before kindergarten lowers reading and math test scores, increases
externalizing and self-control behavior problems, and decreases interpersonal skills at kindergarten
entry. In addition, Baker et al. (2008) analyze the impact of Quebec’s “$5 per day child care”
9
The 2005 The Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommend that children and adolescents engage in no less than 60 minutes of
physical activity each day. Furthermore, the National Association for Sport and Physical Education (NASPE) recommends that toddlers
receive at least 30 minutes of structured physical and 60 minutes of unstructured activity each day. Preschoolers should receive 60
minutes of structured play and another 60 minutes of unstructured play each day.

8

program on several child and parent outcomes. Subsidized children were worse off across a variety
of behavioral and health dimensions, ranging from increased physical aggression and diminished
social skills to increases in common illnesses. The program also led to more hostile parenting, worse
parental health, and lower-quality parental relationships. Previous research finds mixed results for
the impact of non-parental child care on children’s developmental outcomes. A large number of
studies find positive effects of child care attendance (e.g., NICHD, 2003a; 2003b), but others find
insignificant or negative effects (e.g., Bernal & Keane, 2008; Blau, 1999). There is more agreement,
however, that high-quality center-based care has positive effects on cognitive development among
low-income children (e.g., NICHD & Duncan, 2003).
III. Data
The data used in this analysis are drawn from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study,
Kindergarten cohort (ECLS-K), a nationally representative sample of 21,260 children attending
kindergarten in the fall of 1998.10 Children in the ECLS-K are followed through the eighth grade,
with detailed parent, child, and teacher interviews conducted in the fall and spring of kindergarten
(1998 and 1999) and the spring of first (2000), third (2002), fifth (2004), and eighth (2007) grade.
Approximately 20 kindergartners per school from over 1,200 public and private schools are included
in the sample.11
Analyses in this study are based on the fall and spring of kindergarten waves of data
collection, in which children’s height and weight were measured and parents were asked questions
about child care attendance in the year prior to kindergarten entry. We limit our sample to children
10
The ECLS-K is sponsored by the U.S. Department of Education. For more information, see the ECLS-K website at
http://nces.ed.gov/ecls/kindergarten.asp. An additional longitudinal study, the ECLS-Birth cohort, follows 14,000 children born in 2001
through kindergarten entry.
11
The ECLS-K used a multistage probability sample design to select the sample of children attending kindergarten in 1998. The primary
sampling units (PSUs) were geographic areas consisting of counties or groups of counties. The second-stage consisted of public and
private schools within sampled PSUs. The final stage units were students within schools. The school frame was freshened in the spring
of 1998 to include newly opened schools that were not included in the original sample. Once the sample children were identified, parent
contact information was obtained from the school, which was used to locate parents and seek consent for the child assessments and
parent interviews. Completion rates (or response rates that are conditioned on earlier stages of data collection) for the fall of
kindergarten interviews were high: 89.9 percent of child assessments were completed, 85.3 percent of parent interviews were completed,
and over 90 percent of the teacher interviews were completed.

9

who lived with an unmarried mother as of the fall of kindergarten interview.12 We focus on single
mothers because they constitute about two-thirds of eligible subsidy recipients (Herbst, 2008).
Exclusions from the sample are made if children were living in two-parent families (14,129) or
missing data on BMI (438), child care arrangements (3,070), or child care subsidies (34). We
exclude an additional 387 children attending Head Start, since the decision to participate in this early
intervention program is not influenced by child care subsidies. Furthermore, the goal of Head Start is
to increase school readiness through an array of child and family services, whereas CCDF child care
subsidies are aimed at facilitating employment.13 Rates of item non-response on the remaining child
and family variables are low, usually well below one percent of the final sample, and we retain these
cases by imputing zeros for the missing values and creating dummy variables to control for the
possibility of non-random imputation. Our analysis sample consists of 3,113 children in the fall of
kindergarten and 3,007 children in the spring of kindergarten.
Our outcome variables are based on body mass index (BMI), which is calculated as weight in
kilograms divided by height in meters squared (kg/m2). In addition to estimating models using BMI
expressed in levels and logarithms, we construct binary indicators to represent children who are
overweight or obese. For children ages two to 19, BMI values are plotted on growth charts from the
Center’s for Disease Control (CDC) to determine the corresponding BMI-for-age percentile.
Children at or above the 85th percentile of the gender- and age-specific BMI distribution are coded as
overweight, while children at or above the 95th percentile of the BMI distribution are coded as
obese.14

12

Single mothers are identified in the ECLS-K by using the variable P1HPARNT, which describes the child’s living arrangements. We
define single mother families as those in which the child lived with the “biological mother only.”
13
Additional minor exclusions from the sample are made due to an inability to match children to the 2000 Census geocoded data (5
observations) and mothers with nonsensical ages (3 observations).
14
For additional information on the CDC growth charts, see http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpa/growthcharts/resources/growthchart.pdf.
Also, see http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts/. Until recently, this nomenclature differed across children (ages two to 19) and adults.
Children with BMIs above the 95th percentile of the gender- and age-specific distribution were considered “overweight,” and those above
the 85th percentile were considered “at-risk-for-overweight.” However, an expert committee convened by the American Medical
Association (AMA) in collaboration with the Department of Health and Human Services Health Resources and Services Administration

10

A key independent variable in our analysis is a dummy variable indicating whether a child
received subsidized, non-parental child care in the year prior to kindergarten. Parents are asked a
series of questions about child care utilization during the past 12 months, including the types of
arrangements used, the amount of time that each arrangement was used, whether there was a cost
associated with each arrangement, and the amount paid for care. Regarding subsidy receipt, parents
were asked the following: “Did any of the following people or organizations help to pay for this …
provider to care for {CHILD} the year before {he/she} started kindergarten?” Four possible choices
were then presented to parents, and we code those answering “a social service agency or welfare
office” as receiving a child care subsidy.

Similar questions appear in several nationally

representative surveys (e.g., National Survey of America’s Families and the Survey of Income and
Program Participation), and other researchers construct indicators of subsidy receipt based on them
(Blau & Tekin, 2007; Herbst, 2008; Tekin, 2007). The U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services (1999) finds that between 12 and 15 percent of eligible families received a CCDF subsidy in
1998. In our ECLS-K sample, 14.5 percent of children are coded as receiving subsidized care in the
same year.15
Another key variable is an indicator of early maternal work, defined as a dummy variable that
equals unity if a given mother was employed at any point between the child’s birth and kindergarten
entry. We also create mutually exclusive groupings of child care arrangements. Specifically, we
code children as attending relative care (which includes caregiving inside and outside the child’s
home), non-relative care (nanny, babysitter, or family-based), center-based care (daycare center), or
school-based services (prekindergarten, preschool, and nursery school). Children who did not attend
any of these services are coded as receiving parent care. A non-trivial number of children received

(HRSA) and the CDC recently endorsed the use of “overweight” and “obese” for children. See this link for more information on the
adjustment: http://www.ama-assn.org/ama1/pub/upload/mm/433/ped_obesity_recs.pdf.
15
Rates of child care subsidy receipt calculated by researchers using the NSAF match closely our ECLS-K estimate. For example, Tekin
(2007) calculates a participation rate of 11.6 percent for a sample of single mothers, and Herbst (2008) estimates a take-up rate of 13.9
percent, also from a sample of single mothers.

11

child care from more than one provider, so we create a decision rule to ensure mutually exclusive and
exhaustive categories.16
We exploit the richness of the ECLS-K to control for a detailed vector of child and family
characteristics as of the fall or spring of kindergarten. Key child characteristics include gender, age,
race, and birth weight. We capture parental reports of children’s health status through a set of
dummy variables indicating whether the child is in excellent health, good health, or fair/poor health.
Health status is also proxied by an indicator for whether the child experienced a premature birth.
Children’s physical activity habits are captured through variables denoting the number of hours per
day the child watches television, the number of days per week the child experiences vigorous
exercise, and whether the child ever participated in athletics. We control for children’s eating habits
and opportunities to consume healthy meals by incorporating variables for whether the child eats a
school-provided breakfast and receives a free/reduced price school lunch. Also of relevance here are
controls for the number of days per week the family eats breakfast and dinner together. Parental time
and skill inputs are captured by the mother’s age, an indicator for whether the child’s parents were
married at birth, the family’s socioeconomic status, and parent’s educational expectations for the
child. Socioeconomic status (SES) is a composite measure incorporating the mother’s and father’s
(or legal guardian’s) educational attainment, mother’s and father’s (or legal guardian’s) job
occupation, and total household income. We parameterize the SES measure through a set of dummy
variables indicating the quintiles of the full ECLS-K distribution. Other parental resources and goods
inputs are represented by food stamps participation and the number of children in the household.
Summary statistics are presented in Table 1. The average BMI is 16.5, and approximately 29
percent of children are overweight as of the fall of kindergarten interview. Fully 13 percent of

16

Our decision rule is constructed so that we drop only those children who receive exclusively Head Start. Therefore, our indicator of
subsidy receipt omits those reporting subsidy receipt while participating only in Head Start. A child participating in Head Start along
with another service is coded as participating in the non-Head Start service. The remaining tie-breakers are settled as follows: relative
and center: center; non-relative and center: center; relative and school: school; non-relative and school: school; non-relative, relative, and
center: center; non-relative, relative, and school: school.

12

children are obese. This figure is consistent with recent data from the CDC, which reports an obesity
rate of 12.4 percent among children ages two to five.17 As shown in Table 1, the BMIs of children
receiving subsidized and unsubsidized care are quite similar for the fall and spring of kindergarten.
Rates of overweight are slightly higher for subsidized children at both measurement dates. Fully 31
percent and 32 percent of children receiving subsidies are overweight in the fall and spring of
kindergarten, respectively, compared to 29 percent and 30 percent for unsubsidized children.
However, none of these differences are statistically significant. Rates of obesity are also similar
across these groups of children.
As previously stated, approximately 15 percent of the sample received a child care subsidy in
the year prior to kindergarten entry. Consistent with previous studies, mothers of subsidized children
are more likely to be employed than their unsubsidized counterparts (89 percent compared to 82
percent). Participation rates in the various child care arrangements are as follows: 16 percent of
children received exclusively parent care; 22 percent received care from a relative; seven percent
received care from a non-relative; 16 percent participated in center-based care; and 39 percent
participated in a school-based program.

As expected, subsidized children are more likely to use

center-based care than their unsubsidized counterparts (40 percent compared to 12 percent). The use
of non-relative care is also significantly greater among subsidy recipients (10 percent compared to 7
percent). Non-recipients are substantially more likely to utilize care from parents and relatives. This
pattern is consistent with previous research indicating that subsidies effectively shift children from
informal child care settings into the formal market (Tekin, 2005).
Table 1 also shows that subsidized children are less likely to be white and more likely to be
black. Both groups of children are equally likely to be born prematurely and have low birth weights.
Parental reports of children’s health status reveal that subsidized and unsubsidized children are
equally likely to be in excellent health, but subsidized children watch slightly more hours of
17

This figure is based on data from 2003-2006. See http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpa/obesity/childhood/index.htm.

13

television each day and are less likely to have participated in organized sports at some point before
kindergarten entry. Not surprisingly, a much greater share of subsidized children report eating
school-provided breakfast and lunch.
The descriptive results presented in Table 1 suggest that rates of overweight and obesity are
equivalent across subsidized and unsubsidized children. Table 2 further explores this issue by
comparing children’s fall of kindergarten weight outcomes across mothers’ work status (Panel A)
and the child care arrangements used in the year before kindergarten (Panel B). Looking first at
Panel A, we find only minor differences in BMI, overweight, and obesity across subsidized and
unsubsidized children, regardless of whether the mother worked since childbirth. Substantially
greater differences emerge when we compare children’s weight outcomes across mothers with
different work histories.

Specifically, children of employed mothers are more likely to be

overweight and obese, regardless of subsidy receipt status. Summary statistics for the full sample
(shown in the first column) reveal that 30 percent of children of working mothers are overweight and
14 percent are obese. The comparable figures for children of non-working mothers are 26 and 12
percent, respectively.
Turning to the non-parental arrangements (Panel B), we once again find small differences in
weight outcomes across subsidized and unsubsidized children. If anything, non-recipients tend to
have slightly higher BMIs and are more likely to be overweight and obese. However, the story
changes dramatically when we compare the weight outcomes of children in parent care with those
receiving subsidies. Subsidized children consistently have higher BMIs, and the prevalence of
overweight and obesity is substantially greater. For example, 31 percent of subsidized children in
center-based care are overweight and 14 percent are obese. Fully 35 percent of subsidized children
attending school-based services are overweight, while 15 percent are obese. On the other hand, 24
percent of children in parent care are overweight, and 10 percent are obese. In fact, based on the
summary statistics for the full sample, it appears that children in any non-parental arrangement—
14

regardless of whether it is subsidized—have higher BMIs and are more likely to be overweight and
obese than those in parent care.
Together, the results presented in Table 2 highlight the potential for child care subsidies to
operate through maternal employment and participation in non-parental child care. By encouraging
low-income mothers to work and by creating incentives to shift children into formal child care
settings, subsidies place children in environments where the average child is more likely to be
overweight and obese. We will investigate these channels more explicitly in the regression analysis
that follows.
IV. Empirical Model
Our goal is to examine the relationship between child care subsidy receipt in the year prior to
kindergarten and children’s weight outcomes in the fall and spring of kindergarten. Formally, we can
specify this relationship in the context of the following regression model:
Wi = αSi + φEi + Cδ + Xβ + εi,

(1)

where W is one of four weight outcomes for child i in the ECLS-K; S is a binary indicator for
whether a child care subsidy is received by child i; E is a binary indicator of early maternal work; C
is a matrix of child care arrangements; X is a matrix of observable child and family determinants of
children’s health and development, and ε is an idiosyncratic error term. The α, φ, δ, and β are the
estimated parameters. Recall that the four weight outcomes include the level and log of child i’s
BMI and indicators for whether child i is overweight and obese. For ease of interpretation, (1) is
estimated using ordinary least squares (OLS) regression.18 Coefficients are weighted using the
ECLS-K Base Year Parent weight, and standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary heteroskedasticity
using robust standard errors.
An obstacle to obtaining an unbiased estimate of α is the potential endogeneity of subsidy
18

The least squares estimates of coefficients in linear probability models are consistent estimates of average probability derivatives, but
the standard errors are biased as a result of heteroskedasticity (Angrist & Krueger, 1999). As we note in the text, we report standard
errors that are robust to any form of heteroskedasticity.

15

receipt. For example, employed mothers who obtain a child care subsidy and utilize non-parental
care may be systematically different from those who do not in ways that are not captured by
researchers. If high-skilled and physically healthy mothers are more likely to work and use child
care, then failing to control for these maternal characteristics would lead to an upward bias of α if
these characteristics are positively correlated with those of the children.

Another source of

endogeneity stems from the possibility that children’s health and well-being influence maternal
choices regarding work and child care. Mothers with unhealthy children, for example, may decide to
remain out of the labor force or place their children in specialized child care settings. If these choices
are correlated with unobserved child characteristics and the outcomes of interest, estimates of α will
once again be biased.
We attempt to guard against potential endogeneity by adding a rich set of child and family
characteristics to (1). In particular, we capture the health status of children through such controls as
premature birth, low birth weight, and parental reports of children’s well-being. We also remove the
differential propensities across children to engage in sedentary activities (e.g., watching television)
versus those requiring substantial physical activity (e.g., participation in athletics). Family routines
that are correlated with children’s weight are proxied by the extent to which families eat meals
together, and whether children eat breakfast and lunch at school. Finally, we add controls for family
SES and food stamp receipt in order to account for differences across families in the ability to
purchase high quality food and support extracurricular activities.
A potential concern is that our extensive set of child and family controls may not sufficiently
account for the selection into subsidy receipt. As a result, we estimate models that incorporate
county fixed effects. These eliminate bias from unobserved characteristics across children residing
in the same jurisdiction. For the purposes of this paper, fixed effects specified at the county-level
hold a number of advantages. Given that state-level economic and policy conditions are identical for
children in the same county, these factors are automatically controlled for and are not needed in the
16

model. This is particularly important for states’ social policy environment, including the flurry of
recent welfare reforms, expansions to the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), and pre-kindergarten
initiatives, all of which may influence mothers’ work and child care decisions and children’s wellbeing. In addition, to the extent that the availability of fast food restaurants, supermarkets, and parks
is unevenly distributed across the states, inclusion of county fixed effects will control for these
factors as well. Another advantage is that any sub-state-level variation in families’ demographic
characteristics, physical activity and food options, or the social policy environment is captured by the
county fixed effects. Again, this is particularly important for the food and policy environment in
which disadvantaged children are raised. For example, substantial evidence suggests that fast food
restaurants tend to be clustered in low-income urban and rural neighborhoods (Block et al., 2004;
Morland et al., 2002). In addition, a number of studies find that county administrators of subsidy
programs have the authority to shape policy decisions with little oversight (Herbst & Tekin, 2008;
Blau & Tekin, 2007; Layzer & Collins, 2000; Blank, et al., 2001; Mitchell et al., 1997). These locallevel sources of unobserved heterogeneity are removed by the county fixed effects.19
Although the inclusion of early maternal work and child care arrangements in (1) is
interesting in its own right, we argue that such controls are crucial for understanding the ways in
which subsidies influence children’s weight outcomes. In particular, if the impact of subsidy receipt
operates through the increase in maternal employment, one might expect little or no change in the
subsidy estimates after child care arrangements are included in the model. However, if the impact of
subsidies operates through children’s attendance in non-parental care, inclusion of the arrangement
variables should render the estimates on subsidy receipt statistically insignificant. To test these
19
An alternative approach to obtaining an unbiased estimate of α is through the use of instrumental variables (IV). The IV method
requires at least one variable that is correlated with subsidy receipt but uncorrelated with children’s weight outcomes. We experiment
with models using characteristics of the states’ child care subsidies system (e.g., CCDF expenditures per child, reimbursement rates, and
eligibility thresholds) as identifying instruments. One concern is that these variables, while being correlated with subsidy receipt, may
also reflect the states’ generosity or attitude toward assisting children and this may be correlated with weight outcomes. The subsidy
coefficients from these models are qualitatively similar to those presented in the paper, but they are much larger in magnitude. Given the
concerns about the plausibility of the instruments and the fact that these results are qualitatively similar to the current results, we do not
present the IV models.

17

channels, we begin by estimating models that include just the indicator of subsidy receipt, followed
by models that sequentially add controls for maternal employment and child care arrangements.
The primary coefficient of interest in (1) is α, which captures the impact of child care subsidy
receipt on children’s weight outcomes. For models in which the dependent variable is BMI, the
estimated parameter represents the conditional mean effect of subsidy receipt across all children in
the sample and over the distribution of BMI.20 For models specifying overweight and obesity, the
coefficient is interpreted as the average partial change in the likelihood of moving to the upper tail of
the BMI distribution. In both cases, however, the OLS coefficients mask heterogeneous effects of
child care subsidies across children’s observable characteristics, including BMI.
Therefore, OLS estimates provide an incomplete picture if, for example, there are a priori
reasons to be believe that key variables influence not only the conditional mean expectation, but also
the expectation at the tails and other policy-relevant points in the outcome distribution. In the current
analysis, the distributional effects of child care subsidies are of particular interest.

For example,

consider the policy implications associated with changes in BMI at the lower and upper tails of the
distribution. If child care subsidies lead to increases in BMI among underweight children, one could
reasonably argue that this form of assistance may not impose additional health risks on already
fragile children. For extremely low-income families that experience frequent food shortages, the
introduction of a child care subsidy may improve health and development by allowing children to
experience stable and healthy food options in the child care environment. In addition, an increase in
disposable income may improve the ability of disadvantaged families to decrease consumption of
low-cost, calorie-dense fast food and increase consumption of fresh fruits and vegetables. On the
other hand, if parents and child care staff are aware that subsidies increase BMI among overweight
children, such information can be used to aid parental decisions about the optimal environment for

20
In other words, OLS assumes that covariates only affect the location of the conditional distribution of the outcomes, not its scale or any
other attribute of its distribution (Koenker & Hallock, 2001).

18

their children. Child care directors can also use this information to address nutrition and physical
activity training for staff, and teachers may restructure daily schedules in a way that maximizes
indoor and outdoor physical activity. Finally, state-level child care administrators may encourage
child care providers services operating in low-income neighborhoods to increase healthy food
options to accommodate children receiving subsidized care.
Based on these considerations, we explore heterogeneous effects of child care subsidies at
different points in the distribution of children’s BMI. To do so, we utilize quantile regression
methods (Hao & Naiman, 2007; Koenker & Bassett, 1978; Businsky, 1998). Quantile regression is a
semi-parametric technique that is used to characterize the entire conditional distribution of a
continuous dependent variable. This is achieved by dividing the cumulative distribution of a random
function into equal intervals (e.g., quartiles or deciles). Then, unlike OLS, which derives estimates
by minimizing the sum of squared residuals across the entire distribution, quantile regression
estimates are derived for each subsection defined by pn (Koenker & Hallock, 2001)21. Formally,
parameter estimates at the nth quantile are calculated by:

min ∑ pn [ yi − k ( xi , β )] ,
k

(2)

i

where the function pn(.) is the “check function,” and k(xi,β) is specified as a parametric function in
order to generate the estimates.22 Each coefficient produced by the quantile regression model is
interpreted as the partial derivative of the conditional quantile with respect to the observable
covariates. 23 In the current study, coefficients on child care subsidies represent the marginal change
in the nth quantile of BMI due to changes in subsidy receipt status. Insofar as coefficients of varying

21
22

The term “quantile” refers to the general case.
The pn(. ) is called the “check function” because it looks like check-mark when it is plotted (Angrist & Pischke, 2008). Specifically,

⎧ n x u, u > 0
.
p n (u ) = u (n − I (u < 0) = ⎨
⎩(n − 1) x u , u > 0
To estimate the quantile regression models, we use the ivqte command developed by Frolich and Melly (2008) for STATA 10.1.
Note that quantile regression is not the same as fitting OLS models for subsets of the conditional distribution of BMI. The latter
approach is equivalent to estimating a model on samples based on truncated dependent variables, resulting in biased estimates.
23

19

magnitudes are estimated at each quantile of children’s BMI, we can interpret such results as
evidence of heterogeneous effects of child care subsidies throughout the distribution of BMI.24
V. Estimation Results
Discussion of the empirical results proceeds as follows. Table 3 presents the OLS estimates
of the impact of child care subsidies on children’s weight outcomes in the fall of kindergarten. The
odd-numbered columns show the results without county fixed effects, and the even-numbered
columns add these controls. To test whether the impact of subsidy receipt operates through maternal
employment and/or children’s child care arrangements, Table 3 presents results from models that
incorporate just the indicator of subsidy receipt (Panel A), subsidy receipt and maternal work (Panel
B), subsidy receipt and child care arrangements (Panel C), and all three sets of variables (Panel D).
The equivalent results for children’s weight outcomes in the spring of kindergarten are presented in
Table 4. We then turn our attention to exploring heterogeneous subsidy effects. Table 5 (fall of
kindergarten) and Table 6 (spring of kindergarten) show the coefficients from the quantile regression
analysis of BMI. To maintain consistency, we begin with models that incorporate just subsidy
receipt, then sequentially add maternal employment and child care arrangements.25
OLS and Fixed Effects Results
As shown in Panel A of Table 3, child care subsidy receipt is associated with increases in
BMI and a greater likelihood of being overweight and obese. In specifications without county fixed
effects, the coefficient on subsidy receipt is consistently positive but not statistically significant.
Adding controls for unobserved heterogeneity increases the magnitude and precision of the subsidy
estimate in all models. This suggests that, if anything, the impact of subsidy receipt is likely to be
24

Quantile regression methods have been increasingly utilized in economics to study the returns to education (Arias, Hallock, & Sosa
Escudero, 2001), changes in wage structure and inequality (Buchinsky, 1994, 1997; Gonzales & Miles, 2001; Garcia, Hernandez &
Lopez-Nicolas, 2001), union wage effects (Chamberlain, 1994), and birth outcomes (Abrevaya, 2001). See Empirical Economics vol.
26, no. 1, 2001 for further examples on some of the applications of quantile regressions. We also located a few papers using quantile
regression to estimate child and adult correlates of BMI. Examples of this work include: Terry, Wei, & Esserman (2007) and Beyerlein,
Toschke, & von Kries (2008).
25
To economize on space, we only present the coefficients on our key variables. The coefficient estimates from other variables are
mostly consistent with our expectations and in line with those in the relevant literature. They are available from the authors upon
request.

20

biased downward. As shown in column (4), subsidy receipt is associated with a 1.7 percent increase
in children’s fall of kindergarten BMI. The coefficients in column (6) and (8) suggest that subsidized
children are 5.2 percentage points more likely to be overweight and 3.1 percentage points more likely
to be obese.
Adding a control for early maternal work (Panel B) leads to only a small reduction in the
magnitude of the subsidy coefficients, and the standard errors remain unchanged. Subsidy receipt is
now associated with a 4.7 percentage point increase in the likelihood of being overweight and a 2.8
percentage point increase in the likelihood of obesity. Coefficients on maternal work are consistent
with previous research. Children whose mothers were employed at some point between birth and
kindergarten experience a 1.5 percent increase in BMI. Such children are also 4.7 percentage points
more likely to be overweight and 2.7 percentage points more likely to be obese.
Substituting the vector of child care arrangements for the indicator of maternal work (Panel
C) leads to a large reduction in the subsidy coefficients, and renders the estimates statistically
insignificant in all models. For example, the coefficient on subsidy receipt is reduced by 53 percent
in the log BMI model and about 44 percent in the overweight and obesity models compared to the
baseline subsidy estimate in Panel A. Coefficients on the child care arrangements, however, imply
positive and statistically significant increases in BMI, overweight, and obesity.

For example,

children participating in relative care are 6.9 percentage points more likely to be overweight and 4.8
percentage points more likely to be obese than their counterparts in parent care. Children attending
center-based care experience the largest increases in each outcome. Such children have BMIs that
are 4.0 percent higher, rates of overweight that 9.9 percentage points higher, and rates of obesity that
are 6.0 percentage points higher. There is also evidence that participation school-based care is
positively associated with children’s weight outcomes, although the effect sizes are not as large as
those for center-based care. Interestingly, rates of overweight and obesity among children in nonrelative care are not significantly different from those in parent care.
21

When the full model is estimated (Panel D), the coefficients on child care subsidies
experience a further drop in magnitude and remain statistically insignificant. It is interesting to note
that a similar pattern of results emerges for early maternal employment.

Although maternal

employment is initially associated with significant increases in children’s weight outcomes, these
effects attenuate and become imprecisely estimated once the child care controls are added. On the
other hand, the estimates for child care arrangements are largely unchanged by the inclusion of
maternal work. Participation in center-based care continues to be strongly related to children’s
weight outcomes. Children attending this mode of care have BMIs that are 3.7 percent higher, rates
of overweight that 9.0 percentage points higher, and rates of obesity that are 5.5 percentage points
higher than their counterparts in parent care.
Results presented in Table 3 are consistent with the picture emerging from the descriptive
evidence in Table 1 and 2. Although subsidized children tend to have slightly higher BMIs and are
somewhat more likely to be overweight and obese, these differences are not nearly as large as those
between children in parental and non-parental child care arrangements.

Accounting for the

differential participation in child care settings renders the differences in weight outcomes between
subsidized and unsubsidized children statistically insignificant. Variation in employment rates, on
the other hand, does not appear to be responsible for the subsidy-induced changes in children’s
weight.

Rather, the subsidy effects operate through the shifting of children into non-parental

arrangements, where, children have higher BMIs and rates of overweight and obesity. Furthermore,
our results indicate that participation in center-based care is primarily responsible for the larger
weight outcomes among subsidized children. Two pieces of evidence support this claim. Centerbased care is the predominant arrangement among children receiving subsidies, and this child care
setting is consistently associated with the largest increases in BMI, overweight, and obesity.26

26
We subject this assertion to a more rigorous test. We re-estimate the basic regression of children’s weight outcomes on subsidy
receipt, but only among children in different child care arrangements. In the model using the log of BMI as the dependent variable, the

22

Table 4 examines the persistence of subsidy, maternal work, and child care arrangement
effects. Results in Panel A indicate that the impact of subsidy receipt attenuates between the fall and
spring of kindergarten.

Generally speaking, the subsidy coefficients decrease in magnitude as

compared to those from the fall of kindergarten, and none of the coefficients are statistically
significant. Adding the controls for maternal employment and child care, as shown in Panels B
through D, further reduces the magnitude of the subsidy effects. The impact of early maternal work
also attenuates by the spring of kindergarten. Interestingly, strong associations between child care
arrangements and children’s weight outcomes are still present as of the end of kindergarten. When
the full model is estimated (Panel D), participation in relative care is associated with a 2.1 percent
increase in BMI, center-based care is associated with a 3.8 percent increase in BMI, and schoolbased care is associated with a 1.5 percent increase in BMI. Furthermore, center-based care is
expected to increase the prevalence of overweight by 6.8 percentage points and obesity by 7.6
percentage points. School-based care also remains significantly related to overweight and obesity.
Quantile Regression Results
Having established a relationship between subsidy receipt and children’s weight outcomes at
the upper tail of BMI, we now turn to the quantile regression results, which characterize the entire
distribution of BMI.27 Table 5 shows the estimates for the fall of kindergarten BMI, and Table 6
shows the estimates for the spring of kindergarten BMI. As previously stated, we begin by including
only the measure of child care subsidy receipt, and then we add controls for early maternal work and
child care arrangements. All models show coefficients using the level parameterization of BMI
across the 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, and 0.9 quantiles.

County fixed effects are

incorporated into all models.
coefficient on subsidy receipt implies a statistically significant 3.8 percent increase in BMI among children in center-based and family
child care homes. As for the obesity regression, the coefficient on subsidy receipt implies a statistically significant 6.8 percentage point
increase in obesity among such children. Across no other arrangement were any of the subsidy coefficients significant.
27
We also estimated quantile regression models using ln BMI. The results from these models are very similar to those with the BMI in
terms of both pattern and significance.

23

As shown in Panel A of Table 5, we find evidence of substantial heterogeneity in response to
child care subsidy receipt. For comparison purposes, it is useful to recall that the average effect of
subsidy receipt in the fall of kindergarten is 0.308 BMI points (Panel A, Table 3). When the full
distribution of BMI is characterized, the impact of subsidy receipt ranges from 0.065 to 0.420.
Generally speaking, the magnitude of subsidy effect increases monotonically as children move to
higher BMI quantiles. Throughout the first three quantiles, the coefficient is small in magnitude and
statistically insignificant, suggesting that child care subsidies are not associated with increases in
BMI at the lower end of the distribution. Subsidy receipt, however, is associated with increasingly
large and precisely estimated gains in BMI among children above the median. In particular, we find
that BMIs among subsidized children increase from 0.151 points at the 0.5 quantile to 0.397 points at
the 0.9 quantile, peaking at 0.420 points at the 0.8 quantile. This shift represents an increase of 163
percent.
Adding the control for maternal employment (Panel B) reduces somewhat the magnitude of
subsidy coefficients across all BMI quantiles, although qualitative story remains the same.
Furthermore, the impact of maternal work does not reveal a consistent pattern over the BMI
distribution, and very few of the coefficients are statistically significant. Incorporating the vector of
child care arrangements (Panel D) renders statistically insignificant all of the coefficients on subsidy
receipt and most of the coefficients on maternal employment.
As shown in Panel D, an interesting story emerges from the estimates on child care
arrangements. On the one hand, it appears that center-based care leads to comparatively large and
stable increases in BMI throughout most of the distribution. With the exception of the highest BMI
quantile, where the effect is 0.801 points, the impact of center care ranges between 0.301 and 0.483
points over the BMI distribution. A relatively stable effect size throughout the distribution of
children’s BMI amounts to a location shift: as center-based participation increases BMI among
children in the middle of the distribution, children located at other points along the distribution
24

experience similar increases in BMI, causing the entire distribution to shift to the right.

The

remaining child care arrangements exhibit a different pattern, characterized by BMI increases
concentrated at the lower and upper tails of the distribution. Participation in relative care, for
example, is associated with statistically significant increases in BMI at the 0.1 and 0.2 quantiles,
inconsistent effects throughout much of the middle of the distribution, and a large effect at the 0.9
quantile (0.597 BMI points). Similarly, the only quantile at which non-relative care significantly
raises BMI is 0.1, with an effect size of 0.312 BMI points. Participation in school-based care
significantly increases BMI only among children at the upper tail of the distribution (0.522 BMI
points). Across many of the other quantiles, school settings are associated with reductions in BMI,
although in no case is the estimate statistically significant.
Quantile regression results based on the spring of kindergarten BMI (Table 6) are quite
similar to the pattern established in the fall of kindergarten. Although the effect sizes attenuate, the
range of subsidy coefficients in Panel A remains large (from 0.021 to 0.537 BMI points) and most of
the coefficients at the upper tail are statistically significant. The relationship between subsidy receipt
and BMI continues to be strongly monotonic: For children below the median BMI, subsidy receipt is
associated with gains ranging from essentially zero to 0.0.86 BMI points. For children above the
median BMI, the gains range from 0.214 to 0.537 BMI points.
Generally speaking, the pattern of results exhibited in Panel B, C, and D is also broadly
consistent with the fall of kindergarten. Parameter estimates suggest that subsidy receipt remains
significantly related to BMI at the upper tail even after accounting for early maternal work, but the
relationship attenuates after incorporating controls for child care arrangements.

Attendance in

school-based services continues to increase BMI among children at the upper tail, but some of the
significant effects for relative and non-relative care as of the fall of kindergarten are no longer
significant in the spring.

It is interesting to note that the impact of center care tends to increase in

magnitude, become more heterogeneous, and remain highly statistically significant. For children
25

below the median, center care increases BMI between 0.255 and 0.402 points. For children above
the median, the effect size increases from 0.490 to 0.728 points. It is difficult to interpret these
findings, but we offer two explanations. First, the increased magnitude and heterogeneity reflect the
possibility that children in center care are more likely to enroll in kindergarten programs that are less
attentive to serving healthy foods and allowing children sufficient time to exercise throughout the
day. The other explanation is that any center-induced increase in BMI did not reveal itself in
children’s weight until the spring of kindergarten.
VI. Conclusions
The U.S. child care subsidy system places considerable emphasis on moving welfare
recipients into work, and keeping those currently employed out of the welfare system. Indeed, a
number of recent studies suggest that a child care subsidy is an effective policy tool for increasing the
labor force participation of single mothers (e.g., Blau & Tekin, 2007). Furthermore, the principle of
“parental choice,” in which families are able to use subsidies to purchase virtually any legally
operating child care service, is beneficial to low-income families struggling to balance work-life
obligations. However, there may be unintended consequences associated with child care subsidies.
In particular, there are a number of design features associated with states’ CCDF plans that create
disincentives for parents to choose high-quality care and for providers to make costly qualityenhancing improvements (Herbst & Tekin, 2008).

Consequently, a number of observers have

become concerned about the implications of child care subsidies for children’s health and well-being
(e.g., Adams & Rohacek, 2002).
In this paper, we seek to understand the relationship between child care subsidies, measured
in the year before kindergarten, and children’s weight outcomes throughout kindergarten. Our
findings suggest that child care subsidy receipt is associated with increases in BMI as well as
increases in the likelihood of being overweight and obese. We also find initial support for the claim
that the estimated subsidy effects operate through children’s participation in non-parental child care
26

settings. Specifically, our results point to enrollments in center-based care as the primary mechanism
through which the subsidy effects operate. Children in this type of arrangement have substantially
higher BMIs and experience a significantly greater likelihood of being overweight and obese. In
light of our results, it is no coincidence that center care is the predominant child care mode among
subsidized children. Estimates from the quantile regression models provide evidence of substantial
heterogeneity in response to child care subsidy receipt: BMI gains due to subsidized care are
dramatically different depending on where children are located in the BMI distribution. Children at
the upper end of the distribution experience BMI gains that are greater than the gains among children
at the lower end. Once again, our quantile regression results imply that center-based care emerges as
a likely candidate to explain the pattern of subsidy effects.
A possible explanation for these results is that child care subsidies induce mothers to choose
formal arrangements that are of questionable quality. As previously stated, the CCDF’s principle of
“parental choice” allows parents to purchase child care services operating outside states’ regulatory
regimes. Furthermore, conditioning eligibility for subsidies on employment and income creates
challenges for maintaining stable child care arrangements. In particular, if changes in employment
and income are related to lapses in subsidy receipt, such instability could undermine child wellbeing. States’ reimbursement rates can also influence quality. If reimbursements are below the
federally recommended level, families may not have access to high-quality care, thereby reducing
incentives for providers to make important quality enhancements.
Indeed, recent empirical work seems to confirm these critiques. Several studies find that
subsidized children receive lower-quality care than other low-income, unsubsidized children (Adams
et al., 2001; Jones-Branch et al., 2004; Mocan, 2007; Raikes, Raikes, & Wilcox, 2005; Queralt,
Witte, & Greisinger, 2000; Thornburg et al., 2002; Whitebook et al., 2004; Witt, Queralt, & Witte,
2000). As summarized in Story, Kaphingst, and French (2006), another body of evidence suggests
that many child care centers in the U.S. fail to provide children with healthy foods and sufficient
27

opportunities for physical activity. Finally, a recent analysis by Herbst and Tekin (2008) finds that
subsidized children perform worse on tests of reading and math ability and teacher’s assessments of
externalizing

behavior

problems,

self-control,

28

and

interpersonal

skills.

References
Abrevaya, J. 2001. “The Effects of Demographics and Maternal Behavior on the Distribution of Birth
Outcomes.” Empirical Economics, 26, 247–257.
Adams, D., Roach, M., Riley, D., & Edie, D. (2001). Are Program Characteristics Linked to Child
Care Quality? Wisconsin Child Care Research Partnership Issue Brief 3. Madison, WI: University of
Wisconsin-Extension.
Adams, G., & Rohacek, M. (2002). More Than A Work Support? Issues Around Integrating Child
Development Goals into the Child Care Subsidy System. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 17,
418-440.
Anderson, P., Butcher, K. (2006). Childhood Obesity: Trends and Potential Causes. The Future of
Children, 16, 19-46.
Anderson, P., Butcher, K., & Levine. (2003). Maternal Employment and Overweight Children.
Journal of Health Economics, 22, 477-504.
Angrist, J. & Krueger, A. (1999). Empirical Strategies in Labor Economics, in Handbook of Labor
Economics Volume 3A, Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Angrist, J., & Pischke, J. (2008). Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empirisist’s Companion.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Arias, O., Hallock, K., & Sosa-Escudero, W. (2001). Individual Heterogeneity in the Returns to
Schooling: Instrumental Variables Quantile Regression Using Twins Data. Empirical Economics, 26,
7–40.
Bainbridge, J., Meyers, M., Tanaka, S., & Waldfogel, J. (2005). Who Gets An Early education?
Family Income and the Enrollment of Three- to Five-year-olds from 1968 to 2000. Social Science
Quarterly, 86, 724-745.
Baker, M., Gruber, J., & Milligan, K. (2008). Universal Child Care, Maternal Labor Supply, and
Family Well-being. Journal of Political Economy, 116, 709-745.
Beyerlein, Andreas, Toschke Andre M., & von Kries Rudiger. (2008). Breastfeeding and Childhood
Obesity: Shift of the Entire BMI Distribution or Only the Upper Parts? Obesity, 16, 2730-3.
Bernal, R. & Keane, M. (2008). Child Care choices and Children’s Cognitive Achievement: The
Case of Single Mothers, Universidad de los Andes Working Paper WP-July 31.
Blau, D. (1999). The Effect of Child Care Characteristics on Child Development. Journal of
Human Resources, 34, 786-822.
Blau, D. & Tekin, E. (2007). The Determinants and Consequences of Child Care Subsidies for
Single Mothers in the USA. Journal of Population Economics, 20, 719−741.

29

Blank, H., Behr, A., & Schulman, K. (2001). State Developments in Child Care, Early Education,
and School Age Care, 2000. Washington, DC: Children’s Defense Fund.
Block, J., Scribner, R., & DeSalvo, K. (2004). Fast Food, Race/ethnicity, and Income: A Geographic
Analysis. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 27, 211-217.
Brooks-Gunn, J., Han, W., & Waldfogel, J. (2002). Maternal Employment and Child Cognitive
Outcomes in the First Three Years of Life: The NICHD Study of Early Child Care. Child
Development, 73, 1052-1072.
Buchinsky, M. (1994). Changes in U.S. Wage Structure 1963–1987: An Application of Quantile
Regression. Econometrica, 62, 405–458.
Buchinsky, M. (1997). The Dynamics of Changes in the Female Wage Distribution in the USA: A
Quantile Regression Approach. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 13, 1–30.
Bushinsky, M.. (1998). Recent Advances in Quantile Regression Models: A Practical Guide for
Empirical Research. Journal of Human Resources, 33, 88-126.
Capizzano, J., & Adams, G. (2000). The Hours That Children Under Five Spend in Child Care:
Variation Across States. Working Paper No. B-8. Washington, DC: The Urban Institute.
Cawley, J., & Feng, L. (2007). Maternal Employment and Childhood Obesity: A Search for
Mechanisms in Time Use Data. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 13600.
Chamberlain, G. (1994). Quantile Regression, Censoring and the Structure of Wages, in Advances in
Econometrics. Christopher Sims, ed. New York: Elsevier, 171–209.
Child Care Bureau (2006). 2006 CCDF State Expenditure Data. Washington, DC: U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children and Families, Child Care Bureau.
Accessed from http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ccb/data/expenditures/06acf696/toc.htm on
February 10, 2008.
Classen, T. & Hokayem, C. (2005). Childhood Influences on Youth Obesity. Economics and Human
Biology, 3, 165-187.
Courtemanche, C. (2007). Working Yourself to Death? The Relationship between Work Hours and
Obesity. Working Paper, Washington University of St. Louis.
Daniels, S. R., 2006. The Consequence of Childhood Overweight and Obesity. In S. McLanahan
(Ed.), The Future of Children: Childhood Obesity (pp. 47-68). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
and the Brookings Institution.
Deckelbaum, R. & Williams, C. (2001). Childhood Obesity: The Health Issue. Obesity Research, 9,
239S-243S.
Dietz, W. (1998). Health Consequences of Obesity in Youth: Childhood Predictors of Adult Disease.
Pediatrics, 101, 518-525.

30

Dowda, M., Pate, R., Trost, S., Joao, M., Almeida, C., & Sirard, J. (2004). Influences of Preschool
Policies and Practices on Children’s Physical Activity. Journal of Community Health, 29, 183-196.
Fertig, A.R., Glomm, G. & R., Tchernis. (Forthcoming). Maternal Employment and Childhood
Obesity: Inspecting the Mechanism. Review of Economics of the Household.
Freedman, David S., William H. Dietz, Sathanur R. Srinivasan, and Gerald S. Berenson. (1999). The
Relation of Overweight to Cardiovascular Risk Factors Among Children and Adolescents: The
Bogalusa Heart Study. Pediatrics, 103, 1175-1182.
Freedman D., Mei Z., Srinivasan S., Berenson G., & Dietz W. (2007). Cardiovascular Risk Factors
and Excess Adiposity among Overweight Children and Adolescents: The Bogalusa Heart Study.
Journal of Pediatrics, 150, 12–17.
Frizvold, D. (2007). Head Start Participation and Childhood Obesity: Does Investing in Early
Childhood Education Reduce Obesity? Working Paper, University of Michigan.
Frolich, M. & Melly, B. (2008). Estimation of Quantile Treatment Effects with STATA. Mimeo.
Avaliable at: http://www.alexandria.unisg.ch/Publikationen/46580 (2009-04-01).
Garcia, J., Hernandez, P. & Lopez-Nicolas, A. (2001). How Wide is the Gap? An Investigation of
Gender Wage Differences Using Quantile Regression. Empirical Economics, 26, 149–167.
Gonzales, Z. & Miles, D. (2001). Wage Inequality in a Developing Country: Decrease in Minimum
Wage or Increase in Education Returns. Empirical Economics, 26, 135–148.
Gortmaker, S., Peterson, K., Wiecha, J., Sobol, A., Dixit, S., Fox, M.K., & Laird, N. (1999).
Reducing Obesity via a School-Based Interdisciplinary Intervention Among Youth. Archives of
Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, 153, 409-418.
Hao, L., & Naiman, D. (2007). Quantile Regression. Sage Publications.
Herbst, C. (2008). Who are the Eligible Non-recipients of Child Care Subsidies? Children and Youth
Services Review, 30, 1037-1054.
Herbst, C., & Tekin, E. (2008). Child Care Subsidies and Child Development. National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 14474.
Hubbard, M. (2008). The Effect of Mothers' Employment and Child Care Decisions on the Body
Mass Status of Young Children. The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Working Paper,
November.
Jones-Branch, J., Torquati, J., Raikes, H., & Edwards, C. (2004). Child Care Subsidy and Quality.
Early Education and Development, 15, 329-341.
Koenker, R. & Bassett, G. (1978). The Asymptotic Distribution of the Least Absolute Error
Estimator. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 73, 618—622.

31

Koenker, R. & Hallock K. (2001). Quantile Regression: An Introduction. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 15, 143–156.
Layzer, J. & Collins, A. (2000). National Study of Child Care for Low-Income Families, State and
Community Sub-study, Interim Report, Executive Summary, Abt Associates, November.
Magnuson, K., Meyers, M., & Waldfogel, J. (2007). Public Funding and Enrollment in Formal Child
Care in the 1990s. Social Service Review, 81, 47-83.
Mitchell, A., Stoney, L., & Dichter, H. (1997). Financing Child Care in the United States: An
Illustrative Catalog of Current Strategies. Kansas City: MO: Edition E.M. Kaufman Foundation.
Mocan, N. (2007). Can Consumers Detect Lemons? An Empirical Analysis of Information
Asymmetry in the Market for Child Care. Journal of Population Economics, 20, 743-780.
Mocan, N., & Tekin E. (forthcoming). Obesity, Self-esteem, and Wages, in Economic Aspects of
Obesity, Michael Grossman and Naci Mocan (eds.), University of Chicago Press.
Morland, K., Wing, S., Roux, A., & Poole, C. (2002). Neighborhood Characteristics Associated
with the Location of Food Stores and Food Services Places. American Journal of Preventive
Medicine, 22, 23-29.
National Center for Education Statistics. (1996). Child Care and Early Education Program
Participation of Infants, Toddlers, and Preschoolers. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Education.
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD). (2003a). Does quality of
childcare affect child outcomes at age 4 ½? Developmental Psychology, 39, 451-469.
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD). (2003b). Does Amount of
Time Spent in Childcare Predict Socioemotional Adjustment during the Transition to Kindergarten?
Child Development, 74, 976-1005.
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) and Duncan, G. (2003).
Modeling the Impacts of child Care Quality on Children’s Preschool Cognitive Development. Child
Development, 74, 1454-1475.
Padget, A., & Briley, M. (2005). Dietary Intakes at Child-Care Centers in Central Texas Fail to
Meet Food Guide Pyramid Recommendations. Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 105,
790-793.
Phipps S., Lethbridge, L., & Burton, P. (2006). Long-run Consequences of Parental Paid
Work Hours for Child Overweight Status in Canada. Social Science and Medicine, 62, 977-986.
Queralt, M., Witte, A., & Greisinger, H. (2000). Championing Our Children: Changes in Quality,
Price and Availability of Child Care in the Welfare Reform Era. Working Paper 2000-07. Wellesley,
MA: Department of Economics, Wellesley College.

32

Raikes, H., Raikes, A., & Wilcox, B. (2005). Regulation, Subsidy Receipt and Provider
Characteristics: What Predicts Quality in Child Care Homes? Early Childhood Research Quarterly ,
20, 164-184.
Ruhm, C. (2004). Parental Employment and Child Cognitive Development. Journal of Human
Resources, 39, 155-192.
Ruhm, C. (2008). Maternal Employment and Adolescent Development. Labour Economics, 15,
958-983.
Serdula M., Ivery D., Coates R., Freedman D., Williamson D., & Byers T. (1993). Do Obese
Children Become Obese Adults? A review of the literature. Preventive Medicine, 22, 167–177.
Smolensky, E., & Gootman, J. (Eds.) (2003). Working Families and Growing Kids: Caring for
Children and Adolescents. National Research Council. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Story, M. (1999). School-based Approaches for Preventing and Treating Obesity. International
Journal of Obesity, 23, S43-S51.
Story, M., Kaphingst, K., & French, S. (2006). The Role of Child Care Settings in Obesity
Prevention. The Future of Children, 10, 143-168.
Strauss, R. (2000). Childhood Obesity and Self-Esteem. Pediatrics, 105, E15. Available at:
www.pediatrics.org/cgi/content/full/105/1/e15.
Tekin, E. (2005). Child Care Subsidy Receipt, Employment, and Child Care Choices of Single
Mothers. Economics Letters, 89, 1-6.
Tekin, E. (2007). Child Care Subsidies, Wages, and Employment of Single Mothers. Journal of
Human Resources, 42, 453-487.
Terry, M.B., Ying W., & Esserman, D. (2007). Maternal, Birth, and Early-Life Influences on Adult
Body Size in Women. American Journal of Epidemiology, 166, 5-13.
Thornburg, K., Scott, J., & Mayfield, W. (2002). Early childhood program in Missouri: Workforce,
quality, and policy-related findings. Report to the Midwest Child Care Research Consortium.
Columbia, MO: Center for Family and Policy Research.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children and Families. (1999).
Access to Child Care for Low-Income Working Families. Available at:
www.acf.dhhs.gov/programs/ccb/research/ccreport/ccreport.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2001). The Surgeon General’s Call to Action to
Prevent and Decrease Overweight and Obesity. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, Public Health Service, Office of the Surgeon General.
Veugelers, P. & Fitzgerald, A. (2005). Effectiveness of School Programs in Preventing Childhood
Obesity: A Multilevel Comparison. American Journal of Public Health, 95, 432-435.

33

Wang, G. & Dietz, W. (2002). Economic Burden of Obesity in Youths Aged 7 to 17 Years: 1979–
1999. Pediatrics, 10, E81.
Whitebook, M., Phillips, D., Bellm, D., Crowell, N., Almaraz, M., & Jo, J. (2004). Two ears in
Early Care and Education: A Community Portrait of Quality and Workforce Stability, Alameda
County, California. Berkeley, CA: Center for the Study of Child Care Employment, Institute of
Industrial Relations, University of California, Berkeley.
Whitaker, R., Wright, J., Pepe, M., Seidel, K., & Dietz, W.. (1997). Predicting Obesity in Young
Adulthood from Childhood and Parental Obesity. New England Journal of Medicine, 37, 869–873.
Witt, R., Queralt, M., & Witte, A. (2000). Changes in the Availability, Quality, and Price of Child
Care in Massachusetts between 1997 and 1999. Working Paper 2000-12. Wellesley, MA:
Department of Economics, Wellesley College.

34

Variable

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Full Sample
Subsidy Recipient

Weight Outcomes
BMI, Fall (N=3,113)

16.462
(2.397)
BMI, Spring (N=3,007)
16.624
(2.494)
Overweight, Fall (%, N=3,113)
0.293
(0.455)
Overweight, Spring (%, N=3,007)
0.304
(0.460)
Obese, Fall (%, N=3,113)
0.133
(0.340)
Obese, Spring (%, N=3,007)
0.134
(0.342)
Subsidy Receipt, Maternal Employment, and Child Care Arrangements
Subsidy Recipient (%)
0.145
(0.353)
Early Maternal Work (%)
0.834
(0.372)
Parent Child Care (Omitted, %)
0.159
(0.366)
Relative Child Care (%)
0.222
(0.416)
Non-Relative Child Care (%)
0.073
(0.260)
Center-Based Child Care (%)
0.156
(0.363)
School-Based Child Care (%)
0.391
(0.488)
Child Characteristics
Child’s Age (Months, Fall of K)
68.42
(4.46)
Boy (%)
0.508
(0.500)
White (Omitted, %)
0.374
(0.484)
Black (%)
0.354
(0.478)
Hispanic (%)
0.202
(0.402)
Asian (%)
0.018
(0.133)
Other Race/Ethnicity (%)
0.051
(0.220)
First-time Kindergartner (%)
0.946
(0.226)
Low Birth Weight (%)
0.073
(0.261)
Premature Birth (%)
0.178
(0.383)
Only Child (Omitted, %)
0.293
(0.455)
One Sibling (%)
0.366
(0.482)

35

Non-Recipient

16.535
(2.329)
16.663
(2.430)
0.312
(0.464)
0.323
(0.468)
0.137
(0.345)
0.139
(0.347)

16.449
(2.409)
16.617
(2.505)
0.289
(0.454)
0.301
(0.459)
0.133
(0.339)
0.134
(0.341)

1.000
(0.000)
0.892
(0.310)
0.000
(0.000)
0.151
(0.359)
0.102
(0.303)
0.399
(0.490)
0.349
(0.477)

0.000
(0.000)
0.824***
(0.381)
0.186***
(0.389)
0.234***
(0.423)
0.068**
(0.252)
0.115***
(0.319)
0.398*
(0.490)

68.33
(4.06)
0.509
(0.500)
0.325
(0.469)
0.418
(0.494)
0.167
(0.373)
0.012
(0.110)
0.076
(0.266)
0.940
(0.237)
0.057
(0.233)
0.176
(0.381)
0.229
(0.421)
0.351
(0.478)

68.44
(4.52)
0.508
(0.500)
0.382**
(0.486)
0.344***
(0.475)
0.209**
(0.406)
0.019
(0.136)
0.047***
(0.211)
0.947
(0.224)
0.076
(0.265)
0.179
(0.383)
0.304**
(0.460)
0.369
(0.483)

Two or More Siblings (%)
Child in Excellent/Very Good Health (%)
Child in Good Health (Omitted, %)
Child in Fair/Poor Health (%)
Hours/Day Child Watches TV
Days/Week Child Gets Vigorous Exercise
Ever Participated in Athletics (%)
Eats Breakfast Provided by School (%)
Receives Free/Reduced Price Lunch (%)
Family Characteristics
Mother’s Age (Years, Fall of K)

Biological Parents Married at Birth (%)
Family SES in 1st Quintile (%)
Family SES in 2nd Quintile (%)
Family SES in 3rd Quintile (%)
Family SES in 4th Quintile (%)
Family SES in 5th Quintile (Omitted, %)
Food Stamp Recipient (%)
Days/Week Family Eats Breakfast Together
Days/Week Family Eats Dinner Together
Parent Expects HS or Less for Child (%)
Parent Expects Some College for Child (%)
Parent Expects BA for Child (%)
Parent Expects > BA for Child (Omitted, %)

0.341
(0.474)
0.787
(0.409)
0.165
(0.372)
0.047
(0.213)
2.089
(1.289)
3.951
(2.382)
0.324
(0.468)
0.357
(0.479)
0.493
(0.500)

0.420
(0.494)
0.772
(0.420)
0.177
(0.382)
0.051
(0.221)
2.238
(1.258)
3.968
(2.380)
0.273
(0.446)
0.401
(0.491)
0.554
(0.498)

0.327***
(0.469)
0.790
(0.406)
0.163
(0.370)
0.047
(0.211)
2.064**
(1.293)
3.948
(2.383)
0.333**
(0.471)
0.349***
(0.477)
0.483***
(0.500)

30.27
(6.01)
0.363
(0.481)
0.328
(0.470)
0.246
(0.431)
0.205
(0.404)
0.124
(0.330)
0.096
(0.295)
0.454
(0.498)
3.781
(2.392)
5.749
(1.781)
0.129
(0.335)
0.153
(0.360)
0.417
(0.493)
0301
(0.459)

29.04
(5.38)
0.250
(0.434)
0.310
(0.463)
0.311
(0.463)
0.203
(0.403)
0.125
(0.331)
0.052
(0.222)
0.679
(0.467)
3.469
(2.310)
5.783
(1.694)
0.121
(0.327)
0.207
(0.406)
0.424
(0.495)
0.248
(0.432)

30.48***
(6.09)
0.383***
(0.486)
0.331
(0.471)
0.235***
(0.424)
0.206
(0.404)
0.124
(0.330)
0.104***
(0.305)
0.416***
(0.493)
3.833***
(2.402)
5.742
(1.795)
0.130
(0.337)
0.142***
(0.349)
0.417
(0.493)
0.310
(0.463)

Notes: All means are weighted using the ECLS-K Parent Full Sample weight. Standard deviations are in parentheses. Analyses are
conducted on children with non-missing data. *, **, *** indicate that the difference in means for subsidy recipients and non-recipients is
statistically significant at the 0.10 percent, 0.05 percent, and 0.01 percent levels, respectively.

36

Table 2: Children’s Weight Outcomes by Maternal Work Status and Child Care Arrangements,
Fall of Kindergarten
Variable
Full Sample
Subsidy Recipient
Non-Recipient
Panel A: Early Maternal Work
Early Maternal Work
BMI
16.500
16.548
16.491
Overweight
0.300
0.322
0.296
Obese
0.137
0.142
0.136
No Early Maternal Work
BMI
Overweight
Obese

16.268
0.261
0.119

16.489
0.267
0.097

16.246
0.260
0.121

Panel B: Child Care Arrangements
Parent Care
BMI
Overweight
Obese

16.111
0.241
0.099

----

16.111
0.241
0.099

Relative Care
BMI
Overweight
Obese

16.584
0.317
0.143

16.196
0.289
0.095

16.626
0.320
0.149

Non-Relative Care
BMI
Overweight
Obese

16.618
0.283
0.140

16.526
0.255
0.174

16.640
0.290
0.132

Center-Based Care
BMI
Overweight
Obese

16.693
0.331
0.139

16.678
0.312
0.136

16.702
0.342
0.141

School-Based Care
BMI
Overweight
Obese

16.413
0.290
0.139

16.521
0.349
0.147

16.397
0.281*
0.138

Notes: All means are weighted using the ECLS-K Parent Full Sample weight. *, **, *** indicate that the difference in means for
subsidy recipients and non-recipients is statistically significant at the 0.10 percent, 0.05 percent, and 0.01 percent levels,
respectively.

37

Table 3: The Impact of Child Care Subsidies on Children’s Weight Outcomes, Fall of Kindergarten
BMI
ln(BMI)
Overweight
Obese
Variable
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Panel A: Omit Controls for Early Maternal Work and Child Care Arrangements
Subsidy Recipient
0.208
0.308**
0.012*
0.017**
0.037
0.052*
0.024
(0.131)
(0.139)
(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.026)
(0.028)
(0.019)
Panel B: Add Control for Early Maternal Work and Omit Child Care Arrangements
Subsidy Recipient
0.182
0.280**
0.011
0.016**
0.033
0.047*
0.022
(0.131)
(0.139)
(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.026)
(0.028)
(0.019)
Early Maternal Work
0.268**
0.269**
0.015**
0.015**
0.049**
0.047*
0.024
(0.130)
(0.137)
(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.024)
(0.025)
(0.018)
Panel C: Omit Control for Early Maternal Work and Add Child Care Arrangements
Subsidy Recipient
0.058
0.131
0.004
0.008
0.017
0.029
0.013
(0.139)
(0.147)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.028)
(0.029)
(0.020)
Relative Child Care
0.471***
0.430***
0.027***
0.024***
0.070**
0.069**
0.047**
(0.142)
(0.151)
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.029)
(0.030)
(0.020)
Non-Relative Child Care
0.470**
0.386*
0.026**
0.022*
0.036
0.011
0.039
(0.229)
(0.222)
(0.013)
(0.012)
(0.042)
(0.044)
(0.031)
Center-Based Child Care
0.636***
0.714***
0.035***
0.040***
0.089***
0.099***
0.052**
(0.186)
(0.197)
(0.010)
(0.011)
(0.034)
(0.035)
(0.024)
School-Based Child Care
0.311**
0.307**
0.017**
0.017**
0.047*
0.047*
0.045**
(0.137)
(0.145)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.027)
(0.028)
(0.019)
Panel D: Add Controls for Early Maternal Work and Child Care Arrangements
Subsidy Recipient
0.050
0.123
0.004
0.007
0.016
0.028
0.012
(0.139)
(0.147)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.028)
(0.029)
(0.020)
Early Maternal Work
0.165
0.175
0.010
0.010
0.036
0.036
0.015
(0.132)
(0.139)
(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.024)
(0.025)
(0.018)
Relative Child Care
0.432***
0.391**
0.024***
0.022**
0.061**
0.060**
0.044**
(0.144)
(0.154)
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.029)
(0.030)
(0.020)
Non-Relative Child Care
0.425*
0.337
0.024*
0.020
0.026
0.001
0.034
(0.229)
(0.223)
(0.013)
(0.012)
(0.042)
(0.044)
(0.031)
Center-Based Child Care
0.595***
0.672***
0.032***
0.037***
0.080**
0.090**
0.048**
(0.187)
(0.196)
(0.010)
(0.011)
(0.034)
(0.036)
(0.024)
0.041
0.042**
School-Based Child Care
0.282**
0.275*
0.015*
0.015*
0.041
(0.028)
(0.019)
(0.137)
(0.145)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.027)
County Fixed Effects
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No

(8)

0.031
(0.020)
0.028
(0.020)
0.027
(0.019)
0.017
(0.021)
0.048**
(0.021)
0.031
(0.030)
0.060**
(0.025)
0.047**
(0.020)
0.016
(0.021)
0.019
(0.019)
0.044**
(0.021)
0.026
(0.031)
0.055**
(0.025)
0.044**
(0.020)
Yes

Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Analyses are weighted using the ECLS-K Base Year Full Sample Parent Weight. N=3,113 in all models. The dependent variable in models (1)
and (2) is the child’s fall of kindergarten BMI. The dependent variable in models (3) and (4) is the log of child’s BMI. The dependent variable in models (5) and (6) equals unity if the child’s BMI
is at or above the 85th percentile of the age- and gender-specific distribution. The dependent variable in models (7) and (8) equals unity if the child’s BMI is at or above the 95th percentile of the
age- and gender-specific distribution. Unless noted otherwise, all models include the full set of child/family controls in Table 1. All models include dummy variables that equal unity for the child
and family controls with missing data. *, **, *** indicate that the coefficient is statistically significant at 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.

38

Table 4: The Impact of Child Care Subsidies on Children’s Weight Outcomes, Spring of Kindergarten
BMI
ln(BMI)
Overweight
Obese
Variable
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Panel A: Omit Controls for Early Maternal Work and Child Care Arrangements
Subsidy Recipient
0.103
0.205
0.006
0.012
0.026
0.038
0.017
(0.139)
(0.149)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.027)
(0.029)
(0.020)
Panel B: Add Control for Early Maternal Work and Omit Child Care Arrangements
Subsidy Recipient
0.083
0.183
0.005
0.011
0.023
0.035
0.016
(0.139)
(0.149)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.027)
(0.029)
(0.020)
Early Maternal Work
0.282**
0.273*
0.015**
0.015*
0.039
0.041
0.018
(0.133)
(0.142)
(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.025)
(0.027)
(0.018)
Panel C: Omit Control for Early Maternal Work and Add Child Care Arrangements
Subsidy Recipient
-0.042
0.035
-0.001
0.003
0.017
0.020
0.001
(0.147)
(0.157)
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.029)
(0.030)
(0.021)
Relative Child Care
0.466***
0.423***
0.026***
0.023***
0.036
0.028
0.037*
(0.149)
(0.158)
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.031)
(0.032)
(0.021)
Non-Relative Child Care
0.456*
0.273
0.025*
0.015
-0.002
-0.026
0.044
(0.237)
(0.238)
(0.013)
(0.013)
(0.043)
(0.043)
(0.033)
Center-Based Child Care
0.637***
0.724***
0.034***
0.040***
0.045
0.076**
0.065**
(0.188)
(0.197)
(0.010)
(0.011)
(0.036)
(0.038)
(0.026)
School-Based Child Care
0.283*
0.338**
0.014*
0.017*
0.005
0.015
0.034*
(0.149)
(0.157)
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.029)
(0.030)
(0.020)
Panel D: Add Controls for Early Maternal Work and Child Care Arrangements
Subsidy Recipient
-0.046
0.029
-0.002
0.002
0.016
0.019
0.001
(0.147)
(0.156)
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.029)
(0.030)
(0.021)
Early Maternal Work
0.186
0.190
0.010
0.010
0.034
0.037
0.009
(0.135)
(0.143)
(0.007)
(0.008)
(0.025)
(0.027)
(0.018)
Relative Child Care
0.422***
0.381**
0.024***
0.021**
0.027
0.020
0.035
(0.151)
(0.162)
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.031)
(0.032)
(0.021)
Non-Relative Child Care
0.411*
0.229
0.022*
0.013
-0.010
-0.034
0.042
(0.236)
(0.239)
(0.013)
(0.013)
(0.043)
(0.043)
(0.033)
Center-Based Child Care
0.595***
0.681***
0.032***
0.038***
0.037
0.068*
0.063**
(0.188)
(0.197)
(0.010)
(0.011)
(0.036)
(0.038)
(0.026)
0.009
0.033*
School-Based Child Care
0.251*
0.305*
0.012
0.015*
-0.001
(0.031)
(0.020)
(0.149)
(0.158)
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.029)
County Fixed Effects
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No

(8)

0.022
(0.021)
0.020
(0.021)
0.023
(0.019)
0.004
(0.022)
0.048**
(0.022)
0.032
(0.032)
0.079***
(0.027)
0.047**
(0.021)
0.003
(0.022)
0.013
(0.019)
0.035
(0.022)
0.029
(0.032)
0.076***
(0.027)
0.045**
(0.021)
Yes

Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Analyses are weighted using the ECLS-K Base Year Full Sample Parent Weight. N=3,007 in all models. The dependent variable in models (1)
and (2) is the child’s spring of kindergarten BMI. The dependent variable in models (3) and (4) is the log of child’s BMI. The dependent variable in models (5) and (6) equals unity if the child’s
BMI is at or above the 85th percentile of the age- and gender-specific distribution. The dependent variable in models (7) and (8) equals unity if the child’s BMI is at or above the 95th percentile of
the age- and gender-specific distribution. Unless noted otherwise, all models include the full set of child/family controls in Table 1. All models include dummy variables that equal unity for the
child and family controls with missing data. *, **, *** indicate that the coefficient is statistically significant at 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.

39

Table 5: Quantile Regression Results for the Relationship between Child Care Subsidies and BMI, Fall of Kindergarten
Fall of Kindergarten BMI Quantile
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Panel A: Omit Controls for Early Maternal Work and Child Care Arrangements
Subsidy Recipient
0.065
0.096
0.160
0.206*
0.151
0.290**
0.400***
0.420**
(0.110)
(0.110)
(0.106)
(0.109)
(0.115)
(0.131)
(0.149)
(0.172)
Panel B: Add Control for Early Maternal Work and Omit Child Care Arrangements
Subsidy Recipient
0.067
0.098
0.132
0.180*
0.158
0.258**
0.430***
0.363**
(0.105)
(0.108)
(0.108)
(0.109)
(0.114)
(0.131)
(0.148)
(0.174)
Early Maternal
0.035
0.117
0.224**
0.183*
0.063
0.132
0.248*
0.249
Work
(0.094)
(0.096)
(0.099)
(0.107)
(0.114)
(0.120)
(0.136)
(0.182)
Panel C: Omit Control for Early Maternal Work and Add Child Care Arrangements
Subsidy Recipient
-0.020
0.033
0.095
0.009
0.037
0.176
0.241
0.263
(0.116)
(0.114)
(0.116)
(0.116)
(0.123)
(0.140)
(0.157)
(0.183)
Relative Child
0.259**
0.208*
0.244**
0.245**
0.157
0.196
0.249
0.245
Care
(0.131)
(0.118)
(0.116)
(0.121)
(0.128)
(0.138)
(0.161)
(0.202)
Non-Relative
0.327**
0.215
0.193
0.219
0.100
0.068
0.127
0.137
Child Care
(0.162)
(0.163)
(0.162)
(0.160)
(0.172)
(0.180)
(0.191)
(0.222)
Center-Based
0.330**
0.303**
0.353**
0.491***
0.419***
0.382**
0.478**
0.548**
Child Care
(0.148)
(0.138)
(0.144)
(0.146)
(0.157)
(0.165)
(0.196)
(0.235)
School-Based
0.042
-0.056
0.038
0.089
-0.031
0.031
0.120
0.271
Child Care
(0.119)
(0.109)
(0.110)
(0.118)
(0.129)
(0.138)
(0.1590
(0.198)
Panel D: Add Controls for Early Maternal Work and Child Care Arrangements
Subsidy Recipient
0.014
0.041
0.044
0.034
0.032
0.149
0.227
0.249
(0.117)
(0.114)
(0.115)
(0.117)
(0.124)
(0.140)
(0.156)
(0.177)
Early Maternal
-0.012
0.079
0.208**
0.145
0.049
0.076
0.169
0.176
Work
(0.097)
(0.098)
(0.100)
(0.106)
(0.115)
(0.118)
(0.139)
(0.179)
Relative Child
0.251*
0.194*
0.184
0.227*
0.148
0.232*
0.198
0.172
Care
(0.130)
(0.119)
(0.116)
(0.122)
(0.131)
(0.139)
(0.165)
(0.198)
Non-Relative
0.312*
0.210
0.159
0.169
0.100
0.106
0.135
-0.010
Child Care
(0.164)
(0.162)
(0.161)
(0.161)
(0.173)
(0.178)
(0.194)
(0.218)
Center-Based
0.349**
0.301**
0.303**
0.451***
0.427***
0.452***
0.434**
0.483**
Child Care
(0.143)
(0.138)
(0.140)
(0.146)
(0.157)
(0.165)
(0.198)
(0.230)
-0.062
-0.001
0.069
-0.032
0.074
0.088
0.176
School-Based
0.047
(0.115)
(0.108)
(0.111)
(0.117)
(0.130)
(0.137)
(0.159)
(0.196)
Child Care

0.9

0.397
(0.254)
0.351
(0.239)
0.196
(0.256)
0.253
(0.252)
0.608**
(0.264)
-0.123
(0.288)
0.750**
(0.301)
0.585**
(0.246)
0.197
(0.245)
0.256
(0.273)
0.597**
(0.288)
-0.111
(0.288)
0.801**
(0.312)
0.522**
(0.251)

Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Analyses are based on Stata’s ivqte command produced by Frolich & Melly (2008). N=3,113 in all models. The dependent variable is the child’s
BMI, measured in the fall of kindergarten. Unless noted otherwise, all models include the full set variables listed in Table 1, as well as county fixed effects. All models include dummy variables that
equal unity for the child and family controls with missing data. *, **, *** indicate that the coefficient is statistically significant at 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.

40

Table 6: Quantile Regression Results for the Relationship between Child Care Subsidies and BMI, Spring of Kindergarten
Spring of Kindergarten BMI Quantile
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Panel A: Omit Controls for Early Maternal Work and Child Care Arrangements
Subsidy Recipient
0.021
0.057
0.056
0.086
0.107
0.214
0.472***
0.383*
(0.102)
(0.112)
(0.114)
(0.125)
(0.135)
(0.146)
(0.176)
(0.228)
Panel B: Add Control for Early Maternal Work and Omit Child Care Arrangements
Subsidy Recipient
0.031
0.036
0.025
0.098
0.112
0.221
0.435**
0.361
(0.100)
(0.111)
(0.113)
(0.124)
(0.135)
(0.145)
(0.174)
(0.232)
Early Maternal
-0.010
0.180*
0.086
0.093
0.150
0.143
0.263*
0.379*
Work
(0.095)
(0.105)
(0.105)
(0.110)
(0.120)
(0.133)
(0.155)
(0.206)
Panel C: Omit Control for Early Maternal Work and Add Child Care Arrangements
Subsidy Recipient
-0.002
-0.061
-0.071
-0.021
0.031
0.021
0.206
0.177
(0.111)
(0.121)
(0.120)
(0.133)
(0.147)
(0.158)
(0.191)
(0.241)
Relative Child
0.272**
0.161
0.107
0.171
0.252*
0.225
0.186
0.365
Care
(0.123)
(0.127)
(0.124)
(0.134)
(0.145)
(0.161)
(0.184)
(0.234)
Non-Relative
0.253
0.087
0.071
0.077
0.039
-0.034
-0.173
0.156
Child Care
(0.177)
(0.175)
(0.177)
(0.177)
(0.190)
(0.203)
(0.236)
(0.308)
Center-Based
0.275*
0.283*
0.402***
0.397**
0.531***
0.512***
0.557***
0.732***
Child Care
(0.148)
(0.150)
(0.149)
(0.160)
(0.173)
(0.187)
(0.216)
(0.249)
School-Based
0.056
-0.101
-0.102
0.046
0.142
0.114
-0.006
0.395*
Child Care
(0.120)
(0.118)
(0.117)
(0.124)
(0.136)
(0.151)
(0.179)
(0.228)
Panel D: Add Controls for Early Maternal Work and Child Care Arrangements
Subsidy Recipient
0.014
-0.037
-0.048
-0.033
0.026
0.057
0.176
0.185
(0.112)
(0.120)
(0.120)
(0.133)
(0.147)
(0.158)
(0.188)
(0.243)
Early Maternal
-0.054
0.061
0.056
0.026
0.107
0.201
0.181
0.316
Work
(0.096)
(0.106)
(0.105)
(0.112)
(0.120)
(0.131)
(0.161)
(0.205)
Relative Child
0.275*
0.151
0.076
0.154
0.203
0.212
0.176
0.311
Care
(0.128)
(0.130)
(0.126)
(0.136)
(0.148)
(0.163)
(0.185)
(0.242)
Non-Relative
0.254
0.117
0.097
0.080
-0.005
-0.061
-0.157
0.150
Child Care
(0.174)
(0.175)
(0.173)
(0.177)
(0.190)
(0.204)
(0.237)
(0.314)
Center-Based
0.268*
0.255*
0.391***
0.402**
0.469***
0.490***
0.556**
0.719***
Child Care
(0.152)
(0.153)
(0.151)
(0.164)
(0.177)
(0.188)
(0.221)
(0.247)
-0.086
-0.105
0.060
0.091
0.105
-0.010
0.352
School-Based
0.078
(0.119)
(0.121)
(0.117)
(0.126)
(0.138)
(0.150)
(0.176)
(0.231)
Child Care

0.9

0.537*
(0.305)
0.512*
(0.298)
0.347
(0.234)
0.287
(0.309)
0.635**
(0.305)
-0.306
(0.334)
0.603*
(0.319)
0.636**
(0.262)
0.273
(0.308)
0.220
(0.248)
0.613**
(0.313)
-0.320
(0.325)
0.728**
(0.332)
0.635**
(0.269)

Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Analyses are based on Stata’s ivqte command produced by Frolich & Melly (2008). N=3,007 in all models. The dependent variable is the child’s
BMI, measured in the spring of kindergarten. Unless noted otherwise, all models include the full set variables listed in Table 1, as well as county fixed effects. All models include dummy variables
that equal unity for the child and family controls with missing data. *, **, *** indicate that the coefficient is statistically significant at 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.

41

