NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON THE UNSTABLE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EXCHANGE RATES AND MACROECONOMIC
FUNDAMENTALS
Philippe Bacchetta
Eric van Wincoop
Working Paper 15008
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15008

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2009

We would like to thank Raf Wouters, Harald Uhlig, Luca Dedola and other seminar participants at
Breugel, Tilburg, Bocconi, Dutch Central Bank, ECB, University of Lausanne and University of Zurich
for useful comments and suggestions. We also thank Toni Beutler for able research assistance. We
gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Bankard Fund for Political Economy, the National
Science Foundation (grant SES-0649442) (van Wincoop), the National Centre of Competence in Research
"Financial Valuation and Risk Management" (NCCR FINRISK), the Swiss Finance Institute and the
Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research (Bacchetta). The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Philippe Bacchetta and Eric van Wincoop. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

On the Unstable Relationship between Exchange Rates and Macroeconomic Fundamentals
Philippe Bacchetta and Eric van Wincoop
NBER Working Paper No. 15008
May 2009
JEL No. F31,F37,F41
ABSTRACT
It is well known from anecdotal, survey and econometric evidence that the relationship between the
exchange rate and macro fundamentals is highly unstable. This could be explained when structural
parameters are known and very volatile, neither of which seems plausible. Instead we argue that large
and frequent variations in the relationship between the exchange rate and macro fundamentals naturally
develop when structural parameters in the economy are unknown and change very slowly. We show
that the reduced form relationship between exchange rates and fundamentals is driven not by the structural
parameters themselves, but rather by expectations of these parameters. These expectations can be highly
unstable as a result of perfectly rational “scapegoat” effects. This happens when parameters can potentially
change much more in the long run than the short run. This generates substantial uncertainty about
the level of parameters, even though monthly or annual changes are small. This mechanism can also
be relevant in other contexts of forward looking variables and could explain the widespread evidence
of parameter instability found in macroeconomic and financial data. Finally, we show that parameter
instability has remarkably little effect on the volatility of exchange rates, the in-sample explanatory
power of macro fundamentals and the ability to forecast out of sample.

Philippe Bacchetta
Faculty of Business and Economics
University of Lausanne
Extranef
CH-1015 Lausanne
Switzerland
philippe.bacchetta@unil.ch
Eric van Wincoop
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
P.O. Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
and NBER
vanwincoop@virginia.edu

1

Introduction

\The dollar's resilience in the wake of recent dire US economic data has raised the
prospect that the currency market may be experiencing one of its periodic changes
in focus" (Financial Times, February 11, 2008)
\The dollar's latest stumble ... came despite optimistic economic data from the
US. But analysts said the movement of the US currency was no longer driven by
growth fundamentals. All the focus is on the de cit now..." (Financial Times, February 11, 2003)
As re ected in these quotes, foreign exchange traders regularly change the
weight they attach to di erent macro indicators. Cheung and Chinn (2001) have
documented these changes through a survey of U.S. foreign exchange traders. Frequent changes in focus lead to an unstable relationship between exchange rates
and macro fundamentals. Such parameter instability is con rmed in formal econometric evidence. Rossi (2005) conducts a battery of parameter instability tests
and nds \overwhelming evidence of parameter instability". Sarno and Valente
(2008) nd that \(exchange rate) models that optimally use the information in
the fundamentals change often and this implies frequent shifts in the parameters".
Such instability has also been reported by Meese and Rogo (1988) and Meese and
Rogo (1983a,b) conjectured that it may explain the poor out-of-sample forecast
ability of exchange rate models.
One way to explain the highly unstable relationship between exchange rates and
macro fundamentals is to assume large and frequent changes in structural parameters that are known to all agents. This does not appear very plausible though as
these parameters are not directly observed and hard to estimate. Moreover, many
structural changes in the economy, such as those associated with technological and
nancial innovation and institutional reform, are gradual.
The main goal of this paper is to show that large and frequent variations in
the relationship between the exchange rate and macro fundamentals can occur
quite naturally even when structural parameters in the economy are unknown and
change very slowly. We show that the relationship between a forward looking
variable like the exchange rate and macro fundamentals is determined not by the

1

structural parameters themselves, but rather by the expectations of these structural parameters. We show that these expectations can vary signi cantly over
time, giving rise to a highly unstable reduced form relationship between exchange
rates and fundamentals. This happens even though agents are perfectly rational
Bayesian learners and changes in structural parameters are small and gradual.
While the focus of this paper is on exchange rates, our explanation for the
unstable reduced-form relationship could apply similarly to other forward looking
nancial or macroeconomic variables. As rst shown by Stock and Watson (1996),
and since then by many others, the phenomenon of parameter instability in macroeconomic data is widespread.1 The same is the case for nancial data. In a survey,
Pastor and Veronesi (2009) point out that \parameter uncertainty is ubiquitous in
nance"and \many facts that appear ba ing at rst sight seem less puzzling once
we recognize that parameters are uncertain and subject to learning".2
The estimation mistakes that agents make when continuously updating their
views on structural parameters are to a large extent a result of what we refer to as
\scapegoat" e ects. Some information about the nature of structural parameters
can be derived by analyzing macroeconomic data and exchange rates. But these
data are also driven by shocks to unobserved fundamentals. Such unobserved fundamentals can generate considerable confusion in the short to medium run. When
the exchange rate uctuates as a result of an unobserved macroeconomic shock, it
can be optimal for agents to blame this on an observed macro fundamental by giving it more weight and therefore making it a \scapegoat".3 For example, when the
1

Recent contributions include Boivin (2006), Canova (2005), Clarida, Gali and Gertler (2000),
Cogley and Sargent (2005), Del Negro and Otrok (2007), Inoue and Rossi (2007), Primiceri
(2005), Sims and Zha (2006) and Fernandez-Villaverde and Rubio-Ramirez (2007). There has
also been great interest in the impact of parameter or model uncertainty on optimal monetary
policy. See for example contributions by Hansen and Sargent (2008), Onatski and Williams
(2003) or Levin et al. (2006).
2
For example, Cogley (2005) and Piazzesi and Schneider (2007) introduce uncertainty about
time-varying parameters to explain the term spread.
3
In a previous short paper, Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2004), we developed the idea of such
a scapegoat e ect in the context of a simple static noisy rational expectations model in which
some parameters are unknown. We showed that excessive weight could be given to a variable
depending on the correlation between the noise shock and the fundamental shock. However, since
that model is static it could not be used to address the unstable dynamic relationship between
exchange rates and fundamentals and its implications. Apart from the dynamic setup, the model

2

dollar depreciates it is natural to attribute it to a large current account de cit. This
happens even when the depreciation is unrelated to the current account de cit.
There is signi cant potential for such scapegoat e ects when the uncertainty
about structural parameters is large. Two factors contribute to this. First,
parameters can potentially change much more in the long-run than the shortrun. This generates substantial uncertainty about the level of parameters, even
though monthly or annual changes are small. Second, agents cannot observe these
structural parameters and obtain only very indirect information about their level
through inference from the data.
In illustrating the importance of such scapegoat e ects and their role in the
unstable reduced form relationship between exchange rates and fundamentals, we
slightly generalize the \canonical" exchange rate model. This is actually a broad
class of exchange rate models that can be reduced to a single stochastic di erence
equation, which is derived from two equations: an interest rate parity equation
and an equation that relates the interest di erential to observed fundamentals.
The latter can be obtained either from monetary policy speci cations or money
market equilibrium in a standard monetary model (see Engel and West, 2005, for
examples). We generalize this by introducing time variation in the interest rate
di erential equation. While we illustrate the source of this time variation in the
context of the standard monetary model, in general it can have many possible
sources. Examples are changes in monetary policy parameters, changes in money
demand parameters, or changes in the relationship between policy targets and
observed fundamentals.
We calibrate the model to data for 5 industrialized countries, matching moments related to interest rates and exchange rates and the explanatory power of
observed fundamentals. We consider a particular process for time-varying structural parameters that satis es two features. First, changes in these parameters
are small over short horizons of a month or a year. Second, changes in structural
parameters gradually build over time, so that they can change substantially over
long periods. These features are plausible when we think of long-term technological, institutional or cultural changes. Such a process generates large scapegoat
in this paper also di ers in that there is no private information as in Bacchetta and van Wincoop
(2004). Scapegoat e ects naturally develop as long as there is incomplete information about
parameters; the information does not need to be private.

3

e ects as there is substantial uncertainty about the level of parameters even when
month-to-month changes are small.
We do not estimate the process of structural parameters. That would be nearly
impossible to do. First, the data can tell us very little about the exact nature of
the process of time-varying parameters, even if there is clear evidence of parameter
instability (e.g., see Elliott and Timmermann, 2008, for a discussion). Second,
even when a particular process is assumed, its parameters are notoriously hard to
estimate with any precision. While we focus on a speci c process in the benchmark
analysis, we examine the robustness of our results to a wide range of alternative
processes.
We also use the model to evaluate the impact of reduced-form parameter instability on the ability to forecast out of sample. It is exactly in this context
that the issue of parameter instability has most frequently been discussed in the
exchange rate literature.4 Meese and Rogo (1983) rst showed that models do
not outperform the random walk in forecasting future exchange rates, even when
the actual future macro fundamentals are used to forecast. Their results have
largely held up since then, even with a lot more data available.5 Meese and Rogo
(1983a,b) conjectured that time-varying parameters may be responsible for this
poor out-of-sample performance as estimated parameters can be quite di erent
from parameters over the forecast horizon. Nonetheless we obtain the surprising
result that time-varying parameters have very little impact on the out-of-sample
forecasting performance relative to the random walk. We explain what accounts
for this surprising result in conjunction with a companion paper, Bacchetta, van
Wincoop, and Beutler (2009), which considers the impact of exogenous reducedform parameter instability on the out-of-sample performance of the model relative
to the random walk.
The next section presents the model. It also discusses the signal extraction
method used to solve the model and the implications for the relationship between
exchange rates and fundamentals. Section 3 calibrates the model based on data on
interest rates and exchange rates and presents numerical results for the relationship
between exchange rates and fundamentals based on simulations. Section 4 uses the
4

See Wol (1987), Schinasi and Swamy (1989), Rossi (2005), Sarno and Valente (2008) and
Meese and Rogo (1988).
5
See for example Cheung, Chinn and Pascual (2005) and Rogo and Stavrakeva (2008).

4

model to analyze the impact of the unstable relationship between exchange rates
and fundamentals on the ability to forecast out of sample. Section 5 concludes.

2

A Model with Unknown Parameters

We rst describe the model when parameters are constant and known. Then we
introduce unknown and time-varying coe cients and examine how the impact of
fundamentals on the exchange rate is a ected. For that purpose, we need to derive
how expectations about parameters are formed. We show that this process leads
to an unstable relationship between fundamentals and exchange rates. The nal
subsection provides intuition on the mechanism leading to this instability.

2.1

Basic Framework with Constant Parameters

We consider the class of fundamental-based exchange rate models that can be
reduced to a single stochastic di erence equation. The equilibrium value of the
exchange rate in these models depends on the present value of expected future
fundamentals. We start with the usual case of constant and known parameters.
We follow Engel and West (2005) and slightly rewrite their equation (1):
st = (1

2

) 4Ft + bt +

1
X

j=1

j

3

Et (Ft+j + bt+j )5

2
4

t

+

1
X

i

Et

t+j

j=1

3
5

(1)

where st is the log nominal exchange rate (domestic per foreign currency), Et is the
expectation of the representative investor, t is the risk premium and 0 < < 1.
We denote by Ft a linear combination of observed macro fundamentals: Ft = ft0
where ft = (f1t ; f2t ; :::; fN t )0 is the vector of N observed macroeconomic fundamentals and
= ( 1 ; 2 ; :::; N )0 is the vector of associated parameters. Finally, bt
represents unobserved macro fundamentals.
Engel and West (2005) present several models that lead to this equation.6 For
illustrative purposes we focus on the familiar exible-price monetary model. A
two-country model can be described by the standard four equations:
Et st+1
6

s t = it

it +

t

See also Nason and Rogers (2008) who derive this equation from a DSGE model.

5

(2)

st = p t

pt

(3)

m t = pt

it +

m t = pt

it +

0

zt +
0

zt +

(4)

t

(5)

t

As usual, it and it represent the domestic and foreign nominal one-period
interest rates, pt and pt are the domestic and foreign log prices, and mt and mt
are the log nominal money supplies. We denote by zt and zt the vectors of other
observed fundamentals a ecting money demand. Unobserved velocity shocks are
denoted t and t . The parameter is usually set at 1, but does not need to be 1
when the vector zt includes nominal variables as well.7
By combining equations (3), (4), and (5), we nd:
it

it =

1

st

1

[ (mt

0

mt )

(zt

zt )] +

1

(

t

t

)

(6)

This equation can be rewritten in a more compact form as:
it

it =

1

st

1

(Ft + bt )

(7)

0
where bt = ( t
= (mt mt )
t ) is an unobserved fundamental and Ft = ft
0
(zt zt ) is a linear combination of observed fundamentals. Combining equations
(2) and (7), integrating forward and assuming no bubble gives equation (1), where
= =(1 + ).
Since st and fundamentals are typically non-stationary in the data, it is usual
to consider rst di erences. As an illustration, consider the special case without a
risk premium and where bt and ft are iid. More precisely, assume that: i) t = 0,
8t; ii) bt = "bt with "bt N (0; b2 ); iii) fnt = "fnt with "fnt N (0; f2 ). In this case,
we have:
st = ft0 + (1
) bt
(8)

The impact of a change in fundamental fnt on the exchange rate is simply given
by n : @ st =@ fnt = n .
7

Examples of nominal variables in zt include lagged money demand, lagged prices or nominal
nancial wealth. Introducing gives us a parameter multiplying the money supply fundamental,
just like is a vector of parameters multiplying the other observed fundamentals zt . But it is
not critical to the analysis in any substantial way.

6

2.2

Time-varying and Unknown Parameters

We now depart from the standard model by assuming that the vector of coe cients
and varies over time and is not known by investors.8 However, simply replacing these constant parameters with a vector of time-varying parameters raises a
technical problem that arises under any stationary process for the time-varying
parameters. To see this, add a time-subscript to the parameters and and then
take the rst-di erence of (4):
t

mt =

pt

it +

0
t

zt +

t

0
t zt 1

+

t mt 1

(9)

In the data mt , pt and it are stationary. But this is inconsistent with nonstationarity in the last two terms. This non-stationarity arises because parameter
changes are multiplied with the level of fundamentals, which can be unbounded
due to non-stationarity. Both mt and elements of zt are non-stationary in the data.
To solve this issue, we add the time subscript to the parameters and after
taking the rst di erence of (4):
t

mt =

pt

0
t

it +

zt +

t

(10)

This avoids the last two terms on the right hand side of (9) that are non-stationary.
In level terms we can write this speci cation as
m
~ t = pt

it + Zt +

(11)

t

Zt = Zt

1

+

0
t

zt

(12)

m
~t = m
~t

1

+

t

mt

(13)

Together with an analogous speci cation for money demand in the other country, and de ning Ft = (m
~t m
~ t ) (Zt Zt ), the solution for the interest di erential
remains the same as in (7). This again yields the present value equation (1) when
combined with (2). This speci cation for Ft implies that
Ft =
where

8

0

1

mt A
ft = @
zt

;

ft0

(14)

t

t

0

=@

t
t

1
A

We assume, mainly for convenience, that the interest semi-elasticity

7

(15)
is known and constant.

With a total of N fundamentals we will also write t = ( 1t ; 2t ; :::; N t )0 .
We therefore replace the speci cation Ft = ft0 for constant parameters
with the speci cation Ft = ft0 t for time-varying parameters. While for illustrative purposes we have motivated this in the context of the familiar exible price
monetary model, it can also be obtained from other models that lead to the present
value equation (1). One example is to replace the money market equilibrium by
an interest rate rule that depends on a number of observed fundamentals. Timevarying parameters are then associated with time variation in the monetary policy
parameters. Another possibility is that these monetary policy parameters are constant but the (possibly unknown) policy targets have a time-varying relationship
to the observed fundamentals. The exact source of the time-varying parameters is
not critical to the qualitative ndings of the paper.
The major di erence with the standard framework is that Ft is not directly
observable. Investors need to estimate current and future t . They have two
sources of information regarding t . First, they know the process of t , which we
will specify below. Second, by observing the exchange rate and the interest rate
di erential, they know Ft + bt from (7). We describe below how investors combine
optimally these two sources of information to form expectations about t .
The signal Ft + bt provides information about the parameters, but is also a
source of estimation errors. Consider for example the expectation of parameter
nt for fundamental n. While nt a ects Ft + bt , the latter is also a ected by bt , all
current and past fundamentals and all current and past parameters. Therefore, to
the extent that Ft + bt is used as a source of information about nt , its expectation
can change without any change in nt itself. We will see that it is this rational
confusion that is the key driver behind the unstable relationship between exchange
rates and observed fundamentals.

2.3

Exchange Rates and Fundamentals

For convenience, in the remainder of this section we consider the special case
without a risk premium and where bt and ft are iid, as described above. A
more general speci cation will be considered in the numerical analysis in the next
section. We maintain the assumption throughout the paper that shocks to fnt , bt
and parameters are uncorrelated with each other.

8

P

j
Et Ft+i = Et Ft because Et Ft+i =
Under these assumptions, (1
) 1
j=1
Et Ft . The rst di erence of the present value equation (1) then becomes:

st = (1
If the parameters
becomes

t

) Ft + (1

) bt + (Et Ft

Et 1 Ft 1 )

(16)

were known, then Ft is known as well at time t and (16)
st =

ft0

t

+ (1

) bt

(17)

This generalizes (8) by replacing the constant vector of parameters that multiplies the fundamentals ft0 by the vector of time-varying parameters t . When
the parameters nt are not only known, but also very volatile, it could explain the
unstable relationship between exchange rates and fundamentals.
However, in reality the time-varying parameters are unknown. In that case
the last term Et Ft Et 1 Ft 1 in (16) is a complex expression that depends on
expectations of parameters. In order to avoid the technical problem of computing
expectations of parameter innovations going back to the in nite past, we assume
that parameters are known after T periods. Therefore the total number of unknown
parameter innovations is N T , which is nite. In practice we will set T very large.
In that case, we can write (16) as:
st =

ft0 ((1

)

t + Et

t ) + (1

) bt +

T
X

ft0 i (Et

t i

Et

1

t i)

(18)

i=1

As can be seen from the rst term in (18), ft is now multiplied by a weighted
average of actual and expected parameter values. Since the discount rate tends
to be close to 1 (see Engel and West, 2005), almost all of the weight is on the
expected value of parameters rather than the actual level of parameters. The
reason is that the exchange rate is forward looking and depends on expectations
of future fundamentals. In this particular example, where fundamentals follow
a random walk, expected future levels of F are equal to the expected level of F
today, which depends on the expectation of the current set of parameters t . More
generally, if changes in fundamentals are not iid, st also depends on expectations
about future values of the parameters. The general setup is discussed in Appendix
A.
In the last term of (18) we see that st also depends on the change in expectations Et t i Et 1 t i of past parameters, interacted with changes in past
9

P

ft0 i t i , changes in the expectation
fundamentals. Intuitively, since Ft = 1
i=0
of past parameters lead to a change in the expectation of Ft and therefore the
exchange rate. We will show that changes in current fundamentals lead to changes
in the expectation of both current and past parameters. This is therefore an additional channel through which changes in current fundamentals a ect the exchange
rate.
To examine the impact of fundamentals on the exchange rate, we simply consider the derivative of the exchange rate with respect to current fundamentals:
@ st
= (1
@ fnt

)

nt

+ Et

nt

+

T
X
i=0

ft0

i

@Et t i
@ fnt

(19)

The rest of this section analyzes in more detail the last two elements on the righthand side of (19).

2.4

Expectation of Parameters

In order to determine the impact of fundamentals on the exchange rate, we need
to determine the expectation of current and past parameters. We do this by rst
assuming a process for structural parameters and then solving a signal extraction
problem.
We consider the case where a structural parameter nt depends on a nite
number T of past innovations:
nt

=

n+

T
X

ni "n;t i+1

(20)

i=1

where "nt N (0; 2 ). In this section we consider a rather general process characterized by the parameters ni . In the next section we will pick a particular process
for the numerical analysis that satis es the criteria discussed in the Introduction.
As discussed in section 2.3, we assume that parameter innovations at dates t T
and earlier are known at date t in order avoid an in nite number of unknown parameter innovations about which expectations need to be formed. In addition (20)
assumes that parameter innovations at t T and earlier do not a ect parameters at
time t. This is a di erent assumption, which we make to assure stationarity of the
structural parameters. In practice the impact of these assumptions is minimized
by setting T very high in the numerical analysis. In addition we will consider an
10

alternative process in section 3.3 where parameters depend on an in nite number
of lagged innovations.
In vector notation (20) can be written as
t

=

+

(21)

t

where =( 1 ; 2 ; :::; N )0 is a N-vector of constants; t is a N T vector that stacks
all the vectors nt = ( nt ; :::; n;t T +1 )0 ; and is a N N T matrix with [n; T (n
1) + 1 : T n] = 0n = ( n1 ; n2 ; :::; nT ) and zeros otherwise.
In order to form expectations about current and past values of t we need
to compute expectations about the vector t of current and past parameter innovations. Since the problem is linear and all the shocks are normal, we can use
standard signal extraction techniques. Leaving some of the details to Appendix B,
we sketch how this is done. We start from the knowledge that the unconditional
distribution of t is normal with mean zero and variance 2 IN T , where IN T is an
identity matrix of size N T . We combine this with knowledge of dt = Ft + bt over
0
the past T periods. De ning Yt = dt ; ::; dt T +1 , where dt subtracts the known
components from dt , we have
Yt = H0t ! t
(22)
where ! 0t = ( 0t ; "bt ; "bt 1 ; :::; "bt T +1 ) and Ht is a matrix that depends on current and
lagged changes in observed fundamentals: ft i for 0 i T . The precise form
of Ht can be found in Appendix B.
The unconditional distribution of ! t is normal with mean zero and variance
0

~ =@
P

2

1

IN T
0

0 A
2
b IT

(23)

Combining this with (22), standard signal extraction9 implies that the conditional
distribution of ! t is normal with mean
Et ! t = Mt Yt
h
i
~ t H0 PH
~ t
Mt =PH
t

and variance
~
Pt = P
9

~
Mt H0t P

See for example Townsend(1983, p.556).

11

(24)
1

Therefore
Et ! t = Ct ! t

(25)

where Ct = Mt H0t . Together with knowledge of parameter innovations of at least
T periods ago, (25) gives expressions for Et t i , for i = 0; 1; :::; T 1. We use this
to compute Et t i from (21).
We then have
Et t i = ^ t i + ti ! t
(26)
Here ^ t i is equal to
plus (for i > 0) a vector that depends on parameter
innovations of at least T periods ago that are known at time t. The matrix ti
is equal to eIi Ct , where eIi is a matrix of zeros and ones that maps ! t into the
unknown elements of t i .
There are two important features to notice from (26). First, Et t i is determined by a combination of shocks contained in ! t . Thus, the expectation of a
speci c parameter nt i depends on its own innovations, but also on current and
past innovations to the noise vector bt and to all other parameters. Second, ti
depends on current and past ft so that shocks to fundamentals a ect parameter
expectations.10
As we will see, the expectation of nt can change signi cantly over a relatively
short period even when the actual structural parameters change very slowly. What
matters is not the monthly (or even annual) uctuations in structural parameters
but rather their potential to uctuate over a very long period of time (decades
or longer). The unconditional standard deviation of the parameters then becomes
large even though changes from period to period are small. A large unconditional
standard deviation of structural parameters, together with the di culty in learning
about their level, may imply large and frequent changes in expectations about these
parameters. This allows expectations to become signi cantly disconnected from
the true value of the parameters.
10

Current and past

ft enter Ht , which a ects Mt , Ct , and therefore

12

ti .

2.5

Derivative of Exchange Rate with respect to Fundamentals: Intuition

After substituting the solution for the expected parameters into (19), we have an
expression for the derivative of the exchange rate with respect to fundamentals
as a function of all the underlying shocks in the model: shocks to fundamentals,
"fnt , shocks to parameters, "nt , and shocks to unobservables, "bt . We can solve
the model numerically to show how the derivative evolves over time. However, it
is hard to get much intuition out of the algebraic expression. It is highly nonlinear in the shocks, which enter through large matrices and their inverse. To
provide some intuition, especially regarding the scapegoat e ect, in this section
we discuss the rst and second-order components of the derivative.11 This allows
us to show that the impact of the actual structural parameters is signi cantly
dampened relative to the case where the parameters are known, while shocks to
the unobserved fundamentals bt have a signi cant impact.
For convenience we repeat expression (19) for the derivative of the exchange
rate with respect to fundamentals:
@ st
= (1
@ fnt

)

nt

+ Et

nt

+

T
X
i=0

ft0

i

@Et t i
@ fnt

(27)

A Technical Appendix that is available on request computes the various order components of this expression. The rst term on the right hand side, (1
) nt , only
has zero and rst-order components. The second term, Et nt , has components
of all orders. The last term has second and higher-order components. Since third
and higher-order components tend to be small, we only discuss the solution up to
the second order. We will assume that all N parameters are drawn from the same
process, so that n = and ni = i for all n.
The zero-order component of the derivative (27) is simply , the steady state
11

Any variable can be written as the sum of its components of all orders. For example, for
a variable xt we have xt = x(0) + xt (1) + xt (2) + ::. The zero-order component of a variable,
x(0), is its value when the standard deviation of shocks in the model approaches zero. The
rst-order component, xt (1), is proportional to the shocks. The second-order component, xt (2),
is proportional to the product of two shocks (or the same shock squared). Notice that we only
compute these order components for the purpose of intuition. The simulations reported below
are based on the exact expressions.

13

value of the parameter. The rst-order component is
@ st
(1) = (1
)( nt
)
(28)
@ fnt
In comparison to the case where parameters are time varying but known, where the
derivative is nt , the impact of the actual structural parameter is now dampened
by 1
. Since in practice is close to 1, this means that the actual structural
parameters have very little e ect on the derivative. In order to understand this,
consider the rst two terms on the right hand side of the derivative expression
(27), (1
) nt + Et nt . Most of the weight ( ) is on the expectation of nt .
But to the rst-order parameter expectations are una ected by actual parameter
innovations.
To illustrate that parameter innovations have no rst-order e ect on the expectation of parameters, consider the simple case where T = N = 1. In this case,
only the most recent parameter innovation "t is unknown. Apart from knowing
the unconditional distribution of "t , we have one other signal: Ft + bt , for which
the only unknown component in this case is simply "t ft + "bt . This signal is not
very informative about "t as it is multiplied by ft , a rst-order shock rather
than a zero-order constant. In this simple case the expectation of the parameter
innovation is
2

( ft )2 "t + ft "bt
(29)
( ft )2 2 + b2
It is easily veri ed that the term involving the parameter innovation "t has rstand second-order components equal to zero. Only the third-order component is
di erent from zero: ( 2 = b2 )( ft )2 "t . This holds more generally when N and
T di er from 1: only third and higher order components of Et nt depend on
parameter innovations.
The second-order component of the derivative is
Et "t =

@ st
(2) =
@ fnt

2

TX1

2
b

2
b
t;i "t

i+

i=0

2
b

#t "bt

where:
t;i

=

TX1 TXk

j j+k ik

k=i j=1

#t =

T
X
i=0

0

T
Xi

@

j=1

14

j j+i

1
A

fn;t

k

fn;t

i

(30)

and where ik is 1 for k = i and 1
b for k > i.
The rst term on the right hand side of (30) is equal to the second-order
component of Et nt . Two surprising aspects stand out. First, the noise shocks
(shocks to unobserved fundamentals) have a bigger impact on the expectation of
the structural parameters than structural parameter innovations themselves. The
impact of noise shocks on Et nt is second-order, while our previous discussion
showed that the impact of actual parameter innovations is third-order.12 Second,
the second-order component of Et nt involves a product of noise innovations
(current and past) and innovations in the observed fundamentals (current and
past). This re ects what we call a scapegoat e ect.
In order to understand the scapegoat e ect, imagine that innovations in unobserved fundamentals have been high, so that bt is high. But since agents cannot
observe bt , they only see that Ft + bt is high. They will then increase their expectation of parameters whose fundamental innovations have been large (positive).
After all, a large fundamental combined with a high value of its parameter can
also explain the large value of Ft + bt . Such a variable then becomes a scapegoat. This is a result of fully rational confusion as agents form expectations based
on all available information. It explains why the expectation of a parameter depends positively on the product of innovations in the associated fundamental and
unobservable noise innovations.
Next consider the second term on the right hand side of (30). This term also
re ects a scapegoat e ect. It again involves the product of fundamental innovations
with a noise innovation. But in this case it is only the current noise innovation "bt
that enters. Therefore this term is uncorrelated across time. The absence of any
persistence implies that this component leads to very high frequency uctuations
in the derivative.
This term captures the second-order component of the last term in the derivative (27). The impact of a fundamental innovation fnt on the exchange rate
depends not only on the expectation of nt that multiplies the fundamental innovation. It also depends on how the change in the fundamental leads to changes in
the expectation of current and past parameters, as seen in the last term of (27). A
change in the current fundamental a ects current and past parameter expectations
12

The second-order impact of noise innovations on the expectation of parameters is also seen in
(29), where the term involving the unobservable innovation "bt is of second order: ( 2 = b2 ) ft "bt .

15

only to the extent that it becomes a scapegoat in the face of a current noise shock
b
t . To see this last point, one can alternatively write the signals Ft i + bt i for
b
i = 0; ::; T 1 as (1
b L)(Ft i + bt i ) = Ft i
b Ft i 1 + "t . The current fundamental innovation fnt only enters in the most recent signal (i = 0), in which
only the most recent noise innovation enters.
One other aspect of the second-order expression (30) should be emphasized.
The parameters t;i and #t depend on the products j j+k of coe cients of the
process of structural parameters. Coe cients j for j > 1 capture the persistence
of the impact of parameter innovations on the level nt of structural parameters.
Clearly, the more persistence, the larger t;i and #t and therefore the bigger the
scapegoat e ects. This re ects the fact that when parameter innovations have
long-lasting e ects on the structural parameters, there is signi cant uncertainty
about the level of the structural parameters, which leaves plenty of room for the
scapegoat mechanism to operate. This is especially the case when j rises with
j, which implies a gradual change in parameters in response to an innovation, so
that parameters can change much more in the long run than the short run.
While we do not report the third-order component, it is worth pointing out
that it captures another type of rational confusion. Instead of confusing unobserved parameter shocks with unobserved fundamental shocks, agents may also
confuse the unobserved innovations in one parameter with unobserved innovations
in another parameter. This is re ected in the third-order component, which is a
complicated expression that multiplies current and past parameter innovations (including those associated with other parameters) with the product of fundamental
innovations (current and past).
In order to illustrate these points and show the magnitude of the scapegoat
e ect, we now turn to a calibration of the model that is grounded in monthly data
of exchange rates and interest rates.

3
3.1

Numerical Analysis
Calibration

We calibrate the model to data for exchange rates, interest rates and observed
fundamentals. A description of the data can be found in Appendix C. In the
16

previous section, we considered a special case with no risk-premium shocks and
where both bt and fnt are iid. For calibration purposes we now turn to a somewhat
more general form of the model.
First, we assume that bt and fnt follow AR(1) processes:
fnt =

fn;t

f

bt =

b bt 1

1

+ "ft

+ "bt

Second, in order to match observed exchange rate volatility we allow for a timevarying risk premium. Let vt be the present discounted value of the risk premium:
vt =

1
X

k

Et

t+k

k=0

To match the observed volatility and autocorrelation of
follows the process
vt+1

vt =

1 (vt

vt 1 )

2 vt

st , we assume that vt

+ "vt+1

(31)

where "vt+1 N (0; v2 ).13
The process for the structural parameters is determined by the values of the
parameters in in equation (20). We assume that the parameters associated with
all observed fundamentals are the same, so that n = and in = i for all n. As
discussed in the introduction, we consider structural parameters that exhibit two
features that would appear plausible in terms of gradual changes in the structure
of the economy, for example associated with technological and nancial innovation,
or cultural and institutional changes. First, structural parameter changes are small
over short horizons of a month or a year. Second, changes in structural parameters
gradually build over time and can be signi cant over long horizons of many years
or decades. Parameters therefore can change much more in the long run than the
short run, generating substantial uncertainty about the level of parameters, even
though monthly or annual changes are small.
13

These risk-premia shocks are assumed to be uncorrelated with the observed fundamentals
fnt , which exogenously generates a disconnect between st and the observed fundamentals.
For a more endogenous explanation of the disconnect between exchange rates and observed
fundamentals, related to private information, see Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2006).

17

In order to get these features, we set 1 = 1 and then choose the other parameters i (i = 2; ::; T ) such that we maximize the ratio of the unconditional standard
deviation of t relative to the standard deviation of monthly changes in nt . In
other words we maximize
nt
:
nt

The resulting process implies that an innovation impacts the parameter nt slowly
over time in the form of a hump shape. It builds up to a maximum impact after T =2
periods and then gradually declines. We will examine other processes in section
3.3.
Table 1 reports the parameters adopted for the benchmark parameterization.
The rst four parameters relate to the processes for nt . We set T = 1000. Since
we assume that one period is one month, this implies that the current level of
structural parameters is determined by parameters innovations over the last 1000
months or 83 years. We set N = 5, so that the total number of structural parameters (and fundamentals) is 5. Therefore the total number of unknown structural
parameter innovations that agents need to learn about is 5000. We normalize by
setting the mean value of the parameters at = 1. We set
= 0:000165. As
reported in the last row of Table 2, this implies a monthly standard deviation of
the change in nt of 0.3% of the mean value of parameters, which is small. But
there is considerable uncertainty about the level of parameters as their unconditional standard deviation is 1.2, or 120% of their steady state level. This is because
parameter changes build gradually over time.
The next ve parameters are associated with the process for bt and vt . These
are set to closely match four moments related to exchange rates and interest rates:
the standard deviation of st , the standard deviation of it it , the rst-order autocorrelation of st and the rst-order autocorrelation of it it . In doing so, we use
monthly data from 1975(9) to 2008(9) for exchange rates and interest di erentials
of 5 countries relative to the United States. The countries are Canada, Germany,
Japan, Switzerland, and United Kingdom. These moments are reported in the
rst column of Table 2 ( rst 4 rows). We match these moments in the model for
the case of constant parameters ( = 0). The moments for constant parameters
are reported in the second column of Table 2. But the moments are virtually identical under the benchmark assumption about time-varying parameters, as shown

18

in column 3.14
As a by-product the model also generates a signi cant negative correlation
between the change in the exchange rate and lagged interest di erential. The
Fama regression coe cient, reported in the fth row of Table 2, is even slightly
more negative than in the data. We emphasize that this is not intended as an
explanation for the forward discount puzzle as it is due to entirely exogenous
risk-premium shocks (see Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2009) for a more plausible
explanation for the forward discount puzzle). It does imply though that the model
is well grounded in the data as it conforms to the basic statistical properties of
exchange rates and interest rates.
The next two parameters relate to the process of the observed fundamentals.
We set the number of fundamentals at N = 5. We do not take a strong stand on
exactly which observed fundamentals a ect exchange rates. This is not necessary
as the nding that observed fundamentals have limited explanatory power for
exchange rates is well known and applies broadly across fundamentals. But for
concreteness in terms of the calibration, we use some representative results from
Bacchetta, van Wincoop and Beutler (2009). For the same 5 currencies and sample
period used to calibrate exchange rate and interest rate moments, they regress
st on changes in 5 fundamentals ( fnt in our model): changes in money supply,
industrial production, unemployment rate, and oil price and the level of lagged
interest rates. They obtain an average R2 of 0.023.
We set the standard deviation f of fundamental innovations in the model
equal to 0.125% in order to match the average R2 in the data when computed
over a sample of 397 months (33 years) that corresponds to the sample in the
data. As shown in Table 2, we match this for both constant parameters and the
benchmark assumption of time-varying parameters. We set the persistence f of
the process for fundamentals equal to 0 under the benchmark parameterization.
This is also closely consistent with the speci c fundamentals listed above.15 We
14

Both under constant and time-varying parameters the moments are computed based on a
simulation over 1300 months (108 years). So they can reasonably be considered population
moments. Prior to the 1300 months over which we compute the moments we rst simulate the
model for T = 1000 months (83 years) in order to obtain a history.
15
The change in money supply, industrial production, unemployment rate, and the oil price all
have low persistence, with rst-order autocorrelations averaging to 0.02. Only the lagged interest
rate di erential has a high persistence of 0.94.

19

will also consider positive persistence in sensitivity analysis.
Finally, we set
= 100=3, implying a discount rate in the present value
equation for the exchange rate of 0.97. This is consistent with evidence by Engel
and West (2005) that the discount rate is close to 1.

3.2

Results

We simulate the model over 2300 months. All moments reported drop the rst 1000
months in order to generate a prior history of shocks. Unless otherwise indicated,
the results reported are based on the subsequent 1300 months.
Derivative of Exchange Rate with Respect to Fundamentals
Figures 1 and 2 show @ st =@ fnt for each of the ve fundamentals. From now
on we simply refer to this as the derivative of the exchange rate with respect to
fundamentals. Figure 1 does so for a 10-year period (observations 1540-1659 in the
simulation), while Figure 2 does so for a 100-year period (observations 1001-2200
in the simulation).16 Both Figures also show nt , which would be the derivative of
the exchange rate with respect to fundamentals if parameters were known.
It is evident from Figure 1 that the derivative of the exchange rate with respect
to fundamentals is far more volatile than the underlying structural parameters.
As reported in Table 2, the average standard deviation of monthly changes in the
derivative is 25.9% of the mean value of the derivative. By contrast, the standard
deviation of monthly changes in the underlying structural parameters is only 0.3%.
We will call the ratio between these two standard deviations the \scapegoat ratio"
as scapegoat e ects are responsible for the increased instability in the relationship
between the exchange rate and fundamentals. In the benchmark case, this ratio is
equal to 85.1.
This result is consistent with the results from the order analysis in section 2.5,
which shows that the actual structural parameter innovations have very limited
e ect on the derivative. Instead, we saw in section 2.5 that the derivative is very
much driven by noise innovations "bt , which a ect the expectations of parameters
in conjunction with changes in observed fundamentals through scapegoat e ects.
While Figure 1 would suggest that the derivative of exchange rates with respect
16

Figure 1 corresponds to the middle observations of Figure 2.

20

to fundamentals is entirely disconnected from the true underlying structural parameters, Figure 2 shows that this is not the case when we take a longer 100-year
view. There are large changes in parameters over long cycles of several decades,
while the derivative of the exchange rate with respect to the fundamentals broadly
catches up with these long term swings. This implies that when there are persistent changes in parameters, agents do eventually learn about them when they are
consistently re ected in the data Ft + bt for several decades.
But, as illustrated in both Figures 1 and 2, short to medium-term uctuations
around such long-term cycles can be large and even dominate the trend itself. It
is precisely the possibility that parameters can change a lot in the long run that
creates signi cant uncertainty about their level and gives rise to scapegoat e ects
that lead to large changes in the derivatives over the short to medium run.
Expectation of Parameters
It is useful to recall equation (19) of the derivative of the exchange rate with
respect to fundamentals, which is displayed here again for convenience:
@ st
= (1
@ fnt

)

nt + Et

nt +

T
X
i=0

ft0

i

@Et t i
@ fnt

(32)

Since is close to 1, the derivative of the exchange rate with respect to fundamentals is primarily driven by the last two terms. The second term is proportional to
the expectation Et nt of structural parameter n. Focusing on variable 1, Figure
3 compares the evolution of 1t with Et 1t over the samples of 10 and 100 years
used in Figures 1 and 2. The top panels illustrate that Et 1t is signi cantly more
volatile than the underlying parameter 1t . But a comparison with Figures 1 and
2 also shows that the overall derivative @ st = @ fnt has even much larger uctuations at high frequencies. This is illustrated in the bottom panels of Figure 3,
which show 1t , Et 1t as well as @ st =@ f1t .
It follows that the very high frequency volatility in @ st =@ fnt is caused by
the last term in (32). This con rms the analysis in section 2.5 when breaking the
derivative into components of di erent orders. As explained in section 2.5, the
last term in (32) has a second-order component that is proportional to "bt (zero
and rst-order components are zero). Therefore, this term has no persistence and
gives rise to very high frequency uctuations. By contrast, Et nt generates more
21

persistent uctuations in the derivative that deviate from the actual structural
parameter.
To summarize, very gradual changes in structural parameters can lead to a
highly unstable relationship between exchange rates and observed fundamentals.
Three factors play a role in this regard. First, scapegoat e ects lead to high frequency uctuations in the derivative of the exchange rate with respect to fundamentals due to transitory changes in parameter expectations resulting from changes
in observed fundamentals. Second, scapegoat e ects also lead to more persistent
changes in the derivative due to persistent changes in the expected value of structural parameters that are unrelated to the actual changes in structural parameters.
Finally, at a very low frequency the derivative also picks up changes in the structural parameters themselves.

3.3

Sensitivity to Process of Structural Parameters

Perhaps most relevant when conducting sensitivity analysis with respect to these
ndings is to consider how the results depend on the process of parameters. This
is the only aspect of the model that we could not calibrate to the data. There
are good reasons for this. It is impossible to know what exactly the process of
structural parameters is. As emphasized in the Introduction, econometric analysis
cannot distinguish between lots of di erent processes. Nonetheless it is important
to consider alternative processes. We will do so in order to make a general point,
which is key to our results. There is signi cant reduced-form parameter instability relative to structural parameter instability when structural parameters can
potentially change much more in the long-run than the short-run. This implies
signi cant uncertainty about the level of parameters relative to monthly changes
in parameters. Or in more technical terms, for any process where nt =
nt is
high, there will be a high scapegoat ratio.
In order to illustrate this point, we consider four alternative processes. These
are all special cases of the process
n;t+1

with di erent values for

nt

1

=

and

1 ( nt
2.

n;t 1 )

2 ( nt

)+

nt

(33)

In terms of an MA process, (33) can be written

22

as
nt

=

n

+

1
X

i "n;t i+1 :

(34)

i=1

with

1

= 1,

2

=1+

1

2

and

i+1

i

=

1( i

i 1)

2 i

(35)

for i 2.
The benchmark process is a special case of this process as well, with 1 = 1
and 2 = 0:00000985. The benchmark process truncates the M A process to an
M A(T ) by setting i = 0 for i > T . The alternative Process 1 is di erent in that
we do not truncate. As is the case for the benchmark process, the parameters
~
i are chosen to maximize the standard deviation of nt relative to
nt , where
P
T
~nt =
i n;t i+1 captures the component of nt that is unknown at time t
i=1

(most recent T innovations). But the coe cients i are not restricted to be zero
for i > T . In the alternative Processes 2 through 4 we truncate i = 0 for i > T
as for the benchmark process.
For all 4 alternative processes, Figure 4 shows the impulse response functions of
the structural parameters after a one standard deviation parameter innovation. For
comparison each chart also shows the impulse response function for the benchmark
parameterization. The top of each chart shows the parameters 1 and 2 for each
of the alternative processes. In each case the standard deviation of ~nt is kept the
same as under the benchmark parameterization.
In Process 1 the structural parameter rises gradually in response to an innovation, until it peaks at a new level where it will remain. From a theoretical
standpoint this process has the unattractive feature that the structural parameters are non-stationary and therefore unbounded. But in practice we only simulate
the model over a nite 2300 months (192 years) and the uncertainty of nt due to
parameter innovations over the past T = 1000 months (83 years) is kept identical
across all parameterizations. This process captures the idea that certain structural
changes, such as technological and nancial innovation, are indeed permanent. It
also connects well to a lot of the econometrics literature that tests for structural
breaks in parameters. This amounts to testing for permanent changes in parameters. In a way Process 1 captures even better than the benchmark parameterization
what we have in mind with gradual and long-lasting changes in parameters. We
23

only chose to truncate the benchmark process after T innovations in order to assure
stationarity for theoretical reasons.17
Process 2 is a truncated AR(1) process with AR coe cient of 0.99. Process 3 is
a truncated random walk process. In Process 4 the structural parameter gradually
rises over time in response to an innovation and peaks a bit earlier than under the
benchmark. In these three cases the response is truncated to zero after T periods.
Table 3 shows the scapegoat ratio for each of the processes, as well as ~nt =
nt .
Since ~nt is kept the same across all processes, a higher ratio means a smaller standard deviation
nt of monthly changes in structural parameters. Table 3 clearly
shows that the higher the long-run uncertainty about the level of the structural
parameters relative to monthly changes in structural parameters, the bigger the
scapegoat ratio. For Process 1, where ~nt =
nt is about double that under the
benchmark process, the scapegoat ratio is now an amazing 267.7. This is more
than three times that under the benchmark. Figure 5 illustrates the scapegoat effect in this case. A major di erence is that structural parameters are more stable,
even at very low frequency. Both the expectation of nt and the reduced form parameters @ st =@ fnt remain highly unstable and are now even more disconnected
from the smooth structural parameters.
By construction ~nt =
nt is less for the other processes than under the benchmark parameterization and therefore the scapegoat ratio is lower as well.18 Beyond
that, two points are worth making. First, even when ~nt =
nt is much lower than
under the benchmark parameterization, there can still be a substantial scapegoat
ratio. For example, for Process 4, where ~nt =
nt is less than one sixth that under the benchmark, the reduced form monthly parameter instability is still more
than 10 times the structural parameter instability. Second, even when the scapegoat ratio is close to 1, as it is for Process 2, this does not mean that that reduced
form parameters are similar to structural parameters. Indeed, even for Process
2, the correlation between monthly changes in structural parameters and reduced
form parameters is only 0.33 (it is 0.02 in the benchmark case).
17

Of course one could truncate process 1 after T innovations, with T much larger than T . The
results will then be very similar to what we report for Process 1 even though technically the
process will then be stationary.
18
Recall that the benchmark process is chosen to maximize ~nt =
for processes that are
nt
truncated after T periods.

24

We should nally point out that we have restricted ourselves to processes with
normally distributed innovations. It is possible that some parameter changes are
big and infrequent. One can imagine a process where there is a big change in
parameters with some very small probability p > 0. In that case parameters are
perfectly constant almost all of the time. But even when structural parameters do
not change at all, reduced-form parameters will be very volatile as the infrequent
large parameter changes contribute to signi cant uncertainty about the level of
parameters.19

3.4

Other Sensitivity Analysis

We now return to the benchmark process and examine the extent to which the
results are sensitive to changes in various parameters. We consider four types
of parameters: the standard deviation of structural parameter innovations; the
variability and persistence of fundamentals; the horizon T after which parameters
are known; and the volatility of the unobserved fundamentals.
3.4.1

Sensitivity Moments to Parameter Instability

When considering alternative processes for the parameters in the previous subsection, we held constant the overall parameter instability as measured by the
standard deviation of ~t . We now consider the impact of a change in the standard
deviation
of parameter innovations for the benchmark process.
Table 2 reports moments for three values of . In addition to the constant
parameter and the benchmark time-varying parameter cases, the fourth column
shows the case where the standard deviation of parameter innovations is twice
that under the benchmark ( = 0:00033). In the latter case the standard deviation of monthly changes in the derivative of the exchange rate with respect to
fundamentals is 45%, while the same moment is only 0.6% for the structural parameters. This implies a scapegoat ratio of 73.8. While this remains very high, it
is slightly lower than under the benchmark parameterization. The reason for this
19

For example, when the structural parameter follows a Markov process with two states 1 + a
and 1 a and the probability of changing from one state to another is a small p, then ~nt =
nt
is equal to 1=(4p). This can get very large for small p. Our results from Table 3 suggest that
this will again generate a very large scapegoat ratio.

25

is that when structural parameters become su ciently volatile, it becomes easier
to learn about them through data on Ft + bt . This reduces the rational confusion
and associated scapegoat e ects, although numerically the di erence is small.
Even though we have seen that gradual changes in structural parameters lead to
a highly unstable relationship between exchange rates and fundamentals, some basic moments involving exchange rates and interest rates are remarkably insensitive
to the degree of parameter instability. Exchange rate volatility rises only slightly.
The standard deviation of exchange rate changes rises from 2.90% to 3.04%, from
the case of constant parameters to the extreme case where parameter volatility
is twice that under the benchmark. The standard deviation of the interest rate
di erential, as well as the autocorrelation of monthly exchange rate change and
the interest di erential, are all virtually una ected by parameter volatility. The
same is the case for the monthly Fama regression coe cient of st+1 on it it .
The reason for these results is that most exchange rate volatility is unrelated to
changes in fundamentals. For the benchmark parameterization the R2 is 0.023, as
in the data.
3.4.2

Sensitivity to Process Fundamentals

We rst examine the impact of the fundamentals process on the link between
exchange rates and these fundamentals. We consider a higher standard deviation
of the innovations of the fundamentals and positive persistence of changes in the
fundamentals. We nd that the volatility of @@ fsntt decreases with f . When we set
the standard deviation of innovations four times as large as under the benchmark
( f = 0:005), the scapegoat ratio declines from 85.1 to 53.7.
The explanation for these results is that when f is larger, the signal Ft + bt
becomes more informative about structural parameters as they are multiplied by
fundamentals that uctuate more. Consequently, there is less confusion. Scapegoat e ects are smaller and therefore the derivative @@ fsntt is somewhat less volatile.
We should not overstate this though as monthly changes in this derivative remain
54 times more volatile than monthly change in the structural parameter nt . Moreover, a standard deviation of f = 0:005 is implausibly high as it leads to an R2 of
0.15. This is well above representative results for a sample of at least 3 decades.
We also consider raising the persistence f of fnt from 0 to 0.2. As shown in
26

Appendix A, the derivative of exchange rates with respect to fundamentals is then
also a ected by expectations of future levels of the structural parameters. But the
overall impact on the unstable relationship between exchange rates and observed
fundamentals is small. The scapegoat ratio increases slightly from 85.1 to 96.7.
3.4.3

Sensitivity to the horizon T

A smaller T implies that there are fewer parameter innovations to learn about. This
reduces rational confusion and scapegoat e ects. This is illustrated by comparing
the case of T = 1000 to the case of T = 300. For T = 300 we nd a scapegoat
ratio of 9.3. While this still re ects signi cant scapegoat e ects, it is much smaller
than scapegoat ratio of 85.1 found in the benchmark of T = 1000. Conversely,
the scapegoat ratio would rise as we make T even bigger than 1000. However, this
would take an excessive amount of computer time. With T = 1000, 5 fundamentals
and a simulation over 2300 months we already need to solve 2300 signal extraction
problems that each involve 5000 unknown parameter innovations.20
3.4.4

Sensitivity to

b

(volatility of unobserved fundamentals)

Shocks to unobserved fundamentals play a crucial role in generating scapegoat
e ects. However, there is a non-linear relationship between the volatility of unobserved fundamentals and the magnitude of the scapegoat e ect as measured by
the scapegoat ratio. This is illustrated in Figure 6, which plots the scapegoat ratio
as a function of b . As the standard deviation b of the unobserved fundamentals
rises, the scapegoat ratio rst increases and then eventually starts to fall. This
non-linear relationship can be explained by the inference process. At low values,
an increase in b generates more rational confusion as F + b becomes more volatile.
But when b becomes too volatile, F + b is a less valuable source of information for
investors. They will then attach less weight to it when forming expectations about
parameters, which reduces scapegoat e ects.
20

With our current technology, this takes about 40 hours of computer time.

27

4

Time-Varying Coe cients and Forecasting Performance

The previous section has shown that a signi cantly unstable relationship between
exchange rates and fundamentals results from gradual changes in structural parameters coupled with the unobservability of the structural parameters. In this section we investigate the implications of this unstable relationship for out-of-sample
forecasting and the corresponding Meese-Rogo puzzle. If parameters were known,
whether constant or time varying, by construction the model would outperform a
random walk in predicting exchange rates. Since the empirical evidence shows that
this is not the case, one can only conclude that this is due to the estimation error
of the parameters levels. One might expect this problem to become more severe
when parameters are time varying. This has led Meese and Rogo (1983a,b) and
many others to conjecture that time-varying parameters may be responsible for the
poor out-of-sample forecasting performance of the model relative to the random
walk. In this section we evaluate the validity of this conjecture within the context
of our model. A companion paper, Bacchetta, van Wincoop and Beutler (2009)
provides further insight by considering the implications of exogenous reduced form
parameter instability in the exchange rate equation.

4.1
4.1.1

Out-of-Sample Forecasting in the Data
The Meese-Rogo

experiment

In their seminal paper, Meese and Rogo (1983a) conduct an out-of-sample forecasting exercise. It is not true forecasting as they forecast the future exchange
rate using information about future macro fundamentals. The statistic they construct may be better called a measure of out-of-sample t of the model. They rst
regress the exchange rate on a set of fundamental variables over a sample of L
months, using the rst L observations of their data. They use the estimate from
this regression to compute a forecast at L + 1, using the observed fundamentals
at L + 1.21 Using rolling regressions, they repeat this P times, each time starting
21

Meese and Rogo (1983a) estimated the exchange rate equation in levels, using several lags
of the exchange rate, but the subsequent literature has regressed the change in the exchange rate
on fundamentals, sometimes including a cointegration term.

28

the sample one month later. They then compute the ratio of the resulting Mean
Square Error (MSE) with the one obtained assuming that the exchange rate follows a random walk.22 They assume L = 45 and P = 55, but subsequent studies
have considered larger numbers for L and P as data samples became longer. For
example, in Molodstova and Papell (2008) L = 108 and P = 292.
The key result of Meese and Rogo (1983a) is that the MSE ratio is generally
above 1, so that the average forecast error is larger when using the fundamentals
than adopting a random walk assumption. This result has largely held up to
extensive scrutiny in the more than two decades of research that followed. For
example, Cheung, Chinn and Pascual (2005) consider a longer sample of data, more
currencies, and more fundamental variables. In only 2 out of 216 combinations that
they consider does the model signi cantly outperform the random walk at a 10%
signi cance level. Rogo and Stavrakeva (2008) discuss recent models that have
been somewhat more successful but continue to nd that the MSE ratio is generally
above 1 or just slightly below 1.
Figure 7 con rms this evidence. It is based on the same currencies, sample
period and fundamentals used for the calibration in section 3.1. The currencies
are the Canadian dollar, Japanese Yen, Swiss franc, British pound, and DM/euro.
The fundamentals fnt are changes in money supply, industrial production, unemployment rate, and oil price and the level of lagged interest rates. Figure 7
shows the MSE ratio as we increase L from 40 to 196 while keeping P xed at 200.
The results are reported for the average over the 5 exchange rates relative to the
dollar. We see that the ratio is much higher than 1 when L is small, and that it
decreases towards 1. However, while it gets close to 1, it never goes below 1. This
con rms once again that the model does not beat the random walk.
4.1.2

Small Sample Bias

As discussed at the start of this section, the nding that the model underperforms
the random walk must ultimately be due to parameter estimation error. If parameters were known, the model would by construction outperform the random
22

More precisely, Meese and Rogo (1983a) look at the RMSE which is the square root of
MSE. They also look at the mean error and at the mean absolute error. They also consider the
RMSE for forecasts further than 1 months ahead, in particular 6 and 12-month ahead forecasts.

29

walk. One source of parameter estimation error is associated with small samples.
This has been the focus of much recent literature. Estimating an exchange rate
equation over a short data sample can lead to spurious noise in the estimation of
even if it is constant. This can lead to a noisy forecast, raising the mean squared
forecast error of the model compared to the random walk, which does not su er
from any estimation bias. This bias is also illustrated in Figure 7. The MSE ratio
rises as L falls and therefore the sample length for parameter estimation becomes
smaller. This can indeed be a serious problem and statistics have been developed
to correct for such small sample bias (e.g., Clark and West, 2006). However, even
for relatively large values of L, involving more than two decades of data, it has
been hard to outperform the random walk (e.g., Rogo and Stavrakeva, 2008).

4.2

The E ect of Time-Varying Parameters

In order to investigate the relationship between time-varying parameters and the
Meese-Rogo results we compute the MSE ratio in the model for both constant
and time-varying parameters. We do so for di erent values of L and a large value
of P equal to 1000. We rst regress st on the fundamentals fnt . The rst
estimation sample uses observations T + 1 to T + L from the simulation. We use
the estimated coe cients to predict sT +L+1 , using the actual future fundamentals
fn;T +L+1 . We then use rolling regressions, as in Meese and Rogo (1983a), with
the last estimation sample using observations T + P to T + P + L 1 from the
simulation to predict sT +P +L .
Figure 8 reports the results for L ranging from 40 months to 200 months.
Results are reported both for the benchmark parameterization with time-varying
parameters and the case of constant parameters. It can be seen that the MSE
ratio declines as the sample length L increases, as in the data in Figure 7. This
illustrates the small sample bias that is largest for small sample lengths L.
A striking result emerges when we compare the MSE ratio of the time-varying
coe cient model with the one of the constant coe cient model. We see that the
forecasting performance is almost identical in the two cases. This result implies
that time variation in the parameters is not a good explanation for the poor outof-sample forecasting performance of exchange rate models.
In Bacchetta, van Wincoop and Beutler (2009) we further explore what gives

30

rise to this surprising result. We assume exogenous time-varying parameters in
a reduced-form relationship between exchange rates and fundamentals. To be
P
precise, we assume that st = N
n=1 nt fnt + ut , with both the fundamentals
fnt and reduced form parameters nt following AR(1) processes. We nd that
three factors a ect the MSE ratio of the time-varying parameter case relative to
the constant parameter case.
The rst two e ects are substantial, but almost exactly o set each other unless
the persistence of the reduced form parameters is close to 1. First, time-varying
parameters raise the estimation error of the parameters. This comes on top of
the small sample estimation error that also applies under constant parameters.
Abstracting from small sample estimation error, the estimated parameters are a
weighted average of the parameters during the estimation sample. This weighted
average of parameters is generally di erent from the future parameters during the
forecast horizon, causing additional parameter estimation error. This by itself
raises the MSE ratio under time-varying parameters. It is also the reason why
time-varying parameters have been suggested as a possible explanation for the
Meese-Rogo results.
But this is almost exactly o set by a second e ect. Abstracting now from
parameter estimation error, assume that the time-varying parameters are known.
Time-varying parameters then increase the explanatory power of the fundamentals.
Bacchetta et al. (2009) show that the explanatory power of the fundamentals is
determined not by the mean value of the parameters, but by their expected
2
squared value: Et nt
. This rises as a result of time-varying parameters. Intuitively,
coe cients can occasionally take large values when they vary, thereby explaining
more of the exchange rate uctuations. This e ect by itself lowers the MSE ratio
under time-varying parameters.
Finally, there is a third e ect that is quite small. The MSE for the random walk
forecast is larger under time-varying parameters. This by itself lowers the MSE
ratio under time-varying parameters. This can be seen in Table 2. The MSE for
the random walk is equal to the variance of st . Table 2 shows that the volatility
of st rises with time-varying parameters. But it also shows that this e ect is
small.
Bacchetta et al. (2009) show that time-varying parameters only have a substantial e ect on the MSE ratio in the extreme case where the persistence of the
31

parameters in the reduced form relationship between exchange rates and fundamentals is close to 1, or more precisely in the range of 0.95 to 1. This is not the
case under our benchmark parameterization, where the persistence is 0.86. While
the persistence of the structural parameters is close to 1, the persistence of the
reduced form parameters (derivative of st with respect to fnt ) is reduced by
uctuations of high and intermediate frequencies associated with scapegoat e ects.
If the persistence of the reduced form parameters is close to 1, Bacchetta et al.
(2009) show that the additional parameter estimation error due to time-varying
parameters becomes small. With high persistence the weighted average of parameters during the estimation sample will be close to the parameters during the
forecast horizon. Therefore the second factor described above dominates and timevarying parameters lower the MSE ratio. Even when this is the case, it goes in
exactly the wrong direction in terms of explaining the Meese-Rogo puzzle, which
is about the high level of the MSE ratio in the data. In our view the puzzle is
simply explained by the limited explanatory power of the observed fundamentals,
together with small sample estimation error.

5

Conclusion

Anecdotal, survey and econometric evidence all suggest that the relationship between the exchange rate and macro fundamentals is highly unstable. One possible
way to explain this is by assuming large and frequent known changes in the structural parameters. But this does not seem very plausible as structural parameters
are hard to observe and estimate and many changes in the structure of the economy
are gradual as a result of technological and nancial innovation and institutional
changes. We have therefore developed a model where structural parameters are
not observed and changes in these structural parameters are very gradual. We have
shown that the relationship between a forward looking variable like the exchange
rate and macro fundamentals is determined not by the structural parameters themselves, but rather by the expectations of these structural parameters.
We have also shown that expectations of these parameters can change signi cantly and frequently, even when changes in structural parameters are small and
gradual. This is a result of scapegoat e ects, where changes in the exchange rate,
or other macro data, are attributed to certain observed fundamentals even when
32

they are driven by unobserved fundamental shocks. Such scapegoat e ects occur
in an environment where agents are rational Bayesian learners that incorporate all
available information to revise their view on the parameters. When structural parameters can potentially change signi cantly over long horizons of several decades,
there is substantial room for scapegoat e ects as agents are trying to learn about
the level of the parameters.
While our focus has been on the exchange rate, an analogous explanation could
also account for the extensive evidence of parameter instability seen in other forward looking macroeconomic and nancial data. Two key ingredients, which are
not limited in any way to exchange rate models, drive our unstable reduced form
results. First, there must be unobserved fundamental shocks. This applies surely
to other asset prices as well and more generally to other macroeconomic data
as factors driving business cycles and long term growth rates are not perfectly
understood. Second, structural parameters must have the potential to change signi cantly over long horizons. This would be hard to dispute as well, especially
in the context of major technological, nancial and institutional changes over the
past two centuries.
Separate from the question of what accounts for the time-varying relationship
between exchange rates and observed fundamentals, there is also the question of
what its implications are. The answer based on our ndings is \very small". We
have shown that even very large time variation in the relationship between exchange rates and fundamentals has little impact on the statistical properties of
exchange rates, interest rates, the in-sample explanatory power of macro fundamentals and the ability to forecast out of sample.

33

Appendix
A

Solving the General Model

In this Appendix we describe the model's solution in the more general case, where
the processes for fnt , bt , and vt are as speci ed in Section 3. A Technical Appendix provides further details towards the implementation of the simulations with
Gauss. We start from the present value equation (1) of the exchange rate. We
need to express it in way we can easily substitute the expectation terms. This
equation can be rewritten as:
st = (1

)Ft + (1

)bt

vt + (1

)

1
X

k

Et (Ft+k + bt+k )

(36)

k=1

First, consider the term involving the present discounted value of F . Use that
Ft+k = Ft +

N X
k
X

n;t+i

(fn;t+i

fn;t+i 1 )

(37)

n=1 i=1

Therefore
1
X

k

Ft+k =

k=1

Ft +

1

1
N X
X

1
1

i

n;t+i

(fn;t+i

fn;t+i 1 )

(38)

n=1 i=1

The present value of b can be written as ~bEt bt , where
~b = (1

)

b

1

(39)
b

Using this, (36) becomes
st = (1
N X
1
X

(

)Ft + Et Ft + (1
)i Et

n;t+i

(fn;t

)bt

t

fn;t 1 ) + ~bEt bt

(40)

n=1 i=1

Therefore
st

st

1

= (1

)

N
X

nt

(fnt

fn;t 1 ) + [Et Ft

N
X

1 n;t 1

Et 1 Ft 1 ] +

n=1
N
X

Et ~nt (fn;t

n=1

(1

fn;t 1 )

Et

~

(fn;t

1

fn;t 2 ) +

n=1

)(bt

bt 1 ) + ~b (Et bt

Et 1 bt 1 )
34

(vt

vt 1 )

(41)

where
~nt =

1
X

)i

(

(42)

n;t+i

i=1

Finally, we can write
Et Ft

Et 1 Ft

N
X

nt

Et

= Et (Ft

1

(fnt

fn;t 1 ) +

n=1

Ft 1 )
N
T
XX

+ [Et Ft

(fn;t

1

fn;t

i

Et 1 Ft 1 ] =
i 1 ) [Et n;t i

(43)
Et

1 n;t i ]

n=1 i=1

Using (43) and collecting terms multiplying fnt
st

st

=

1

N
X

(1

)

nt

+ Et

nt

fn;t 1 , (41) becomes
+ Et ~nt (fnt

fn;t 1 ) +

n=1
N
X

~

Et

1 n;t 1

n=1
T
N X
X

(fn;t

(fn;t

1

fn;t

i

fn;t 2 ) +

i 1 ) [Et n;t i

(44)
Et

1 n;t i ]

+

n=1 i=1

(1

bt 1 ) + ~b (Et bt

)(bt

Given the processes of
written as:
Et

=!
^ Et

nt

Et ~nt

1
Et bt = ^bEt bt +
T
X

(fn;t

i

fn;t

Et 1 bt 1 )

(vt

vt 1 )

and bt , the terms including expectations can be

t

nt

= ^Et

nt

T
b bt T
i 1 ) [Et n;t i

Et

1 n;t i ]

=

i=1

T
X

(fn;t

i

fn;t

i 1 ) T i+1 n;t T

^ nt Et
+h

nt

f^n;t 1 Et

1 n;t 1

i=1

^ and h are 1 by T vectors with
where , ^, ^b, h
!
^ (j) =
^(j) =
^b(j) =

(45)

j
TXj

j+i

(

i=1
j 1
b

)i

(46)
(47)

35

^ nt (j) =
h

jX
1

(fn;t

fn;t

i

i 1) j i

(48)

i=1

f^n;t 1 (j) =

j
X

(fn;t

fn;t

i

i 1 ) j i+1

(49)

i=1

^ nt (1) = 0.
and h
Substituting these results into (44) gives
st

st

=

1

N
X

n=1
N
X

+ ^Et

1

n=1
N X
T
X

+ (1

1

(fn;t

fn;t

i

1 n;t 1

)(

!

(fn;t

)+

nt

i

!
^ + ^ Et

nt

!

(fnt

fn;t 1 ) +

fn;t 2 ) +

1

i 1 ) T i+1 n;t T

N
X

+

n=1 i=1

(1

h

(50)

^ nt Et
h

f^n;t 1 Et

nt

+

1 n;t 1

n=1

)(bt

bt 1 )

vt 1 ) + ~b ^b(Et bt

(vt

Et 1 bt 1 ) +

T
b (bt T

bt

T 1)

The expectation terms can be derived from the signal extraction problem, where
Et ! t = Ct ! t . This gives:
st

st

=

1

N
X

N
X

n

+

n=1 1
T
N X
X

(fn;t

+ (1

1

n=1

Ct 1 ! t

fn;t

i

i

1)

1

)(
!

(fn;t

)+

nt

n

n

! +

i

!

Ct ! t (fnt

fn;t 1 ) +

fn;t 2 ) +

1

T i+1 n;t T

N
X

+

(51)

hnt Ct ! t

ftn 1 Ct 1 ! t

+

1

n=1

n=1 i=1

(1

h

)(bt

bt 1 )

(vt

vt 1 ) + ~b b(Ct ! t

Ct 1 ! t 1 ) +

T
b (bt T

bt

T 1)

Here n is a 1 by (N + 1)T vector with ^ in elements T (n 1) + 1 through T n and
zeros otherwise. The vectors ! n , hnt and ftn 1 are de ned analogously. b is a 1 by
(N + 1)T vector with ^b in elements N T + 1 through N T + T and zeros otherwise.
Collecting terms in Ct ! t and Ct 1 ! t 1 , we can rewrite this as
st

st

1

=

N
X

1

n=1
N h
X

n=1

n

! +

n

i

(fnt

+ (1
fn;t 1 ) +

)(

nt

N
X

n=1

36

hnt

!

) (fnt
!

fn;t 1 ) +

+ ~bb Ct ! t

(52)

N
X

n=1
N
X

n=1

(1

n

(fn;t

N
X

fn;t 2 ) +

1

ftn 1

!

+ ~bb Ct 1 ! t

n=1

(fn;t

1

fn;t 2 ) +

1

N X
T
X

(fn;t

1

+

fn;t

i

i 1 ) T i+1 n;t T

+

n=1 i=1

)(bt

bt 1 ) + ~b

T
b (bt T

bt

T 1)

(vt

vt 1 )

The derivative with respect to the current fundamental is:
@ st =@ fnt =
@

B

PN

n=1

h

!n +

1
n

+ (1
i

(fnt

)(

!

) +

nt

fn;t 1 ) +
@ fnt

PN

n=1

(53)

hnt + ~bb Ct ! t

Signal Extraction

The signal extraction problem is described in Section 2.3. The matrix Ht is de ned
as:
H0t = [A1t ; :::; AN t ; B]
(54)
with
Ant

and

2

f^nt (1) f^nt (2)
6
6
0
f^n;t 1 (1)
6
=6
6
:::
4
0
0
2

1
6
6 0
6

:::
1 :::
B=6
6
::: :::
4
0 0 :::

C

b

:::
f^nt (T )
::: f^n;t 1 (T 1)
:::
:::
::: f^n;t T +1 (1)
T 1
b
T 2
b

:::
1

3
7
7
7
7
7
5

3
7
7
7
7
7
5

Empirical Evidence on Meese-Rogo

As in Meese-Rogo (1983a), we implement rolling regressions to produce the outof-sample forecasts underlying the MSE ratios in Figure 7. The forecasts are based
on the following regression:
st = ft0 a + ut
37

where a is the vector of constant parameters to be estimated and
= (1 L),
where L is the lag operator. The size of the estimation sample is L and the
forecasting sample size is P , hence the regression is rolled forward P times. The
M SE m is given by
M SE m =

1
P

L+P
X1
t=L

st+1

0 b
ft+1
a

2

(55)

b is estimated by OLS over the interval t + 1
where a
L to t. Realized values of
ft+1 are used to compute the forecast of st+1 .
We compute a similar measure M SE rw for the same forecasting sample, asb = 0 in the above
suming the exchange rate follows a random walk, i.e. setting a
m
rw
equation. M SE is divided by M SE to obtain the ratio of MSE displayed in
Figure 7. We set P = 200 and vary L from 40 to 196. We compute the MSE ratios
and take the simple average over the ve countries mentioned in Figure 7.
The exchange rate, st , is the bilateral US Dollar end-of-period rate from IFS.
The vector ft0 is made of a constant and the following 5 variables:

Money supply: (mt mUt S ), where mt = ln Mt and Mt is M1, OECD Main
Economic Indicators (MEI), for Canada and M1, IFS line 59MA, for Japan.
In the case of Germany/Euro area, we consider M1 seasonally adjusted, IFS
line 59MACZF until December 1998 and M1, OECD MEI, for the Euro Area
from January 1999. For the United Kingdom, we take M0, IFS line 19MC.ZF,
until April 2006 (last observation of the IFS series) and M1, OECD MEI,
from May 2006. For Switzerland, we consider IFS line 34ZF. Finally, for
the United States, we take the corresponding series, i.e. either M1, IFS line
59MA or M1, OECD MEI. All seasonally unadjusted series were adjusted
using monthly dummies.
Industrial production: (yt ytU S ), where yt = ln Yt and Yt is the industrial production index, taken from IFS, line 66CZF, except for Switzerland for
which no monthly series is available. For this country, we compute monthly
observations from quarterly data (IFS, line 66) using the same procedure as
in Molodstova and Papell (2009).
Unemployment rate: (ut uUt S ), where ut = ln Ut and Ut is the unemployment rate from OECD MEI except for Germany / Euro area. For this
38

country, we take a series from Datastream (Mnemonic WGUN%TOTQ) that
covers only West Germany and is thus una ected by the German reuni cation that took place in 1990.
Interest rate: it 1 iUt S1 , where it is the monthly return calculated from
the money market rate, IFS line 60B.
oil
oil
oil
is the average crude oil spot
Oil price: poil
t , where pt = ln Pt and Pt
price from IFS.

39

References
[1] Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop (2004), \A Scapegoat Model of
Exchange Rate Determination," American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 94, 114-118.
[2] Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric van Wincoop (2006), \Can Information Heterogeneity Explain the Exchange Rate Determination Puzzle?" American Economic Review 96, 552-576.
[3] Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric van Wincoop (2009), \Infrequent Portfolio Decisions: A Solution to the Forward Discount Puzzle," American Economic
Review, forthcoming.
[4] Bacchetta, Philippe, Eric van Wincoop, and Toni Beutler (2009), \Can Parameter Instability Explain the Meese-Rogo puzzle?" mimeo.
[5] Boivin, Jean (2006), \Has U.S. Monetary Policy Changed? Evidence from
Drifting Coe cient and Real Time Data," Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking 38(5).
[6] Canova, Fabio (2005), \Monetary Policy and the Evolution of the U.S. Economy," working paper, CREI.
[7] Cheung, Yin-Wong and Menzie David Chinn (2001), \Currency Traders and
Exchange Rate Dynamics: A Survey of the US Market," Journal of International Money and Finance 20(4), 439-71.
[8] Cheung, Yin-Wong, Menzie David Chinn, and Antonio Garcia Pascual (2005),
\Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the Nineties: Are Any Fit to Survive?"
Journal of International Money and Finance 24, 1150-1175.
[9] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali and Mark Gertler(2000), \Monetary Policy Rules
and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory," Quarterly Journal
of Economics 115(1), 147-180.
[10] Clark, Todd E. and Kenneth D. West (2006), "Using Out-of-sample Mean
Square Prediction Errors to Test the Martingale Di erence Hypothesis," Journal of Econometrics 135, 155-186.
40

[11] Cogley, Timothy (2005), \Changing Beliefs and the Term Structure of Interest Rates: Cross-Equation Restrictions with Drifting Parameters," Review of
Economic Dynamics 8, 420-451.
[12] Cogley, Timothy and Thomas J. Sargent (2005), \Drifts and Volatilities: Monetary Policies and Outcomes in the Post WWII U.S. ," Review of Economic
Dynamics 82(2), 262-302.
[13] Del Negro, Marco and Christopher Otrok (2007), \Dynamic Factor Models
with Time-Varying Parameters," mimeo.
[14] Elliott, Graham and Allan Timmermann (2008), \Economic Forecasting,"
Journal of Economic Literature 46, 3-56.
[15] Engel, Charles and Kenneth D. West (2005), \Exchange Rates and Fundamentals," Journal of Political Economy 113, 485-517.
[16] Fernandez-Villaverde, Jesus and Juan F. Rubio-Ramirez (2007), \How Structural are Structural Parameters? " working paper, Duke University.
[17] Hansen, L. and T. Sargent (2008), Robustness, Princeton University Press,
forthcoming.
[18] Inoue, A. and B. Rossi (2007), \Which Structural Parameters Are \Structural"? Identifying the Sources of Instabilities in Structural Models," mimeo.
[19] Levin, A., A. Onatski, J. Williams, and N. Williams (2006), "Monetary Policy under Uncertainty in Micro-Founded Macroeconometric Models" in M.
Gertler and K. Rogo , eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
[20] Meese, Richard A. and Kenneth Rogo (1983a), \Empirical Exchange Rate
Models of the Seventies: Do They Fit Out of Sample?" Journal of International Economics 14, 345-373.
[21] Meese, Richard A. and Kenneth Rogo (1983b), \The Out-of-Sample Failure
of Empirical Exchange Rate Models: Sampling Error or Misspeci cation?" in
J. Frenkel (ed.), Exchange Rates and International Macroeconomics, 67{105,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
41

[22] Meese, Richard A. and Kenneth Rogo (1988), \Was it Real? The Exchange
Rate-Interest Di erential Relation Over the Modern Floating-Rate Period,"
Journal of Finance 43, 933-948.
[23] Molodstova, Tanya and David Papell (2008), "Out-of-Sample Exchange Rate
Predictability with Taylor Rule Fundamentals," mimeo.
[24] Nason, James N. and John N. Rogers (2008), "Exchange Rates and Fundamentals: A Generalization," International Finance Discussion Paper No. 948.
[25] Onatski, A. and N. Williams (2003), "Modeling Model Uncertainty," Journal
of the European Economic Association 1, 1087-1022.
[26] Pastor, Lubos and Pietro Veronesi (2009), "Learning in Financial Markets,"
NBER WP 14646.
[27] Piazzesi, Monika and Martin Schneider (2007), \Equilibrium Yield Curves,"
in Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogo , and Michael Woodford (eds.) , NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2006, MIT Press.
[28] Primiceri, Giorgio E. (2005), "Time Varying Structural Vector Autoregressions and Monetary Policy," Review of Economic Studies 72, 821-852.
[29] Rogo , Rogo and Vania Stavrakeva (2008), "The Continuing Puzzle of Short
Horizon Exchange Rate Forecasting," NBER WP 14071.
[30] Rossi, Barbara (2006), \Are Exchange Rates Really Random Walks? Some
Evidence Robust to Parameter Instability," Macroeconomic Dynamics 10, 2038.
[31] Sarno, Lucio and Giorgio Valente (2008), \Exchange Rates and Fundamentals:
Footloose or Evolving Relationship?, " forthcoming Journal of the European
Economic Association.
[32] Schinasi, Garry J. and P.A.V.B Swamy (1989), "The Out-of-Sample Forecasting Performance of Exchange Rate Models when Coe cients Are Allowed to
Change," Journal of International Money and Finance 8, 375-390.

42

[33] Sims, Christopher A. and Tao Zha (2006), \Were There Regime Switches in
U.S. Monetary Policy?, " American Economic Review 96(54-81).
[34] Stock, James, H. and Mark W. Watson (1996), "Evidence on Structural Instability in Macroeconomic Time Series Relations," Journal of Business and
Economic Statistics 14, 11-30.
[35] Townsend, Robert M. (1983), \Forecasting the Forecasts of Others," Journal
of Political Economy 91, 546-588.
[36] Wol , Christian C.P. (1987), \Time-Varying Parameters and the Out-ofSample Forecasting Performance of Structural Exchange Rate Models," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 5, 87-97.

43

Table 1 Benchmark Parameter Assumptions*
T

1000

N

5

β
σβ

σb
ρb
συ
φ1
φ2
σf
ρf
α
* Standard deviations are given in %.

1
0.0165
2.2
0.96
2.7
0.06
0.1
0.125
0
33.3

Table 2

Moments: Data and Model*

Data

σβ=0

Benchmark
σβ=0.0165

σβ=0.033

Standard Deviation ∆s t

2.91

2.90

2.99

3.04

Corr( ∆s t , ∆s t -1 )

0.04

0.04

0.04

0.04

Standard Deviation i t -i*t

0.22

0.23

0.23

0.23

Corr(i t -i*t ,i t -1 -i*t -1 )

0.92

0.92

0.93

0.93

cov(∆s t ,i t -1 -i*t -1 ) / var(i t -1 -i*t -1 )

-1.25

-1.82

-1.86

-1.83

R 2 monthly

0.023

0.022

0.022

0.031

s.d. Monthly Change ∂∆ s t / ∂ ∆ f nt

-

0

25.9

45.0

s.d. Monthly Change ∆β nt

-

0

0.30

0.61

* Standard deviations are given in %.

Table 3 Scapegoat Ratio*
~
s.d .( β nt )
s.d .( ∆β nt )

Scapegoat
ratio

Benchmark Process

319

86.3

Process 1

637

267.7

Process 2

7

1.6

Process 3

22

4.4

Process 4

49

10.1

* The scapegoat ratio is the standard deviation of monthly changes in the reduced
form derivative ∂∆s t/∂∆fnt of the exchange rate with respect to fundamentals relative
to the standard deviation of monthly changes in structural parameters.

Figure 1 Derivative Δst with respect to Δfnt (10 years)*
2

2.5

2

Variable 1

1

1. 5

0

1

0.5
0

12

24

1

36

48

60

72

84

96

10 8 12 0

0
0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

9 6 10 8 12 0

0

12

24

1

Variable 4

Variable 5

0

0
0

-1

Variable 3

Variable 2

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

96

0

10 8 12 0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

9 6 10 8 12 0

-1

* The smooth line is βnt, while the volatile line represents

the derivative of Δst with respect to Δfnt.

36

48

60

72

84

96

10 8 12 0

Figure 2 Derivative Δst with respect to Δfnt (100 years)*
3

3

Variable 2

Variable 1

3.5

2

2

2.5

1

1

1. 5

0

0
0

200

2

400

600

800

10 0 0

0

200

400

2

1

600

800

10 0 0

12 0 0

0

200

Variable 5

1

0
0

-1

0.5

12 0 0

Variable 4

Variable 3

200

400

600

800

10 0 0

12 0 0

0
0

200

400

600

800

10 0 0

12 0 0

-1

* The smooth line is βnt, while the volatile line represents

the derivative of Δst with respect to Δfnt.

400

600

800

10 0 0

12 0 0

Figure 3

Expectations βnt (variable 1)

Et β nt and β nt (10 years)

Et β nt and β nt (100 years)

2

3

βnt

2

1

βnt

1

Et βnt

Et βnt
0
0

0

200

400

600

800

10 0 0

12 0 0

-1

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

96

108

120

∂Δst / ∂Δf nt , Et β nt , and β nt (10 years)
βnt

2

∂Δst/∂Δfnt

∂Δst / ∂Δf nt , Et β nt , and β nt (100 years)
3

1

βnt

∂Δst/∂Δfnt

2

1

Et βnt

Et βnt

0
0

0
0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

96

10
8

12
0

-1

200

400

600

800

10 0 0

12 0 0

Figure 4 Impulse Response Functions for Alternative
Processes for Structural Parameters*
0.1

Process 1

δ1 = 1; δ 2 = 0.00000247

0.08

Process 2

0.2

δ1 = 0; δ 2 = 0.01

0.16

0.06

0.12

0.04

0.08

0.02

0.04

0

0

0

200

400

600

800

1000 1200 1400 1600

Process 3

0.1

200

0.08

0.06

0.06

0.04

0.04

0.02

400

600

800

1000

Process 4
δ1 = 0.99; δ 2 = 0.00001

0.1

δ1 = 0; δ 2 = 0

0.08

0

0.02

0

0
0

200

400

600

800

1000

0

200

400

600

800

1000

* Each graph shows the impulse response functions of the structural parameters in response to one standard deviation
parameter innovations. The different charts correspond to different values for δ1 and δ2 for the process described in the
paper. For comparison each graph also shows the impulse response function for the benchmark process (thinner humpshaped line).

Figure 5 Derivative Δst with respect to Δfnt (100 years)* Process 1
4

2

Variable 2

Variable 1
3

5.5

4.5

1

2

3.5

0
0

200

400

600

800

10 0 0

12 0 0

1
0

200

0.5

400

600

800

10 0 0

12 0 0

0

200

400

600

800

2.5
-1

0

2

Variable 4
10 0 0

200

400

600

800

10 0 0

12 0 0

Variable 5

12 0 0

- 0.5

1

- 1. 5

0
0

- 2.5

Variable 3

200

400

600

800

10 0 0

12 0 0

-1

* The smooth thin line is βnt, the thick line is Etβnt,while the most volatile line represents the derivative of Δst with respect to Δfnt.

Figure 6 Unobservable Shocks and Scapegoat Ratio*

Scapegoat Ratio
90
80

t

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

σ b (in %)

*Scapegoat ratio=standard deviation monthly changes in ∂∆st/∂∆fnt relative to standard deviation monthly
changes in βnt.

Figure 7 Out-of-Sample Fit and Sample Size
Empirical Evidence
1.2

1.1

1

0.9
40

80

120

160

200

S ize of Re gression Sa mple - L
Note: Mean-Square Error (MSE) of one-month ahead exchange rate forecasts from model including changes in money, output,
unemployment rate, oil price and level of lagged interest rate estimated by rolling regressions relative to MSE of random walk forecast.
The reported line is an average for bilateral US dollar exchange rate with Canadian dollar, Japanese yen, Swiss franc, British pound
and German mark – Euro composite. Forecasting sample is 200 periods. Sample : 1975M9 - 2008M9. Data sources: IFS and OECD.

Figure 8 Out-of-Sample Forecasting:
MSE Model/MSE Random Walk
1.2

Time-Varying Parameters
Constant Parameters

1.15
1.1
1.05
1
0.95
0.9
40

80

12 0

16 0

200

L

