                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        UNRAVELING RESULTS FROM COMPARABLE DEMAND AND SUPPLY:
                    AN EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION

                                            Muriel Niederle
                                            Alvin E. Roth
                                            M. Utku Ünver

                                         Working Paper 15006
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15006


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2009




The preliminary version of this study reporting pilot experiments and the latest version were presented
at the ESA Meetings in Pittsburgh and Tucson, at the Winter ES Meeting in Philadelphia, and at NYU.
We thank the participants for comments. Of course, all possible errors are our own responsibility.
We used the Z-Tree software (Fischbacher, 2007) in our experiment. We would like to gratefully acknowledge
the support of the NSF. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Muriel Niederle, Alvin E. Roth, and M. Utku Ünver. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Unraveling Results from Comparable Demand and Supply: An Experimental Investigation
Muriel Niederle, Alvin E. Roth, and M. Utku Ünver
NBER Working Paper No. 15006
May 2009
JEL No. C78,C9,C92

                                              ABSTRACT

Markets sometimes unravel, with offers becoming inefficiently early. Often this is attributed to competition
arising from an imbalance of demand and supply, typically excess demand for workers. However this
presents a puzzle, since unraveling can only occur when firms are willing to make early offers and
workers are willing to accept them. We present a model and experiment in which workers' quality
becomes known only in the late part of the market. However, in equilibrium, matching can occur
(inefficiently) early only when there is comparable demand and supply: a surplus of applicants, but
a shortage of high quality applicants.


Muriel Niederle                                      M. Utku Ünver
Stanford University                                  Boston College
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall                                       140 Comm. Ave.
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                              Chestnut Hill, MA, 02467
and NBER                                             unver@bc.edu
niederle@stanford.edu

Alvin E. Roth
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer 308
Cambridge, MA 02138-3001
and NBER
aroth@hbs.edu
1         Introduction
In many professional labor markets most entry-level hires begin work at around the same time, e.g.
soon after graduating from university, or graduate or professional school. Despite a common start
time, o¤ers can be made and contracts can be signed at any time prior to the start of employ-
ment. Such markets sometimes unravel, with o¤ers becoming earlier and more dispersed in time, not
infrequently well over a year before employment will begin.1
        Unraveling is sometimes a cause of market failure, particularly when contracts come to be deter-
mined before critical information is available.2 Attempts to prevent or reverse unraveling are often
a source of new market design in the form of new rules or market institutions.3
        It is commonly suggested, both by economists and lay participants in these markets, that unrav-
eling results from competition related to an imbalance of demand and supply. For example, Roth
(1984), writing about the market for new physicians around 1900, writes

             “The number of positions o¤ered for interns was, from the beginning, greater than
          the number of graduating medical students applying for such positions, and there was
          considerable competition among hospitals for interns. One form in which this competition
          manifested itself was that hospitals attempted to set the date at which they would …nalize
          binding agreements with interns a little earlier than their principal competitors.”

        Describing the growth of early admissions to colleges, Avery, Fairbanks, and Zeckhauser (2003,
p32) quote a 1990 U.S. News and World Report story4

             “Many colleges, experiencing a drop in freshman applications as the population of
          18-year-olds declines, are heavily promoting early-acceptance plans in recruiting visits to
          high schools and in campus tours in hopes of corralling top students sooner.”
    1
     See Roth and Xing (1994) for many examples, including markets other than labor markets in which contracts are
ful…lled at around the same time but can be …nalized substantially earlier, such as the market for college admissions,
or for post-season college football bowls.
   2
     See e.g. Niederle and Roth (2003) on how the market for gastroenterology fellows fragmented when it unraveled,
or Fréchette, Roth, and Ünver (2007) on how college football bowls lost television viewership in years when teams and
bowls were matched too early.
   3
     See e.g. Niederle, Proctor, and Roth (2006, 2008) and Niederle and Roth (2004, 2005, 2009) on the market
for gastroenterologists, Roth and Peranson (1999) on the market for new American medical graduates, Roth (1991),
Ünver (2001, 2005) on markets for new British doctors, and Fréchette, Roth, and Ünver (2007) on college football
bowl selections.
   4
     Titled "A Cure for Application Fever: Schools Hook More Students with Early Acceptance O¤ers." (April 23).




                                                          2
      There is also no shortage of commentary by market participants linking excess demand for workers
to unraveling.5 And indeed, a number of unraveling events seem to have been initiated by a shock to
supply or demand. See e.g. Niederle and Roth (2003) and McKinney, Niederle, and Roth (2005) for
a description of just such a development in the market for gastroenterology fellows, in which a shock
that produced excess demand for fellows (i.e. a shock that led, for the …rst time, to fewer fellowship
applicants than fellowship positions) led to unraveling that lasted for a decade.
      But, when looking at a labor market, it is not uncommon for participants on both sides of the
market to be nervous about their prospects, and it can be di¢ cult to be sure which is the short side
of the market. Even in a market with more applicants than positions there may be a shortage of the
most highly quali…ed applicants.
      For example, the market for law clerks has experienced serious unraveling, with positions for
new graduates in some recent periods being …lled two years before graduation (see Avery, Jolls,
Posner, and Roth 2001, 2007, and Haruvy, Roth, and Ünver 2006). Wald (1990) writes of the judges’
perception of that market as follows:

           “But why the fervent competition for a handful of young men and women when our
        law schools spawn hundreds of …ne young lawyers every year? Very simply, many judges
        are not looking just for quali…ed clerks; they yearn for neophytes who can write like
        Learned Hand, hold their own in a discussion with great scholars, possess a preternatural
        maturity in judgment and instinct, are ferrets in research, will consistently outperform
        their peers in other chambers and who all the while will maintain a respectful, stoic, and
        cheerful demeanor.
           ... Thus, in any year, out of the 400 clerk applications a judge may receive, a few
        dozen will become the focus of the competition; these few will be aggressively courted
        by judges from coast to coast. Early identi…cation of these ”precious few”is sought and
        received from old-time friends in the law schools – usually before the interview season
        even begins.”

      In just the same way, there are many federal appellate court judges, but only a few dozen are
considered to have highly prestigious clerkships.

      A similar story can be told about college admissions. For example, Menand (2003) says

           “There are more than two thousand four-year colleges in the United States. Only
        about two hundred reject more students than they accept. The vast majority of American
  5
    See for example Santos and Sexson (2002) on the market for new psychiatrists, or Gorelick (1999) on gastroen-
terologists.

                                                       3
         colleges accept eighty per cent or more of those who apply. But among the top …fty there
         is a constant Darwinian struggle to improve selectivity.”


       So both law clerks and college admissions are examples of markets in which participants on each
side of the market can think of themselves as being on the long side, i.e. as facing a shortage of
appropriate opportunities, if they focus on an elite subset of participants on the other side of the
market. In such markets it can be a little hard to assess the relative balance of demand and supply
in …eld data.
       We are going to argue that such a situation, which we will call comparable demand and supply, is
in fact characteristic of markets in which we should expect to see costly, ine¢ cient unraveling. The
intuition is that unraveling requires both that …rms want to make early o¤ers and that applicants
want to accept them. If information about match quality evolves over time, and if one side of the
market knows that it will be in short enough supply to attract a good match when the good matches
become clear, then there will not be unraveling, as one side of the market will want to await the
resolution of the uncertainty.6
       Unraveling will cause changes in who is matched with whom, but whether this will cause big
e¢ ciency losses will depend on whether the demand and supply imbalances are such that some
"mismatches" are inevitable (in which case unraveling may just cause redistribution of mismatches),
or whether they can largely be avoided by awaiting information on match quality (in which case
too-early matches are likely to be ine¢ cient).
       This paper reports an experiment on these issues. The control available in the laboratory allows
us to precisely vary the conditions of demand and supply.7 Section 2 outlines the elements of a
   6
      In any model in which o¤ers are made over time, unraveling will occur at equilibrium only if early o¤ers are
made and accepted. The theoretical model closest in spirit to the one explored here is that of Li and Rosen (1998)
in which …rms and workers unravel to each insure the other against an outcome that leaves their side of the market
in excess supply (in an assignment model in which agents on the long side of the market earn zero). Damiano, Li,
and Suen (2005) look at a model with a continuum of agents in which unraveling is driven at equilibrium by the
fact that it makes later contracting less desirable because of the di¢ culty of …nding a match when everyone else
contracts early. Unraveling as insurance is further explored in Li and Suen (2000, 2004) and Suen (2000). Other
theoretical models have unraveling (under conditions of …xed supply and demand) determined by the competition for
workers as determined by how correlated …rms’preferences are (Halaburda 2008), or by how well connected …rms are
to early information about workers’qualities (Fainmesser 2009), or by the establishment of certain kinds of centralized
matching mechanisms (Roth and Xing 1994, Sönmez 1999, and Ünver 2001). In prior experimental studies, Kagel and
Roth (2000), Ünver (2005) and Haruvy, Roth, and Ünver (2006) look at unraveling as a function of what kinds of
centralized market clearing mechanism are available at the time when matching may be done e¢ ciently. Niederle and
Roth (2009) look at unraveling as a function of the rules governing exploding o¤ers in a decentralized market.
    7
      The usual di¢ culties of measuring supply and demand in the …eld are compounded when the supply of workers
of the highest quality must be evaluated.

                                                          4
theoretical model, su¢ ciently to apply it to the experimental design presented in Section 3. Although
we will concentrate here on the predictions about unraveling and ine¢ ciency as a function of demand
and supply, we will also note that the theoretical framework we develop enriches the standard model
of stable matching in ways that allow for some novel predictions about the e¤ect on one side of the
market of adding participants to the other side.


2     The Model
Consider a market with nF …rms and nA applicants. Denote a typical …rm by f , and a typical
applicant by a. Every …rm wants to hire up to one applicant, and every applicant can work for up
to one …rm. Firms and applicants can be of one of two possible qualities, high (h) or low (`): A
matching is a mapping that (i) maps each agent to a partner or leaves her unmatched, and (ii) for
any …rm f and applicant a, maps …rm f to applicant a if and only if it maps applicant a to …rm f .
The interpretation is that a …rm f and an applicant a are matched if …rm f hired applicant a and
applicant a works for …rm f .
    Unmatched …rms and applicants receive a payo¤ of 0: If …rm f and applicant a are matched
with each other, they receive payo¤s that depend upon their own quality, the quality of the matched
partner, and a random variable: We assume every agent prefers a high quality partner to a low quality
partner, and being unmatched is the least preferred alternative for each agent. For each …rm f of
quality i, the payo¤ for being matched with an applicant a of quality j is Vf (a) = uij + "a , where
"a is a random variable with mean 0, and uij > 0. For each applicant a of quality i, the payo¤ for
being matched with a …rm f of quality j is Va (f ) = uij + "f ; where "f is a random variable with
mean 0. "f and "a are identically distributed with a marginal distribution G in the interval [      ; ]
where    > 0: The joint distribution of f"a g is such that there is no tie in "a ; that is, there are no
two applicants a1 and a2 such that "a1 = "a2 occurs with positive probability. Similarly, the joint
distribution of f"f g is such that there is no tie in "f .
    A matching is ex-post stable if there is no …rm-applicant pair such that, after all uncertainty
is resolved, each prefers one another to her match. A matching is e¢ cient if the sum of the
payo¤s of the agents is highest among all matchings after all uncertainty is resolved. A matching is
qualitywise-e¢ cient if the sum of the payo¤s of agents excluding "’s is highest among all matchings.
Since ex-post there are no ties in "f and "a with probability one, …rms and applicants can be strictly
rank-ordered with respect to preferences. A matching is assortative if for all k      minfnF ; nA g, the
k th best applicant is matched with the k th best …rm. The market has a unique assortative matching
with probability one. A matching is qualitywise-assortative if there is no …rm f of quality i
and applicant a of quality j such that f is matched with an applicant of lower quality than j or is


                                                      5
unmatched, and a is matched with a …rm of lower quality than i or is unmatched.8
       We assume that
                                           uhh    uh` > u`h      u`` > 0:9

We choose       (the bound of the "’s) small enough such that with the above assumptions, an e¢ cient
matching is qualitywise-assortative; i.e. no agent ever prefers a low quality partner to any high quality
partner. This implies that a matching is qualitywise-assortative if and only if it is qualitywise-e¢ cient.
Moreover, there is a unique ex-post stable matching (the unique assortative matching, due to the
random variables "), which is e¢ cient.
       We will be mostly interested in qualitywise e¢ ciency or qualitywise ine¢ ciency rather than e¢ -
ciency or ine¢ ciency, since the values of random f"g will be rather small and this will cause small
welfare losses when a qualitywise-e¢ cient matching is not e¢ cient.10 However, qualitywise-ine¢ cient
matchings will lead to comparatively large welfare losses.
       While we denote qualities as high and low, it would be misleading to think of those as e.g. Ivy
League universities and community colleges. Rather, the analogy would be between the very best
colleges and some only slightly less prestigious ones. Note that in the model the …rms literally hire
from the same pool of applicants. Similarly, each applicant has a chance to be among the very best,
or not quite make it (hence they are far from applicants who would have no chance to be accepted
to a top university, no matter the …nal information available about them).
   8
      The assortative matching is qualitywise-assortative, although the converse doesn’t hold. Note that the "’s de…ne
an absolute standard of e¢ ciency, but we look at quality-wise e¢ ciency and sorting. This is because the "’s play
three roles in our treatment: 1. as a technical assumption to give us uniqueness, 2. to re‡ect the fact that, in future
…eld work, we expect the data might be able to distinguish quality in the large, but not preferences among applicants
with similar observables (so that quality would be observable only up to the "’s); and 3. to make clear in our model
that we are not claiming that just because a market isn’t unraveled it is e¢ cient, rather we are only claiming that
avoiding unraveling avoids a large source of ine¢ ciency, quality-wise ine¢ ciency.
    9
      That is, high quality …rms (and applicants) have a strictly higher marginal expected payo¤ from increasing their
partner’s quality than low quality …rms (and applicants). I.e., if the production function regarding a …rm and worker
is the sum of the pay-o¤s of the …rm and the worker, then it is supermodular.
   10
      For example, a qualitywise e¢ cient matching may be ine¢ cient when the applicant with the largest " value
remains unmatched while an applicant of the same quality is matched. Qualitywise e¢ ciency or its absence is also
what can generally be assessed from evaluating …eld data such as that obtained by using revealed preferences over
choices in marriage or dating markets for estimating preferences over observables (i.e. such estimates can determine
how important a potential mate’s education is in forming preferences, but cannot observe which among identically
educated potential mates will have the best personal chemistry (see e.g. Banerjee et al. 2009; Hitsch et al. 2009; Lee
2009).




                                                          6
2.1       The Game
Firms and applicants can match in a market that is characterized by early and late hiring stages.
Each stage consists of several hiring periods. The …rms’ qualities, high or low, are revealed and
become common knowledge to all market participants at the beginning of the …rst period in the
early hiring stage. Let nhF         nF be the number of high quality …rms in the market and nF                    nhF
be the number of low quality …rms. The applicants’qualities, however, are uncertain and revealed
only at the …rst period of the late hiring stage when they become common knowledge. Furthermore,
each market is characterized by a common knowledge deterministic …nal proportion of high and low
                                                                                            nh
quality applicants. That is, from the beginning, it is known that a proportion               A
                                                                                            nA
                                                                                                 of applicants for
some integer     nhA   < nA will be of high quality, and the remaining applicants, nA            nhA will be of low
quality. (For example, there might be a special distinction attached to hiring a “top ten”applicant.)
To simplify the exposition, and the later experiments, we assume that all applicants have the same
                                                            nh
                                                             A 11
ex-ante probability of being of high quality, namely        nA
                                                               .
       At the beginning of the late hiring stage, the qualities of the applicants are revealed, and become
common knowledge. Furthermore, we assume that the values of the random variables f"g are realized
at the beginning of the late hiring stage, and become common knowledge. The distribution of f"g is
common knowledge at the beginning of the early hiring stage.
       The market is one in which …rms make o¤ers to applicants, and applicants have to decide whether
to accept or reject those o¤ers right away (they cannot hold on to o¤ers). Once an applicant has
accepted an o¤er from a …rm, the …rm and the applicant are matched with each other: the applicant
cannot receive any other o¤ers, and the …rm cannot make any other o¤ers.
       In every period, …rms that are not yet matched may decide to make up to one o¤er to any
available applicant. Once all the …rms have decided what if any o¤ers to make, the o¤ers become
public information. Then, applicants can decide how to respond to o¤ers they have received; whether
to accept at most one o¤er, or reject all o¤ers. After all applicants have decided, their actions become
public information.
       Therefore, the market is a multi-period game in which …rms (and applicants) make simultaneous
decisions with public actions, and a move by nature in the middle of the game which determines the
qualities of the applicants and the f"g perturbations of preferences over di¤erent …rms and applicants.
       There are T E periods in the early hiring stage, and T L periods in the late hiring stage.
  11                                                                                                        nh
    For risk-neutral market participants we can equivalently assume that each applicant has a probability    A
                                                                                                            nA   to be
of high quality. We instead choose a …xed fraction to reduce variance in the experiment that follows.




                                                        7
  2.2    Analysis of Unraveling
  This game has many (Nash) equilibria, including ones in which every match is concluded in period 1
  of the early hiring stage. For example, a strategy pro…le in which for each applicant a there is only
  one …rm fa whose o¤er a accepts in period 1, and in which …rm fa only makes an o¤er in period 1 to
  applicant a; and no other o¤ers are made or accepted, is an equilibrium. However, such equilibria will
  in general not be subgame-perfect. We restrict our theoretical analysis to subgame perfect equilibria
  (SPEs).
      We partition the space of possible demand and supply relations into 3 di¤erent scenarios repre-
  senting excess supply, comparable demand and supply, and excess demand for labor, respectively.
  The important variables will be nF , the total number of …rms, nhF , the number of high quality …rms,
  nA , the total number of applicants, and nhA , the total number of high quality applicants:

Case 1. nhA    nF : Every …rm can be matched with a high quality applicant, some high quality applicants
        remain unmatched (if nhA > nF ). There is excess supply.

Case 2. nA > nF > nhA : Excess applicants, but shortage of high quality applicants. There is comparable
        demand and supply.

Case 3. nF     nA : Each applicant can be matched with a …rm. There is excess demand. We analyze
        excess demand in two subcases:

            a. nF   nA > nhF : Excess …rms, but shortage of high quality …rms.
          b. nhF    nA : Every applicant can be matched with a high quality …rm, some high quality
              …rms remain unmatched (if nhF > nA ).

      We will show that the SPEs of this game support the following intuition. In case 1, no …rm will
  wish to make an early o¤er, because by waiting until applicants’qualities are known, every …rm can
  hire a high quality applicant. Thus, there is excess supply of labor.
      In Case 2, in the early stage, a given applicant does not know if she will be on the long or short
  side of the market, since her quality is still unknown (and since there will be too few high quality
  applicants, and too many low quality applicants). This is why we say that there is comparable
  demand and supply. An applicant may therefore …nd it attractive to take an early o¤er from (even)
  a low quality …rm, and making such an o¤er is pro…table for a low quality …rm, since this is the only
  way to possibly hire a high quality applicant. So Case 2 may be subject to unraveling.
      Case 3a looks super…cially symmetric to Case 2 but with the critical di¤erence that the role of
  …rms and applicants are reversed. Since the qualities of …rms are already known in the early stage,


                                                      8
no high quality …rm is in any doubt that it will be on the short side of the market, and no applicant
is in any doubt that she can …nd a position in the late period. So no applicant will take an early
o¤er from a low quality …rm (since such o¤ers will remain available even if the applicant turns out
to be low quality), and no high quality …rm will make an early o¤er.12 Case 3b looks like Case 1
with …rms and workers reversed, but in this case there is much less di¤erence between early or late
matching, since even early matchings cannot be qualitywise-ine¢ cient, as every applicant, regardless
of quality, will match to a high quality …rm. Thus, we refer to Cases 3a and 3b as excess demand
conditions.
       We are concerned about the ine¢ ciency (or e¢ ciency) of SPE outcomes. We will mostly focus on
“large scale” ine¢ ciency, namely qualitywise ine¢ ciency. Our …rst result characterizes the demand
and supply condition in which there are qualitywise-ine¢ cient outcomes under SPEs:

Theorem 1 A qualitywise-ine¢ cient early matching is an outcome of a subgame perfect equilibrium
only if the market is one of comparable demand and supply (Case 2), i.e. if nA > nF > nhA .

       Note that not all early matching equilibria are qualitywise-ine¢ cient. For example, when nhF
nA , high …rms can hire applicants early under SPE as described by Lemma 3, but the outcome
will not be qualitywise-ine¢ cient. That is the reason we concentrate on qualitywise-ine¢ cient early
hiring (as opposed to all early hiring) in Theorem 1, since only qualitywise-ine¢ cient hiring creates
large welfare problems.13
       We will prove Theorem 1 using several lemmas. The proofs of all results are given in Appendix
A.

Lemma 1 Any subgame perfect equilibrium produces assortative matching among the …rms and ap-
plicants still unmatched at the beginning of the late hiring stage.
  12
      There is another asymmetry between cases 2 and 3a, namely that the …rms make o¤ers, and applicants accept or
reject them. However, this will not be important to determine the SPEs. It may however be important empirically,
in the experiment and in the …eld.
   13
      In their pioneering theoretical investigation of unraveling, Li and Rosen (1998) study an assignment market with
continuous payo¤s in which the supply and demand are assumed to always fall in Case 2. In the early period of their
model each worker has a probability of being a productive worker in period 2 (and in period 2 all workers are either
productive or unproductive, and only …rms matched with a productive worker have positive output). In this context,
their assumption that supply and demand fall in Case 2 is that there are more workers than …rms, but a positive
probability that there will be fewer productive workers than …rms. They …nd, among other things, that ine¢ cient
unraveling is more likely "the smaller the total applicant pool relative to the number of positions." Our framework
allows us to see how this conclusion depends on supply and demand remaining in Case 2. When the total applicant
pool declines su¢ ciently, the market enters Case 3a (when the number of workers falls below the number of …rms), and
ine¢ cient unraveling is no longer predicted. Moreover, we …nd a characterization of supply and demand conditions
necessary for sequentially rational unraveling.

                                                          9
   The next two lemmas are about SPE outcomes for Cases 1, 3a, and 3b.

Lemma 2 When nhA          nF (Case 1), and nF        nA > nhF (Case 3a), the unique subgame perfect
equilibrium outcome is late, assortative matching.

Lemma 3 When nhF         nA (Case 3b), the outcome of any subgame perfect equilibrium is qualitywise-
e¢ cient.

   In the next result, we state some necessary and su¢ cient conditions of comparable demand and
supply that lead to unraveling under SPEs. That is, Theorem 1 establishes that qualitywise-ine¢ cient
SPEs can only exist in Case 2, but whether one will in fact exist depends on whether, in stage 1,
an applicant will …nd it attractive to accept an o¤er from a low quality …rm. This decision will of
course depend both on the number of high and low quality applicants and …rms, and on the expected
utility of having a high or low quality position.

Theorem 2 In the case of comparable demand and supply, i.e. nA > nF > nhA (Case 2), all high
quality …rms hire in the late stage under any subgame perfect equilibrium. At every subgame perfect
equilibrium, at least one low quality …rm hires early if and only if
          (
             nhA uhh nhA uh` + (nhF nhA )u`h      nA nhA       nF nhF        u``           if nhF   nhA
       0>
                              nhF uhh nhF uh` (nA nF ) u``                                 otherwise

and
                                             nhA  nh     nhF
                                                 > A         :
                                             nA   nF     nhF

   Note that when nhF      nhA , then whenever a low quality …rm succeeds in hiring early, there is a
positive probability that a qualitywise-ine¢ cient matching will result, since the applicant hired by
the low quality …rm may turn out to be of high quality.
   The last result of this section …nds a su¢ cient condition under which all low quality …rms hire
early in the case of comparable demand and supply (Case 2). We will use this proposition in our
experimental design:

Proposition 1 In the case of comparable demand and supply with nA > nF > nhA (Case 2), if

                  0 > nhF uhh + nF     nhF   nhA uh`     nA      nhA u`` and nhF   nhA ,

then all low quality …rms hire in the early hiring stage under any subgame perfect equilibrium, leading
to a qualitywise-ine¢ cient matching outcome with positive probability.


                                                    10
2.3       E¤ects of Changing Labor Supply
A robust result in the literature of static matching models is about the welfare of agents on one side
of the market when the number of agents on the other side of the market increases or decreases.
Using the …rm-optimal stable matching as the solution concept for centralized models of matching
markets, Gale and Sotomayor (1985) showed that increasing the number of applicants in the market
while keeping the …rm preferences unchanged within the old applicant set cannot make any …rm
worse o¤ (Proposition 2, p. 264).14 We can state a similar result on our domain, if we con…ne our
attention to the late hiring stage.

Proposition 2 For a given set of …rms that remain unmatched until the late hiring stage, if the
number of available applicants increases and the number of available high quality applicants does not
decrease, no available …rm will be ex-ante worse o¤ under any subgame perfect equilibrium.

       However, if we consider our full two-stage matching game, this conclusion no longer holds. An
increase in the number of applicants can move the market conditions from Case 3a, when all equilibria
yield late matching, to Case 2, and an unravelled market, and this can harm some …rms. (A change
in the number of applicants could also simply increase the amount of unraveling within Case 2.
Note that Proposition 2 implies that …rms can become worse o¤ from an increase in the number of
applicants only when this leads to a decrease in the number of high quality applicants available in
the late hiring stage, through unraveling.)

Proposition 3 It is possible that, for a given set of …rms, if the number of applicants increases and
the number of high quality applicants does not decrease, a …rm can be ex-ante worse o¤ at a subgame
perfect equilibrium outcome.

       Note also that a decrease in the number of high quality applicants can hurt …rms in two ways.
First, as in static models (and as in Proposition 2) a reduction in the number of potential high quality
partners hurts …rms in the usual way. Second, if the decrease in the number of applicants moves
the market from Case 1 to Case 2, it may also change the SPE outcome from late matching to one
with some unraveling, and this may further hurt the high quality …rms by decreasing the amount
of assortative matching. (Something like this happened in the market for gastroenterologists in the
late 1990’s.15 )
  14
      The …rm-optimal stable matching is a stable matching that makes every …rm best o¤ among all stable matchings.
It always exists in the general Gale and Shapley (1962) matching model, and in many of its generalizations (see Roth
and Sotomayor, 1990). In our model, there is a unique stable matching, which is therefore the …rm-optimal stable
matching.
   15
      See Niederle and Roth (2009) for a survey.

                                                        11
                                nA = 6                                      nA = 12
                                nhA   =2                                    nhA = 4
                 THIN COMPARABLE MARKET
                                                             MARKET WITH EXCESS SUPPLY
                                Case 2
                                                                             Case 1
    nF = 4                 (baseline design)
                                                                        SPE Prediction:
    nhF = 2                 SPE Prediction:
                                                                  Late and assortative matching
                      Low quality …rms hire early
                                                                        e¢ cient outcome
                     qualitywise-ine¢ cient outcome
               MARKET WITH EXCESS DEMAND                     THICK COMPARABLE MARKET
                                Case 3                                       Case 2
    nF = 8
                            SPE Prediction:                             SPE Prediction:
    nhF = 4
                     Late and assortative matching                 Low quality …rms hire early
                           e¢ cient outcome                      qualitywise-ine¢ cient outcome

                                           Table 1: Treatments

3     Experimental Design
The theoretical analysis of this simple market shows that there are a multitude of Nash-equilibria.
However, restricting attention to SPEs provides clear predictions. Early, qualitywise-ine¢ cient
matching can occur only when demand and supply are comparable in the sense that there is ini-
tial uncertainty whether a given applicant will be on the long or short side of the market.
    However, behavior doesn’t always conform to the predictions of SPE. Consequently we also test
the theoretical predictions in laboratory experiments.
    Apart from testing the SPE predictions, the experiments also allow us to distinguish these from
alternative hypotheses about unraveling. As noted in the introduction, in many markets we have
studied, the intuition of market participants is that unraveling results simply from a shortage of
applicants.
    The experimental markets have two hiring stages each of which consists of 4 periods, so that there
is time to make multiple o¤ers at each stage (the market is uncongested). The qualities of applicants
and " values are determined at the beginning of period 5, i.e. the …rst period of the late hiring stage.
    We consider a design with four treatments in which there are 4 or 8 …rms, and 6 or 12 applicants
(in all possible combinations). In each case, half the …rms are of high quality, and a third of the
applicants are eventually of high quality. It will be helpful to consider the treatment with the fewest
…rms and applicants as the baseline treatment, to which others will be compared. We will refer to the
baseline treatment as the thin comparable market treatment, since it satis…es the Case 2 demand


                                                     12
and supply condition, comparable demand and supply. We then change the market conditions by
increasing the number of …rms and workers. Doubling the number of low and high quality applicants
yields the treatment referred to as the market with excess supply, satisfying the Case 1 demand
and supply condition. Doubling the number of high and low quality …rms, keeping the number
of applicants at the baseline level, yields the market with excess demand (Case 3, in particular
Case3a). The largest treatment is obtained by doubling both the number of high and low quality
…rms and applicants. When the number of …rms and workers are both at their highest levels, we are
again in the case of comparable demand and supply (Case 2), so we refer to this treatment as the
thick comparable market (see Table 1).
   In each market an agent earns points when she gets matched to a partner. We set uhh = 36
points, uh` = u`h = 26 points, and u`` = 20 points for the preferences, which satisfy that
uhh uhl > ulh ull > 0. We choose the distribution of " as follows: When there are 2 agents in a qual-
ity type (high quality applicants, high quality …rms or low quality …rms in various treatments), we
set f"1 ; "2 g = f 1:2; 1:2g, and each permutation, i.e. ("1 ; "2 ) = ( 1:2; 1:2) and ("1 ; "2 ) = (1:2; 1:2),
is chosen with equal probability. When there are 4 agents in a quality type (high quality appli-
cants, low quality applicants, high quality …rms or low quality …rms in various treatments), we have
f"1 ; "2 ; "3 ; "4 g = f 1:2; 0:4; 0:4; 1:2g, and each permutation is chosen with equal probability. When
there are 8 agents in a quality type (such as low applicants in the market with excess supply), we set
f"1 ; "2 ; "3 ; "4 ; "5 ; "6 ; "7 ; "8 g = f 1:4; 1; 0:6; 0:2; 0:2; 0:6; 1; 1:4g and each permutation is chosen
with equal probability.
   At the beginning of each session, participants were randomly assigned their role as applicant and
…rm, which they kept throughout the session. Participants who were …rms also kept their quality
types as high quality or low quality throughout each session. In each session, the market game was
played 20 consecutive times by generating new ID numbers for applicants in each market. Subjects
received a $10 participation fee plus their total earnings in the session except in the treatment with
excess supply, where we also gave an additional $5 participation fee to the subjects in the roles
of applicants at the end of the session. The experimental points were converted to dollars at the
exchange rate $1=20 points.
   The experimental sessions were run at the Computer Laboratory for Experimental Research
(CLER) of the Harvard Business School using a subject pool consisting of college students (primar-
ily from Harvard, Boston, Tufts, and Northeastern Universities) and at the Pittsburgh Experimental
Economics Laboratory (PEEL) of the University of Pittsburgh using a subject pool consisting of
college students (primarily from Pittsburgh, Carnegie Mellon, and Duquesne Universities). Each
participant could only participate in one session. The experiment was conducted using z-Tree (Fis-
chbacher 2007). We ran 4 sessions of the treatments requiring the most subjects, namely the excess


                                                      13
supply treatment and the thick comparable market treatment. For the other treatments we collected
7 sessions. The instructions for the excess supply market treatment are given in Online Appendix C.
Instructions for the other treatments are similar.
       The theoretical properties of the general model apply to the experimental design. Hence, the thin
and thick comparable market treatments each fall under Case 2, the treatment with excess supply
falls under Case 1, and the treatment with excess demand falls under Case 3a of the demand-supply
conditions described in the previous section. It is trivial to check that our comparable market treat-
ments satisfy the conditions of Proposition 1. Therefore, the SPE predictions for each treatment are
given in Table 1 via Theorem 1 and Proposition 1. The SPE predictions are thus that, we should see
qualitywise-ine¢ cient early matching in the baseline - thin comparable market treatment. As we add
either only applicants or only …rms (the treatments with excess supply and excess demand) e¢ ciency
should be restored. Restoring the relative balance (in the thick comparable market treatment), that
is adding both …rms and applicants, is predicted to bring back qualitywise-ine¢ cient early matching.
       Note that this design allows us to distinguish the SPE predictions from the alternative hypothesis
that excess demand for workers (i.e. a shortage of workers) causes unraveling, since in that case there
should be the most unraveling in the excess demand treatment. The excess supply treatment could
well be similar according to this hypothesis, despite the asymmetric roles of …rms and workers and
how their qualities are revealed. The design also allows us to distinguish the SPE predictions from
the congestion hypothesis that increasing the number of …rms or of applicants will by itself facilitate
unraveling, since the equilibrium predictions are that, moving from cell to cell in the experiment, an
increase in the size of one side of the market will in some cases increase and in other cases decrease
unraveling.16


4        Experimental Results
4.1       The Analysis of Matches and Unraveling
We …rst analyze when …rms and workers match, and whether the market experiences unraveling. In
every market, in all cohorts, the maximal number of matches were formed, that is, it was never the
case that both a …rm and a worker were unmatched. Hence, we can focus the analysis in this section
on how many matches were formed in the early hiring stage, the amount of unraveling.
  16
    While this market experiment has been designed with multiple periods so that congestion should not be a big
issue, there are markets in which there is insu¢ cient time for the market to clear after the information needed for
e¢ cient matching has been realized, i.e. because there are too many o¤ers that need to be made and considered.
Congestion can be an incentive for unraveling (cf. Roth and Xing 1997 for an account in the …eld, and Kagel and
Roth 2000 for an experiment focused on this cause of unraveling).


                                                        14
       Actual (SPE) % Firms Hiring Early
                                                         THIN COMPARABLE                    EXCESS SUPPLY
            In the last …ve markets - Medians
                    Low Firms                                   100% (100% )                     25% (0% )
                    High Firms                                   0% (0% )                        0% (0% )
                                                           EXCESS DEMAND                THICK COMPARABLE
                     Low Firms                                   0% (0% )                     87.5% (100% )
                   High Firms                                    0% (0% )                        0% (0% )

Table 2: Median percentage of …rms hiring early in the last …ve markets, with subgame perfect
equilibrium predictions in parentheses.

       Figure 1 shows over time the number of …rms that hire in the early stage, as they gain experience.
In Table 2, we report the median of the median percentage of …rms that hire early in the last …ve
markets for each treatment.17,18 Especially in the …nal …ve markets, the observed behavior in the
experiments are similar to the SPE predictions for risk-neutral subjects outlined in Table 1, although
we do not observe that hiring behavior is fully consistent with SPE.
       Figure 1 shows that the hiring behavior moves in the direction of the SPE predictions, suggesting
that there is learning over time. In the two comparable demand and supply treatments, more and
more low quality …rms hire early, while more and more high quality …rms hire late, approaching the
SPE predictions in the last …ve markets.
  17
     For the graphs and tables, for each session, for each of the markets, we compute the median of the variable in
question, in this case the number of …rms that hire early. We then compute the median of each market block, for
markets 1-5, 6-10, 11-15, 16-20 for each session, and then the median for each market block taking these session
medians as data points, to report the …nal variable.
   For example, in Session 7 of the thin comparable market treatment, in markets 1 to 5, 100%, 0%, 50%, 0%, and
0% of the high type …rms are hiring early, respectively, which results in a 0% median hiring rate. In Sessions 1 to 6,
medians are similarly calculated for markets 1-5 as 0%, 50%, 50%, 0%, 50%, and 50%, respectively. The median of
these six sessions and Session 7 is 50%, which is marked in the top graph of Figure 1 for markets 1-5.
  18
     In Appendix B, we report alternative analyses using means instead of medians. The …gures and statistical test
results are similar. In general, the mean statistics are noisier than medians due to the fact that the mean takes extreme
outcomes into consideration for these samples with relatively small sizes.
   In the main text, we use medians instead of means for two reasons:
   First, our statistical test is an ordinal non-parametric median comparison test (i.e. Wilcoxon rank sum test) and
not a cardinal parametric mean comparison test. We chose an ordinal test based on the small sample sizes, 7 or 4 for
each treatment.
   Second, many of the empirical distributions are truncated. I.e., even if the e¢ ciency measure is centered around
100%, there will be no observations above 100% while depending on the variance, we will observe lower e¢ ciency
levels. Since we use percentages to compare treatments of di¤erent size, the appropriate measure of the center of a
distribution seems to be a median rather than the mean due to the inevitable skewedness of the empirical distributions.


                                                           15
                           Median % High Type Firms Hiring Early
          100.00%
           87.50%
           75.00%
           62.50%
           50.00%
           37.50%
           25.00%
           12.50%
            0.00%
                     Markets 1-5          Markets 6-10          Markets 11-15         Markets 16-20

                    THIN COMPARABLE - 6 App - 4 Firm        EXCESS SUPPLY - 12 App - 4 Firm
                    EXCESS DEMAND - 6 App - 8 Firm          THICK COMPARABLE - 12 App - 8 Firm



                           Median % Low Type Firms Hiring Early
          100.00%
           87.50%
           75.00%
           62.50%
           50.00%
           37.50%
           25.00%
           12.50%
            0.00%
                     Markets 1-5          Markets 6-10          Markets 11-15         Markets 16-20

                    THIN COMPARABLE - 6 App - 4 Firm        EXCESS SUPPLY - 12 App - 4 Firm
                    EXCESS DEMAND - 6 App - 8 Firm          THICK COMPARABLE - 12 App - 8 Firm




Figure 1: Median percentage of high and low type …rms hiring early across treatments.




                                                       16
 H0 (For median % high/low …rms hiring early) sample sizes p-value: High p-value: Low
        Thin Comparable = Thick Comparable                      7,4               1                0.79
           Excess Supply = Excess Demand                        4,7              0.67              0.76
          Thin Comparable = Excess Supply                       7,4              0.56            <0.01**
          Thin Comparable = Excess Demand                       7,7              0.44            <0.01**
          Thick Comparable = Excess Supply                      4,4              0.43             0.03*
         Thick Comparable = Excess Demand                       4,7              0.42            <0.01**

Table 3: Testing equivalence of median high …rm and low …rm early hiring percentages in the last
…ve markets. We denote signi…cance regarding the rejection of the null hypotheses at 95% level with
* and signi…cance at 99% level with ** after the reported p-values.

   We increase excess demand when moving from the comparable to the excess demand treatment.
The amount of early hiring in the excess demand condition refutes the hypothesis that excess demand,
i.e. a shortage of applicants generates unraveling. Furthermore, unraveling in these markets is not
driven primarily by congestion, since neither the excess demand or excess supply conditions experience
as much early hiring as the thin comparable condition, despite having more participants.
   In the excess demand condition, both high and low quality …rms approach the SPE prediction of
no early hiring. Using the non-parametric two-sample and two-sided Wilcoxon rank sum test, we test
whether the median early hiring levels of the excess demand and comparable treatment are the same
(in the last …ve markets), taking each session median for the last …ve markets as an independent
observation. The p-values reported in Table 3 con…rm that there is signi…cantly more early hiring
by low quality …rms in the comparable compared to the excess demand treatments.
   Similarly, the excess supply treatment also approaches SPE predictions of late hiring by both
high and low quality …rms (see Figure 1 and Table 3).
   As predicted by SPE, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that median early hiring by high
quality …rms in the last …ve markets is the same across all treatments under pairwise comparison.
On the other hand, the comparable treatments have signi…cantly higher proportions of low quality
…rms hiring early than the excess demand and excess supply treatments. The comparable treatments
do not signi…cantly di¤er from each other. Neither do the excess demand and supply treatments
di¤er from each other.


4.2    The Analysis of Early O¤er and Acceptance Rates
In what follows, we examine not only the outcomes, but also the observed o¤er making and acceptance
behavior. The top two graphs of Figure 2 show the percentage of high and low quality …rms making


                                                 17
  Median % High Type Firms Making Early Offers                        Median % Low Type Firms Making Early Offers

100.00%                                                             100.00%
 87.50%                                                              87.50%
 75.00%                                                              75.00%
 62.50%                                                              62.50%
 50.00%                                                              50.00%
 37.50%                                                              37.50%
 25.00%                                                              25.00%
 12.50%                                                              12.50%
  0.00%                                                               0.00%
            Mrkt 1-5     Mrkt 6-10     Mrkt 11-15 Mrkt 16-20                  Mrkt 1-5    Mrkt 6-10      Mrkt 11-15 Mrkt 16-20

                  THIN COMPARABLE - 6 App - 4 Firm                                  THIN COMPARABLE - 6 App - 4 Firm
                  EXCESS DEMAND - 6 App - 8 Firm                                    EXCESS DEMAND - 6 App - 8 Firm
                  EXCESS SUPPLY - 12 App - 4 Firm                                   EXCESS SUPPLY - 12 App - 4 Firm
                  THICK COMPARABLE - 12 App - 8 Firm                                THICK COMPARABLE - 12 App - 8 Firm

   Median % High Type Firm Early Offers Being                         Median % Low Type Firm Early Offers Being
                  Accepted                                                           Accepted
100.00%                                                             100.00%
 87.50%                                                              87.50%
 75.00%                                                              75.00%                               No Low Firm
                                                                                                             Offers
 62.50%                                                              62.50%
 50.00%                                                              50.00%
 37.50%                                                              37.50%
 25.00%                                                              25.00%
 12.50%                                                              12.50%
  0.00%                                                               0.00%
           Mrkt 1-5     Mrkt 6-10      Mrkt 11-15 Mrkt 16-20                  Mrkt 1-5    Mrkt 6-10      Mrkt 11-15 Mrkt 16-20

                  THIN COMPARABLE - 6 App - 4 Firm                                  THIN COMPARABLE - 6 App - 4 Firm
                  EXCESS DEMAND - 6 App - 8 Firm                                    EXCESS DEMAND - 6 App - 8 Firm
                  EXCESS SUPPLY - 12 App - 4 Firm                                   EXCESS SUPPLY - 12 App - 4 Firm
                  THICK COMPARABLE - 12 App - 8 Firm                                THICK COMPARABLE - 12 App - 8 Firm




          Figure 2: Median early o¤er rates and acceptance rates across treatments.




                                                               18
o¤ers in the early stage across treatments. As before, we represent markets in groups of …ve and
report the medians of the median rates across these …ve market groups for each treatment. The …rst
median mentioned is obtained across cohorts of data for each treatment. If a …rm makes one or more
o¤ers in the early stage, it is counted as a …rm that is making an early o¤er. The bottom two graphs
of Figure 2 show the acceptance rates by applicants of the early o¤ers. That is, we determine for each
early o¤er whether it was accepted or rejected. We use the same reporting convention as before with
one important di¤erence. When there are no early o¤ers by any …rm in a market, the acceptance rate
is not de…ned. In our median calculations, we only consider markets in which o¤ers were actually
made. This technique results in well-de…ned acceptance rates, even though the median o¤er rate is
0% in many instances. (The only exception is markets 11-15 in the excess supply treatment: no low
type …rms make any o¤ers in any of these markets in any of the cohorts of data, hence we omit that
acceptance rate, see the bottom right graph of Figure 2.)
   We observe that the number of early o¤ers from high type …rms is decreasing and mostly con-
verging to zero in all treatments, and that acceptance rates of high …rm o¤ers are 100%. Both of
these …ndings are consistent with the SPE predictions both on and o¤ the equilibrium paths. In the
comparable demand and supply treatments, these percentages converge to 0% very fast. However,
in the excess supply and excess demand treatments, convergence takes more time, and in the excess
supply treatment we do not observe full convergence.
   For early o¤ers from low type …rms and the applicants’acceptance behavior we observe di¤erent
behavior across di¤erent treatments. On and o¤ the SPE path, predictions are such that in the
comparable demand and supply treatments all low quality …rms make early o¤ers and all applicants
always accept them, whenever such o¤ers are made. Behavior in the experiment is consistent with
the SPE predictions.
   In the excess demand treatment, applicants should not accept early o¤ers from low quality …rms
on the SPE paths. Thus, low quality …rms are indi¤erent between making early o¤ers and not making
them at all. However, when applicants make mistakes and accept such o¤ers, we expect low quality
…rms to make early o¤ers (i.e., on a trembling hand-perfect equilibrium path). Indeed in markets 1-5,
25% of applicants accept an early o¤er from a low quality …rm. This reinforcement seems to cause
100% of low quality …rms to make early o¤ers throughout the early markets. However, towards the
…nal markets, early o¤ers from low quality …rms are never accepted anymore. This seems to reduce
the amount of early o¤ers from low quality …rms, only 75% of them make early o¤ers.
   In the excess supply treatment, we expect low quality …rms not to make early o¤ers under SPE.
Yet, o¤ the SPE paths, when they make early o¤ers, we expect the applicants to accept these o¤ers.
Initially, this is exactly what happens. Low quality …rms almost never make early o¤ers. However,
when they make mistakes and make early o¤ers (which is a more frequent mistake in markets 1-10,


                                                 19
never happens in market 11-15, and only rarely in markets 16-20), applicants tend to accept those
o¤ers (as seen in the bottom right graph of Figure 2). Only in the …nal markets, markets 16-20,
when early o¤ers are very rare, are they accepted only 50% of the time (though this is a very small
number phenomenon).
       In summary, in all treatments the behavior of the …rms and applicants are mostly consistent not
only with SPE predictions, but also with trembling-hand perfection predictions.


4.3       The Analysis of E¢ ciency
We conclude our analysis of the experimental results with qualitywise e¢ ciency (i.e. ignoring "’s).
A full matching is an assignment under which the maximum number of …rms and applicants are
matched. Since for both …rms and workers, matching to a high quality partner is worth more than
to a low quality partner, we use the welfare of …rms to provide a measure of total welfare.19 We aim
to measure the proportion of gains achieved compared to the payo¤s achieved by a random match
that matches as many agents as possible, that is the payo¤s achieved by a randomly generated full
matching, where each possible full matching is equally likely. We call the sum of these expected …rm
payo¤s the random match payo¤s. Normalized (qualitywise) e¢ ciency is de…ned as the sum of
…rm payo¤s (disregarding " values) minus the random match payo¤s divided by the maximum sum
of possible expected …rm payo¤s minus the random match payo¤s (see Table 4). A value of 100%
indicates that the matching in the lab achieved all possible gains compared to the average random
full matching and is hence the matching that maximizes …rm payo¤s.20 The random match payo¤s
and maximum sums of possible expected …rm payo¤s of a full matching in each treatment are given
in Table 4 along with the median of the sum of actual …rm payo¤s (disregarding " values) and the
normalized e¢ ciency of the last …ve markets. We also report in the same table the predictions of
SPE outcomes in terms of e¢ ciency.
       First note that both comparable demand and supply treatments lack full qualitywise e¢ ciency.
The median SPE outcomes predict 57% and 79% e¢ ciency for the thin and thick comparable treat-
ment. The outcomes are exactly aligned with the theoretical predictions.21 This re‡ects the earlier
  19
     We could also have chosen the welfare of applicants or the sum of applicant and …rm payo¤s in our e¢ ciency
measure. Note that all of these measures will give the same e¢ ciency level, since a …rm and a worker who are matched
receive exactly the same payo¤.
  20
     In each treatment, the best full matching is the qualitywise assortative matching, that is, as many high quality
…rms as possible are matched with high quality applicants, and as many high quality applicants as possible are matched
before matching low quality applicants.
  21
     The di¤erence in the median of the comparable treatments is due to the small market size of the thin comparable
treatment. The mean of both SPE predictions generates 71.38% e¢ ciency. Under a typical matching (i.e. a median
SPE matching), in the thick comparable treatment, one low quality …rm hires a high quality applicant and the other


                                                         20
               In the last …ve markets - Medians                 THIN COMPARABLE                   EXCESS SUPPLY
        Actual Firm Welfare [Random, Max.]                           108 [102.67, 112]              124 [102.67, 124]
                                     W. - Random W.
 Actual (SPE) N. E¢         ciency= Max. W.- Random W.
                                                                       57% (57%)                     100% (100%)
                                                                   EXCESS DEMAND                THICK COMPARABLE
        Actual Firm Welfare [Random, Max.]                            164 [154, 164]                220 [205.34, 224]
                                      W. - Random W.
 Actual (SPE) N. E¢         ciency= Max. W. - Random W.
                                                                      100% (100%)                      79% (79%)

Table 4: Median of the sum of …rm payo¤s in the last …ve markets, with random match payo¤s
and maximum …rm payo¤s under full matchings in parentheses, and normalized e¢ ciency with the
theoretical SPE prediction in parentheses.

                       H0 (For median n. e¢ ciency)                 sample sizes p-value
                   Thin Comparable = Thick Comparable                     7,4            0.12
                        Excess Supply=Excess Demand                       4,7            0.73
                       Thin Comparable=Excess Supply                      7,4            0.33
                      Thin Comparable=Excess Demand                       7,7           0.021*
                      Thick Comparable=Excess Supply                      4,4            0.49
                     Thick Comparable=Excess Demand                       4,7           0.048*

          Table 5: Testing equality of median normalized e¢ ciency in the last …ve markets.

results that both early o¤ers and acceptances, and hence early matches follow SPE predictions (low
quality …rms hire early, while high quality …rms hire late).
    When we inspected the data, we found that there is less overall early hiring in the excess demand
treatment compared to the comparable demand and supply treatments. Furthermore, there is also a
signi…cantly higher proportion of e¢ ciency realized, compared to both the thin and thick comparable
treatments (the two of which are not signi…cantly di¤erent from one another). See Table 5 for p-values
of the Wilcoxon rank sum tests of median e¢ ciency.22
    In the excess supply treatment, we found that, in the last …ve markets, a median of 25% of high
three low quality …rms hire low quality applicants through unraveling, where as in the thin comparable treatment, one
low quality …rm hires a high quality applicant and the other low quality …rm hires a low quality applicant through
unraveling.
  22
     In our analysis with the means for the last market block reported in Appendix B, we observe a mean of 20-21%
of high type …rms making early o¤ers which are accepted in the excess demand treatment. SPE predicts that no high
quality …rms hire early. However, in the excess demand condition, there are only 2 high quality applicants for 4 high
quality …rms. So, even if 50% of high quality …rms were to hire early, e¢ ciency would not be a¤ected given that the
other agents follow SPE strategies. And indeed, all seven of our excess demand sessions have close to average 100%
e¢ ciency despite of relatively high average of high type …rms hiring early.


                                                         21
type …rms hire early, while low type …rms do not hire early. SPE predicts that no high quality
…rms hire early. In the excess supply treatment, there are four high quality applicants for four …rms,
including the two high quality …rms. A high quality …rm that hires early, will however match with
a high type applicant only one third of the time. That is two thirds of the time there will be an
e¢ ciency loss of 10 points (when the high type …rm only receives 26 points from hiring a low type
applicant compared to the 36 from hiring a high type applicant). Since only once in every other
market does a high type …rm hire early, we expect about one third of all sessions to yield median
e¢ ciency below 100%. And indeed, the median e¢ ciencies are 100, 100, 100, and 53.11% (which
results from one high type …rm hiring a low type worker, and all other …rms hiring high type workers).
Hence while the median e¢ ciency of the excess supply treatment is 100%, there is some variance,
such that the e¢ ciency is not signi…cantly higher in the excess supply treatment compared to the
comparable demand and supply treatments (see Table 5).


5        Discussion
It has been known at least since Roth and Xing (1994) that many markets unravel, so that o¤ers
become progressively earlier as participants seek to make strategic use of the timing of transactions.
It is clear that unraveling can have many causes, because markets are highly multidimensional and
time is only one dimensional (and so transactions can only move in two directions in time, earlier
or later). So there can be many di¤erent reasons that make it advantageous to make transactions
earlier.23
       Thus the study of factors that promote unraveling is a large one, and a number of distinct causes
have been identi…ed in di¤erent markets or in theory, including instability of late outcomes (which
gives blocking pairs an incentive to identify each other early), congestion of late markets (which
makes it di¢ cult to make transactions if they are left until too late), and the desire to mutually
insure against late-resolving uncertainty. There has also been some study of market practices that
may facilitate or impede the making of early o¤ers, such as the rules and customs surrounding
“exploding”o¤ers, which expire if not accepted immediately.
       In this paper we take a somewhat di¤erent tack, and consider conditions related to supply and
demand that will tend to work against unraveling, or to facilitate it. There seems to be a widespread
perception, in markets that have experienced it, that unraveling is sparked by a shortage of workers.
       But for ine¢ cient unraveling to occur, …rms have to be willing to make early o¤ers and workers
have to be willing to accept them. Our experiment supports the hypothesis that a shortage of
  23
    There can also be strategic reasons to delay transactions; see e.g. Roth and Ockenfels (2002) on late bidding in
internet auctions.


                                                        22
workers is not itself conducive to unraveling, since workers who know that they are in short supply
need not hurry to accept o¤ers by lower quality …rms. Instead, in the model and in the experiment,
it is comparable supply and demand that leads to unraveling, in which attention must be paid not
only to the overall demand and supply, but to the supply and demand of workers and …rms of the
highest quality. An important feature of our model and experiments is that when there is ine¢ cient
unraveling, this is due to low type …rms, but not high types, hiring early.
   We emphasize again that the qualities of workers and …rms in our model should not be taken
literally as “low” and “high” while mapping our predictions to real markets. Being hired in our
model can refer to being hired by one of the elite …rms in a real market, some better than the others,
and being unmatched can refer to being hired by one of the ordinary …rms in a secondary market.
For example, clerkships for federal appellate judges are elite positions for law school graduates. Yet,
there is unraveling in this market, and it seems to start in the 9th Circuit, whose judges are a little
disadvantaged compared to the East Coast circuits.
   Our results seem to re‡ect what we see in many unraveled markets, in which competition for the
elite …rms and workers is …erce, but the quality of workers may not be reliably revealed until after a
good deal of hiring has already been completed.




                                                  23
A      Appendix: Proofs
Proof of Lemma 1: First recall that there is a unique strict rank-ordering of …rms and applicants
with respect to preference with probability one, when all uncertainty is resolved at the beginning of
the late hiring stage.
    We prove the lemma by backward induction.

      We …rst show that in the last period T L of the late hiring stage, every SPE involves assortative
      matching among the remaining …rms and applicants:

        – In every subgame starting with applicants’information sets in period T L of the late hiring
           stage, it is a dominant strategy for the applicant to accept the best incoming o¤er, since
           otherwise she will either remain unmatched or be matched with a worse …rm.
        – The best remaining unmatched …rm, by making an o¤er to the best applicant, will be
           accepted by the applicant, and receive the highest possible payo¤. The second best re-
           maining …rm, will be rejected if she makes an o¤er to the best applicant, since the applicant
           will get an o¤er from the best …rm. The highest applicant who will accept the second
           best …rms’o¤er is the second best applicant. Similarly, the k th best remaining unmatched
           …rm maximizes her payo¤ from making an o¤er to the k th highest remaining unmatched
           applicant.

      We showed that the outcome of any SPE will involve assortative matching of agents who are
      available in any last period subgame of the late hiring stage.

      Let us assume that we showed for a period t + 1 < T L that SPE strategies for any subgame
      starting in period t + 1 involve assortative matching among the remaining unmatched …rms and
      applicants. We now show that this implies that for any subgame starting in period t the SPE
      involve assortative matching among the unmatched applicants in period t: Let us relabel the
      remaining …rms and applicants, such that the remaining …rms are f 1 ; f 2 ; :::; f m and available
      applicants a1 ; a2 ; :::; an such that f k is better than f k+1 for any k < m and ak is better than
      ak+1 for any k < n.

        – We show that at any SPE in period t involves applicant a1 not to accept an o¤er from
           …rm f j for any j > 1 if …rm 1 did not make an o¤er to any applicant. By rejecting …rm
           f j , applicant a1 will be the highest quality remaining applicant in period t + 1, and f 1
           will be the highest quality unmatched …rm. That is, by the inductive assumption, a1 can
           expect to be matched to …rm f 1 in the SPE.

                                                   24
          – We show that at any SPE in period t, …rm f 1 ; either makes no o¤er, or an o¤er to applicant
            a1 in period t: This guarantees that f 1 is either accepted by applicant a1 in period t; or
            else both f 1 and applicant a1 are unmatched in period t, in which case …rm f 1 will be
            matched to applicant a1 before the end of the game by the inductive assumption.
          – We show that at any SPE in period t applicant a2 does not accept an o¤er from f j ; j > 2
            if …rms f 1 and f 2 both did not make an o¤er to an applicant al for any l > 2: As in the
            case of applicant a1 ; by rejecting …rm f j ; a2 can expect to be matched to either f 1 or f 2
            in period t + 1; since at least one of the two …rms will be unmatched.
          – We now show that any SPE in period t involves …rm f 2 ; not to make an o¤er to an
            applicant aj ; j > 2:

     We can follow this line of iterative argument to show that any SPE strategies in any subgame
     starting in period t involve no matches that are not assortative in period t: Therefore, by the
     inductive assumption, we have that any SPE starting in period t involves assortative matching.



Proof of Lemma 2: We prove the lemma for Case 1 and Case 3a separately.

     nhA     nF (Case 1): We already established by Lemma 1 that once participants are in the late
     hiring stage, the unique SPE outcome is assortative matching among the remaining …rms and
     applicants. When nhA           nF , by not hiring any applicant in the early hiring stage each …rm
     guarantees to hire a high quality applicant in the late hiring stage under a SPE. For a …rm
     f of quality i 2 fh; `g, her expected payo¤ of hiring an applicant in the early stage is given by
                                               nhA       nA nhA
                                                   uih +        ui`
                                               nA          nA
     which is strictly smaller than her expected payo¤ of hiring a high quality applicant in the late
     stage, uih . Therefore, under any SPE no …rm will make any early hiring, and thus, by Lemma
     1 the outcome will be assortative.

     nF       nA > nhF (Case 3a): By Lemma 1, once participants are in the late hiring stage, the
     unique SPE outcome is assortative matching among the remaining …rms and applicants. Since
     nF      nA , under a SPE, every applicant will at least be matched with a low quality …rm by
     waiting for the late hiring stage. We will show that no matches will occur in the early hiring
     stage under a SPE by backward iteration.
     First consider the last period (period T E ) of the early hiring stage. We will show that no high
     quality …rm is matched under a SPE in this period as long as more applicants than high quality

                                                     25
…rms are available. We prove this with two claims. Consider an information set I of applicants
located in this period.
Claim 1 Under a SPE, no available applicant will accept a low quality …rm’s o¤er in I if there
is a high quality …rm who did not make an o¤er in period T E .
Proof of Claim 1 Consider a SPE pro…le and an applicant a available in I. Suppose that there
is at least one high quality …rm that did not make an o¤er in T E : Then the applicant has a
chance to be of high quality and be matched to a high quality …rm (of which at least one is
available in the late hiring stage), if she is of low quality, she will receive a low quality …rm by
Lemma 1. Hence her expected payo¤ from waiting is strictly larger than her expected payo¤
from accepting a low quality …rm o¤er in period T E .
Consider a subgame        starting in the last period (period T E ) of the early stage.
Claim 2 Under a SPE, no high quality …rm makes an o¤er to an applicant, unless the number
of remaining applicants is equal to the number of remaining high quality …rms (in which case
we do not determine the strategies fully).
Proof of Claim 2 Suppose there are l high quality …rms left, and k > l applicants. If a high
quality …rm f h makes an o¤er to an applicant, it will hire her and this will be an average quality
applicant. If …rm f h makes no o¤er this period, then we have seen that no applicant will accept
an o¤er from a low quality …rm. Suppose rH high quality …rms are left after the end of early
stage; including the high quality …rm f h : This implies that there are rA = k        (l   rH ) > rH
applicants unmatched at the end of period T E : Since …rm f h has equal chance to be ranked
in any place amongst the remaining rH high quality …rms, and since by Lemma 1, any SPE
matching in the late hiring stage is assortative, …rm f h ; by not matching early, will match to
one of the best rH applicants in the remaining rA ; and has an equal chance to match with
any of them. The average applicant’s quality amongst the rH (< rA ) best applicants of all
rA is strictly better than the unconditional average applicant quality. Therefore, f h ; by not
making an o¤er, is matched with an applicant with an expected quality higher than the average,
receiving higher expected earnings in an SPE than by making an early o¤er.
We showed that in the last period of the early hiring stage no matches will occur, if the number
of high quality …rms available is smaller than the number of applicants available under a SPE
pro…le. By iteration, we can similarly prove that in period T E       1 of the early hiring stage no
matches will occur, if the number of high quality …rms available is smaller than the number of
applicants available under a SPE pro…le. By backward iteration, we conclude the proof of no
matches will occur in the early hiring stage under a SPE. Therefore, all hirings occur in the
late hiring stage and these hirings are assortative under any SPE by Lemma 1.

                                               26
Proof of Lemma 3: Let nhF                       nA . By Lemma 1, every applicant guarantees to be matched with
a high quality applicant by waiting for the late hiring stage under a SPE. Therefore, no applicant
will accept an o¤er from a low quality …rm in the path of a SPE. Therefore, all applicants will be
matched with high quality …rms in every SPE. Every such matching is qualitywise-e¢ cient.

Proof of Theorem 2: Let the market be of comparable demand and supply with nA > nF > nhA .
Let   be a SPE pro…le. We will prove the theorem using three claims:

Claim 1 Under            restricted to any subgame, no high quality …rm is matched in the early hiring stage.

Proof of Claim 1 If a …rm matches early, she receives average quality, i.e. the expected quality she
              nh         nA nh
receives is    A
              nA
                 h   +     nA
                              A
                                l:   If the …rm does not match early, and if there are rF …rms left, then there
will be rA > rF applicants left (since nA > nF ); and the …rm, instead of receiving the average quality
of rA receives the average quality of rF ; which is strictly better.

Claim 2 Let I be an information set in period t of the early stage for an applicant a such that if
applicant a does not accept any o¤ers in I, she does not receive any more o¤ers in the remainder
of the early hiring stage under . Suppose no other applicants accepted any o¤ers until I under .
Then applicant a accepts the best o¤er she receives in all such I under all SPE if and only if
         (
            nhA uhh nhA uh` + (nhF nhA )u`h     nA nhA        nF nhF u``          if nhF nhA
     0>                                                                                                                    (1)
                            nhF uhh nhF uh` (nA nF ) u``                           otherwise



Proof of Claim 2 An applicant a strictly prefers to accept an o¤er from a low quality …rm in a
period in the early stage compared to only matching in the late stage, in case no other applicant has
accepted and will accept an o¤er from a low quality …rm in such I under all SPE if and only if

              nh    n   nh                 nh         n  nh nh nh         n   nh n      nh
               A
                 u + AnA A ull >
              nA hl
                                            A
                                              u + AnA A nFA nhA ulh + AnA A nFA
                                           nA hh
                                                                                         F
                                                                                        nh
                                                                                           ull   if nhF   nhA , and
              nh     n  nh                 nh  h         nh  h
                                                                 A
                                                                 h        nA nh
                                                                                         A
                                                                                         h                            .    (2)
                                            A nF          A nA nF              A nF     nA
               A
                 u + AnA A ull >
              nA hl                        nA nh
                                                 u hh  + nA   nh   u hl +   nA nA
                                                                                           u
                                                                                        nh ll
                                                                                                    if nhF < nhA
                                               A               A                         A

In both cases, when         nhF      nhA   or   nhF   <   nhA ,   the expected payo¤ on the left hand side is the expected
payo¤ of accepting a low quality …rm o¤er. In each case, the expected payo¤ on the right hand side
of Inequality 2 can be interpreted as follows: When nhF                           nhA , by Lemma 1, the applicant will be
matched with a high quality …rm, if she is of high quality, or one of the best nhF                           nhA low quality
applicants, and she will be matched with a low quality …rm, if she is one the next nF                              nhF best low
quality applicants. When nhF < nhA , the applicant will be matched with a high quality …rm, if she is
one the best nhF high quality applicants, and she will be matched with a low quality applicant, if she


                                                                       27
is one of worst nhA     nhF high quality applicants or one of the best nF                          nhA low quality applicants.
Inequality 2 can be rewritten as
                   nh          nA nh            nh          nh
                                                             F nA
                                                                 h           nF nh
                    A
                      u
                   nA hl
                           +     nA
                                    A
                                      ull   >    A
                                                   u
                                                nA hh
                                                        +     nA
                                                                   ulh   +     nA
                                                                                  F
                                                                                    ull   if nhF    nhA , and
                   nh          nA nh            nh          nh  nh           nF nh                              ,
                    A
                      u
                   nA hl
                           +     nA
                                    A
                                      ull   >    F
                                                   u
                                                nA hh
                                                        +    A
                                                              nA
                                                                 F
                                                                   uhl   +     nA
                                                                                  A
                                                                                    ull      if nhF < nhA

which is equivalent to Condition 1.

Claim 324 All low quality …rms make early o¤ers to applicants under                                given that their last early
o¤er will be accepted if and only if

                                                        nhA  nh          nhF
                                                            > A              :
                                                        nA   nF          nhF


Proof of Claim 3 Suppose k > 0 low quality …rms made early o¤ers that were accepted under .
Then a low quality …rm strictly prefers to make an early o¤er (in case it is accepted) if and only if the
expected probability of hiring a high quality applicant early is higher than the expected probability
of hiring a high quality applicant in the late hiring stage, which is equal to the expected number of
high quality applicants that remain after the high quality …rms hired high quality applicants, divided
by the number of remaining low quality …rms, that is, if and only if
                                                                             nh
                                                  nhA   nhA nhF               A
                                                                             nA
                                                                                k
                                                      >
                                                  nA     n   nh                  k
                                                        | F {zF                      }
                                                                  =p(k)


Therefore, when k = 0, one low quality …rm will always make an o¤er (if that will be accepted in
the early stage) under SPE           in the early stage if and only if

                                                        nhA  nh          nhF
                                                            > A              :                                            (3)
                                                        nA   nF          nhF

Moreover p (k) is decreasing in k, implying that all low quality …rms will make o¤ers in the early
stage if they will be accepted under SPE                 if and only if Condition 3 holds.

       Claims 1-3 complete the proof of the theorem.

Proof of Proposition 1: Let the market be of comparable demand and supply with nA > nF > nhA .
Let      be a SPE pro…le. By Claim 1 of Theorem 2, no high quality …rm will hire early under . Since
  24
    This claim is more strong than what we need for the proof of this Theorem. However, we will make use of this
claim in the proof of Proposition 1.

                                                                28
nhF     nhA , no low quality …rm will go late under       as long as their o¤ers are accepted early by Claim
3 of Theorem 2.
      We will show that any applicant is ready to accept o¤ers from low quality …rms in the early hiring
stage under      if 0 > nhF uhh + nF   nhF     nhA uh`        nA    nhA u`` :

Claim 1 Let
                            0 > nhF uhh + nF       nhF    nhA uh`      nA       nhA u`` :
Also let I be an information set in period t of the early stage for an applicant a such that if applicant
a does not accept any o¤ers in I, she does not receive any more o¤ers in the remainder of the early
hiring stage under SPE . Then applicant a accepts the best o¤er she receives in I under .

Proof of Claim 1 Applicant a will be better o¤ by accepting the best o¤er if it is from a high quality
…rm, because she may remain unmatched with positive probability when she remains available in
the late hiring stage given that nA > nF by Lemma 1. Suppose that the best o¤er is from a low
quality …rm in period t and suppose that she rejects all o¤ers in I under . Let                    be the subgame
such that information set I is located at the beginning of . Let rFh be the number of high quality
…rms available, rF` be the number of low quality …rms available, and rA be the number of applicants
available in the late hiring stage under      restricted to . By Lemma 1, applicant a will be matched
with a high quality …rm if she turns out to be one of the best rFh applicants, she will be matched
with a low quality …rm if she turns out to be one of the rF` + rFh applicants who are not among the
best rFh applicants. Under      restricted to , applicant a’s expected payo¤ is
                                                    rFh     r`
                                              v =       wh + F w`
                                                    rA      rA
where wh is the expected payo¤ a gets by being matched with a high quality …rm and w` is the
expected payo¤ she gets by being matched with a low quality …rm. The lowest upper-bound for wh
is uhh , and the lowest upper-bound for w` is uh` . Thus, v is bounded above by
                                                    rFh      r`
                                             v =        uhh + F uh`
                                                    rA       rA
Since the number of applicants available, rA , satis…es rA = nA              nF      rFh    rF` , we have

                                                  rFh uhh + rF` uh`
                                       v =
                                               nA      nF rFh rF`

Upper-bound v is an increasing function of both rFh and rF` . Therefore, v achieves its highest value
when rFh = nhF , and rF` = n    nhF and this value is given by
                                              nhF uhh + nF         nhF uh`
                                       v~ =
                                                        nA

                                                         29
   Consider a deviation in applicant a’s strategy such that she accepts the best o¤er in I and her
actions in other information sets coincide with those under . The expected payo¤ of applicant a
under this deviation restricted to subgame        is given by

                                          nhA uh` + nA      nhA u``
                                     v=
                                                    nA

Since 0 > nhF uhh + nF    nhF   nhA uh`      nA     nhA u`` , rearranging the terms and dividing them by
nA , we obtain that

                   nhA uh` + nA    nhA u``     nhF uhh + nF        nhF uh`
                v=                           >                               = v~      v     v ,
                             nA                          nA
contradicting   being a SPE pro…le. Therefore, applicant a accepts one of the o¤ers from low quality
…rms in information set I under SPE .

   This concludes the proof of Proposition 1.

Proof of Proposition 2: By Lemma 1, there is a unique SPE outcome that is assortative among
available …rms and applicants in the late hiring stage. When there are more available applicants
and not less high quality applicants, each …rm’s partner quality weakly increases. Hence, each …rm’s
expected payo¤ weakly increases.

Proof of Proposition 3: We prove the proposition with an example. Let nF = 4, nhF = 2; nA = 4,
nhA = 2, uhh = 36; uh` = u`h = 26; u`` = 20. Since nF = nA > nhF , this market satis…es demand
and supply condition Case 3a, and therefore by Theorem 1; all SPE outcomes are assortative. So
each high quality …rm’s expected payo¤ is uhh . Suppose that the number of applicants increases
to n0A = 6 and number of high quality applicants does not change. The new market is the thin
comparable market treatment in our experiment, i.e. a market of comparable demand and supply
(Case 2). By Proposition 2 since nhF = nhA , and nhF uhh        nhF uh`   (nA       nF ) u`` =     20 < 0, all low
quality …rms hire early under a SPE, causing that a high quality …rm gets matched with a low quality
applicant with positive probability. This expected payo¤ of a high quality …rm is lower than uhh in
the new market under any SPE.




                                                     30
B     Appendix: Alternative Analyses with the Means
In this appendix, we present our alternative analyses of the experimental data using the mean statistic
instead of the ones using the median statistic which were presented in Figure 1, Table 2, Table 3,
Figure 2, Table 4, and Table 5 of the main text, respectively. These results are consistent with the
analyses using medians.

                                     Mean % High Type Firms Hiring Early
                   100.00%
                    87.50%
                    75.00%
                    62.50%
                    50.00%
                    37.50%
                    25.00%
                    12.50%
                     0.00%
                                Markets 1-5         Markets 6-10        Markets 11-15         Markets 16-20

                             THIN COMPARABLE - 6 App - 4 Firm        EXCESS SUPPLY - 12 App - 4 Firm
                             EXCESS DEMAND - 6 App - 8 Firm          THICK COMPARABLE - 12 App - 8 Firm



                                      Mean % Low Type Firms Hiring Early
                   100.00%
                    87.50%
                    75.00%
                    62.50%
                    50.00%
                    37.50%
                    25.00%
                    12.50%
                     0.00%
                                Markets 1-5         Markets 6-10        Markets 11-15         Markets 16-20

                             THIN COMPARABLE - 6 App - 4 Firm        EXCESS SUPPLY - 12 App - 4 Firm
                             EXCESS DEMAND - 6 App - 8 Firm          THICK COMPARABLE - 12 App - 8 Firm



      Figure 3: Mean percentage of high and low type …rms hiring early across treatments.




                                                                31
   Actual (SPE) % Firms Hiring Early
                                              THIN COMPARABLE             EXCESS SUPPLY
            In the last …ve markets - Means
                    Low Firms                    77.14% (100% )               2.5% (0% )
                   High Firms                       7.14% (0% )                  20% (0% )
                                                EXCESS DEMAND          THICK COMPARABLE
                   Low Firms                        6.43% (0% )             87.5% (100% )
                   High Firms                       20.71% (0% )             1.25% (0% )

Table 6: Mean percentage of …rms hiring early in the last …ve markets, with subgame perfect equi-
librium predictions in parentheses.




 H0 (For mean % high/low …rms hiring early) sample sizes p-value: High p-value: Low
       Thin Comparable = Thick Comparable                  7,4               1                0.33
            Excess Supply = Excess Demand                  4,7             0.86               0.64
           Thin Comparable = Excess Supply                 7,4             0.56              <0.01**
           Thin Comparable = Excess Demand                 7,7             0.085             <0.01**
           Thick Comparable = Excess Supply                4,4             0.43              0.029*
        Thick Comparable = Excess Demand                   4,7             0.15              <0.01**

Table 7: Testing equivalence of mean high …rm and low …rm early hiring percentages in the last …ve
markets.




                                               32
                 In the last …ve markets - Means                            THIN COMPARABLE                                 EXCESS SUPPLY
       Actual Firm Welfare [Random, Max.]                                          108 [102.67, 112]                            124 [102.67, 124]
                                                  W. - Random W.
 Actual (SPE) N. E¢ ciency                    = Max. W. - Random W.
                                                                                   71.21% (71.38%)                               86.87% (100%)
                                                                              EXCESS DEMAND                           THICK COMPARABLE
       Actual Firm Welfare [Random, Max.]                                           164 [154, 164]                              220 [205.34, 224]
                                          W. - Random W.
 Actual (SPE) N. E¢             ciency= Max. W. - Random W.
                                                                                   96.57% (100%)                                77.49% (71.38%)

Table 8: Mean of the sum of …rm payo¤s in the last …ve markets, with random match payo¤s
and maximum …rm payo¤s under full matchings in parentheses, and normalized e¢ ciency with the
theoretical SPE prediction in parentheses.


        Mean % High Type Firms Making Early Offers                          Mean % Low Type Firms Making Early Offers

      100.00%                                                            100.00%
       87.50%                                                             87.50%
       75.00%                                                             75.00%
       62.50%                                                             62.50%
       50.00%                                                             50.00%
       37.50%                                                             37.50%
       25.00%                                                             25.00%
       12.50%                                                             12.50%
        0.00%                                                              0.00%
                 Mrkt 1-5    Mrkt 6-10      Mrkt 11-15 Mrkt 16-20                    Mrkt 1-5    Mrkt 6-10     Mrkt 11-15 Mrkt 16-20

                        THIN COMPARABLE - 6 App - 4 Firm                                   THIN COMPARABLE - 6 App - 4 Firm
                        EXCESS DEMAND - 6 App - 8 Firm                                     EXCESS DEMAND - 6 App - 8 Firm
                        EXCESS SUPPLY - 12 App - 4 Firm                                    EXCESS SUPPLY - 12 App - 4 Firm
                        THICK COMPARABLE - 12 App - 8 Firm                                 THICK COMPARABLE - 12 App - 8 Firm

          Mean % High Type Firm Early Offers Being                         Mean % Low Type Firm Early Offers Being
                        Accepted                                                        Accepted
      100.00%                                                            100.00%
       87.50%                                                             87.50%
       75.00%                                                             75.00%                                 No Low Firm
                                                                                                                    Offers
       62.50%                                                             62.50%
       50.00%                                                             50.00%
       37.50%                                                             37.50%
       25.00%                                                             25.00%
       12.50%                                                             12.50%
        0.00%                                                              0.00%
                 Mrkt 1-5    Mrkt 6-10      Mrkt 11-15 Mrkt 16-20                    Mrkt 1-5    Mrkt 6-10     Mrkt 11-15 Mrkt 16-20

                       THIN COMPARABLE - 6 App - 4 Firm                                     THIN COMPARABLE - 6 App - 4 Firm
                       EXCESS DEMAND - 6 App - 8 Firm                                       EXCESS DEMAND - 6 App - 8 Firm
                       EXCESS SUPPLY - 12 App - 4 Firm                                      EXCESS SUPPLY - 12 App - 4 Firm
                       THICK COMPARABLE - 12 App - 8 Firm                                   THICK COMPARABLE - 12 App - 8 Firm


                Figure 4: Mean early o¤er rates and acceptance rates across treatments.




                                                                    33
                    H0 (For mean n. e¢ ciency)           sample sizes p-value
                Thin Comparable = Thick Comparable             7,4         0.65
                    Excess Supply=Excess Demand                4,7         0.94
                   Thin Comparable=Excess Supply               7,4         0.28
                  Thin Comparable=Excess Demand                7,7        0.014*
                   Thick Comparable=Excess Supply              4,4         0.31
                  Thick Comparable=Excess Demand               4,7        0.012*

         Table 9: Testing equality of mean normalized e¢ ciency in the last …ve markets.

References
 [1] Avery, C., Fairbanks, A., and Zeckhauser, R. (2003) The Early Admissions Game: Joining the
    Elite. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

 [2] Avery, C., Jolls, C., Posner, R.A., and Roth, A.E. (2001) "The Market for Federal Judicial Law
    Clerks." University of Chicago Law Review 68: 793-902.

 [3] Avery, C., Jolls, C., Posner, R.A., and Roth, A.E. (2007) "The New Market for Federal Judicial
    Law Clerks." University of Chicago Law Review 74: 447-486.

 [4] Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Du‡o, Maitreesh Ghatak and Jeanne Lafortune (2009), "Marry for
    What? Caste and Mate Selection in Modern India", working paper, MIT.

 [5] Damiano, E., Li, H., and Suen, W. (2005) "Unravelling of Dynamic Sorting." The Review of
    Economic Studies 72: 1057-1076.

 [6] Fainmesser, I.P. (2009) "Social Networks and Unraveling in Labor Markets." Working paper.

 [7] Fischbacher, U. (2007) "z-Tree: Zurich Toolbox for Ready-made Economic Experiments." Ex-
    perimental Economics 10: 171-178

 [8] Fréchette, G., Roth, A.E., and Ünver, M.U. (2007) "Unraveling Yields Ine¢ cient Matchings:
    Evidence from Post-Season College Football Bowls." Rand Journal of Economics 38: 967-982.

 [9] Gale, D. and Shapley, L. (1962) "College Admissions and the Stability of Marriage." American
    Mathematical Monthly 69: 9-15.

[10] Gale, D. and Sotomayor, M. (1985) "Ms. Machiavelli and the Stable Matching Problem." Amer-
    ican Mathematical Monthly 92: 261-268.


                                                34
[11] Gorelick, F.S. (1999) "Striking up the match." Gastroenterology 117: 295.

[12] Halaburda, H. (2008) "Unravelling in Two-Sided Matching Markets and Similarity of Agents’
    Preferences." Working paper.

[13] Hitsch, Gunter J., Ali Hortacsu, and Dan Ariely (2009), "Matching and Sorting in Online
    Dating," American Economic Review, forthcoming.

[14] Haruvy, E., Roth, A.E., and Ünver, M.U. (2006) "The Dynamics of Law Clerk Matching: An
    Experimental and Computational Investigation of Proposals for Reform of the Market." Journal
    of Economic Dynamics and Control 30: 457-486.

[15] Kagel, J. H. and Roth, A.E. (2000) "The dynamics of reorganization in matching markets: A
    laboratory experiment motivated by a natural experiment." Quarterly Journal of Economics
    115: 201-235.

[16] Lee, Soohyung (2009) "Preferences and Choice Constraints in Marital Sorting: Evidence from
    Korea," working paper, University of Maryland.

[17] Li, H. and Rosen, S. (1998) "Unraveling in Matching Markets." American Economic Review 88:
    371-387.

[18] Li, H. and Suen, W. (2000) "Risk Sharing, Sorting, and Early Contracting." Journal of Political
    Economy 108: 1058-1091.

[19] Li, H. and Suen, W. (2004) "Self-Ful…lling Early-Contracting Rush." International Economic
    Review 45: 301-324.

[20] McKinney, C.N., Niederle, M., and Roth, A.E. (2005) "The Collapse of a Medical Labor Clear-
    inghouse (and Why Such Failures are Rare)." American Economic Review 95: 878-889..

[21] Menand, L. (2003) "The thin envelope: Why college admissions has become unpredictable."
    The New Yorker, April 3.

[22] Niederle, M., Proctor, D.D., and Roth, A.E. (2006) "What will be needed for the new GI
    fellowship match to succeed?" Gastroenterology 130: 218-224.

[23] Niederle, M., Proctor, D.D., and Roth, A.E. (2008) "The Gastroenterology Fellowship Match –
    The First Two Years." Gastroenterology 135: 344-346.

[24] Niederle, M. and Roth, A.E. (2003) "Unraveling reduces mobility in a labor market: Gastroen-
    terology with and without a centralized match." Journal of Political Economy 111: 1342-1352.

                                                35
[25] Niederle, M. and Roth, A.E. (2004) "The Gastroenterology Fellowship Match: How it failed,
    and why it could succeed once again." Gastroenterology 127: 658-666.

[26] Niederle, M. and Roth, A.E. (2005) "The Gastroenterology Fellowship Market: Should there be
    a Match?" American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 95: 372-375.

[27] Niederle M. and Roth, A.E. (2009) "Market Culture: How Norms Governing Exploding O¤ers
    A¤ect Market Performance." American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, forthcoming.

[28] Niederle, M. and Roth, A.E. (2009) "The E¤ects of a Central Clearinghouse on Job place-
    ment, Wages, and Hiring Practices." in Labor Market Intermediation, David Autor, Editor, The
    University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.

[29] Roth, A.E. (1984) "The Evolution of the Labor Market for Medical Interns and Residents: A
    Case Study in Game Theory." Journal of Political Economy 92: 991-1016.

[30] Roth, A.E. (1991) "A Natural Experiment in the Organization of Entry Level Labor Markets:
    Regional Markets for New Physicians and Surgeons in the U.K." American Economic Review
    81: 415-440.

[31] Roth, A.E. and Peranson, E. (1999) "The Redesign of the Matching Market for American
    Physicians: Some Engineering Aspects of Economic Design." American Economic Review 89:
    748-780.

[32] Roth, A.E. and M. Sotomayor Two-Sided Matching: A Study in Game-Theoretic Modeling and
    Analysis, Cambridge University Press, 1990.

[33] Roth, A. E. and Xing, X. (1994) "Jumping the Gun: Imperfections and Institutions Related to
    the Timing of Market Transactions." American Economic Review 84: 992-1044.

[34] Roth, A.E. and Xing, X. (1997) "Turnaround Time and Bottlenecks in Market Clearing: Decen-
    tralized Matching in the Market for Clinical Psychologists." Journal of Political Economy 105:
    284-329.

[35] Santos, C.W. and Sexson, S. (2002) "Supporting the Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Match."
    Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 41: 1398-1400.

[36] Sönmez, T. (1999) "Can Pre-Arranged Matches be Avoided in Two-Sided Matching Markets?"
    Journal of Economic Theory 86: 148-156.



                                                36
[37] Suen, W. (2000) "A Competitive Theory of Equilibrium and Disequilibrium Unraveling in Two-
    Sided Matching." RAND Journal of Economics 31: 101-120.

[38] Ünver, M.U. (2005) "On the Survival of Some Unstable Two-Sided Matching Mechanisms."
    International Journal of Game Theory 33: 239-254.

[39] Ünver, M.U. (2001) "Backward Unraveling over Time: The Evolution of Strategic Behavior in
    the Entry-Level British Medical Labor Markets." Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control
    25: 1039-1080:

[40] US News and World Report (1990) "A Cure for Application Fever: Schools Hook More Students
    with Early Acceptance O¤ers." April 23.

[41] Wald, P.M. (1990) "Selecting Law Clerks." Michigan Law Review 89, 152-163.




                                              37
C      Not for Publication. Online Appendix: Instructions of
       the Experiment
Below, we present the instructions for the excess supply treatments with 12 applicants and 4 …rms.
The instructions and corresponding …gures were distributed as hand-outs at the beginning part of
each session. The …gure hand-outs are attached after the instructions. Other sessions are conducted
similarly.

    WELCOME

    Thank you for participating in this experiment about economic decision making. It is important
that during the experiment you remain silent. If you have any questions, or need assistance of any
kind, please raise your hand, and I will come to assist you. Thank you for your cooperation.
    The decisions made in this experiment are hiring decisions. Accordingly, your role will be either
“…rm” or “applicant.” Your role, …rm or applicant, will stay the same throughout the experiment.
In other words, if you begin as a FIRM, you will remain a FIRM until the end of the experiment.
Similarly, if you begin as an APPLICANT, you will remain an APPLICANT until the end of the
experiment.
    The experiment will have many “markets,”which will last eight “periods”each.
    If you are a “…rm,”to get a positive payo¤ in a given market of the experiment you will need to
hire one, and only one, applicant in that market.
    If you are an “applicant” you will need to accept one, and only one, job o¤er in each market of
the experiment.
    In each market, there are four …rms and twelve applicants. The …rms are numbered 1-4, and the
applicants are numbered 1-12.
    The …rms and applicants are assigned “qualities.”Firms and applicants will be divided into two
groups as HIGH quality and LOW quality. These qualities determine the average payo¤s that …rms
and applicant can earn. When you hire or are hired by a partner, the points you earn depend on
your own quality and the quality of your partner.
             When a HIGH quality …rm hires a HIGH quality applicant, on average the …rm and the
applicant each get 36 points.
             When a HIGH quality …rm hires a LOW quality applicant, OR a LOW quality …rm hires a
HIGH quality applicant, on average the …rm and the applicant each get 26 points.
             When a LOW quality …rm hires a LOW quality applicant, on average the …rm and the
applicant each get 20 points.
             If you end up unmatched you do not earn any points.

                                                  38
      Firms’qualities are determined according to their assigned participant number. Firms 1 and 2
are LOW quality …rms and Firms 3 and 4 are HIGH quality …rms. If you are a …rm, you will retain
the same …rm number in all markets.
      Applicants’“qualities,” in contrast, have nothing to do with their assigned ID number and are
randomly determined in the experiment.

      Exactly how are applicants’qualities determined?
      In period 1-4, qualities of each applicant are unknown.
      In period 5, four applicants are randomly determined to be HIGH quality applicants. The re-
maining eight applicants become LOW quality applicants.
      Therefore in periods 1-4, there is not yet any di¤erence among applicants: each applicant has
the same chance to be a HIGH quality applicant (i.e. 4 in 12 applicants will end up being a HIGH
quality applicant), and each applicant has the same chance to be a LOW quality applicant (i.e. 8 in
12 applicants will end up being LOW quality applicants).

      How is the exact ranking among HIGH and LOW quality …rms and applicants de-
termined?
      Small random scores called “…t” scores determine the EXACT ranking among HIGH and LOW
quality …rms and applicants.
      Fit scores are determined randomly at the beginning of period 5. In period 5, the 2 HIGH quality
…rms will each receive one of the 2 …t scores: -1.2 and 1.2. Similarly for the 2 LOW quality …rms.
The 4 HIGH quality applicants will each receive one of the 4 …t scores: -1.2, -0.4, 0.4 and 1.2. The
8 LOW quality applicants will get one of the following 8 …t scores: -1.4, -1, -0.6, -0.2, 0.2, 0.6, 1 and
1.4.
      A …rm that hires an applicant, receives a payo¤ depending on their own quality, the quality of
the applicant, plus the …t score of the applicant.
      Similarly, an applicant that is hired by a …rm, receives a payo¤ depending on their own quality,
the quality of the …rm, plus the …t score of the …rm.
      For example, when a HIGH quality …rm with 1.2 …t score (…t F) hires a LOW quality applicant
with -0.6 …t score (…t A), the …rm will earn 26 points, which is the average payo¤ for a HIGH-
LOW quality match, plus -0.6 points, the …t score of the applicant (…t A). His total payo¤ will be
26-0.6=25.4 points.
      On the other hand, the applicant gets a total payo¤ of 26+1.2=27.2 points for this match.
      The …t scores are small enough that being matched with the HIGH quality partner with the
lowest …t is still more pro…table than being matched with the LOW quality partner with the highest
…t.


                                                     39
Making and accepting o¤ers

   Firms can make an o¤er in each of the 8 periods in a market as long as they are unmatched.

   Firms’decisions in each period:
   A …rm that has not yet hired an applicant in that market has to decide whether to make an o¤er
and, if so, to which applicant. A …rm may make at most one o¤er in a period. The …rm makes an
o¤er by typing in the ID number of the applicant to whom the o¤er is made.

   Applicants’decisions in each period:
   In each period the applicant sees all the o¤ers he has received that period (and also all o¤ers that
other applicants received). The applicant has to decide whether to accept or reject his o¤ers. All the
o¤ers that are not accepted are automatically rejected. When an applicant accepts an o¤er from a
…rm, we say the applicant and the …rm are matched to each other.
   Once a …rm and an applicant are matched, the …rm cannot make any further o¤ers, and the
applicant cannot accept any further o¤ers. The …rms cannot make o¤ers to applicants who are
matched, so a matched applicant will not receive any further o¤ers.

The Information on the Screen of Applicants and Firms:

   In the top left box you can see whether you are a …rm or an applicant. Let’s start by looking at
a sample screen for one of the …rms.

The Information on the Screen of Firms:

   We are looking at a screen of Firm 1.
   In the top right you can see the current period in the market. Each market has 8 periods, and
quality information about the applicants, …t scores of applicants and …rms become available in period
5. Any …rm (and applicant) who is not matched by the end of period 8, remains unmatched in this
market, and earns zero points. The screen shot is from period 1 of Market 1.
   Below the top row, the screen is divided into two, showing the matchings that occurred in the
market so far on the left and list of applicants on the right.
   In the middle left, there is a box which shows whether the …rm has already hired an applicant.
   In the bottom left the …rm has a box that records ALL o¤ers that were rejected in this market.
It shows the period in which the o¤er was made, which applicant received (and rejected) that o¤er
and the ID and quality of the …rm who made the o¤er.
   All the boxes we discussed so far are also available on the screen of the applicants. Now we discuss
the part that is speci…c to …rms.

                                                  40
   In the middle right, the …rm has a box in which the …rm can choose to make an o¤er. To make
an o¤er, the …rm types in the ID of the applicant to whom the o¤er is directed. To make the o¤er
the …rm has to click the “make o¤er”button. The …rm cannot make an o¤er to an applicant who is
already matched to another …rm.
   If the …rm does not want to make an o¤er, or is already matched, the …rm has to click the “Make
No O¤er” button so the experiment can proceed. (Don’t forget, since everyone has to wait until
everyone has clicked a button.)
   In the bottom right, there are two boxes which remind when the applicant qualities are determined
(in period 5) and how many of the applicant will be HIGH quality and LOW quality (4 of them will
be HIGH quality, 8 of them will be LOW quality). The second box in the bottom right, reminds
the …rm how many points he will get ON AVERAGE in case he hires an applicant who eventually
becomes LOW quality or HIGH quality.

   Firm screen: Period 5-8
   The screen of the …rms and applicants changes slightly beginning from period 5. In this period,
qualities of applicants, and …t scores of …rms and applicants are determined. Let’s look at the screen
of the same …rm 1 in period 5 of the same market:
   There are two changes on the screen:
   The “Matchings”box is now located on the bottom right of the screen.
   The new “List of Firms”box orders the …rms by quality and …t score, the …rst column shows the
ID numbers of …rms, the second column shows their qualities, HIGH or LOW. This screen belongs
to Firm 1, this is denoted by ** 1 ** in the …rst column instead of just 1. The third column in the
box, titled “…t” shows the …t scores of the …rms. For example the best …rm in this market is Firm
4 with 1.2 …t score, who is HIGH quality and has the highest …t score among HIGH quality …rms
while the worst …rm is Firm 2 with -1.2 …t score who is LOW quality and has the lowest …t score
among LOW quality …rms. Note that HIGH quality …rms are always better than LOW quality …rms
regardless of their …t scores. The fourth and …fth columns show whether …rms have already hired an
applicant, and if so, the ID and quality of the applicant. This screen shows that, by period 5, …rm 4
has already hired applicant 2 who turned out (in period 5) to be of HIGH quality.
   In the “List of Applicants”box: the …rst column shows the ID numbers of applicants, the second
column shows their quality, HIGH or LOW, and the third column shows their …t score. Both the
quality of the applicants, and their …t score are only determined in period 5. For example the best
applicant in this market is Applicant 11 of HIGH quality with 1.2 …t, while the worst applicant is
Applicant 8 of LOW quality with -1.4 …t. Note that HIGH quality applicants are always better than
LOW quality applicants regardless of their …t scores. The fourth and …fth columns show whether
applicants were hired by a …rm, and if so, the ID and quality of the …rm.

                                                 41
   The box in the middle left shows whether the …rm has already hired an applicant, and if so his
exact earnings. If, for example Firm 1 of LOW quality hires applicant 11 of HIGH quality with …t
score 1.2, …rm 1 would earn 26 points for a LOW-HIGH match, plus the applicant’s …t score of 1.2.
Therefore, Firm 1’s pro…ts would be 26+1.2=27.2 points.

The Information on the Screen of Applicants:

   This screen shot is from Applicant 2 in period 1 of Market 1 (as can be seen in the top 2 boxes).
Each applicant will receive a new ID number in every market, which has nothing to do with the …nal
quality that is determined during the market.
   The “Applicants’pro…ts”box lists the average earnings of applicants in each case when they turn
out to be HIGH quality or LOW quality when they get matched to a HIGH quality …rm or LOW
quality …rm. “Matchings” box to the right of the above table lists who got matched to which …rm
in which period.
   In the bottom left, the applicant has a box that reminds the applicant of ALL o¤ers that were
rejected in this market. It shows the period in which the o¤er was made, the ID and quality of the
…rm who made the o¤er and the ID of the applicant who received (and rejected) that o¤er.
   Now we discuss the tables and choices that are only available to the applicants.
   On the right side the applicant has a table called “Your o¤ers”that shows all the o¤ers available
(for this applicant). In the example, applicant 2 has one o¤er, from Firm 4. To accept an o¤er,
the applicant has to …rst click on the o¤er (in this example the o¤er is highlighted, because it is
clicked) and then click on the “Accept o¤er” button. Once an applicant accepted an o¤er, he is
matched to that …rm (i.e. hired by that …rm) for this market, and will not receive any subsequent
o¤ers. The applicant can also decide to reject all o¤ers by clicking the “Reject / Continue”button.
If the applicant received no o¤ers, he nevertheless has to click the “Reject / Continue” button so
the experiment can proceed. (Don’t forget, since everyone has to wait until everyone has clicked a
button.)
   The applicant not only sees his own o¤ers but also current o¤ers of all other applicants. Below
the o¤ers box, each applicant can see all o¤ers made to the applicants in the current period. There
are 2 other o¤ers made in the current period in this example.
   The table in the middle left shows whether and to whom the applicant is matched. And the
payo¤ he earns in this market. Applicant 2 is not matched with any …rm yet.
   The box at the bottom right is a reminder to how qualities of the applicants are determined in
period 5.

   Applicant screen: Periods 5-8:


                                                42
   The screen of applicants also slightly changes starting from period 5, when the qualities of appli-
cants and …t scores are determined.
   Now the top left box tells the quality of the applicant, which is HIGH quality.
   There are three changes on the applicants’screens.
   The top left “Applicants’qualities”box lists for each applicant, ID number, quality and …t score,
where the applicants’own ID number is marked with asterisks ** 2 ** in applicant 2’s screen shot.
Notice that applicants are listed according to their qualities and then according to their …t scores,
starting in period 5.
   Applicant 2 turns out to have HIGH quality and the least desirable HIGH quality applicant
because he has the lowest …t score among all HIGH quality applicants; he is listed 4th from the top.
Applicant 8 is the worst applicant, with a LOW quality and the lowest …t score of -1.4, Applicant 11
is best applicant, with a HIGH quality and the highest …t score of 1.2
   A new box called the “List of Firms”sorts …rms according to their qualities and then according
to their …t scores. Also it shows whether the …rms have already hired applicants, and if so which
applicants with which quality and in which period.
   Finally, a box on the bottom right reminds applicants how pro…ts are determined.
   For example Applicant 2 is already hired by Firm 4 of HIGH quality with a …t score of 1.2.
Applicant 2 earned on average 36 points, for a HIGH-HIGH match plus the …t score of …rm 4 which
is 1.2. Applicant 3 earns exactly 36+1.2=37.2 points.

Payment

   The payment you receive in this experiment has two components.
   The …rst is based on your performance in the experiment: For each point you accumulate in the
experiment, you receive $0.05 (i.e., 20 points are worth $1). The second component is independent
of your performance in the experiment, and already determined in advance. It consists of the $10
show-up fee. The third component is a payment of $5 that will be paid to some of the participants
at the end of the experiment. The participants who will get this $5 additional payment will be
announced at the end of today’s session. Your behavior in the experiment in‡uences your payo¤ only
through the points you accumulate in the markets (the …rst component of your payo¤s). Your total
payment will be rounded to the nearest dollar.

Summary

   At the beginning of the experiment you learn whether you are a …rm or an applicant. If you are
a …rm, you also learn your quality, which is LOW for …rms 1 and 2 and HIGH for …rms 3 and 4.
Your ID number has however nothing to do with your …t score. If you are an applicant, you receive

                                                 43
a new ID number in every market, and your ID number has nothing to do with both your quality
and your …t score. In each market there are 4 …rms and 12 applicants.

   Information about Applicants’qualities is revealed over periods:

         Periods 1-4: Each applicant has equal chance to be a HIGH quality applicant (4 of the 12
that is 1 in 3 applicants will be of HIGH quality) and equal chance to be a LOW quality applicant
(8 of the 12 that is 2 in 3 applicants will be of LOW quality).
         Periods 5-8: At the beginning of period 5, four applicants become HIGH quality and the
remaining eight applicants become LOW quality applicants.
         Periods 5-8: Firms and applicants are assigned small …t scores. A HIGH quality partner
with the lowest …t is still much more desirable than a LOW quality partner with the highest …t. But
the higher the …t score, the more desirable that partner is.

   To earn points in a market, a …rm will need to hire one, and only one, applicant in that market,
and an “applicant”will need to accept one, and only one, job o¤er. How is this done?

         In each period, each …rm that has not yet hired an applicant, has to decide whether to make
an o¤er and, if so, to which applicant. Each …rm can only make one o¤er in each period, and only
to applicants who have not accepted an o¤er yet.
         In each period, applicants who receive o¤ers have to decide whether to accept or reject the
o¤er.
         Once an applicant accepted an o¤er, he cannot accept another o¤er in the same market,
and will no longer receive o¤ers.
         Firms and Applicants that are not matched by the end of period 8 in a market remain
unmatched and earn zero points.
         In a HIGH quality-HIGH quality match, …rms and applicants each earn 36 points plus the
…t scores of their partner.
         In a HIGH quality-LOW quality match, …rms and applicants each earn 26 points plus the
…t scores of their partner.
         In a LOW quality-LOW quality match, …rms and applicants each earn 20 points plus the
…t scores of their partner.
         After period 8, a completely new market begins, and everyone is free to try to match once
again.
         The experiment has 20 consecutive markets each with 8 periods length.

   On a technical note: The applicant screen only comes up when all …rms made a decision, that
is, as soon as applicants see their screen, they can make decisions right away, as the information on

                                                 44
their screen will not change over time. If applicants received no o¤er, or …rms are already matched
in a market, please hit the Continue button right away to speed up the experiment.
             Firm Screen: Periods 1-4                                        12-4




             Firm Screen: Periods 5-8:




                                                45
Applicant Screen: Periods 1-4:




Applicant Screen: 5-8:




                                 46
