                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               UNDERSTANDING INFLATION-INDEXED BOND MARKETS

                                          John Y. Campbell
                                           Robert J. Shiller
                                           Luis M. Viceira

                                        Working Paper 15014
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15014


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2009




Campbell and Viceira's research was supported by the U.S. Social Security Administration through
grant #10-M-98363-1-01 to the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the SSA Retirement
Research Consortium. Viceira's research was also supported by the Division of Research at the Harvard
Business School. The findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not
represent the views of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER. We are grateful
to Carolin Pflueger for exceptionally able research assistance, to Mihir Worah and Gang Hu of PIMCO,
Derek Kaufman of Citadel, and Albert Brondolo, Michael Pond, and Ralph Segreti of Barclays Capital
for their help in understanding TIPS and inflation derivatives markets and the unusual market conditions
in the fall of 2008, and to Barclays Capital for providing data. An earlier version of the paper was
presented at the Brookings Panel on Economic Activity, April 2-3, 2009. We acknowledge the helpful
comments of panel members and our discussants, Rick Mishkin and Jonathan Wright. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by John Y. Campbell, Robert J. Shiller, and Luis M. Viceira. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Understanding Inflation-Indexed Bond Markets
John Y. Campbell, Robert J. Shiller, and Luis M. Viceira
NBER Working Paper No. 15014
May 2009
JEL No. E43,E44,G12

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper explores the history of inflation-indexed bond markets in the US and the UK. It documents
a massive decline in long-term real interest rates from the 1990's until 2008, followed by a sudden
spike in these rates during the financial crisis of 2008. Breakeven inflation rates, calculated from inflation-
indexed and nominal government bond yields, stabilized until the fall of 2008, when they showed
dramatic declines. The paper asks to what extent short-term real interest rates, bond risks, and liquidity
explain the trends before 2008 and the unusual developments in the fall of 2008. Low inflation-indexed
yields and high short-term volatility of inflation-indexed bond returns do not invalidate the basic case
for these bonds, that they provide a safe asset for long-term investors. Governments should expect
inflation-indexed bonds to be a relatively cheap form of debt financing going forward, even though
they have offered high returns over the past decade.


John Y. Campbell                                       Luis M. Viceira
Morton L. and Carole S.                                George E. Bates Professor
Olshan Professor of Economics                          Harvard Business School
Department of Economics                                Baker Library 367
Harvard University                                     Boston, MA 02163
Littauer Center 213                                    and NBER
Cambridge, MA 02138                                    lviceira@hbs.edu
and NBER
john_campbell@harvard.edu

Robert J. Shiller
Yale University, Cowles Foundation
Box 208281
30 Hillhouse Avenue, Room 11a
New Haven, CT 06520-8281
and NBER
robert.shiller@yale.edu
1    Introduction

In recent years government in‡ation-indexed bonds have become available in a number
of countries and have provided a fundamentally new instrument for use in retirement
saving. Because expected in‡ation varies over time, long-term nominal Treasury
bonds are not safe in real terms; and because short-term real interest rates vary over
time, Treasury bills are not safe assets for long-term investors. In‡ation-indexed
bonds …ll this gap by o¤ering a truly riskless long-term investment (Campbell and
Shiller 1996, Campbell and Viceira 2001, 2002, Brennan and Xia 2002, Campbell,
Chan, and Viceira 2003, Wachter 2003).

    The UK government issued in‡ation-indexed bonds in the early 1980’s, and the
US government followed suit by issuing Treasury in‡ation-protected securities (TIPS)
in 1997. In‡ation-indexed government bonds are also available in many other coun-
tries including Canada, France, and Japan. These bonds are now widely accepted
…nancial instruments. However, their history raises some new puzzles that deserve
investigation.

   First, given that the real interest rate is determined by the marginal product of
capital in the long run, one might expect in‡ation-indexed yields to be extremely
stable over time. But during the 1990’s, 10-year in‡ation-indexed yields averaged
about 3.5% in the UK (Barr and Campbell 1997), and exceeded 4% in the US around
the turn of the millennium, whereas in the mid-2000’s they both averaged below 2%
and bottomed out at around 1% in early 2008 before spiking up above 3% in late
2008. The massive decline in long-term real interest rates from the 1990’s to the
2000’s is one puzzle, and the instability in 2008 is another.

    Second, in recent years in‡ation-indexed bond prices have tended to move opposite
stock prices, so that these bonds have a negative “beta”with the stock market and can
be used to hedge equity risk. This has been even more true of nominal bond prices,
although nominal bonds behaved very di¤erently in the 1970’s and 1980’s (Campbell,
Sunderam, and Viceira 2009). The origin of the negative beta for in‡ation-indexed
bonds is not well understood.

   Third, given integrated world capital markets, one might expect that in‡ation-
indexed bond yields would be similar around the world. But this is not always
the case. Around the year 2000, the yield gap between US and UK in‡ation-indexed
bonds was over 2 percentage points, although it has since converged. In January 2008,


                                          1
while 10-year yields were similar in the US and the UK, there were still important
di¤erentials across countries, with yields ranging from 1.1% in Japan to almost 2.0%
in France. Yield di¤erentials were even larger at long maturities, with UK yields well
below 1% and French yields well above 2%.

    To understand these phenomena, it is useful to distinguish three major in‡uences
on in‡ation-indexed bond yields: current and expected future short-term real interest
rates; di¤erences in expected returns on long-term and short-term real bonds caused
by risk premia (which can be negative if in‡ation-indexed bonds are valuable hedges);
and di¤erences in expected returns on long-term and short-term bonds caused by
liquidity premia or technical factors that segment the bond markets. The expectations
hypothesis of the term structure, applied to real interest rates, states that only the
…rst in‡uence is time-varying while the other two are constant. However there is
considerable evidence against this hypothesis for nominal Treasury bonds, so it is
important to allow for the possibility that risk and liquidity premia are time-varying.

    Undoubtedly the path of real interest rates is a major in‡uence on in‡ation-
indexed bond yields. Indeed, before TIPS were issued Campbell and Shiller (1996)
argued that one could anticipate how their yields would behave by applying the
expectations hypothesis of the term structure to real interest rates. A …rst goal of this
paper is to compare the history of in‡ation-indexed bond yields with the implications
of the expectations hypothesis, and to understand how shocks to short-term real
interest rates are transmitted along the real yield curve.

    Risk premia on in‡ation-indexed bonds can be analyzed by applying theoreti-
cal models of risk and return. Two leading paradigms deliver useful insights. The
consumption-based paradigm implies that risk premia on in‡ation-indexed bonds over
short-term debt are negative if these bonds covary negatively with consumption, which
will be the case if consumption growth rates are persistent (Backus and Zin 1994,
Campbell 1986, Gollier 2005, Piazzesi and Schneider 2006, Wachter 2006), while the
CAPM paradigm implies that in‡ation-indexed risk premia are negative if in‡ation-
indexed bond prices covary negatively with stock prices. The second paradigm has
the advantage that it is easy to track the covariance of in‡ation-indexed bonds and
stocks using high-frequency data on their prices, in the manner of Viceira (2007) and
Campbell, Sunderam, and Viceira (2009).

    Finally, it is important to take seriously the e¤ects of institutional factors on
in‡ation-indexed bond yields. Plausibly, the high TIPS yields in the …rst few years
after their introduction were caused by slow development of mutual funds and other

                                           2
indirect investment vehicles. Currently, long-term in‡ation-indexed yields in the UK
may be depressed by strong demand from UK pension funds. The volatility of TIPS
yields in the fall of 2008 appears to have resulted in part from the unwinding of large
institutional positions after the failure of Lehman Brothers. These institutional
in‡uences on yields can alternatively be described as liquidity, market segmentation,
or demand and supply e¤ects (Greenwood and Vayanos 2008).

    The organization of this paper is as follows. In section 2, we present a graphi-
cal history of the in‡ation-indexed bond markets in the US and the UK, discussing
bond supplies, the levels of yields, and the volatility and covariances with stocks of
high-frequency movements in yields. In section 3, we ask what portion of the TIPS
yield history can be explained by movements in short-term real interest rates, to-
gether with the expectations hypothesis of the term structure. This section revisits
the VAR analysis of Campbell and Shiller (1996). In section 4, we discuss the risk
characteristics of TIPS and estimate a model of TIPS pricing with time-varying sys-
tematic risk, a variant of Campbell, Sunderam, and Viceira (2009), to see how much
of the yield history can be explained by changes in risk. In section 5, we discuss the
unusual market conditions that prevailed in the fall of 2008 and the channels through
which they in‡uenced in‡ation-indexed bond yields. Section 6 draws implications
for investors and policymakers. An Appendix available online (Campbell, Shiller,
and Viceira 2009) presents technical details of our bond pricing model and of data
construction.



2    The History of In‡ation-Indexed Bond Markets

In this section we summarize graphically the history of two of the largest and best es-
tablished in‡ation-indexed bond markets, the US TIPS market and the UK in‡ation-
indexed gilt (UK government bond) market. We present a series of comparably
formatted …gures, …rst for the US (panel A of each …gure) and then for the UK (panel
B).

    Figure 1A shows the growth of the outstanding supply of TIPS during the past
ten years. From modest beginnings in 1997, the supply of TIPS grew to around 10%
of the marketable debt of the US Treasury, and 3.5% of US GDP, in 2008. This
growth has been fairly smooth, with a minor slowdown in 2001-02. Figure 1B shows
a comparable history for the UK. From equally modest beginnings in 1982, in‡ation-


                                          3
indexed gilts have grown rapidly to account for almost 30% of the British public debt,
and 10% of GDP, in 2008. The growth in the in‡ation-indexed share of the public
debt slowed down in 1990-97, and reversed in 2004-05, but otherwise proceeded at a
rapid rate.

    Figure 2A plots the yields on 10-year nominal and in‡ation-indexed US Treasury
bonds over the period from January 1998 through March 2009. The …gure shows
a considerable decline in both nominal and real long-term interest rates since TIPS
yields peaked early in the year 2000. Through 2007, the decline was roughly parallel,
as in‡ation-indexed yields fell from slightly over 4% to slightly over 1%, while nominal
yields fell from around 7% to 4%. Thus, this was a period in which both nominal and
in‡ation-indexed bond yields were driven down by a large decline in long-term real
interest rates. In 2008, however, nominal Treasury bond yields continued to decline,
while in‡ation-indexed bond yields spiked up above 3% towards the end of the year.

    Figure 2B shows a comparable history for the UK since the early 1990’s. To
facilitate comparison of the two plots, the beginning of the US sample period is marked
with a vertical dashed line. The downward trend in in‡ation-indexed government
bond yields is even more dramatic over this longer period. UK in‡ation-indexed gilts
also experienced a dramatic yield spike in the fall of 2008.

    Figure 3A plots the 10-year break-even in‡ation rate, the di¤erence between 10-
year nominal and in‡ation-indexed bond yields. The breakeven in‡ation rate was
fairly volatile in the …rst few years of the TIPS market, then stabilized between 1.5%
and 2.0% in the early years of this decade before creeping up to a stable level of
about 2.5% from 2004 through 2007. In 2008, the breakeven in‡ation rate collapsed,
reaching almost zero at the end of the year.

    The …gure also shows, for the early years of the sample, the subsequently realized
3-year in‡ation rate. After the …rst couple of years, in which there is little relation
between breakeven and subsequently realized in‡ation, one can see that a slight de-
crease in breakeven in‡ation between 2000 and 2002, followed by a slow increase in
breakeven in‡ation from 2002 to 2006, is matched by similar gradual changes in sub-
sequently realized in‡ation. Although this is not a rigorous test of the rationality of
the TIPS market— apart from anything else, the bonds are forecasting in‡ation over
10 years, not 3 years— it does suggest that in‡ation forecasts in‡uence the relative
pricing of TIPS and nominal Treasury bonds. We explore this issue in greater detail
in the next section of the paper.


                                           4
    Figure 3B reports the breakeven in‡ation history for the UK. The …gure shows
a strong decline in breakeven in‡ation in the late 1990’s, probably associated with
the independence granted to the Bank of England by the newly elected Labour gov-
ernment in 1997, and a steady upward creep from 2003 to early 2008, followed by a
collapse in 2008 comparable to that which has occurred in the US.

    In Figure 4A we turn our attention to the short-run volatility of TIPS returns.
Using daily nominal prices, with the appropriate correction for coupon payments,
we calculate daily nominal return series for 10-year TIPS. The …gure plots the an-
nualized standard deviation of this series within a moving one-year window. For
comparison, the …gure also shows the corresponding annualized standard deviation
for 10-year nominal Treasury bond returns, calculated from Bloomberg yield data
using the assumption that nominal bonds trade at par.

   The striking message of Figure 4A is that TIPS returns have become far more
volatile in recent years. In the early years, until 2002, the short-run volatility of 10-
year TIPS was only about half the short-run volatility of 10-year nominal Treasuries,
but the two standard deviations converged between 2002 and 2004 and have been
extremely similar since then. The annualized standard deviation of both bonds
ranged between 5% and 8% until 2008, and then increased dramatically to about
13% during 2008.

    Mechanically, two variables drive the volatility of TIPS returns. The most im-
portant is the volatility of TIPS yields, which has increased over time; in recent years
it has been very similar to the volatility of nominal yields as breakeven in‡ation has
stabilized. A second, amplifying factor is the duration of TIPS, which has increased
as TIPS yields have declined.2 The same two variables determine the very similar
volatility patterns shown in Figure 4B for the UK.

   Figure 5A plots the annualized standard deviation of 10-year breakeven in‡ation
(a bond position long a 10-year nominal Treasury and short a 10-year TIPS). This
standard deviation trended down from 6% in 1998 to about 1% in 2007, before spiking
up above 13% in 2008. To the extent that breakeven in‡ation represents the long-term
   2
     The duration of a bond is the weighted average time to payment of its cash ‡ows, where the
present values of cash ‡ows are used as weights. Duration also equals the elasticity of a bond’s price
with respect to its gross yield. Coupon bonds have duration less than their maturity, and duration
increases as yield falls. Since TIPS yields are lower than nominal yields, TIPS have greater duration
for the same maturity, and hence a greater return volatility for the same yield volatility, but the
di¤erences in volatility explained by duration are quite small.


                                                  5
in‡ation expectations of market participants, these expectations stabilized during
most of our sample period, but moved dramatically in 2008. Such a destabilization
of in‡ation expectations should be a matter of serious concern to the Federal Reserve,
although, as we discuss in section 5, institutional factors may have contributed to
the movements in breakeven in‡ation during the market disruption of late 2008.
Figure 5B shows that the Bank of England should be equally concerned by the recent
destabilization of the yield spread between nominal and in‡ation-indexed gilts.

    The …gures also plot the correlations of daily in‡ation-indexed and nominal bond
returns within a one-year moving window. Early in the period, the US correlation
was quite low at about 0.2, but it increased to almost 0.9 by the middle of 2003 and
stayed there until 2008. In the mid-2000’s, TIPS behaved like nominal Treasuries and
did not exhibit independent return variation. This coupling of TIPS and nominal
Treasuries ended in 2008. The same patterns are visible in the UK data.

    Although TIPS have been volatile assets, this does not necessarily imply that
they should command large risk premia. According to rational asset pricing theory,
risk premia should be driven by assets’covariances with the marginal utility of con-
sumption rather than by their variances. One common proxy for marginal utility,
used in the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), is the return on an aggregate eq-
uity index. In Figures 6A and 6B we plot the correlations of daily in‡ation-indexed
bond returns, nominal government bond returns, and breakeven in‡ation returns (the
di¤erence between the …rst two series) with the daily returns on aggregate US and
UK stock indexes, within our standard moving one-year window. Figures 7A and
7B repeat this exercise for betas (regression coe¢ cients of daily bond returns and
breakeven in‡ation onto the stock index).

    All these …gures tell a similar story. During the 2000’s there has been consider-
able instability in the correlations between US and UK government bonds and stock
returns, but these correlations have been predominantly negative, implying that gov-
ernment bonds can be used to hedge equity risk. To the extent that the CAPM
describes risk premia across asset classes, government bonds should have predomi-
nantly negative rather than positive risk premia. The negative correlation is particu-
larly striking for nominal government bonds, because breakeven in‡ation is positively
correlated with stock returns, especially during 2002-03 and 2007-08. Campbell,
Sunderam, and Viceira (2009) build a model in which a changing correlation between
in‡ation and stock returns drives changes in the risk properties of nominal Treasury
bonds. Their model assumes a constant equity market correlation for TIPS, and thus


                                          6
cannot explain the correlation movements shown for TIPS in Figures 6A and 7A. In
section 4 of this paper, we explore the determination of TIPS risk premia in greater
detail.



3    In‡ation-Indexed Yields and the Dynamics of
     Short-Term Real Interest Rates

To understand the movements of in‡ation-indexed bond yields, it is essential …rst to
understand how changes in short-term real interest rates propagate along the real
term structure. Declining yields for in‡ation-indexed bonds in the 2000’s may not
be particularly surprising given that short-term real interest rates have also been low
in this decade.

    Before TIPS were issued in 1997, Campbell and Shiller (1996) used a time-series
model for the short-term real interest rate to create a hypothetical TIPS yield series
under the assumption that the expectations theory of the term structure in log form,
with zero log risk premia, describes in‡ation-indexed yields. (This does not require
the assumption that the expectations theory describes nominal yields, a model that
has often been rejected in US data.) In this section, we update Campbell and Shiller’s
analysis and ask how well the simple expectations theory describes the 12-year history
of TIPS yields.

    Campbell and Shiller estimated a VAR model in quarterly US data over the period
1953-1994. Their basic VAR included the ex post real return on a 3-month nominal
Treasury bill, the nominal bill yield, and the lagged one-year in‡ation rate, with a
single lag. They solved the VAR forward to create forecasts of future quarterly
real interest rates at all horizons, and then aggregated the forecasts to generate the
implied long-term in‡ation-indexed bond yield.

   In Table 1A, we repeat this analysis for the period 1982-2008. The top panel
reports the estimates of VAR coe¢ cients, with standard errors in parentheses below.
The bottom panel reports selected sample moments of the hypothetical VAR-implied
10-year TIPS yields, and for comparison the same moments of observed TIPS yields,
over the period since TIPS were issued in 1997. The table delivers several interesting
results.


                                          7
    First, hypothetical yields are considerably lower on average than observed yields,
with a mean of 1.17% as compared with 2.68%. This implies that on average,
investors demand a risk or liquidity premium for holding TIPS rather than nominal
Treasuries. Second, hypothetical yields are more stable than observed yields, with
a standard deviation of 0.36% as opposed to 0.94%. This re‡ects the fact that
observed yields have declined more dramatically since 1997 than have hypothetical
yields. Third, hypothetical and observed yields have a relatively high correlation of
0.70, even though no TIPS data were used to construct the hypothetical yields. Real
interest rate movements do have an important e¤ect on the TIPS market, and the
VAR system is able to capture much of this e¤ect.

    Figure 8A shows these results in graphical form, plotting the history of the ob-
served TIPS yield, the hypothetical VAR-implied TIPS yield, and the VAR estimate
of the ex ante short-term real interest rate. The sharp decline in the real interest rate
in 2001 and 2002 drives down the hypothetical TIPS yield, but the observed TIPS
yield is more volatile and declines more strongly. The gap between the observed
TIPS yield and the hypothetical yield shrinks fairly steadily over the sample period
until the very end, when the 2008 spike in observed yields widens the gap again.
These results suggest that when they were …rst issued, TIPS commanded a high risk
or liquidity premium, which declined until 2008.

    Table 1B and Figure 8B repeat these exercises for the UK. The hypothetical and
observed yields have very similar means in the UK (2.64% and 2.67% respectively),
but again the standard deviation is lower for hypothetical yields at 0.66% than for
actual yields at 1.03%. The two yields have a high correlation of 0.79. Figure 8B
shows that the VAR model captures much of the decline in in‡ation-indexed gilt yields
since the early 1990’s. It is able to do this because the estimated process for the
UK ex ante real interest rate is highly persistent, so the decline in the real rate over
the sample period translates almost one for one into a declining yield on long-term
in‡ation-indexed gilts. However, for the same reason the model cannot account for
variations in the yield spread between the short-term expected real interest rate and
the long-term in‡ation-indexed gilt yield in the UK.

   It is notable that the expectations hypothesis of the real term structure does not
explain the decline in UK in‡ation-indexed gilt yields from 2005 through 2008. A
change in UK accounting standards, FRS 17, may account for this. As Viceira
(2003) and Vayanos and Vila (2007) explain, FRS 17 requires UK pension funds to
mark their liabilities to market, using discount rates derived from government bonds.


                                           8
The accounting standard was implemented, after some delay, in 2005, and it greatly
increased the demand for in‡ation-indexed gilts from pension funds seeking to hedge
their in‡ation-indexed liabilities.



4     The Systematic Risks of In‡ation-Indexed Bonds

The yield history and VAR analysis presented in the previous two sections suggest
that in‡ation-indexed bonds had low risk premia in the mid-2000’s, but, in the US at
least, had higher risk premia when they were …rst issued. In this section we use asset
pricing theory to ask what fundamental properties of the macroeconomy might lead
to high or low risk premia on in‡ation-indexed bonds. We …rst use the consumption-
based asset pricing framework, and then present a less structured empirical analysis
that relates bond risk premia to changing covariances of bonds with stocks.


4.1    Consumption-Based Pricing of In‡ation-Indexed Bonds

A standard paradigm for consumption-based asset pricing assumes that a representa-
tive investor has Epstein-Zin (1989, 1991) preferences. This preference speci…cation,
a generalization of power utility, allows the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion and
the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS) to be separate free parameters,
whereas power utility restricts one to be the reciprocal of the other.

   Under the additional assumption that asset returns and consumption are jointly
lognormal and homoskedastic, the Epstein-Zin Euler equation implies that the risk
premium on any asset i over the short-term safe asset is
                                                  2
                                                  i       ic
                 RPi    Et [ri;t+1 ]   rf;t+1 +       =        + (1   )   iw :    (1)
                                                  2
The risk premium is de…ned to be the expected excess log return on the asset plus
one-half its variance to correct for Jensen’s Inequality. The preference parameter
     (1    )=(1 1= ); in the power utility case, = 1= and = 1. According to
this formula, the risk premium on any asset is a weighted average of two conditional
covariances, the consumption covariance ic (scaled by the reciprocal of the EIS)
which gets full weight in the power utility case, and the wealth covariance iw . The
risk premium is constant over time by the assumption of homoskedasticity.

                                             9
   It is tempting to treat the consumption covariance and wealth covariance as two
separate quantities, but this ignores the fact that consumption and wealth are linked
by the intertemporal budget constraint and by a time-series Euler equation. By using
these additional equations, one can substitute either consumption (Campbell 1993)
or wealth (Restoy and Weil 1998) out of the formula for the risk premium.

    The …rst approach explains the risk premium using covariances with the cur-
rent market return and with news about future market returns; this might be called
“CAPM+”, as it generalizes the insight about risk that was …rst formalized in the
CAPM. Campbell (1996) and Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004) pursue this ap-
proach, which can also be regarded as an empirical version of Merton’s (1973) in-
tertemporal CAPM.

    The second approach explains the risk premium using covariances with current
consumption growth and with news about future consumption growth; this might be
called the “CCAPM+”, as it generalizes the insight about risk that is contained in the
consumption-based CAPM with power utility. This approach has generated a large
asset pricing literature in recent years (Bansal and Yaron 2004, Bansal, Khatchatrian,
and Yaron 2005, Piazzesi and Schneider 2006, Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron 2007, Bansal,
Dittmar, and Kiku 2008, Hansen, Heaton, and Li 2008). Some of this recent work
adds heteroskedasticity to the simple homoskedastic model discussed here.

   The CAPM+ approach delivers an approximate formula for the risk premium on
any asset as
                      RPi = iw (         1) i;T IP S ;
where iw is the covariance of the unexpected return on asset i with the return on
the aggregate wealth portfolio, and i;T IP S is the covariance with the return on an
in‡ation-indexed perpetuity.

    The intuition, which dates back to Merton (1973), is that conservative long-term
investors value assets that deliver high returns at times when investment opportunities
are poor. Such assets hedge investors against variation in the sustainable income
stream that is delivered by a given amount of wealth. In a homoskedastic model, risk
premia are constant and the relevant measure of long-run investment opportunities
is the yield on an in‡ation-indexed bond. Thus, the covariance with the return
on an in‡ation-indexed perpetuity captures the intertemporal hedging properties of
an asset. In equilibrium, an asset that covaries strongly with an in‡ation-indexed
perpetuity will o¤er a low return as the price of the desirable insurance it o¤ers.


                                          10
   Applying this formula to the in‡ation-indexed perpetuity itself, we …nd that
                                                                      2
                        RPT IP S =   T IP S;w         (        1)     T IP S :

The risk premium on a long-term in‡ation-indexed bond is increasing in its covariance
with the wealth portfolio, as in the traditional CAPM, but decreasing in the variance
of the bond return whenever the risk aversion of the representative agent is greater
than one. Paradoxically, the insurance value of in‡ation-indexed bonds is higher
when these bonds have high short-term volatility, because in this case they hedge
important variability in investment opportunities. In a traditional model with a
constant real interest rate, in‡ation-indexed bonds have constant yields; but in this
case there is no intertemporal hedging to be done, and the traditional CAPM can be
used to price all assets including in‡ation-indexed bonds.

   The CCAPM+ approach can be written as

                                                           1
                            RPi =        ic   +                     ig ;          (2)

where ig is the covariance of the unexpected return on asset i with revisions in
expected future consumption growth get+1 , de…ned by
                                                     X
                                                     1
                                                           j
                         get+1   (Et+1        Et )             ct+1+j :           (3)
                                                     j=1



    The risk premium on any asset is the coe¢ cient of risk aversion        times the
covariance of that asset with consumption growth, plus ( 1= ) times the covariance
of the asset with revisions in expected future consumption growth. The second term
is zero if = 1= , the power utility case, or if consumption growth is unpredictable
so that there are no revisions in expected future consumption growth. Evidence on
the equity premium and the time-series behavior of real interest rates suggests that
   > 1= . This implies that controlling for assets’ contemporaneous consumption
covariance, investors require a risk premium to hold assets that pay o¤ when expected
future consumption growth increases. Bansal and Yaron (2004) use the term “long-
run risks”to emphasize this property of the model.

    What does this model imply about the pricing of an in‡ation-indexed perpe-
tuity? When expected real consumption growth increases by 1 percentage point,


                                              11
the equilibrium real interest rate increases by 1=               percentage points, and thus the
in‡ation-indexed perpetuity return is given by3
                                                       1
                                     rT IP S;t+1 =         get+1 :                            (4)


   Combining (2) with (4), we can solve for the risk premium on the in‡ation-indexed
perpetuity:

                                         1                      1      1    2
                     RPT IP S =               cg   +                        g:                (5)


    With power utility, only the …rst term in (5) is nonzero. This case is described
by Campbell (1986). In a consumption-based asset pricing model with power utility,
assets are risky if their returns covary positively with consumption growth. Since
bond prices rise when interest rates fall, bonds are risky assets if interest rates fall
in response to consumption growth. Because equilibrium real interest rates are
positively related to expected future consumption growth, this is possible only if
positive consumption shocks drive down expected future consumption growth, that is,
if consumption growth is negatively autocorrelated. In an economy with temporary
downturns in consumption, equilibrium real interest rates rise and TIPS prices fall in
recessions, so investors require a risk premium to hold TIPS.

    In the presence of persistent shocks to consumption growth, by contrast, consump-
tion growth is positively autocorrelated. In this case recessions not only drive down
current consumption but lead to prolonged periods of slow growth, driving down real
interest rates. In such an economy the prices of long-term in‡ation-indexed bonds
rise in recessions, making them desirable hedging assets with negative risk premia.

    This paradigm suggests that the risk premium on TIPS will fall if investors be-
come less concerned about temporary business-cycle shocks, and more concerned
about shocks to the long-term consumption growth rate. It is possible that such a
shift in investor beliefs did take place during the late 1990’s and 2000’s, as the Great
Moderation mitigated concerns about business-cycle risk while long-term uncertain-
ties about technological progress and climate change became more salient. Of course,
   3
    A more careful derivation of this expression can be found in Campbell (2003), equation (34) on
p.839.


                                               12
the events of 2007-08 have brought business cycle risk to the fore again. The move-
ments of in‡ation-indexed bond yields have been broadly consistent with changing
risk perceptions of this sort.

   The second term in (5) is also negative under the plausible assumption that >
1= , and its sign does not depend on the persistence of the consumption process.
However its magnitude does depend on the volatility of shocks to long-run expected
consumption growth. Thus increasing uncertainty about long-run growth drives
down in‡ation-indexed bond premia through this channel as well.

   Overall, the Epstein-Zin paradigm suggests that in‡ation-indexed bonds should
have low or even negative risk premia relative to short-term safe assets, consistent
with the intuition that these bonds are the safe asset for long-term investors.


4.2    Bond Risk Premia and the Bond-Stock Covariance

The consumption-based analysis of the previous section delivers insights but also has
weaknesses. The model assumes constant second moments and thus implies constant
risk premia; it cannot be used to track changing variances, covariances, or risk premia
in the in‡ation-indexed bond markets. While one could generalize the model to allow
time-varying second moments, as in the long-run risks model of Bansal and Yaron
(2004), the low frequency of consumption measurement makes it di¢ cult to implement
the model empirically. In this section, we follow a di¤erent approach, writing down a
model of the stochastic discount factor (SDF) that allows us to relate the risk premia
on in‡ation-indexed bonds to the covariance of these bonds with stock returns.

    In order to capture the time-varying correlation of the returns on in‡ation-indexed
bonds with stock returns, we propose a highly stylized term structure model in which
the real interest rate is subject to conditionally heteroskedastic shocks. Conditional
heteroskedasticity is driven by a state variable which captures time variation in ag-
gregate macroeconomic uncertainty. We build our model in the spirit of Campbell,
Sunderam, and Viceira (2009), which emphasizes the importance of changing macro-
economic conditions to understand time variation in systematic risk and in the cor-
relation of returns on fundamental asset classes. Our model modi…es their quadratic
term structure model to allow for heteroskedastic shocks to the real rate.




                                          13
   We assume that the log of the real SDF, mt+1 = log Mt+1 , can be described by
                                                        1      2
                                    mt+1 = xt +                m   + "m;t+1 ;               (6)
                                                        2
where xt follows a conditionally heteroskedastic AR(1) process,

                       xt+1 =   x   (1        x)   +    x xt    + vt "x;t+1 + "0x;t+1 ;     (7)

and vt follows a standard AR(1) process

                             vt+1 =      v   (1        v)   +      v vt   + "v;t+1 :        (8)

The shocks "m;t+1 , "x;t+1 , "0x;t+1 , and "v;t+1 have zero means and are jointly normally
distributed shocks with constant variance-covariance matrix. We assume that "0x;t+1
and "v;t+1 are orthogonal to each other and to the other shocks in the model. We
adopt the notation 2i to describe the variance of shock "i , and ij to describe the
covariance between shock "i and shock "j . The conditional volatility of the log SDF
( m ) describes the price of aggregate market risk or maximum Sharpe ratio in the
economy, which we assume to be constant.4

    In the Appendix, we show how to solve this model for the real term structure
of interest rates. The state variable xt is equal to the log short-term real interest
rate, which follows an AR(1) process whose conditional variance is driven by the state
variable vt .

    In a standard consumption-based power utility model of the sort we discussed in
the previous subsection, vt would capture time-variation in the dynamics of consump-
tion growth. When vt is close to zero, shocks to the real interest rate are uncorrelated
with the stochastic discount factor; in a power utility model, this would imply that
shocks to future consumption growth are uncorrelated with shocks to the current level
of consumption. As vt moves away from zero, the volatility of the real interest rate
increases and its covariance with the SDF becomes more positive or more negative. In
a power utility model, this corresponds to a covariance between consumption shocks
   4
     CSV consider a much richer term structure model in which 2m is time varying. They note
that in that case the process for the log real SDF admits an interpretation as a reduced model
of structural models such as those of Bekaert, Engstrom and Grenadier (2005) and Campbell and
Cochrane (1999) in which aggregate risk aversion is time-varying. CSV …nd that time-varying risk
aversion plays only a limited role in explaining the observed variation in bond risk premia. For
simplicity, we set 2m to be constant.


                                                       14
and future consumption growth that is either positive or negative, re‡ecting either
momentum or mean-reversion in consumption. Broadly speaking we can interpret
vt as a measure of aggregate uncertainty about long-run growth in the economy. At
times where uncertainty about future economic growth increases, real interest rates
become more volatile.

    Solving the model for the real term structure of interest rates, we …nd that the
price of an n-period log in‡ation-indexed bond is linear in the short-term real interest
rate xt , with coe¢ cient Bx;n , and quadratic in aggregate economic uncertainty vt ,
with linear coe¢ cient Bv;n and quadratic coe¢ cient Cv;n . An important property of
this model is that bond risk premia are time varying. They are approximately linear
in vt , where the coe¢ cient on vt is proportional to 2m .

    A time varying conditional covariance between the SDF and the real interest rate
implies that the conditional covariance between real bonds and risky assets such as
equities should also vary over time as a function of vt . To see this, we now introduce
equities into the model. To keep things simple, we assume that the unexpected log
return on equities is given by

                             re;t+1   Et re;t+1 =    em "m;t+1 :                    (9)

This implies that the equity premium equals em 2m , the conditional standard devi-
ation of stock returns is em m , and the Sharpe ratio on equities is m . Equities
deliver the maximum Sharpe ratio because they are perfectly correlated with the
SDF. Thus we are imposing the restrictions of the traditional CAPM, ignoring the
intertemporal hedging arguments given in the previous subsection.

   The covariance between stocks and in‡ation-indexed bonds is given by

                        Covt (re;t+1 ; rn;t+1 ) = Bx;n   1 em mx vt ;              (10)

which is proportional to vt . This proportionality is also a reason why we consider
two independent shocks to xt . In the absence of a homoskedastic shock "0x;t to xt ,
our model would imply that the conditional volatility of the short real rate would
be proportional to the covariance of stock returns with real bond returns. However,
while the two moments appear to be correlated in the data, they are not perfectly
correlated, still less proportional to one another.

   We estimate this term structure model using the nonlinear Kalman Filter proce-
dure described in CSV. To estimate the model we use data on zero-coupon in‡ation-

                                            15
indexed bond yields from Gürkaynak, Sack and Wright (2008) for the period 1999-
2008, and data on total returns on the value-weighted US stock market portfolio
(inclusive of NYSE, NASDAQ and AMEX) from CRSP.5 Because the US Treasury
does not issue TIPS with short maturities, and there are no continuous observations
of yields on near-to-maturity TIPS, this dataset does not include short-term zero-
coupon TIPS yields. To approximate the short-term real interest rate we use the ex
ante short-term real interest rate implied by our VAR approach described in Section
3.

    In our estimation we make several identifying and simplifying assumptions. First,
we identify m using the long-run average Sharpe ratio for US equities, which we set to
0.23 on a quarterly basis (equivalent to 0.46 on an annual basis). Second, we identify
  em as the sample standard deviation of equity returns in our sample period (0.094
per quarter, or 18.9% per year) divided by m , for a value of 0.41. Third, we exactly
identify xt with the ex-ante short-term real interest rate estimated from the VAR
model of the previous section, which we treat as observed, adjusted by a constant..
That is, we give the Kalman …lter a measurement equation that equates the VAR-
estimated short-term real rate to xt with a free constant term but no measurement
error. The inclusion of the constant term is intended to capture liquidity e¤ects which
lower the yields on Treasury bills relative to the longer-term real yield curve.

    Fourth, because the shock "x;t+1 is always premultiplied by vt , we normalize x
to one. Fifth, we assume that there is perfect correlation between the shock "x;t+1
and the shock shock "m;t+1 to the SDF; equivalently, we set mx equal to 0.23. This
delivers the largest possible time-variation in in‡ation-indexed bond risk premia, and
thus maximizes the e¤ect of changing risk on the TIPS yield curve.           Sixth, we
treat equation (10) as a measurement equation with no measurement error, where
we replace the covariance on the left-hand side of the equation with the realized
monthly covariance of returns on 10-year zero-coupon TIPS with return on stocks.
We estimate the monthly realized covariance using daily observations on stock returns
and on TIPS returns from the Gürkaynak-Sack-Wright dataset. Since em and mx
have been already exactly identi…ed, this is equivalent to identifying the process vt
with a scaled version of the covariance of returns on TIPS and stocks.
   5
     Gürkaynak, Sack and Wright estimate zero-coupon TIPS yields by …tting a ‡exible functional
form, a generalization of Nelson and Siegel (1987) suggested by Svensson (1994), to the instantaneous
forward rates implied by o¤-the-run TIPS yields. From …tted forward rates it is straightforward to
obtain zero coupon yields.




                                                 16
    We include one …nal measurement equation for the 10-year zero-coupon TIPS
yield using the model’s solution for this yield and allowing for measurement error.
The identifying assumptions we have made imply that we are exactly identifying xt
with the observed short-term real rate, vt with the realized covariance of returns on
TIPS and stocks, and the log SDF with stock returns. Thus our estimation procedure
in e¤ect generates hypothetical TIPS yields from these processes, and compares them
with observed TIPS yields.

    Table 2 reports the parameter estimates from our full model, in the middle column,
and two restricted models. The left column drops the measurement equation for
the realized stock-bond covariance and assumes that the stock-bond covariance is
constant, hence that TIPS have constant risk premia, as in the VAR model of section
3. The right hand column generates the largest possible e¤ects of time-varying risk
premia on TIPS yields by increasing the persistence of the covariance state variable
vt from the freely estimated value of 0.77, which implies an 8-month half-life for
covariance movements, to the largest permissible value of one.

    Figure 9 shows how these three variants of our basic model …t the history of the
10-year TIPS yield. The actual TIPS yield is the thick solid line in the …gure. The
dotted and thin solid lines are the freely estimated model of changing risk and the
restricted model with a constant bond-stock covariance. The fact that these lines are
almost on top of one another, diverging only slightly in periods such as 2003 and 2008
when the realized bond-stock covariance was unusually negative, tells us that changing
TIPS risk is not persistent enough to have a large e¤ect on TIPS yields. Only when
we impose a unit root on the process for the bond-stock covariance, illustrated with
a dashed line in the …gure, do we obtain large e¤ects of changing risk. This model
implies that TIPS yields should have fallen more dramatically than they did in 2002-
03, and again in 2007, when the covariance of TIPS with stocks turned negative. The
model does capture TIPS movements in the …rst half of 2008, but dramatically fails
to capture the spike in TIPS yields in the second half of 2008.

   Overall, this exploration of changing risk, as captured by the changing realized
covariance of TIPS returns and aggregate stock returns, suggests that risk variations
play only a supporting role in the determination of TIPS yields. The major problem
with a risk-based explanation for movements in the in‡ation-indexed yield curve is
that the covariance of TIPS and stocks has moved in a transitory fashion, and thus
should not have had a large e¤ect on TIPS yields unless investors were expecting
more persistent variation and were surprised by an unusual sequence of temporary


                                         17
changes in risk.

    These results contrast with those reported by CSV, who …nd that persistent move-
ments in the covariance between in‡ation and stock returns have had a powerful in-
‡uence on the nominal US Treasury yield curve. CSV …nd that US in‡ation was
negatively correlated with stock returns in the late 1970’s and early 1980’s, when the
major downside risk for investors was stag‡ation; it has been positively correlated
with stock returns in the 2000’s, when investors have been more concerned about
de‡ation. As a result, CSV argue that the in‡ation risk premium was positive in the
1970’s and 1980’s but has been negative in the 2000’s, implying even lower expected
returns on nominal Treasury bonds than on TIPS. The movements in in‡ation risk
identi…ed by CSV are persistent enough to have important e¤ects on the shape of
the nominal US Treasury yield curve, reducing its slope and concavity relative to the
shapes that were typical in the 1970’s and 1980’s. Figure 6A in this paper illustrates
the positive correlation of US in‡ation and stock returns during the 2000’s, while
Figure 6B shows that this correlation has changed sign in the UK since the early
1990’s.



5    The Crisis of 2008 and Institutional In‡uences
     on TIPS Yields

In 2008, as the subprime crisis intensi…ed, the TIPS yield became highly volatile,
and appeared suddenly disconnected from the yield on nominal Treasuries. At the
beginning of 2008 the 30-year TIPS yield fell to extremely low levels, as low as 1.66%
on January 23, 2008. Shorter maturity TIPS showed even lower yields, and in the
summer of 2008 some of these showed yields below minus 0.5%, reminding market
participants that zero is not the lower bound for in‡ation-indexed bond yields. Then,
in the fall of 2008 there was an unprecedented and short-lived spike in TIPS yields,
peaking at the end of October 2008 when the 30-year TIPS yield reached 3.44%.

    These extraordinary short-run movements in TIPS yields are mirrored in the ten-
year TIPS yield shown in Figure 2A. The extremely low TIPS yield in early 2008 was
given a convenient explanation by some market observers, that people were panicked
by the apparent heightened risks in …nancial markets brought in to the subprime
crisis, and would buy safety at just about any price. But, if this is the explanation


                                         18
of that phenomenon, we are left with the mystery of a massive surge in TIPS yield
later in that year. The leap upwards in TIPS yields in the fall of 2008 was puzzling
since it was not shared by nominal bond yields, and so it marked a massive drop in
the breakeven in‡ation rate, seen in Figure 3A. The UK market behaved in a similar
fashion, as can be seen from Figures 2B and 3B.

    The anomalous sudden jump in in‡ation-indexed bond yields came as a total sur-
prise to market participants. Indeed, just as the sudden jump occurred in October
2008 some observers were saying that because in‡ation expectations had become ex-
tremely stable, TIPS and nominal Treasury bonds were virtually interchangeable.
Brière and Signori (2008) concluded in a paper published in October 2008 that “Al-
though diversi…cation was a valuable reason for introducing IL bonds in a global
portfolio before 2003, this is no longer the case.”The extent of this surprise suggests
that the TIPS yield, and its decoupling from the nominal Treasury yields, had some-
thing to do with the systemic nature of the crisis that beset US …nancial institutions
in 2008.

   Indeed, the sharp peak in the TIPS yield and the companion steep drop in the
breakeven in‡ation rate occurred shortly after an event that some observers blame for
the anomalous behavior of TIPS yields. This was the bankruptcy of the investment
bank Lehman Brothers, announced on September 15, 2008. The unfolding of the
Lehman Brothers bankruptcy proceedings also took place over the same interval of
time over which the in‡ation-indexed bond yield made its spectacular leap upwards.

    Lehman’s bankruptcy was an important event, the …rst bankruptcy of a major
investment bank since the Drexel Burnham Lambert bankruptcy in 1990. That is
not to say that other investment banks did not get into trouble, especially during
the subprime crisis. But, the government had always stepped in to allay fears. Bear
Stearns was sold to commercial bank J.P. Morgan in March 2008 in a deal arranged
and …nanced by the government. Bank of America announced its purchase of Merrill
Lynch on September 14, 2008, again with government …nancial support. The govern-
ment decided to let Lehman fail, and so it is possible that this event was indicative
of future government policy that might spell major changes in the economy.

   One conceivable interpretation for the events that followed the Lehman bank-
ruptcy announcement is that the bankruptcy was seen by the market as a macroeco-
nomic indicator, indicating that the economy would be suddenly weaker. This could
imply a deterioration in the government’s …scal position, justifying an increase in
expected future real interest rates and therefore the long-term real yield on US Trea-

                                          19
sury debt, and a decline in in‡ation expectations, explaining the drop in breakeven
in‡ation.

    However, many observers doubt that we can really expect such a radical change in
real-rate and in‡ation expectations from the macroeconomic impact of just this one
bankruptcy. At one point in 2008 the breakeven 7-year in‡ation rate reached minus
1.5%. According to a paper by Hu and Worah (2009), bond traders at PIMCO, “The
market did not believe that it was possible to realize that kind of real rate or sustained
de‡ation.”

    Another interpretation of this shift is that there was a shift in the risk premium
for in‡ation-indexed bonds. In terms of our analysis above, it could be a change in
the covariance of TIPS returns with consumption or wealth. But, such a view sounds
even less plausible than the view that the Lehman e¤ect worked through in‡ation
expectations. We have seen that the observed ‡uctuations in the covariances of TIPS
returns with other variables are hard to rationalize even after the fact, and so it is
hard to see why the market would have made a major adjustment in this covariance.

    Hu and Worah conclude instead that “the extremes in valuation were due to a
potent combination of technical factors.... Lehman owned Tips as part of repo trades
or posted Tips as counterparty collateral. Once Lehman declared bankruptcy, both
the court and its counterparty needed to sell these Tips for cash.” The traders at
PIMCO saw then a ‡ood of TIPS on the market. There appeared to be few buyers
for these. Distressed market makers were not willing to risk taking positions in these
TIPS; their distress was marked by a crisis-induced sudden and catastrophic widening,
by October of 2008, in TIPS bid-asked spreads. The situation was exacerbated by the
fact that some TIPS funds had commodity overlay strategies that forced them to sell
TIPS because of the fall at that time in commodity prices. Moreover, institutional
money managers had to confront a sudden loss of client interest in relative value
trades, trades that might have exploited the abnormally low breakeven in‡ation.


5.1    In‡ation Derivatives Markets in the Fall of 2008

An important clue about the events of fall 2008 is provided by the diverging be-
havior of breakeven in‡ation rates in the TIPS cash market and breakeven in‡ation
rates implied by zero-coupon in‡ation swaps during the months following the Lehman
bankruptcy.

                                           20
    Zero-coupon in‡ation swaps are derivatives contracts where one of the parties
pays the other cumulative CPI in‡ation over the term of the contract at maturity,
in exchange for a predetermined …xed rate. This rate is known as the “synthetic”
breakeven in‡ation rate because, if in‡ation grew at this …xed rate over the life of
the contract, the net payment on the contract at maturity would be equal to zero.
As with the “cash” breakeven in‡ation rate implied by TIPS and nominal Treasury
bonds, this rate re‡ects both expected in‡ation over the relevant period as well as an
in‡ation risk premium.

   Figure 10 plots the cash in‡ation breakeven rate implied by o¤-the-run TIPS and
nominal Treasury bonds maturing on July 2017 and the synthetic in‡ation breakeven
rate for the 10-year zero-coupon in‡ation swap for the time period between July 2007
and April 2009. The …gure also plots the TIPS asset swap spread— explained below.
The …gure shows that the two breakeven rates track each other very closely up to
mid-September 2008, with the synthetic in‡ation breakeven rate being about 35-40
basis points larger than the cash breakeven in‡ation rate on average.

    This di¤erence in breakeven rates is typical under normal market conditions. Ac-
cording to analysts, it re‡ects among other things the cost of manufacturing pure
in‡ation protection in the US. Most market participants supplying in‡ation protec-
tion in the US in‡ation swap market are levered investors such as hedge funds and
banks proprietary trading desks. These investors typically hedge their in‡ation swap
positions by simultaneously taking long positions in TIPS and short positions in
nominal Treasuries in the asset swap market. A buying position in an asset swap
is functionally similar to a levered position in a bond. In an asset swap, one party
pays the cash ‡ows on a speci…c bond, and receives in exchange LIBOR plus a spread
known as the asset swap spread. Typically this spread is negative and its absolute
magnitude is larger for nominal Treasuries than for TIPS. Thus a levered investor pay-
ing in‡ation— i.e. selling in‡ation protection— in an in‡ation swap faces a positive
…nancing cost derived from his long-short TIPS-nominal Treasury position.

   Figure 10 shows that starting in mid-September 2008, cash breakeven rates fell
dramatically while synthetic breakeven rates did not fall nearly as much, while at the
same time TIPS asset swap spreads increased from their normal levels of about -35
basis points to about +100 basis points. Although not shown in the …gure, nominal
Treasury asset swap spreads remained at their usual levels. That is, …nancing long
positions in TIPS became extremely expensive relative to historical levels just as their
cash prices fell abruptly.


                                          21
   There is no reason why declining in‡ation expectations should directly a¤ect the
cost of …nancing long positions in TIPS relative to nominal Treasuries. These two
simultaneous changes suggest instead that we may have witnessed an episode of in-
tense selling in the cash market with insu¢ cient demand to absorb those sales— as
described by Hu and Worah— and simultaneously another shortage of capital to …-
nance levered positions in markets other than nominal Treasuries; that is, we may
have witnessed a “liquidity”episode.

   Under this interpretation, in the fall of 2008 the synthetic breakeven in‡ation
rate was a better proxy for in‡ation expectations in the marketplace than the cash
breakeven in‡ation rate, despite the fact that in normal times the in‡ation swap mar-
ket is considerably less liquid than the cash TIPS market. The synthetic breakeven
in‡ation rate declined from about 3% per year to about 1.5% at the trough. This
long-run in‡ation expectation is perhaps more plausible than the 0% 10-year in‡ation
expectations re‡ected in the cash market for the o¤-the-run 2017 bonds.

    Interestingly, cash breakeven in‡ation rates also diverged between on-the-run and
o¤-the-run TIPS with similar maturities during this period. The online Appendix
shows that breakeven rates based on newly issued, or on-the-run, TIPS were lower
than those based on o¤-the-run TIPS. This divergence re‡ected another feature of
TIPS which causes cash breakeven in‡ation rates calculated from on-the-run TIPS to
be poor proxies for in‡ation expectations in the face of de‡ation risk. Contractually
TIPS holders have the right to redeem their bonds at maturity for the maximum
of either par value at issuance or that value plus accrued in‡ation during the life of
the bond. Thus, when there is a risk of de‡ation after a period of in‡ation, new
TIPS issues o¤er better de‡ation protection than old ones. Accordingly, on-the-
run TIPS should be more expensive and thus their real yields lower than those of
o¤-the-run TIPS. Breakeven in‡ation rates derived from on-the-run TIPS must be
adjusted upwards for the de‡ation-protection premium to arrive at a measure of
in‡ation expectations.

    We view the experience with TIPS yields after the Lehman bankruptcy as the sign
of a highly abnormal market situation, where liquidity problems suddenly created
severe …nancial anomalies. This may seem to imply that we can take the recent
episode as unrepresentative, and ignore the observations from these dates. And yet,
investors in TIPS who would like to regard them as the safest long-term investments
must consider the extraordinary short-term volatility that such events have given
their yields.


                                         22
6     The Uses of In‡ation-Indexed Bonds

6.1    Implications for Investors

What lessons should investors learn from the history of TIPS and in‡ation-indexed gilt
yields? The basic case for in‡ation-indexed bonds, stated by Campbell and Shiller
(1996) and further developed by Brennan and Xia (2002), Campbell and Viceira
(2001, 2002), Campbell, Chan, and Viceira (2003), and Wachter (2003), is that these
bonds are the safe asset for long-term investors. An in‡ation-indexed perpetuity
delivers a known stream of real spending power to an in…nite-lived investor, and
a zero-coupon in‡ation-indexed bond delivers a known real payment in the distant
future to an investor who values wealth at that single horizon. This argument does
not make any assumption about the time-series variation in yields, and so it is not
invalidated by the gradual long-term decline in in‡ation-indexed bond yields since the
1990’s, the mysterious medium-run variations in TIPS yields relative to short-term
real interest rates, the spike in yields in the fall of 2008, or the high daily volatility
of TIPS returns.

    There are, however, two circumstances in which other assets can substitute for
in‡ation-indexed bonds by providing long-term safe returns. First, if the breakeven
in‡ation rate is constant, as will be the case when the central bank achieves perfect
anti-in‡ationary credibility, then nominal bonds are perfect substitutes for in‡ation-
indexed bonds and the conventional Treasury or gilt market can be used by con-
servative long-term investors. For a time in the mid-2000’s, it looked as if we were
approaching this nirvana of central bankers, but the events of 2008 dramatically desta-
bilized in‡ation expectations and rea¢ rmed the distinction between real and nominal
bonds.

    Second, if the ex ante real interest rate is constant, as was famously asserted
by Fama (1975), then long-term investors can roll over short-term Treasury bills to
achieve almost perfectly certain long-term real returns. Because in‡ation uncertainty
is minimal over a month or a quarter, Treasury bills expose investors to minimal
in‡ation risk. In general, they do expose investors to the risk of persistent variation
in the real interest rate, but this risk is absent if the real interest rate is constant over
time.

    Investors can tell whether this happy circumstance prevails by forecasting realized


                                             23
real returns on Treasury bills and measuring the movements of their forecasts, as we
did in Figures 8A and 8B, or more simply by measuring the volatility of in‡ation-
indexed bond returns. If in‡ation-indexed bonds have yields that are almost constant
and returns with almost no volatility, then Treasury bills are likely to be good substi-
tutes.6 Seen from this point of view, the high daily volatility of in‡ation-indexed bond
returns illustrated in Figures 4A and 4B, far from being a drawback, demonstrates
the value of in‡ation-indexed bonds for conservative long-term investors.

    A simple quantitative measure of the usefulness of in‡ation-indexed bonds is the
reduction in long-run portfolio standard deviation that these bonds permit. We can
estimate this reduction by calculating the long-run standard deviation of a portfolio
of other assets chosen to minimize long-run risk. This is the smallest risk that long-
run investors can achieve if in‡ation-indexed bonds are unavailable. Once in‡ation-
indexed bonds become available, the minimum long-run risk portfolio consists entirely
of these bonds and has zero long-run risk. Thus, the minimized long-run standard
deviation of a portfolio of other assets measures the risk reduction that in‡ation-
indexed bonds make possible.7

    Figures 11 and 12 plot the time series of the annualized 10-year standard deviation
of the real return on the 10-year global minimum variance (GMV) portfolio of US
stocks, nominal 5-year Treasury bonds, and 3-month Treasury bills. To derive the
composition of this portfolio and its volatility at each horizon we use the long-horizon
mean-variance approach described in Campbell and Viceira (2005) and its companion
technical guide (Campbell and Viceira 2004). We estimate a VAR(1) system for
the ex-post real return on T-bills, and the excess log return on stocks and nominal
bonds that also includes variables known to forecast bond and equity risk premia.
Speci…cally, we include in the VAR system as forecasting variables the log dividend-
price ratio, the spread between the yield on the 5-year bond and the yield on Treasury
bills, and the yield on Treasury bills in addition to lagged returns and real interest
   6
     Strictly speaking, this argument assumes that real yields are described by the expectations
hypothesis of the term structure, so that constant short-term real interest rates imply constant
long-term real yields. Volatile risk or liquidity premia on in‡ation-indexed bonds could make their
yields volatile even if short-term real interest rates are constant. However, it is quite unlikely that
time-variation in risk or liquidity premia would stabilize the yields on in‡ation-indexed bonds in an
environment of time-varying real interest rates.
   7
     As an alternative approach, Campbell, Chan, and Viceira (2003) calculate the utility of an
in…nite-lived investor who has access to stocks, nominal bonds, and bills, and the utility gain when
this investor also can hold an in‡ation-indexed perpetuity. We do not update this more complex
calculation here.


                                                  24
rates. From this system we extract the conditional variance-covariance of 10-year
returns using the formulae in Campbell and Viceira (2004), and …nd the portfolio
that minimizes this variance.

    Instead of estimating a single VAR system for our entire quarterly sample, 1953:1-
2008:4, we estimate two VAR systems, one for the period 1953:1-1972:4, and another
for the period 1973:1-2008:4. We split the sample this way because we are concerned
that the process for in‡ation and the real interest rate might have changed during
this period. The conditional long-horizon moments of returns also depend on the
quarterly variance-covariance matrix of innovations, which we estimate using three-
year windows of quarterly data. Within each window and VAR sample period, we
combine the variance-covariance matrix with the full-sample estimate of the slope
coe¢ cients to compute the 10-year GMV portfolio and its annualized volatility.

    The annualized 10-year standard deviation of the 10-year GMV portfolio is fairly
low in the 1960’s at around 1% per year. This is the period that led Fama (1975) to
assert that the ex ante real interest rate is constant over time. Starting in the 1970’s,
however, persistent movements in the real interest rate cause the standard deviation
to rise rapidly to about 4% per year. The standard deviation drops back to about
2% in the mid-1990’s, but by 2008 is once again at a historical high of 4%. These
numbers imply that in‡ation-indexed bonds substantially reduce risk for long-term
investors.

    In Figure 11, we compare the estimated standard deviation of the GMV portfolio
(right axis scale) with the annualized daily standard deviations of TIPS and in‡ation-
indexed gilts (left axis scale) over the period where these bonds exist. In Figure 12,
we compare the same GMV standard deviation with the estimated standard deviation
of hypothetical TIPS returns, constructed from the VAR system using the method
of Campbell and Shiller (1996) and section 3 of this paper, which assumes the log
expectations hypothesis for in‡ation-indexed bonds. Both comparisons show that
historically, the minimum long-run risk that can be achieved using other assets has
been high when short-term TIPS returns have been volatile. In other words, in‡ation-
indexed bonds are particularly good long-run risk reducers whenever their short-run
risk is high. Such a result may seem paradoxical, but it follows directly from the fact
that in‡ation-indexed bonds are needed for long-term safety when real interest rates
vary persistently over time.8
   8
    This point is related to the asset pricing result discussed in section 4.1, that controlling for the
stock market covariance of in‡ation-indexed bonds, the equilibrium risk premium on these bonds


                                                  25
    In‡ation-indexed bonds also play an important role for institutional investors who
need to hedge long-term real liabilities. Pension funds and insurance companies with
multi-year commitments should use in‡ation-indexed bonds to neutralize the swings
in the present value of their long-dated liabilities that will be caused by changes
in long-term real interest rates. Of course, these swings only become apparent to
institutional investors when they discount real liabilities using market real rates, as
the UK has required in recent years. The resulting institutional demand for in‡ation-
indexed gilts seems to have been an important factor driving down the yields on these
bonds (Viceira 2003, Vayanos and Vila 2007).

    The total demand of long-term investors for in‡ation-indexed bonds will depend
not only on their risk properties, but also on their expected returns relative to other
available investments and the risk tolerance of investors. An aggressive long-term
investor might wish to short in‡ation-indexed bonds and invest the proceeds in eq-
uities, since stocks have only very rarely underperformed bonds over three or more
decades in US and UK data. In 2008 it was reported that Clare College, Cambridge
was planning to undertake such a strategy. However, Campbell, Chan, and Viceira
(2003) estimated positive long-term demands for in‡ation-indexed bonds by long-
term investors who also have the ability to borrow short-term or to issue long-term
nominal bonds.

    Long-term in‡ation-indexed bonds may be of interest to some short-term investors.
Given their high short-run volatility, however, short-term investors will only wish
to hold in‡ation-indexed bonds if they expect to receive high excess returns over
Treasury bills (as might reasonably have been the case in 1999-2000, or during the
yield spike of fall 2008), or if they hold other assets, such as stocks, whose returns
can be hedged by an in‡ation-indexed bond position. We have shown evidence that
TIPS and in‡ation-indexed gilts have hedged stock returns during the downturns of
the early 2000’s and the late 2000’s, and this should make them attractive to short-
term equity investors.

     The illiquidity of in‡ation-indexed bonds is often mentioned as a disadvantage of
the asset class. It is important to note, however, that in‡ation-indexed bonds are only
illiquid relative to nominal government bonds which, along with foreign exchange, are
the most liquid …nancial assets. Relative to almost any other long-term investment,
in‡ation-indexed government bonds are extremely cheap to trade. In addition, long-
is declining in their variance when assets are priced by a conservative in…nite-lived representative
investor.


                                                26
term buy-and-hold investors should care very little about transactions costs since they
will rarely need to turn over their bond positions.


6.2    Implications for Policymakers

In managing the public debt, the US Treasury seeks to minimize the average cost of
debt issue while paying due regard to risk, including re…nancing risk. It is commonly
thought that short-term Treasury bills are less expensive than long-term debt but
that exclusive reliance on bills would impose an unacceptable re…nancing risk as bills
must frequently be rolled over.

   In the period since TIPS were issued in 1997, they have proven to be an expensive
form of debt ex post, because of the unexpected decline in real interest rates from
the 1990’s through early 2008. However, our analysis implies that the cost of TIPS
should be lower than that of Treasury bills ex ante because TIPS o¤er investors
desirable insurance against future variation in real interest rates. This is the relevant
consideration going forward, as Roush, Dudley, and Steinberg Ezer (2008) emphasize,
so governments should not be deterred from issuing in‡ation-indexed bonds by the
high realized returns on their past in‡ation-indexed bond issues.

   In the current environment, with in‡ation positively correlated with stock prices,
the in‡ation risk premium in nominal Treasury bonds is likely negative. This implies
that long-term nominal debt should be even cheaper for the Treasury than TIPS.
However, the correlation between in‡ation and stock prices has changed sign in the
past (Campbell, Sunderam, and Viceira 2009), and it may easily do so again in the
future.

    Several other considerations also suggest that in‡ation-indexed bonds are a valu-
able form of public debt. First, to the extent that particular forms of debt have
di¤erent investment clienteles with downward-sloping demand curves for bonds, it
is desirable to diversify across di¤erent forms to …nd the largest possible market for
government debt (Greenwood and Vayanos 2008, Vayanos and Vila 2007).

   Second, in‡ation-indexed bonds can be used to draw inferences about bond in-
vestors’in‡ation expectations, and such information is extremely valuable for mone-
tary policymakers. It is true that market disruptions, such as those that occurred in
the fall of 2008, complicate the measurement of in‡ation expectations, but our analy-


                                           27
sis shows that it is possible to derive meaningful information even in these extreme
conditions.

   Finally, in‡ation-indexed bonds provide a safe real asset for long-term investors,
and promote public understanding of in‡ation. These public bene…ts should be
taken into account by …scal authorities as part of their broader mission to improve
the functioning of their economies.




                                         28
  References

Backus, David and Stanley Zin. 1994.      “Reverse Engineering the Yield Curve.”
    NBER Working Paper No. 4676.

Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron. 2004. “Risks for the Long Run.”Journal of Finance
    59:1481–1509.

Bansal, Ravi, Robert Dittmar, and Dana Kiku. 2008. “Cointegration and Con-
    sumption Risks in Asset Returns.”Forthcoming Review of Financial Studies.

Bansal, Ravi, Varoujan Khatchatrian, and Amir Yaron. 2005. “Interpretable Asset
    Markets?”European Economic Review 49:531–560.

Bansal, Ravi, Dana Kiku and Amir Yaron. 2007. “Risks for the Long Run: Esti-
    mation and Inference.” Unpublished paper, Duke University and University of
    Pennsylvania.

Barr, David G., and John Y. Campbell. 1997. “In‡ation, Real Interest Rates, and
    the Bond Market: A Study of UK Nominal and Index-Linked Government Bond
    Prices.”Journal of Monetary Economics 39:361-383.

Beechey, Meredith J., and Jonathan H. Wright. 2009. “The High-Frequency Im-
    pact of News on Long-Term Yields and Forward Rates: Is It Real?” Sveriges
    Riksbank and Johns Hopkins University.

Bekaert, Geert, Eric Engstrom, and Steve Grenadier. 2005. “Stock and Bond Re-
    turns with Moody Investors.” Unpublished paper, Columbia University, Uni-
    versity of Michigan, and Stanford University.

Brennan, Michael J., and Yihong Xia. 2002. “Dynamic Asset Allocation Under
    In‡ation.”Journal of Finance 57:1201–1238.

Brière, Marie, and Ombretta Signori. 2008. “Do In‡ation-Linked Bonds Still
    Diversify?”European Financial Management, 15 October.

Campbell, John Y. 1986. “Bond and Stock Returns in a Simple Exchange Model.”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 101: 785–804.

Campbell, John Y. 1993. “Intertemporal Asset Pricing without Consumption Data.”
   American Economic Review 83:487–512.

                                     29
Campbell, John Y. 1996. “Understanding Risk and Return.” Journal of Political
   Economy 104:298–345.

Campbell, John Y. 2003. “Consumption-Based Asset Pricing.”Chapter 13 in Hand-
   book of the Economics of Finance Vol. IB, edited by George Constantinides,
   Milton Harris, and Rene Stulz. North-Holland.

Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane. 1999. “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-
   Based Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior.” Journal of Political
   Economy 107:205–251.

Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller. 1991. “Yield Spreads and Interest Rate
   Movements: A Bird’s Eye View.”Review of Economic Studies 58:495–514.

Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller. 1996. “A Scorecard for Indexed Govern-
   ment Debt.”In National Bureau of Economic Research Macroeconomics Annual
   1996, edited by Ben S. Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg. MIT Press.

Campbell, John Y., Robert J. Shiller, and Luis M. Viceira. 2009. “Understanding
   In‡ation-Indexed Bond Markets: Appendix.”Available online at

http://kuznets.fas.harvard.edu/~campbell/papers.html.

Campbell, John Y., Adi Sunderam, and Luis M. Viceira. 2009. “In‡ation Bets or
   De‡ation Hedges? The Changing Risks of Nominal Bonds.” NBER Working
   Paper No. 14701.

Campbell, John Y., and Luis M. Viceira. 2001. “Who Should Buy Long-Term
   Bonds?”American Economic Review 91:99–127.

Campbell, John Y., and Luis M. Viceira. 2002. Strategic Asset Allocation: Portfolio
   Choice for Long-Term Investors. Oxford University Press.

Campbell, John Y., and Luis M. Viceira. 2004. “Long-Horizon Mean-Variance
   Analysis: A User Guide”. Available online.

Campbell, John Y., and Luis M. Viceira. 2005. “The Term Structure of the Risk-
   Return Tradeo¤.” Financial Analysts Journal 61(1):34–44.

Campbell, John Y., and Tuomo O. Vuolteenaho. 2004. “Bad Beta, Good Beta.”
   American Economic Review 94:1249–1275.


                                       30
Christensen, Jens H.E., Jose A. Lopez, and Glenn D. Rudebusch. 2008. “In‡ation
    Expectations and Risk Premiums in an Arbitrage-Free Model of Nominal and
    Real Bond Yields.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.

D’Amico, Stefania, Don H. Kim, and Min Wei. 2008. “Tips from TIPS: The
   Informational Content of Treasury In‡ation-Protected Security Prices.” Federal
   Reserve Board of Governors.

Epstein, Lawrence, and Stanley Zin. 1989. “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the
    Temporal Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Frame-
    work.”Econometrica 57:937–69.

Epstein, Lawrence, and Stanley Zin. 1991. “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the
    Temporal Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: An Empirical Investi-
    gation.”Journal of Political Economy 99:263–286.

Fabozzi, Frank J. 2005. The Handbook of Fixed Income Securities. McGraw-Hill.

Fabozzi, Frank J., and Steven V. Mann. 2001.       Introduction to Fixed Income
    Analytics. Frank J. Fabozzi Associates.

Fama, Eugene F. 1975. “Short-Term Interest Rates as Predictors of In‡ation.”
   American Economic Review 65:269–282.

Fleming, Michael J., and Neel Krishnan. 2009. “The Microstructure of the TIPS
    Market.”Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Gollier, Christian. 2005. “The Consumption-Based Determinants of the Term Struc-
     ture of Discount Rates.” University of Toulouse.

Greenwood, Robin, and Dimitri Vayanos. 2008. “Bond Supply and Excess Bond
    Returns.”Harvard Business School and London School of Economics.

Grishchenko, Olesya V., and Jing-zhi Huang. 2008. “In‡ation Risk Premium:
    Evidence from the TIPS Market.” Pennsylvania State University.

Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright. 2006. “The U.S.
    Treasury Yield Curve: 1961 to the Present.” FEDS working paper 2006-28,
    http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2006/200628.




                                      31
Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright. 2008. “The TIPS
    Yield Curve and In‡ation Compensation.” Bilkent University, Macroeconomic
    Advisers, LLC, and Johns Hopkins University.

Hansen, Lars Peter, John C. Heaton, and Nan Li. 2008. “Consumption Strikes
   Back? Measuring Long-Run Risk.”Journal of Political Economy 116:260–302.

Haubrich, Joseph, George Pennacchi, and Peter Ritchken. 2008. “Estimating Real
   and Nominal Term Structures using Treasury Yields, In‡ation, In‡ation Fore-
   casts, and In‡ation Swap Rates.”Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, University
   of Illinois, and Case Western Reserve University.

Hu, Gang, and Mihir Worah. 2009. “Why Tips Real Yields moved signi…cantly
    higher after the Lehman Bankruptcy.”PIMCO, Newport Beach, CA .

McCulloch, J. Huston, and H. Kwon. 1993. “US Term Structure Data, 1947–1991.”
   Working Paper 93-6, Ohio State University.

Merton, Robert C. 1973. “An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model.” Econo-
    metrica 41:867–87.

Nelson, Charles R., and Andrew F. Siegel. 1987. “Parsimonious Modeling of Yield
    Curves.” Journal of Business 60:473–489.

Piazzesi, Monika, and Martin Schneider. 2006. “Equilibrium Yield Curves.” In
    NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2006, edited by Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Ro-
    go¤, and Michael Woodford. MIT Press.

Restoy, Fernando, and Philippe Weil. 1998.     “Approximate Equilibrium Asset
    Prices.”NBER Working Paper No. 6611.

Roush, Jennifer, William Dudley, and Michelle Steinberg Ezer. 2008. “The Case
    for TIPS: An Examination of the Costs and Bene…ts.” Sta¤ Report 353, Federal
    Reserve Bank of New York.

Svensson, Lars E.O. 1994. “Estimating and Interpreting Forward Interest Rates:
    Sweden 1992–1994.” NBER Working Paper No. 4871.

Vayanos, Dimitri, and Jean-Luc Vila. 2007. “A Preferred-Habitat Model of the
    Term Structure of Interest Rates.” Unpublished paper, London School of Eco-
    nomics.


                                      32
Viceira, Luis M. 2003. “Pension Policy at The Boots Company PLC.”Case N2-203-
    105, Harvard Business School.

Viceira, Luis M. 2007. “Bond Risk, Bond Return Volatility, and the Term Structure
    of Interest Rates.”Harvard Business School.

Wachter, Jessica A. 2003. “Risk Aversion and Allocation to Long-Term Bonds.”
   Journal of Economic Theory 112:325–333.

Wachter, Jessica A. 2006. “A Consumption-Based Model of the Term Structure of
   Interest Rates.”Journal of Financial Economics 79:365–399.




                                      33
                                  Table 1A
                     US VAR Estimation Results
Dependent Variable Real T-bill rate Nominal T-bill rate   In‡ation   R2
VAR Estimation Results
Real T-bill return           0:02             0:02           0:19    0:25
                           (0:12)            (0:03)        (0:11)
Nominal T-bill yield        0:59              0:94          0:54     0:91
                           (0:18)            (0:04)        (0:18)
In‡ation                    0:09               0:04         0:58     0:59
                           (0:09)            (0:02)        (0:08)
Const.                      0:005              0:002       0:007
                          (0:002)           (0:0005)      (0:002)
Observed and hypothetical moments of 10 year real bonds
                     Observed           Hypothetical
Mean                        2:66              1:04
Standard Deviation          0:95              0:39
Correlation                 0:71

                                 Table 1B
                     UK VAR Estimation Results
Dependent Variable Real T-bill rate Nominal T-bill rate   In‡ation   R2
VAR Estimation Results
Real T-bill return         0:07                 0:06         0:41    0:26
                          (0:11)             (0:03)        (0:10)
Nominal T-bill yield       0:51               1:055         0:78     0:93
                          (0:20)             (0:05)        (0:19)
In‡ation                   0:00                 0:03        0:67     0:87
                          (0:07)             (0:02)        (0:07)
Const.                     0:0006            0:0003        0:0012
                         (0:0019)           (0:0005)      (0:0018)
Observed and hypothetical moments of 10 year real bonds
                     Observed          Hypothetical
Mean                       2:64                2:49
Standard Deviation         1:00                0:61
Correlation                0:77
                           Table 2
      Parameter Estimates for Alternative Risk Models
Parameter Constant Covariance Full Model         Persistent Risk
 x         0:93                  0:94            0:95
 x         0:0104                0:0028          0:0034
 v         N/A                   0:77            set to 1
                                               5
 v         N/A                     2:01   10     0:0010
 m         set to 0:23           set to 0:23     set to 0:23
 x         0:0031                set to 1        set to 1
                       4
 mx        7:23   10             0:23            0:23
 x 0       N/A                   0:0048          0:0031
 v         N/A                   0:0003          0:0004
 em        N/A                   set to 0:41     set to 0:41
                         4                   6
 yield     1  12    10           1:16   10       9:14 10 6
                                             4
 cov       N/A                   4:74 10         5 10 4
premium    0:0016                0:0157          0:00160
                     US Inflation Indexed Bonds Outstanding
12
               % of Debt
10             % of GDP


 8


 6


 4


 2


 0
 1997   1998      1999     2001   2002      2004   2005       2006     2008   2009


                                  Figure 1A

                     UK Inflation Indexed Bonds Outstanding

30
               % of Debt
25             % of GDP

20


15


10


5


0
 1980      1985            1990      1995          2000         2005          2010


                                  Figure 1B
                                                 US Real and Nominal Yields

    10.00                       10-year nominal yield
                                10-year real yield

            8.00
Annualized (%)




            6.00



            4.00



            2.00



            0.00
                         1990   1992        1995        1998        2000      2003       2006          2009


                                                        Figure 2A

                                                 UK Real and Nominal Yields


            10.00
                                                                               10-year nominal yield
                                                                               10-year real yield

                    8.00
        Annualized (%)




                    6.00




                    4.00




                    2.00




                    0.00
                         1990   1992         1995        1998       2000      2003        2006         2009

                                                        Figure 2B
                                US Realized and Breakeven Inflation Rates
                  6
                          3-year realized inflation

                  5       10-year breakeven
                          inflation

                  4
Annualized (%)




                  3



                  2



                  1



                  0
                  1990   1992     1995        1998        2000       2003   2006   2009


                                              Figure 3A

                                UK Realized and Breakeven Inflation Rates
                  6



                  5



                  4
 Annualized (%)




                  3



                  2

                           3-year realized inflation
                  1
                           10-year breakeven
                           inflation
                  0
                  1990   1992      1995       1998        2000       2003   2006   2009




                                              Figure 3B
                         Standard Deviations of US Daily Bond Returns Over 1‐Year Moving Window
                  0.16
                                   10-year real daily standard deviation
                  0.14             10-year nominal daily standard deviation


                  0.12


                   0.1
Annualized (%)




                  0.08


                  0.06


                  0.04


                  0.02


                    0
                     1990         1992        1995        1998        2000     2003     2006      2009


                                                        Figure 4A

                         Standard Deviations of UK Daily Bond Returns Over 1‐Year Moving Window
                  0.16
                                    10-year real daily standard deviation
                                    10-year nominal daily standard deviation
                  0.14


                  0.12


                   0.1
 Annualized (%)




                  0.08


                  0.06


                  0.04


                  0.02


                    0
                     1990         1992        1995        1998        2000     2003     2006      2009


                                                        Figure 4B
                             US Breakeven Inflation Volatility and Nominal/Real Correlation

                     16                                                                           1.60
                                Standard deviation of breakeven inflation
                     14         Correlation of daily real and nominal bond returns                1.40

                     12                                                                           1.20
Annualized (%)




                     10                                                                           1.00

                     8                                                                            0.80

                     6                                                                            0.60

                     4                                                                            0.40

                     2                                                                            0.20

                     0                                                                            0.00
                     1990     1992       1995        1998        2000        2003     2006    2009


                                                      Figure 5A

                             UK Breakeven Inflation Volatility and Nominal/Real Correlation
                     16                                                                            1.60
                                Standard deviation of breakeven inflation

                     14         Correlation of daily real and nominal bond returns                 1.40


                     12                                                                            1.20


                     10                                                                            1.00
    Annualized (%)




                      8                                                                            0.80


                      6                                                                            0.60


                      4                                                                            0.40


                      2                                                                            0.20


                      0                                                                            0.00
                      1990     1992       1995        1998        2000        2003     2006    2009



                                                      Figure 5B
            US Correlations of Daily Bond Returns with Equity Returns

 0.7
            10-year real bond correlation

 0.5        10-year breakeven inflation correlation

            10-year nominal bond correlation
 0.3


 0.1


-0.11990   1992        1995          1998         2000           2003         2006          2009



-0.3


-0.5


-0.7


                                      Figure 6A

            UK Correlations of Daily Bond Returns with Equity Returns
0.7
                                                      10-year real bond correlation
                                                      10-year breakeven inflation correlation
0.5
                                                      10-year nominal bond correlation


0.3



0.1


   1990    1992        1995          1998         2000           2003         2006          2009
-0.1



-0.3



-0.5



-0.7


                                      Figure 6B
                US Betas of Daily Bond Returns with Equity Returns

0.6
                10-year real bond beta
                10-year breakeven inflation beta
0.4             10-year nominal bond beta



0.2



  0
   1990       1992        1995           1998        2000          2003          2006          2009

-0.2



-0.4



-0.6

                                         Figure 7A

                UK Betas of Daily Bond Returns with Equity Returns

 0.6



 0.4



 0.2



   0
       1990   1992         1995           1998        2000          2003          2006          2009


 -0.2



 -0.4                                                       10-year real bond beta
                                                            10-year breakeven inflation beta
                                                            10-year nominal bond beta
 -0.6

                                         Figure 7B
                                      US Observed and Hypothetical Real Yields

5

4

3

2

1

0
  1998             1999     2000          2001     2002         2003       2004        2005      2006       2007          2008     2009
-1

-2                           Observed real 10-year yield

                             Hypothetical real 10-year yield
-3
                             Fitted real 3-month Treasury bill rate
-4


                                                                Figure 8A

                                      UK Observed and Hypothetical Real Yields
6



5



4



3



2


                            Observed real 10-year yield
1
                            Hypothetical real 10-year yield

                            Fitted real 3-month Treasury bill rate
0
     1991

            1992

                     1993

                            1994

                                   1995

                                           1996

                                                  1997

                                                         1998

                                                                  1999

                                                                         2000

                                                                                2001

                                                                                       2002

                                                                                              2003

                                                                                                     2004

                                                                                                            2005

                                                                                                                   2006

                                                                                                                            2007

                                                                                                                                   2008




                                                                Figure8B
                                                          US 10‐Year Real Yields Implied by Alternative Risk Models

                        4

                    3.5

                        3

                    2.5
   Annualized (%)




                        2
                                                            Observed yield

                    1.5
                                                            Constant
                                                            covariance yield
                        1
                                                            Fitted yield

                    0.5                                     Persistent risk
                                                            yield
                        0
                       1998                           1999                     2001                          2002                     2004                      2005                          2006                   2008                        2009
                    -0.5

                                                                                                                    Figure 9

                                                          US Breakeven Inflation Rates and TIPS Asset Swap Spread
3.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              140


  3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              120

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 100
2.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 80
  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 60
1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 40
  1                                                  July 2017 TIPS/nominal breakeven inflation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20
                                                     10-year synthetic zero-coupon breakeven
0.5                                                  inflation
                                                     TIPS asset swap spread                                                                                                                                                                      0

  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -20
                            Aug2007




                                                           Nov2007




                                                                                                   Mar2008
                                                                                                              Apr2008
                                                                                                                        May2008




                                                                                                                                                      Aug2008




                                                                                                                                                                                    Nov2008




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Apr2009
              Jul2007


                                      Sep2007
                                                Oct2007


                                                                     Dec2007
                                                                               Jan2008
                                                                                         Feb2008




                                                                                                                                  Jun2008
                                                                                                                                            Jul2008


                                                                                                                                                                Sep2008
                                                                                                                                                                          Oct2008


                                                                                                                                                                                               Dec2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jan2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Feb2009




-0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -40

 -1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -60


                                                                                                                    Figure 10
                                     Standard Deviations of GMV Portfolio and Daily TIPS Returns
                     16                                                                                             6
                                          Standard deviation of 10-year TIPS daily returns
                     14                   Standard deviation 10-year UK real bond daily returns
                                          10-year standard deviation of 10-year GMV portfolio                       5

                     12

                                                                                                                    4
                     10
     Annualized(%)




                         8                                                                                          3


                         6
                                                                                                                    2

                         4

                                                                                                                    1
                         2


                         0                                                                                           0
                         1954                  1967                  1981                  1995                  2008

                                                              Figure 11

                             Standard Deviations of GMV Portfolio and Hypothetical Quarterly TIPS Returns

                     8
                                                                                   Standard deviation of
                                                                                   hypothetical quarterly TIPS
                     7                                                             returns
                                                                                   10-year standard deviation
                                                                                   of 10-year GMV portfolio
                     6


                     5
Annualized (%)




                     4


                     3


                     2


                     1


                     0
                     1954                    1967                   1981                  1995                   2008

                                                              Figure 12
