                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            NEWS, NOISE, AND FLUCTUATIONS:
                              AN EMPIRICAL EXPLORATION

                                        Olivier J. Blanchard
                                        Jean-Paul L'Huillier
                                         Guido Lorenzoni

                                       Working Paper 15015
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15015


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2009




We thank Daron Acemoglu, Marios Angeletos, Ricardo Caballero, Larry Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum,
Matteo Iacoviello, Anna Mikusheva, Roberto Rigobon, Paul Schrimpf, Chris Sims, Mark Watson,
Iván Werning and seminar participants at MIT, the NBER Summer Institute, the FED Board, University
of Southern California, University of Maryland, EIEF, the AEA Meetings (San Francisco), Indiana
University, the Richmond FED, and Brandeis University for very useful suggestions. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Olivier J. Blanchard, Jean-Paul L'Huillier, and Guido Lorenzoni. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
News, Noise, and Fluctuations: An Empirical Exploration
Olivier J. Blanchard, Jean-Paul L'Huillier, and Guido Lorenzoni
NBER Working Paper No. 15015
May 2009
JEL No. C32,D83,E32

                                              ABSTRACT

We explore empirically models of aggregate fluctuations with two basic ingredients: agents form anticipations
about the future based on noisy sources of information; these anticipations affect spending and output
in the short run. Our objective is to separate fluctuations due to actual changes in fundamentals (news)
from those due to temporary errors in the private sector's estimates of these fundamentals (noise). Using
a simple model where the consumption random walk hypothesis holds exactly, we address some basic
methodological issues and take a first pass at the data. First, we show that if the econometrician has
no informational advantage over the agents in the model, structural VARs cannot be used to identify
news and noise shocks. Next, we develop a structural Maximum Likelihood approach which allows
us to identify the model's parameters and to evaluate the role of news and noise shocks. Applied to
postwar U.S. data, this approach suggests that noise shocks play an important role in short-run fluctuations.


Olivier J. Blanchard                                  Guido Lorenzoni
International Monetary Fund                           MIT
Economic Counsellor and Director                      Department of Economics, E52-251C
Research Department                                   50 Memorial Drive
700 19th Street, NW                                   Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
Rm. 10-700                                            and NBER
Washington DC, 20431                                  glorenzo@mit.edu
MIT and NBER
blanchar@mit.edu

Jean-Paul L'Huillier
MIT
Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
lhuill@MIT.EDU
Introduction
A common view of the business cycle gives a central role to anticipations. Consumers and
firms continuously receive information about the future, which sometimes is news, sometimes
just noise. Based on this information, consumers and firms choose spending and, because of
nominal rigidities, spending affects output in the short run. If ex post the information turns
out to be news, the economy adjusts gradually to a new level of activity. If it turns out to
be just noise, the economy returns to its initial state. Therefore, the dynamics of news and
noise generate both short-run and long-run changes in aggregate activity. In this paper, we
ask how aggregate time series can be used to shed light on this view of the business cycle.
   We are interested in this view for two reasons. The first is that it appears to capture
many of the aspects often ascribed to fluctuations: the role of animal spirits in affecting
demand—spirits coming here from a rational reaction to information about the future—,
the role of demand in affecting output in the short run, together with the notion that in the
long run output follows a natural path determined by fundamentals.
    The second is that it appears to fit the data in a more formal way. More specifically,
it offers an interpretation of structural VARs based on the assumption of two major types
of shocks: shocks with permanent effects and shocks with transitory effects on activity.
As characterized by Blanchard and Quah (1989), Galı́ (1999), Beaudry and Portier (2006),
among others, “permanent shocks” appear to lead to an increase in activity in the short run,
building up to a larger effect in the long run, while “transitory shocks”—by construction—
lead to a transitory effect on activity in the short run. It is tempting to associate shocks
with permanent effects to news and shocks with transitory effects to noise.
    In this paper, we focus on a simple model which provides a useful laboratory to address
two issues: a methodological one and a substantive one. First, can structural VARs indeed
be used to recover news and noise shocks? Second, what is the role of news and noise shocks
in short-run fluctuations?
    On the first question, we reach a strong negative conclusion—one which came as an
unhappy surprise for one of the coauthors. In models of expectation-driven fluctuations in
which consumers solve a signal extraction problem, structural VARs can typically recover
neither the shocks nor their propagation mechanisms. The reason is straightforward: If
agents face a signal extraction problem, and are unable to separate news from noise, then
the econometrician, faced with either the same data as the agents or a subset of these data,
cannot do it either.
   To address the second question, we then turn to structural estimation, first using a


                                              2
simple method of moments and then Maximum Likelihood. We find that our model fits the
data well and gives a clear description of fluctuations as a result of three types of shocks:
shocks with permanent effects on productivity, which build up slowly over time; shocks with
temporary effects on productivity, which decay slowly; and shocks to consumers’ signals
about future productivity. All three shocks affect agents’ expectations, and thus demand
and output in the short run, and noise shocks are an important source of short-run volatility.
In our baseline specification, noise shocks account for more than half of the forecast error
variance at a yearly horizon, while permanent technology shocks account for less than one
third. This result is somewhat surprising when compared with variance decompositions from
structural VARs where transitory “demand shocks” often account for a smaller fraction of
aggregate volatility at the same horizons and permanent technology shock capture a bigger
share (e.g., Shapiro and Watson, 1989, and Galı́, 1992). Our methodological analysis helps
to explain the difference, showing why structural VARs may understate the contribution of
noise/demand shocks to short-run volatility and overstate that of permanent productivity
shocks.
    Recent efforts to empirically estimate models of news-driven business cycles include Chris-
tiano, Ilut, Motto and Rostagno (2007) and Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2008). These papers
follow the approach of Jaimovich and Rebelo (2006), modeling news as advanced, perfect
information about shocks affecting future productivity. We share with those papers the em-
phasis on structural estimation. The main difference is that we model the private sector
information as coming from a signal extraction problem and focus our attention on disen-
tangling the separate effects of news and noise.
    The problem with structural VARs emphasized in this paper is essentially an invertibil-
ity problem, also known as non-fundamentalness. There is a resurgence of interest in the
methodological and practical implications of invertibility problems, see, e.g., Sims and Zha
(2006) and Fernández-Villaverde, Rubio-Ramı́rez, Sargent and Watson (2007). Our paper
shows that non-invertibility problem are endemic to models where the agents’ uncertainty
is represented as a signal extraction problem. This idea has also recently surfaced in models
that try to identify the effects of fiscal policy when the private sector receives information
on future policy changes (see Leeper, Walker and Yang, 2009).
    The paper is organized as follows. Sections 1 and 2 present and solve the model. Section
3 looks at the use of structural VARs. Section 4 presents the results of our structural
estimation. Section 5 explores a number of extensions and Section 6 concludes.




                                              3
1     The model
For most of the paper, we focus on the following model, which is both analytically convenient,
and, as we shall see, provides a good starting point for looking at postwar U.S. data.
   We want to capture the notion that, behind productivity movements, there are two
types of shocks: shocks with permanent effects and shocks with only transitory effects. In
particular, we assume that the effects of the first type of shock gradually build up over time,
while the effects of the second gradually decay over time. One can think of the transitory
component as either true or reflecting measurement error. This does not matter for our
purposes.
    We also want to capture the notion that spending decisions are based on agents’ expec-
tations of the future, here future productivity. We assume that agents observe productivity,
but not its individual components. To capture the idea that they have more information
than just current and past productivity, we allow them to observe an additional signal about
the permanent component of productivity. Having solved the signal extraction problem, and
based on their expectations, agents choose spending. Because of nominal rigidities, spending
determines output in the short run.
   Thus, the dynamics of output are determined by three types of shocks, the two shocks
to productivity, and the noise in the additional signal. For short, we shall refer to them as
the “permanent shock”, the “transitory shock”, and the “noise shock”. Permanent shock is
a slight (and common) misnomer, as it refers to a shock whose effects build up gradually.
    Now to the specific assumptions.


1.1    Productivity
Productivity (in logs) is given by the sum of two components:

                                         a t = xt + z t .                                  (1)

The permanent component, xt , follows a unit root process given by

                                    ∆xt = ρx ∆xt−1 + ²t .                                  (2)

The transitory component, zt , follows a stationary process given by

                                       zt = ρz zt−1 + ηt .                                 (3)


                                                4
The coefficients ρx and ρz are in [0, 1), and ²t and ηt are i.i.d. normal shocks with variances
σ²2 and ση2 . Agents observe productivity, but not the two components separately.1
   For most of the paper, we assume that the univariate representation of at is a random
walk
                                    at = at−1 + ut ,                                  (4)

with the variance of ut equal to σu2 , and restrict attention to the family of processes (1)-(3)
that are consistent with this assumption. We do this for two reasons. The first is analytical
convenience, as it makes our arguments more transparent. The second is that, as we shall
see, this assumption provides a surprisingly good starting point when looking at postwar
U.S. data. As will be clear, however, none of our central results depends on this assumption.
   In general, a given univariate process is consistent with an infinity of decompositions
between a permanent and a transitory component with orthogonal innovations, as shown
in Quah (1990, 1991). In our setup, there is a one-parameter family of processes (1)-(3)
which deliver the univariate random walk (4). This is the family of processes that satisfy
the following conditions:
                                     ρx = ρz = ρ,

                                    σ²2 = (1 − ρ)2 σu2 ,        ση2 = ρσu2 ,

for some ρ ∈ [0, 1).2
    Productivity may be the sum of a permanent process with small shocks that build up
slowly and a transitory process with large shocks that decay slowly (high ρ, small σ²2 and
large ση2 ), or it may be the sum of a permanent process which is itself close to a random walk
and a transitory process close to white noise with small variance (low ρ, large σ²2 and small
ση2 ). An econometrician who can only observe at cannot distinguish these cases. The sample
variance of ∆at gives an estimate of σu2 , but the parameter ρ, and thus ρx , ρz , σ²2 and ση2 , are
not identified. As we shall see, when consumers have some additional source of information
   1
     A similar process for technology, which combines level and growth rate shocks, has been recently used in
an open economy context by Aguiar and Gopinath (2007). Boz, Daude and Durdu (2008) explore the role
of different informational assumptions in that context.
   2
     To prove this result, notice that, in general, (1)-(3) imply
                                                       1           2
                                     V ar[∆at ] =          σ²2 −       σ2 ,
                                                         2
                                                    1 − ρx       1 + ρz η

and
                                                    1              1 − ρz 2
                       Cov[∆at , ∆at−j ] = ρjx          σ 2 − ρj−1       σ for all j > 0.
                                                 1 − ρ2x ²     z
                                                                   1 + ρz η
Under the assumed parameter restrictions these yield V ar[∆at ] = σu2 and Cov[∆at , ∆at−j ] = 0 for all j > 0.



                                                        5
on the permanent component xt and the econometrician has access to consumption data, he
will be able to identify ρ and the remaining parameters.


1.2    Consumption
We assume that consumption smoothing leads to the Euler equation

                                         ct = E[ct+1 |It ],                                 (5)

where It is the consumers’ information at date t, to be specified below. For a generic variable
Xt , we use, when convenient, Et [Xτ ] or Xτ |t as alternative notation for E [Xτ |It ].
    We drastically simplify the supply side, by considering an economy with no capital, in
which consumption is the only component of demand and output is fully determined by the
demand side. Output is given by yt = ct and the labor input adjusts to produce yt , given the
current level of productivity. We impose the restriction that output returns to its natural
level in the long run, namely that

                                    lim Et [ct+j − at+j ] = 0.
                                   j→∞


In Appendix A, we show that this model can be derived as the limit case of a standard New
Keynesian model with Calvo pricing when the frequency of price adjustment goes to zero.
   Combining the last two equations gives

                                      ct = lim Et [at+j ].                                  (6)
                                             j→∞


Consumption, and by implication, output, depend on the consumers’ expectations of pro-
ductivity in the long run.
   To close the model we only need to specify the consumers’ information set. Consumers
observe current and past productivity, at . In addition, they receive a signal regarding the
permanent component of the productivity process

                                          st = xt + νt ,                                    (7)

where νt is i.i.d. normal with variance σν2 . Moreover, consumers know the structure of the
model, i.e., know ρ and the variances of the three shocks.
    Finally, on the econometrician’s side, we will consider both the case where the signal st
is directly observable and the econometrician has access to time series for at , ct and st , and

                                                 6
the case where only at and ct are observed (as it will be the case in our empirical exercise).
We will use Ite to denote the econometrician’s information set.


2     Solving the model
The solution to the model gives consumption and productivity as a function of current and
lagged values of the three shocks, ²t , ηt , and νt . It is derived in two steps. First, we solve
for consumption as a function of productivity expectations. From equations (1)-(3) and (6)
above, we obtain
                                               ρ
                               ct = xt|t +        (xt|t − xt−1|t ).                           (8)
                                             1−ρ
Recall that xt|t and xt−1|t denote the consumers’ expectations about the unobservable states
xt and xt−1 .
    Second, we derive the dynamics of the expectations in (8) using the Kalman filter. Agents
enter the period with beliefs xt|t−1 and xt−1|t−1 about the current and lagged values of the
permanent component of productivity. They observe current productivity at = xt + zt and
the signal st = xt + νt , and update their beliefs applying the Kalman filter:
                                                   
                             xt|t           x                   
                                           t−1|t−1         a
                                                            t
                           xt−1|t  = A    xt−2|t−1  + B                                (9)
                                                          st
                             zt|t            zt−1|t−1

where the matrices A and B depend on the underlying parameters (see Appendix B).
   Equations (8)-(9) together with equations (1)-(3) fully characterize the dynamic responses
of productivity and consumption to the different shocks. Except for two special cases to
which we shall come back below (the case of a fully informative and of a fully uninformative
signal), these must be solved numerically.
    Figure 1 shows the impulse responses of consumption and productivity computed using
parameters in line with the estimates obtained later, in Section 4. The time unit is the
quarter. The parameter ρ is set to 0.89, implying slowly building permanent shocks and
slowly decaying transitory shocks. The standard deviation of productivity growth, σu , is
set to 0.67%. These values for ρ and σu yield standard deviations of the two technology
shocks, σ² and ση , equal to 0.07% and 0.63%, respectively. The standard deviation of the
noise shock, σν , is set to 0.89%, implying a fairly noisy signal.
    In response to a one standard deviation increase in ²t , a permanent technology shock,
productivity builds up slowly over time—the implication of a high value for ρ. Consumption

                                               7
         −3       a. permanent shock
     x 10
 8

 6

 4
                                         consumption
 2
                                         productivity
 0
     0        5           10            15              20
         −3       b. transitory shock
     x 10
10
                                        consumption
 5                                      productivity


 0

−5
     0        5           10            15              20
         −3         c. noise shock
     x 10
 6
                                        consumption
 4
                                        productivity
 2

 0

−2
     0        5           10            15              20




 Figure 1: Impulse Responses to the Three Shocks




                         8
also increases slowly. This reflects the fact that the standard deviations of the transitory
shock ηt and of the noise shock νt are both large relative to the standard deviation of ²t .
Thus, it takes a long time for consumers to assess that this is really a permanent shock and
to fully adjust consumption.
    For our parameter values, consumption (equivalently, output) initially increases more
than productivity, generating a transitory increase in employment. Smaller transitory shocks,
or a more informative signal would lead to a larger initial increase in consumption, and thus
a larger initial increase in employment. Larger transitory shocks, or a less informative signal,
might lead instead to an initial decrease in employment.
    In response to a one standard deviation increase in ηt , the transitory shock, productivity
initially increases, and then slowly declines over time. As agents put some weight on it
being a permanent shock, they initially increase consumption. As they learn that this was a
transitory shock, consumption returns back to normal over time. For our parameter values,
consumption increases less than productivity, leading to an initial decrease in employment.
Again, for different parameters, the outcome may be an increase or a decrease in employment.
    Finally, in response to a one standard deviation increase in νt , the noise shock, consump-
tion increases, and then returns to normal over time. The response of consumption need not
be monotonic; in the simulation presented here, the response turns briefly negative, before
returning to normal. By assumption, productivity does not change, so employment initially
increases, to return to normal over time.


2.1     Innovations representation
Our assumptions make it easy to derive the innovations representation of the processes for
consumption and productivity.3 In particular, rearranging (8), we obtain

                                      (1 − ρ)ct = xt|t − ρxt−1|t .                                 (10)

Writing the corresponding expression for ct−1 and taking differences side by side, we obtain

                                            ct = ct−1 + uct ,                                      (11)

with
                               1                        ρ
                      uct =       (xt|t − xt−1|t−1 ) −     (xt−1|t − xt−2|t−1 ).
                              1−ρ                      1−ρ
  3
    See Anderson, Hansen, McGrattan, and Sargent (1996) for general results on the existence of an inno-
vations representation.


                                                   9
Turning to productivity, equations (1) and (3) imply

                               at − ρat−1 = xt + zt − ρ (xt−1 + zt−1 )
                                             = xt − ρxt−1 + ηt .

Using (10), lagged one period, we then obtain

                                     at = ρat−1 + (1 − ρ) ct−1 + uat ,                                   (12)

with
                             uat = xt − xt−1|t−1 − ρ(xt−1 − xt−2|t−1 ) + ηt .

   To show that uct and uat in (11) and (12) are indeed innovations take expectations and
use (2) to obtain
                                              1
                               Et−1 [uct ] =     Et−1 [²t ] = 0,
                                             1−ρ
                                      Et−1 [uat ] = Et−1 [²t + ηt ] = 0.

This shows that uct and uat are innovations with respect to the consumers’ information.
Turning to the econometrician, we can assume that the econometrician observes (ct , at , st )
or just (ct , at ). In either case the econometrician has (weakly) less information than the
consumer and the law of iterated expectations implies E[uct |Ite ] = 0 and E[uat |Ite ] = 0.
Therefore, uct and uat represent innovations for consumption and productivity both in a
reduced form VAR in (ct , at , st ) and in a reduced form VAR in (ct , at ).
   Note that, under our assumptions, the univariate representations of both productivity
and consumption are random walks. For productivity this follows from our assumptions
on the productivity process, for consumption it follows from the behavioral assumption (5).
When we move to multivariate representations including ct and at , past productivity does not
help predict consumption, but, as (12) shows, past consumption typically helps to predict
productivity as it captures the consumers’ information on the permanent component xt .4
   4
    The special case in which consumption does not help to predict productivity is ρ = 0. As we shall
see below, in this case at and ct are perfectly collinear, so, given at−1 , ct−1 provides no extra information
on at . In this case, the innovations representation is not unique, as (12) can be replaced, for example, by
at = at−1 + uat .




                                                     10
3     A structural VAR approach
The question we take up in this section is whether a structural VAR approach can recover
the underlying shocks and their impulse responses.
   The answer to this question is, generally, no. The basic intuition is the following: if con-
sumption is a random walk given the consumers’ information sets, then an econometrician
with access to the same information, or less, cannot identify any shock that has a transitory
effect on consumption based on the reduced form VAR innovations at time t. If the econo-
metrician could, so would the agents. But then they would optimally choose a consumption
path that does not respond to these identified shocks.
   In the rest of this section we flesh out this intuition and show how it leads to a non-
invertibility problem. We begin from two special cases, the case where the signal st is
perfectly informative, σν = 0, and the case where it is completely uninformative, σν = ∞.
In both cases, noise shocks do not affect the consumption and productivity dynamics, so we
can focus on the econometrician’s problem of recovering the two shocks ²t and ηt from the
bivariate time series (ct , at ).


3.1    A perfectly informative signal
If the signal is perfectly informative, consumers no longer face a signal extraction problem.
They know exactly the value of the permanent component of productivity, xt , and by impli-
cation, the value of the transitory component, zt = at − xt . In this case, equations (11) and
(12) simplify to:

                                             1
                             ct = ct−1 +        ²t ,
                                           1−ρ
                             at   = ρat−1 + (1 − ρ) ct−1 + ²t + ηt .

    Consumption responds only to the permanent shock, productivity to both. In this case,
a structural VAR approach does work. Imposing the long-run restriction that only one of
the shocks has a permanent effect on consumption and productivity, we can recover ²t and
ηt , and their dynamic effects.


3.2    An uninformative signal
If, instead, the signal is uninformative, the consumers rely only on current and past produc-
tivity to forecast future productivity. Then, trivially, our random walk assumption for at


                                               11
leads to ct = at . In this case, the two innovations uct and uat coincide and are identical to
the innovation ut in the univariate representation of at . That is, the bivariate dynamics of
consumption and productivity are given by

                                        ct = at−1 + ut ,
                                        at = at−1 + ut .

    This characterization holds for any value of ρ. Thus, whatever the value of ρ and the
relative importance of permanent and transitory productivity shocks, a structural VAR with
long-run restrictions will attribute all movements in productivity and consumption to per-
manent shocks, and none to transitory shocks. The impulse responses of productivity and
consumption to ²t will show a one-time permanent increase; the impulse responses of pro-
ductivity and consumption to ηt will be identically equal to zero.
    However, in this case the decomposition between temporary and permanent shocks is
essentially irrelevant, given that no information is available to ever separate the two. We
might as well take the random walk representation of productivity as our primitive produc-
tivity process and just interpret ut as the single, permanent shock. With this interpretation,
one can safely adopt a structural VAR approach.


3.3    The general case
In the two special cases just considered, a structural VAR approach seems to work, albeit for
very different reasons: In the first, we can exploit the perfect information of the consumers
to separate permanent and transitory shocks. In the second, we can ignore the “true”
productivity process and just focus on the observable random walk for productivity.
    Unfortunately, once we move away from these special cases and have a partially informa-
tive signal, a structural VAR approach fails. In the general case, unlike in the first case, the
consumers’ information at time t is not sufficient to exactly recover the shocks. At the same
time, unlike in the second case, consumption reflects some information on the transitory and
permanent components of productivity, so we cannot ignore their underlying dynamics.
   Now the model features three shocks, ²t , ηt and νt , so we consider the econometrician’s
problem of recovering these three shocks from the trivariate time series (ct , at , st ). The econo-
metrician runs a reduced form VAR in (ct , at , st ) and obtains the reduced form innovations
(uct , uat , ust ). He then tries to use some identification restriction to map the reduced form
innovations into the economic shocks. An identified shock will correspond to a linear com-


                                                12
bination of reduced form innovations. The next proposition characterizes the shape of the
estimated responses of consumption to any identified shock.

Proposition 1 Suppose that the econometrician observes (ct , at , st ). Then, the estimated
impulse response of ct to any identified shock from a structural VAR will be, asymptotically,
either permanent and flat or zero.

   Comparing this result with the impulse responses obtained in Figure 1 immediately shows
that a structural VAR will be, in general, unable to recover the model’s responses to our
three shocks, given that none of them leads to a flat consumption response.
    Why does the structural VAR fail? Suppose there was an identified structural shock that
could be mapped into the noise shock of the model. That means that there would be a
linear combination of reduced form innovations at time t that can be used to forecast the
transitory increase in consumption in panel (c) of Figure 1. The consumers have access to all
the data used by the econometrician to construct the innovations at time t: they know the
model’s parameters and they have observed all variable realizations up to time t. Therefore,
they must also be able to forecast this transitory fluctuation in consumption. But this would
violate consumption smoothing. Therefore, the consumption response to any identified shock
must be flat.
    This is not a problem in the special case where consumers have a perfectly informative
signal, because in that case the impulse responses in the model coincide with the ones in
Proposition 1: permanent and flat response to ²t and zero response to ηt . The same is true
in the special case of an uninformative signal, if we limit ourselves to recovering responses
to the shock ut . In the general case, however, the impulse responses are richer than those in
Proposition 1. Moreover, as we shall see in Section 4, the data contain enough information
to estimate these responses. The problem is that a structural VAR approach tries to get
there by exactly recovering the shocks at time t from the observables up to that period, and
this is not feasible in the general case.
    Notice that our specific assumptions on the productivity process and on the informational
structure are not crucial for Proposition 1. In fact, the result can be extended to any process
for at and any signal process, as long as the consumption process is well defined and satisfies
ct = limj→∞ E [at+j |It ].
    One could enrich the model, e.g., adding preference shocks and allowing for changes in the
real interest rate, so as to relax the random walk hypothesis for consumption. However, the
essence of the argument remains: noise shocks that lead to transient “mistakes” by consumers


                                              13
cannot be detected using information available to consumers at date t. A structural VAR
identification scheme can only use that information and is bound to fail.
   Proposition 1 clearly extends to the case where the econometrician only observes the
bivariate series (ct , at ). Given that this will be the information set used in our empirical
exercise in Section 4, it is useful to analyze this case in more detail. In particular, we can use
a numerical example to further investigate the direction of the bias in the estimated impulse
responses.
    Figure 2 shows the estimated impulse responses to the shocks with permanent and tran-
sitory effects obtained from structural VAR estimation, together with the true impulse re-
sponses to the three underlying shocks. The underlying parameters are the same as for
Figure 1. The estimated impulse responses are obtained by generating a 10,000-period time
series for consumption and productivity using the true model and running a structural VAR
on it. The structural VAR is identified by imposing a long-run restriction which distinguishes
two orthogonal shocks: one with permanent effects on output and one with only transitory
effects.
    Look first at the true and estimated responses of productivity to a shock with permanent
effects. The solid line in the top left quadrant plots the true response to a permanent
technology shock, which replicates that in Figure 1, namely a small initial effect, followed by
a steady buildup over time. The dashed line gives the estimated response from the structural
VAR estimation: The initial effect is much larger, the later buildup much smaller. Indeed,
simulations show that the less informative the signal, the larger the estimated initial effect,
the smaller the later build up. (Remember that, when the signal is fully uninformative, the
estimated response shows a one-time increase, with no further build up over time).
    Turn to the true and estimated responses of consumption to a permanent shock in the
bottom left quadrant. The solid line again replicates the corresponding response in Figure
1, showing a slow build-up of consumption over time. The dashed line shows the estimated
response, namely a one-time response of consumption with no further build up over time.
    The right quadrants show the true and estimated responses to shocks with transitory
effects on output. The solid lines show the true responses to a transitory technology shock
(thick line) and to a noise shock (thin line). The dashed lines give the estimated response to
the single transitory shock from the structural VAR. They show that the estimated response
of productivity to a transitory shock is close to the true response to a transitory technology
shock, but the estimated response of consumption is equal to zero.
    In short, the responses from the structural VAR overstate the initial response of produc-
tivity and consumption to permanent shocks, and thus give too much weight to these shocks

                                               14
             Productivity: permanent shock         Productivity: temporary and noise shocks
  0.01                                             0.01

 0.005                                         0.005

    0                                                 0

−0.005                                        −0.005

 −0.01                                         −0.01
         0         5      10     15      20               0   5       10     15      20

         Consumption: permanent shock              Consumption: temporary and noise shocks
  0.01                                             0.01

 0.005                                         0.005

    0                                                 0

−0.005                                        −0.005

 −0.01                                         −0.01
         0         5      10     15      20               0   5       10     15      20



             Figure 2: True and SVAR-based estimated impulse responses




                                              15
in accounting for fluctuations. For productivity, the less informative the signal, the larger the
overstatement. For consumption, the overstatement is independent of the informativeness
of the signal.


3.4     What if the econometrician has more information than the
        agents?
The result above suggests two potential ways out, both based on the possibility that the
econometrician may have access to more information than the agents, either at time t or
later.
   First, if we think of the transitory component as reflecting in part measurement error,
and if the series for productivity is revised over time, the econometrician, who has access to
the revised series, may be better able than the consumers to separate the permanent and
the transitory components. To take an extreme case, if the transitory component reflects
only measurement error, and if the revised series remove the measurement error, then the
econometrician has access to the time series for the permanent component directly, and can
therefore separate the two components. While this is extreme, it suggests that the bias from
SVAR estimation may be reduced when using revised series rather than originally published
series.5 The dispersed information model in Lorenzoni (2009) goes in this direction, by
assuming that consumers do not have access to real time information on aggregate output,
but only to noisy local information. Under that assumption it is possible to map the noise
shock in that model to the transitory shock from an identified VAR. However, also in models
with dispersed information, once we enrich the consumers’ information set, the problem
raised here is bound to reappear.
   The need for superior information on the econometrician’s side, suggests a second way
out. In the end, the econometrician always has access to superior information, as he can
observe future realizations of variables that the consumer did not observe at time t. Then one
may hope that a combination of past and future data may be used to identify current shocks.
More formally, the traditional invertibility problem is that the map from the economic shocks
to the shocks in the VAR may not have an inverse that is one-sided in nonnegative powers of
the lag operator. Maybe adding a sufficient number of lead terms an inverse can be found?
Unfortunately, the answer is no. As we will show numerically in Section 4.5, even having
   5
    A related article here is Rodriguez Mora and Schulstad (2007). They show that growth in period t is
correlated with preliminary estimates of past growth available in period t, not with final estimates, available
later. One potential interpretation of these results is that agents choose spending in response to these
preliminary estimates, and their spending in turn determines current output.


                                                      16
access to an infinite sequence of past and future data the econometrician is never able to
exactly recover the values of the shocks.


3.5    What does the structural VAR deliver?
A different way of looking at the problem is to understand what is the correct interpretation
of the identified shocks that the structural VAR delivers. It turns out that the structural
VAR allows us to recover the process for at in its innovations representation. Namely, the
process for at can be equivalently represented by the state-space system:

                                x̂t = x̂t−1 + vt1                                             (13)
                                at = ρat−1 + (1 − ρ)x̂t−1 + vt2 .                             (14)

To prove the equivalence it is sufficient to define x̂t ≡ ct , and use the results in Section 2.1,
substituting vt1 for uct and vt2 for uat .
    But then why not start directly from (13)-(14) as our model for productivity dynam-
ics and give consumers full information on the state x̂t ? One reason why (13)-(14) is not
particularly appealing as a primitive model is that the disturbances vt1 and vt2 in the inno-
vation representation above are not mutually independent, and thus are hard to interpret
as primitive shocks. In particular, our signal extraction model implies that vt1 and vt2 are
positively correlated and their correlation is higher the higher the underlying value of σν .
As we shall see in the next section, this positive correlation is indeed observed in the data.
Our informational assumptions provide a rationale for it.
    Going back to structural VARs, a long-run identifying restriction will lead us to identify
vt1as the permanent technology shock and will give a linear combination of vt1 and vt2 as the
temporary shock. For some purposes, this representation may be all we are interested in.
Clearly, that is not the case if we are trying to analyze the role of noise shocks in fluctuations.


4     Structural estimation
We now turn to structural estimation, proceeding in two steps. For our benchmark model
structural estimation is particularly easy, and all parameters can be obtained matching a
few moments of the model to the data; thus we start with it. For more general processes
however, one must use maximum likelihood. We show how it can be done, show estimation
results for our benchmark model and compare them to those obtained by matching moments.


                                                17
4.1     Matching moments
In general, structural estimation allows us to exploit the cross-equation restrictions implied
by the model to achieve identification. Equation (12), our reduced form equation for pro-
ductivity, provides a good example of this principle: estimating this equation by OLS, allows
us immediately to recover the parameter ρ. Moreover, σu2 can be estimated by the sample
variance of ∆at . Having estimates for ρ and σu2 , we immediately get estimates for σ²2 and ση2 .
    Although identification is particularly simple here, the point holds more generally. In
the class of models considered here, identification can be achieved exploiting two crucial as-
sumptions: some behavioral assumption which links consumption (or some other endogenous
variables) to the agents’ expectations about the future, here equation (6), and an assumption
of rational expectations.6
    How well does our reduced form benchmark model (11)-(12) fits the time series facts for
productivity and consumption? The answer is: fairly well. Although it clearly misses some
of the dynamics in the data, it provides a good starting point.
    Throughout this section, we only use time series for at and ct . We construct the produc-
tivity variable as the logarithm of the ratio of GDP to employment and the consumption
variable as the logarithm of the ratio of NIPA consumption to population. We use quar-
terly data, from 1970:1 to 2008:1. An issue we have to confront is that, in contradiction to
our model, and indeed to any balanced growth model, productivity and consumption have
different growth rates over the sample (0.34% per quarter for productivity, versus 0.46% for
consumption). This difference reflects factors we have left out of the model, from changes in
participation, to changes in the saving rate, to changes in the capital-output ratio. For this
reason, in what follows, we allow for a secular drift in the consumption-to-productivity ratio
(equal to 0.46%-0.34%) and remove it from the consumption series.7
    The basic characteristics of the time series for productivity and consumption are pre-
sented in Table 1. Lines 1 and 2 show the results of estimated AR(1) for the first differences
of the two variables. Recall that our model implies that both productivity and consumption
   6
      The use of behavioral assumptions as identification assumptions to estimate an underlying exogenous
process, connects our paper to a large body of work on household income dynamics. See, for example,
Blundell and Preston (1998), who use the permanent income hypothesis as an identification assumption to
decompose the household income process into transitory and permanent components.
    7
      We are aware that, in the context of our approach, where we are trying to isolate potentially low frequency
movements in productivity, this is a rough and dangerous approximation. But, given our purposes, it seems
to be a reasonable first pass assumption. The reason why we concentrate on the sample 1970:1 to 2008:1
is precisely because, with longer samples, we are less confident that this approach does a satisfactory job
at accounting for low frequency changes in the consumption-to-productivity ratio. When we turn to the
variance decomposition, we will show that our results are robust to extending the sample.



                                                       18
should follow random walks, so the AR(1) term should be equal to zero. In both cases, the
AR(1) term is indeed small, insignificant in the case of productivity, significant in the case
of consumption.
    Our model further implies a simple dynamic relation between productivity and consump-
tion, equation (12), which can be rewritten as the cointegrating regression:

                                   ∆at = (1 − ρ)(ct−1 − at−1 ) + uat

Line 3 shows the results of estimating this equation. Line 4 allows for lagged rates of change
of consumption and productivity, and shows the presence of richer dynamics than implied by
our specification, with significant coefficients on the lagged rates of change of both variables.

                   Line Dependent            ∆a(−1)          ∆c(−1)          (c − a)(−1)
                        variable:
                    1   ∆a                 -0.06 (0.09)
                    2   ∆c                                 0.24 (0.08)
                    3   ∆a                                                   0.05   (0.03)
                    4   ∆a                 -0.21 (0.10) 0.32 (0.12)          0.03   (0.02)
                    5   ∆(8)a                                                0.03   (0.15)
                    6   ∆(20)a                                               0.31   (0.30)
                    7   ∆(40)a                                               0.98   (0.43)


Table 1: Consumption and Productivity Regressions.
Note: Sample: 1970:1 to 2008:1. ∆(j)a ≡ a(+j − 1) − a(−1). In parenthesis: robust standard
errors computed using the Newey-West window and 10 lags.

       Our model’s dynamic implications on the relation between consumption and productivity
can be extended to longer horizons. Specifically, (12) can be extended to obtain the following
cointegrating regression, which holds for all j ≥ 0,8

                               at+j − at = (1 − ρj )(ct−1 − at−1 ) + ua,j
                                                                      t ,

   8
                                                                                  ¡      ¢
    This is obtained by induction. Suppose it is true for j, that is, Et [at+j ] = 1 − ρj ct + ρj at . Taking
expectations at time t − 1 on both sides yields
                                          ¡     ¢
                         Et−1 [at+j ] = 1 − ρj Et−1 [ct ] + ρj Et−1 [at ]
                                          ¡     ¢
                                      = 1 − ρj ct−1 + ρj ((1 − ρ) ct−1 + ρat−1 )
                                          ¡        ¢
                                      = 1 − ρj+1 ct−1 + ρj+1 at−1 ,

the second equality follows from (5) and (12), the third from rearranging.




                                                     19
where ua,j
        t is a disturbance uncorrelated to the econometrician’s information at date t. Thus,
according to the model, a larger consumption-productivity ratio should forecast higher future
productivity growth at all horizons and the coefficient in this regression should increase
with the horizon. Lines 5 to 7 explore this implication. We correct for the presence of
autocorrelation due to overlapping intervals by using Newey-West standard errors. These
results are roughly consistent with the model predictions, and all point to relatively high
values for ρ: the point estimates implicit in lines 3, 5, 6 and 7 are, respectively, 0.95, 0.996,
0.98 and 0.91. The maximum likelihood approach below will use all the model restrictions
to produce a single estimate of ρ, for now we just take the estimate from line 3, ρ = 0.95.
    The standard deviation σu can be estimated directly from the univariate representation
of at as the sample mean squared deviation of ∆at , giving a point estimate σu = 0.67%.
Together with ρ = 0.95, this implies σ² = 0.03% and ση = 0.65%. In words, these results
imply a very smooth permanent component, in which small shocks steadily build up over
time, and a large transitory component, which decays slowly over time.
   Recovering the variance of the noise shock is less straightforward, but it can be done
matching another moment: the correlation coefficient between the reduced form innovations
uct and uat . In particular, numerical results show that, given the remaining parameters, this
moment is an increasing function of σν . Therefore, we recover this parameter by matching
the correlation in the data. The coefficient of correlation between ∆c and the residual of
the regression on line 3 (corresponding, respectively to uct and uat ) is equal to 0.52. If the
signal was perfectly informative this correlation would be equal to 0.05, while if the signal
had infinite variance it would be 1.9 Therefore, the observed correlation is consistent with
the model and yields a fairly large standard deviation of the noise shock, σν = 2.1%.
    The fact that we are able in our benchmark model to recover all the model parameters by
matching a few moments from the data, is clearly a special case. It is thus useful to develop a
general approach, which can be applied to any specification of productivity or consumption
behavior. We now discuss this approach, and then return to the data.


4.2     Maximum Likelihood
To estimate a model where consumers face a non trivial signal extraction problem, one can,
generally, proceed in two steps.10
   9
      These bounds can be derived from the analysis
                                                  p in Sections 3.1 and 3.2.pTo obtain the first, some algebra
shows that under full information Cov[uct , uat ]/ V ar[uct ]V ar[uat ] = (1−ρ)/ (1 − ρ)2 + ρ. The second bound
is immediate.
   10
      More detailed derivations are provided in Appendices B and D.


                                                      20
       • Take the point of view of the consumers. Write down the dynamics of the unobserved
         states in state space representation and solve the consumers’ filtering problem. In our
         case, the relevant state for the consumer is given by ξt ≡ (xt , xt−1 , zt ), its dynamics are
         given by (2) and (3), the observation equations are (1) and (7), and Kalman filtering
         gives us the updating equation (9).

       • Next, take the point of view of the econometrician, write down the model dynamics
         in state space representation and write the appropriate observation equations (which
         depend on the data available). In our case, the relevant state for the econometrician
         is given by ξtE ≡ (xt , xt−1 , zt , xt|t , xt−1|t , zt|t ). Notice that the consumers’ expectations
         become part of the unobservable state and the consumers’ updating equation (9) be-
         comes part of the description of the state’s dynamics. The observation equations for the
         econometrician are now (1) and (10), where the second links consumption (observed by
         the econometrician), to consumers’ expectations. The econometrician’s Kalman filter
         is then used to construct the likelihood function and estimate the model’s parameters.

   Table 2 shows the results of estimation of the benchmark model presented as a grid
over values of ρ from 0 to 0.99.11 For each value of ρ, we find the values of the remaining
parameters that maximize the likelihood function and in the last column we report the
corresponding likelihood value. The table shows that the likelihood function has a well-
behaved maximum at ρ = 0.89, on line 6. The corresponding values of σ² and ση are 0.07%
and 0.63%, respectively. The standard deviation of the noise shock σν is 0.89%.
   Relative to the moment matching approach in Section 4.1, the Maximum Likelihood
approach uses all the implicit restrictions imposed by the model on the data generating
process. This explains the difference between the estimates on line 6 of Table 2 and those
obtained in Section 4.1. In particular, the Maximum Likelihood approach favors smaller
values of ρ and σν . However, if we look at line 8 of Table 2, we see parameters much closer
to those in Section 4.1 and the likelihood gain from line 8 to line 6 is not too large. In other
words, the data are consistent with a range of different combinations of ρ and σν . When
we look at the model’s implications in terms of variance decomposition, we will consider
different values in this range.
    A simple exercise, using this approach, is to relax the random walk assumption for
productivity, allowing ρx to differ from ρz , and allowing the variances of the shocks to be
  11
    For all our Maximum Likelihood estimates we used Dynare (v.3), which allows for the use of matrices in
the model section of the code. Our observables are first differences of labor productivity and consumption,
so we use a diffuse Kalman Filter to initialize the variance covariance matrix of the estimator (a variance-
covariance matrix with a diagonal of 10).

                                                     21
                 Line    ρ      σu       σ²        ση       σν       ML
                  1     0.00   0.0067   0.0067    0.0000   0.0089   −3 ∗ 1012
                  2     0.25   0.0183   0.0137    0.0092   0.0000   859.2
                  3     0.50   0.0102   0.0051    0.0072   0.0000   980.5
                  4     0.70   0.0077   0.0023    0.0065   0.0026   1042.6
                  5     0.80   0.0071   0.0014    0.0064   0.0056   1064.5
                  6     0.89   0.0067   0.0007    0.0063   0.0089   1073.2
                  7     0.90   0.0067   0.0007    0.0064   0.0099   1073.1
                  8     0.95   0.0068   0.0003    0.0066   0.0234   1072.2
                  9     0.99   0.0063   0.0001    0.0063   0.0753   1068.5


              Table 2: Maximum Likelihood Estimation: Benchmark Model

freely estimated. The estimation results are reported in Table 3 and are quite close to those
obtained under the random walk assumption.

                                    Estimate Standard error
                               ρx    0.8879      0.0478
                               ρz    0.8878      0.0474
                               ση    0.0065      0.0004
                               σ²    0.0007      0.0003
                               σν    0.0090      0.0052
                               ML    1073.3


             Table 3: Maximum Likelihood Estimation: Unconstrained Model



4.3    Variance decomposition
What do our results imply in terms of the dynamic effects of the shocks and of variance
decomposition? If we use the estimated parameters from the benchmark model (line 6
in Table 2), the dynamic effects of each shock are given in Figure 1 and were discussed in
Section 2: A slow and steady build up of permanent shocks on productivity and consumption;
a slowly decreasing effect of transitory shocks on productivity and consumption; and a slowly
decreasing effect of noise shocks on consumption.
    Figure 3 presents the variance decomposition, plotting the contribution of the three
shocks to forecast error variance, from 1 to 20 quarters ahead. The main result is that noise
shocks are an important source of short run volatility, accounting for more than 70% of
consumption volatility at a 1-quarter horizon and more than 50% at a 4-quarter horizon,


                                             22
                                             productivity
                  1
                                                                 permanent technology shock
                                                                 temporary technology shock
                 0.8                                             noise shock


                 0.6


                 0.4


                 0.2


                  0
                       0   2   4   6     8       10         12   14       16      18      20
                                             consumption
                  1


                 0.8


                 0.6


                 0.4


                 0.2


                  0
                       0   2   4   6     8       10         12   14       16      18      20




                  Figure 3: Variance Decomposition: Benchmark Model

while permanent technology shocks play a smaller role, having almost no effect on quarterly
volatility and explaining less than 30% at a 4-quarter horizon. It is interesting to compare
this result to traditional SVAR exercises, such as Shapiro and Watson (1989) and Gali
(1992), where demand shocks typically explain a smaller fraction of aggregate volatility and
permanent technology shocks play a bigger role. The analysis in Section 3 helps to explain
these differences, by showing that, asymptotically, a SVAR is biased towards assigning 100%
of the volatility to the permanent shock.
    In Table 4, we report the results of some robustness checks. On each line, we report the
fraction of consumption variance due to the noise shock at a 1, 4 and 8-quarter horizon, for
different parameter values. Line 1 corresponds to our benchmark estimation. Line 2 reports
the results obtained by setting ρ at a higher level and choosing the remaining parameters by
maximum likelihood (line 8 of Table 2). The variance decomposition at short horizons is not
very different, but noise shocks turn out to be more persistent under this parametrization
and explain a much bigger fraction of variance at a 8-quarter horizon. On line 3 we report


                                               23
the parameters obtained when estimating our model on a longer sample, 1948:1 to 2008:1.
With this data set the estimate of ρ is larger and we obtain results analogous to the ones on
line 2.
    Finally, in lines 4 and 5 we experiment with changing only the volatility of noise shocks,
keeping the other parameters fixed. In particular, relative to the benchmark, we first decrease
and then increase σν by one standard deviation (which is 0.0034 in our maximum likelihood
estimate). Interestingly, it is the lower value of σν that leads to the largest amount of noise-
driven volatility. A lower σν makes the signal st more precise, so consumers rely on it more.
In our range of parameters, this leads to greater short-run volatility.

                Line                  Parameters         Noise-driven variance (fraction)
                                ρ        σu      σν     1 Quarter 4 Quarter 8 Quarter
      1       benchmark        0.89    0.0067 0.0089       0.75        0.53        0.23
      2          high ρ        0.95    0.0068 0.0234       0.71        0.68        0.58
      3   sample 1948:1-2008:1 0.96    0.0099 0.0382       0.73        0.71        0.64
      5          low σν        0.89    0.0067 0.0055       0.82        0.46        0.17
      4         high σν        0.89    0.0067 0.0123       0.68        0.53        0.26


                       Table 4: Variance Decomposition: Robustness Checks



4.4       Recovering the states: retrospective history
So far we have focused on using structural estimation to estimate the model’s parameters.
Now we turn to the question: what information on the unobservable states and on the shocks
can be recovered from structural estimation? We begin with the states.
    Using the Kalman smoother it is possible to form Bayesian estimates of the state vector
ξtEusing the full time series available and obtain a retrospective history of the U.S. business
cycle. The top panel of Figure 4 plots estimates for the permanent component of productivity
xt obtained from our benchmark model. The solid line correspond to xt , the dashed line
to the consumers’ real time estimate of the same variable xt|t . Notice that both xt and xt|t
are unobservable states for the econometrician, so the two lines correspond to the Bayesian
estimates of the respective state (see Appendix D).
    Looking first at medium-run movements, the model identifies a gradual adjustment of
consumers’ expectations to the productivity slowdown in the 70s and a symmetric gradual
adjustment in the opposite direction during the faster productivity growth after the mid
90s. Around these medium-run trends, temporary fluctuations in consumers’ expectations


                                              24
           0.05



             0



          −0.05                                                             smoothed xt
                                                                            smoothed xt|t

           −0.1
             1970     1975     1980     1985        1990   1995    2000          2005


            0.1



             0



           −0.1                                                           smoothed xt+∞
                                                                          smoothed xt+∞|t

           −0.2
             1970     1975     1980     1985        1990   1995    2000          2005




Figure 4: Smoothed estimates of the permanent component of productivity, of long-run
productivity, and of consumers’ real time expectations
Top panel: smoothed estimate of xt (solid line) and of xt|t (dashed line)
Bottom panel: smoothed estimate of xt+∞ (solid line) and of xt+∞|t (dashed line)


produce short-run volatility.
    To gauge the short-run effects of expectational errors, however, the consumers’ expec-
tations of xt are not sufficient, given that consumers project future growth based on their
expectations of both xt and xt−1 . For this reason, in the bottom panel of Figure 4, we plot
the smoothed series for the consumers’ real time expectations regarding long-run produc-
tivity, xt+∞|t = (xt|t − ρxt−1|t )/(1 − ρ), and compare it to the smoothed series for xt+∞ .
The model generates large short-run consumption volatility out of temporary changes in
consumers’ expectations of future productivity. Sometimes these changes occur when con-
sumers’ overstate current xt (e.g., at the end of the 80s), other times when consumers slowly
catch up to an underlying productivity acceleration and understate xt−1 (e.g., at the end
of the 90s). Obviously, the model is too stylized to give a credible account of all cyclical
episodes. For example, given the absence of monetary policy shocks the recession of 1981-82
is fully attributed to animal spirits.
   The Kalman smoother also tells us how much information on the unobservable states is


                                               25
                             x 10
                                 −3             state x
                         5


                         4


                         3


                         2
                             0        5           10          15         20

                             x 10
                                 −3             state z
                         5


                         4


                         3


                         2
                             0        5           10          15         20
                                            number of leads


          Figure 5: RMSE of the estimated states at time t using data up to t + j

contained in past and future data. In particular, in Figure 5 we plot the root mean squared
errors (RMSE) of the smoothed estimates of xt and zt , when data up to t+j are available, for
j = 0, 1, 2, .... Formally, these RMSE correspond to the square root of Et+j [(xt − Et+j [xt ])2 ],
and can be computed using two different information sets: the econometrician’s, which only
includes observations of ct and at , and the consumer’s, which also includes st . For simplicity,
we compute RMSE at the steady state of the Kalman filter, that is, assuming the forecaster
has access to an infinite series of data, from −∞ to t + j. In this case, the econometrician’s
information set coincides with the consumer’s, that is, the econometrician can back up the
current value of st perfectly from current and past observations of ct and at . Although we
have not established this result analytically, it holds numerically in all our examples: the
computed RMSE of the econometrician’s estimate of st goes immediately to zero at j = 0.
This implies that, in our model, with a sufficiently long data set, the direct observation of
st does not add much to the econometrician’s ability to recover the unobservable states (or
the shocks).
    Figure 5 shows that the contemporaneous estimate of the current state xt has a standard
deviation of 0.44%. By using future data, this standard deviation almost halves, to 0.28%.
However, most of the relevant information arrives in the first six quarters, after that, there
are minimal gains in the precision of the estimate.




                                                26
                                         permanent shock ε
          2


          0


         −2
          1970     1975       1980     1985          1990      1995   2000   2005
                                          transitory shock η
          5


          0


         −5
          1970     1975       1980     1985          1990      1995   2000   2005
                                              noise shock ν
          5


          0


         −5
          1970     1975       1980     1985          1990      1995   2000   2005




                          Figure 6: Smoothed estimates of the shocks

4.5    Recovering the shocks: more on invertibility
Turning to the shocks, we know from our discussion of structural VARs that the information
in current and past values of ct and at is not sufficient to derive the values of the current
shocks. However, this does not mean that the data contain no information on the shocks.
In particular, using the Kalman smoother the econometrician can form Bayesian estimates
on ²t , ηt , and νt using the entire time series available. Figure 6 plots these estimates for
our benchmark model. As for the states, in Figure 7 we report the RMSE of the estimated
shocks as a function of the number of leads available. To help the interpretation, each RMSE
is normalized dividing it by the ex ante standard deviation of the respective shock (σ² , ση ,
and σν ).
    Notice that if the model was invertible, the RMSE would be zero at j = 0. The fact
that all RMSE remain bounded from zero at all horizons shows that even an infinite data
set would not allow us to recover the shocks exactly.
    The transitory shock ηt is estimated with considerable precision already on impact and
the precision of its estimate almost doubles in the long run. The noise shock νt is less
precisely estimated, but the data still tell us a lot about it, giving us an RMSE which is


                                                27
                                             shock ε
                    1


                  0.98


                  0.96

                  0.94
                         0   2   4   6   8     10      12   14   16   18   20

                                             shock η
                  0.25

                   0.2


                  0.15


                   0.1
                         0   2   4   6   8     10      12   14   16   18   20

                                             shock ν
                   0.5

                  0.45

                   0.4

                  0.35


                         0   2   4   6   8     10      12   14   16   18   20
                                         number of leads




Figure 7: Normalized RMSE of the estimated shocks at time t using data up to t + j




                                             28
about 1/3 of the prior uncertainty in the long run. The shock that is least precisely estimated
is the permanent shock ²t . Even with an infinite series of future data, the residual variance
is about 94% of the prior uncertainty on the shock.
    How do we reconcile the imprecision of the estimate of ²t with the fact that we have
relatively precise estimates of the state xt , as seen in Figure 5? The explanation is that
the econometrician can estimate the cumulated effect of permanent productivity changes by
looking at productivity growth over longer horizons, but cannot pinpoint the precise quarter
in which the change occurred. Therefore, it is possible to have imprecise estimates of past
²t ’s, while having a relatively precise estimate of their cumulated effect on xt . This also helps
to explain the high degree of autocorrelation of the estimated permanent shocks in Figure
6. The smoothed estimates of ²t in consecutive quarters tend to be highly correlated, as the
econometrician does not know to which quarter to attribute an observed permanent change
in productivity. Notice that the autocorrelation of the estimated shocks is not a rejection of
the assumption of i.i.d. shocks, but purely a reflection of the econometrician’s information.
In fact, performing the same estimation exercise on simulated data delivers a similar degree
of autocorrelation as the one obtained from actual data.


5     Extensions
We have shown how models where agents face signal extraction problems cannot be estimated
through SVARs, but can be estimated through structural estimation. Structural estimation
however requires a full specification of the model, including the productivity process, the
information structure, and the behavior of consumers. To explore how sensitive are the
estimated parameters to the specific assumptions, we consider two extensions.
    The first is motivated by the data. As we saw from Table 1, the dynamics of consump-
tion and the dynamic relation between productivity and consumption are richer than those
implied by the benchmark. These require at least a modification of our assumptions about
consumption behavior. Our assumption about consumption implies that consumption fol-
lows an exact random walk for any productivity process and any standard deviation of the
noise in the signal. As we have seen however, the univariate process for consumption, on
line 2 of Table 1, shows evidence of richer dynamics.
    Here we try two approaches. The first is to allow for some time variation in the real
interest rate by turning to a standard New Keynesian model with Calvo pricing. Such a
model is described in Appendix A and leads to a process for consumption (and output) of



                                                29
the form
                              ct = d1 at + d2 xt|t + d3 xt|t−1 + d4 zt|t                    (15)

where the coefficients d are non-linear functions of the following parameters: the discount
factor β, a parameter φ, reflecting the response of the nominal interest rate to inflation in the
monetary policy rule, and a parameter κ, capturing the degree of nominal and real rigidities
in price setting. We set β at 0.99 and estimate the remaining parameters by Maximum
Likelihood, following the same steps laid out in 4.2. The results are reported in Table 5.

                                      Estimate Standard error
                                κ      0.0011      0.0004
                                φ      1.4436      0.1403
                                ρ      0.8780      0.0225
                               σu      0.0067      0.0004
                               σν      0.0065      0.0019
                               ML      1073.8


        Table 5: Maximum Likelihood Estimation: standard New Keynesian model

    Notice that the data prefer a very low value for κ, so the implications of the New Keyne-
sian model are very close to those of the benchmark model. In particular, the implied values
of the coefficients in (15) are

             d1 = 0.0016,       d2 = 7.9250,          d3 = −6.9266,        d4 = 0.0359,

while, in our benchmark model, given the same ρ = 0.878, the corresponding values would
be d2 = 1/(1 − ρ) = 8.1967, d3 = −ρ/(1 − ρ) = −7.1967 and zeros for d1 and d4 . The implied
impulse responses are thus close to the ones in Section 2.
   To capture slow consumption adjustment, we then try an alternative specification of
consumption behavior, which incorporates a simple backward looking element (a stylized
form of habit):
                           ct = δct−1 + (1 − δ) lim Et [at+j ].
                                                       j→∞

In Table 6 we report the results from estimating this variant of the model, presented as a grid
search over the value of the adjustment parameter δ. The data seem to prefer a small but
positive value of δ, which helps to account for the positive autocorrelation in the univariate
process for consumption growth (see Table 1, line 2).
   Our second extension is motivated by the discussion of labor hoarding and pro-cyclical


                                                 30
                   δ ρ         σu     σ²     ση     σν     ML
                   0 0.8785    0.0068 0.0008 0.0063 0.0086 1073.3
                  0.1 0.8700   0.0071 0.0009 0.0066 0.0080 1075.9
                  0.2 0.8591   0.0075 0.0011 0.0070 0.0072 1074.8
                  0.3 0.8412   0.0082 0.0013 0.0075 0.0062 1068.8
                  0.4 0.7823   0.0092 0.0020 0.0081 0.0035 1057.0
                  0.5 0.6915   0.0107 0.0033 0.0089 0.0002 1044.4
                  0.6 0.7126   0.0130 0.0037 0.0110 0.0003 1018.2
                  0.7 0.6524   0.0177 0.0061 0.0143 0.0006 976.7
                  0.8 0.6371   0.0272 0.0099 0.0217 0.0012 910.9
                  0.9 0.6480   0.0567 0.0200 0.0456 0.0033 796.0


        Table 6: Maximum Likelihood Estimation: Slow Consumption Adjustment

                   α ρ         σu     σ²     ση     σν            ML
                   0 0.8910    0.0067 0.0007 0.0063 0.0089        1073.2
                  0.1 0.8989   0.0069 0.0007 0.0065 0.0067        1072.9
                  0.2 0.9110   0.0072 0.0006 0.0069 0.0052        1071.6
                  0.3 0.9249   0.0077 0.0006 0.0074 0.0039        1068.2
                  0.4 0.8948   0.0085 0.0009 0.0080 0.0           1064.6
                  0.6 0.9434   0.0114 0.0006 0.0111 0.0           1034.1
                  0.8 0.9645   0.0229 0.0008 0.0225 0.0           937.6
                   1 0.0070    0.0067 0.0067 0.0006 0.0857        391.1


                Table 7: Maximum Likelihood Estimation: Labor hoarding

productivity in the research on the relation between output and employment. Our bench-
mark model has assumed that labor productivity is exogenous; there is however substantial
evidence that some of the movements in productivity are in fact endogenous. Thus, in con-
trast to our assumption, a positive realization of the noise shock may lead consumers to
spend more, and lead in turn to an increase in productivity.
    To capture endogenous responses of productivity, we extend the model by assuming that
the process at captures the exogenous component of productivity, while actual productivity,
denoted by ãt , responds to increases in employment according to the relation:

                                   ãt = at + α(ct − at ).

Table 7 displays the Maximum Likelihood estimation for this case, as a grid over values for
α. In this case, the model fits the data better with no endogenous productivity responses,


                                             31
i.e., with α = 0. However, the likelihood is relatively flat for low levels of α. Notice that, in
that region, the model compensates for higher values of α by choosing lower estimates for σν .
To interpret this result, remember from Section 4.1 that higher values of σν are associated to
a higher coefficient of correlation between the innovations of consumption and productivity
uct and uat . Allowing for endogenous productivity, gives us an alternative channel to explain
this correlation. The results in Table 7 show that, having only data on consumption and
observed productivity, it is hard to distinguish the role of these two channels.


6     Conclusions
On the methodological side, we have explored the problem of estimating models with news
and noise—which we think provide an appealing description of the cycle. We have shown the
limits of SVAR estimation, and shown how these models can be estimated with structural
methods. This implies that to identify the role of news and noise in fluctuations one must
rely more heavily on the model’s structure. In this paper, a central role for identification
was played by the consumer’s Euler equation, that is, by the assumption that current move-
ments in consumption are primarily driven by changes in the consumers’ expectations on
the economy’s lung run potential.
    On the empirical side, the data appear quite consistent with a view of fluctuations where
the pattern of technological change is smooth, subject to random shocks which only build
up slowly, while most of the short-run action in consumption and output comes from noisy
information on these long-run trends. Clearly, we need to extend the model in many dimen-
sions before having confidence in these conclusions. In particular, adding investment seems
an essential step in building models of the business cycle driven by anticipations.
    Another natural extension is to add variables to the empirical exercise, to better capture
consumers’ expectations about the future. For example, one could include financial market
prices, following Beaudry and Portier (2006), or survey measures of consumer confidence,
as Barsky and Sims (2008). However, the analysis in Section 3, where we allowed the
econometrician to directly observe all the signals observed by the consumers, shows that
adding variables is not sufficient, in general, to solve the identification problems of SVARs.
   Finally, it is useful to notice that the applicability of SVAR methods depends crucially
on the way in which one models the information structure. In models where the consumer
exactly observes shocks which will affect productivity in the future, invertibility problems
may be less damning (see our comments in Section 3.5 and the analysis in Sims (2009)).
However, we think that, in many instances, signal extraction models provide a more realistic

                                               32
and flexible description of the informational environment. When dealing with these models,
the researcher can choose, depending on the question at hand, either to limit attention to
the innovation representation of the consumers’ forecasting problem or to take the structural
approach developed here.




                                             33
Appendix A. Relation of the model with the standard New Key-
nesian model
Consider a standard New Keynesian model, as laid out, e.g., in Gali (2008). Preferences are
given by
                                              ∞
                                              X
                                          E         β t U (Ct , Nt ) ,
                                              t=0

with
                                                                 1
                                 U (Ct , Nt ) = log Ct −           N 1+ζ ,
                                                                1+ζ t
where Nt are hours worked and Ct is a composite consumption good given by
                                               µZ 1       γ−1     ¶ γ−1
                                                                     γ
                                                           γ
                                        Ct =            Cj,t dj           ,
                                                    0


Cj,t is the consumption of good j in period t, and γ > 1 is the elasticity of substitution
among goods. Each good j ∈ [0, 1] is produced by a single monopolistic firm with access to
the linear production function
                                      Yj,t = At Nj,t .                                (16)

Productivity is given by At = exp at and at follows the process (1)-(3). Firms are allowed to
reset prices only at random time intervals. Each period, a firm is allowed to reset its price
with probability 1 − θ and must keep the price unchanged with probability θ. Firms hire
labor on a competitive labor market at the wage Wt , which is fully flexible.
   Consumers have access to a nominal one-period bond which trades at the price Qt . The
consumer’s budget constraint is
                                   Z 1                                        Z 1
                      Qt Bt+1 +          Pj,t Cj,t dj = Bt + Wt Nt +                Πj,t dj,   (17)
                                    0                                          0


where Bt are nominal bonds’ holdings, Pj,t is the price of good j, Wt is the nominal wage
rate, and Πj,t are the profits of firm j. In equilibrium consumers choose consumption, hours
worked, and bond holdings, so as to maximize their expected utility subject to (17) and a
standard no-Ponzi-game condition. Nominal bonds are in zero net supply, so market clearing
in the bonds market requires Bt = 0. The central bank sets the short-term nominal interest
rate, that is, the price of the one-period nominal bond, Qt . Letting it = − log Qt , monetary
policy follows the simple rule
                                               it = i∗ + φπt ,                                 (18)



                                                        34
where i∗ = − log β and φ is a constant coefficient greater than 1.
  Following standard steps, consumers’ and firms’ optimality conditions and market clear-
ing can be log-linearized and transformed so as to obtain two stochastic difference equations
which characterize the joint behavior of output and inflation in equilibrium. After substi-
tuting the policy rule we obtain:

                               yt = Et [yt+1 ] − φπt + Et [πt+1 ] ,
                               πt = κ (yt − at ) + βEt [πt+1 ] ,

where κ ≡ (1 + ζ) (1 − θ) (1 − βθ) /θ and where constant terms are omitted. As long as
φ > 1 this system has a unique locally stable solution where yt and πt are linear functions
of the four exogenous state variables at , xt|t , xt−1|t , zt|t ,
                                                                 
                                            
                                                           at     
                                                                 
                                    y         
                                    t  = Dκ 
                                                           xt|t   
                                                                  .
                                                                 
                                    πt         xt−1|t
                                              
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                           zt|t

The matrix Dκ can be found using the method of undetermined coefficient as the solution
to                                                                                        
                                                                 
                                                                           0 1 + ρ −ρ ρ 
                                                                                       
            1 φ          0 0 0 0   1 1                                0 1 + ρ −ρ 0 
                 Dκ =            +        Dκ 
                                               
                                                                                        .
                                                                                        
           −κ 1          −κ 0 0 0     0 β      
                                               
                                                                           0   1    0 0 
                                                                                        
                                                                           0   0   0   ρ
The elements of Dκ are a continuous non-linear function of κ and some lengthy algebra
(available on request) shows that
                                                                      
                                         1  0 1 −ρ 0 
                               lim Dκ =                 .
                               κ→0      1−ρ 0 0 0 0

Since κ → 0 when θ → 1, this completes the argument.




                                                  35
Appendix B. Consumers’ Kalman filter
Define the matrices
                                                          
                                    1 + ρx −ρx 0                        
                                                                 1 0 1
                         C≡
                                     1     0  0
                                                           
                                                           ,D ≡        ,
                                                                 1 0 0
                                      0     0 ρz

and                                                 
                                    σ2 0 0                                       
                                   ²                                0 0 
                                                    
                             Σ1 ≡  0 0 0            ,        Σ2 ≡        .
                                                                    0 σν2
                                    0 0 ση2
Then the process for ξt ≡ (xt , xt−1 , zt ) is described compactly as

                                        ξt = Cξt−1 + (²t , 0, ηt )0 ,

and the observation equation for the consumers is

                                        (at , st )0 = Dξt + (0, νt )0 .

Let P ≡ V art−1 [ξt ]. The value of P is found solving the equation
                                h                                            i
                                                                  −1
                        P = C P − P D0 (DP D0 + Σ2 )                   DP C 0 + Σ1 .

The matrixes A and B in the text are then given by:

                                    A = (I − BD) C,
                                                                        −1
                                    B = P D0 (DP D0 + Σ2 )                   .


Appendix C. Proof of Proposition 1
Let wt be an identified shock, corresponding to a linear combination of current and past
observables. Applying the law of iterated expectations we get
           h             i                                                             h   i
                       e                                     e                         e
         E ct+k |wt , It−1 = E[ lim E [at+k+j |It+k ] |wt , It−1 ] = lim E at+j |wt , It−1 ,
                                   j→∞                                           j→∞




                                                      36
for all k ≥ 0 and, similarly,
                                          h               i                    h            i
                                              e                  e
                                     E ct+k |It−1 = lim E at+j |It−1 .
                                                                  j→∞


It follows that the response of consumption to wt is constant and equal to
           h                    i     h             i                  h                    i                 h          i
                       e            e                       e                  e
         E ct+k |wt , It−1 − E ct |It−1 = lim E at+j |wt , It−1 − lim E at+j |It−1 ,
                                                          j→∞                                       j→∞


for all k ≥ 0.


Appendix D. Econometrician’s Kalman Filter
The econometrician’s state vector is given by
                                                ³                                          ´0
                                     ξtE ≡ xt , xt−1 , zt , xt|t , xt−1|t , zt|t .

Rewrite the dynamics of the vector of consumer expectations (xt|t , xt−1|t , zt|t ), from (9), as
follows:
                                                                                                               
                    xt|t                      xt−1|t−1                                                     xt−1
                                                           1 + ρx                  −ρx ρz                     
                           
                  xt−1|t    =     A
                                             xt−2|t−1
                                                          
                                                          +B
                                                                                                
                                                                                                            xt−2
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    +
                                                           1 + ρx                  −ρx 0                       
                    zt|t                      zt−1|t−1                                                       zt−1
                                                                                           
                                        1          1          0
                                    +B   ²t + B   ηt + B   νt .
                                        1          0          1

Then the state ξtE evolves according to:

                                              ξtE = Qξt−1
                                                      E
                                                          + R (²t , ηt , νt )0 .                                             (19)

where the matrices Q and R are given by
                                                                                  
                                
                                    1 + ρx −ρx                0                    
                                                                                  
                                
                                
                                      1     0                 0                0 
                                                                                 
                                                                            
                   Q =          
                                
                                      0                 0 ρz                ,
                                                                             
                                   
                                                                            
                                
                                 B
                                     1 + ρx             −ρx ρz              
                                                                           A 
                                     1 + ρx −ρx               0




                                                                  37
                                                                           
                       
                                                1 0 0                       
                                                                           
                       
                       
                                      0 0 0                                 
                                                                            
                                                                           
               R =     
                       
                                      0 1 0                                .
                                                                            
                                                    
                                                                           
                       
                        B
                            1 0 0 +B
                                       0 1 0 +B
                                                  0 0 0 
                                                                            
                                                                            
                              1 0 0              0 0 0           0 0 1

   When the econometrician can observe (at , ct ), the observation equation is, in matrix form,

                                       (at , ct )0 = T Xt ,                               (20)

where                                                           
                                1 0 1    0        0   0 
                           T =            ρx      ρx
                                                          .
                                0 0 0 1 + 1−ρx − 1−ρx 0
The econometrician’s filtering problem can then be solved from (19)-(20). The case in which
the econometrician can also observe st is treated in a similar way. This filter can be used
both to compute recursively the likelihood function and to derive smoothed estimates of the
unobservable states in ξtE , as in Section 4.4. Expanding the state space to include the shocks
(²t , ηt , νt ), it is easy to compute their smoothed estimates, as in Section 4.5.




                                               38
References
 [1] Aguiar, M. and G. Gopinath, 2007, “Emerging Market Business Cycles: The Cycle is
     the Trend,” Journal of Political Economy, 115(1): 69-102.

 [2] Anderson, E. W., L. P. Hansen, E. R. McGrattan, and T. J. Sargent, 1996, “Mechanics
    of Forming and Estimating Dynamic Linear Economies,” in Handbook of Computational
    Economics ed. by H. M. Amman, D. A. Kendrick, and J. Rust, Vol. 1, Chap. 4, 171-252,
    Elsevier.

 [3] Barsky, R. and E. Sims, 2008, “Information, Animal Spirits, and the Meaning of Inno-
    vations in Consumer Confidence”, mimeo, Michigan.

 [4] Beaudry, P. and F. Portier, 2006, “Stock Prices, News, and Economic Fluctuations,”
     American Economic Review, 96(4): 1293-1307.

 [5] Blanchard, O. and D. Quah, 1989, “The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate Demand and
     Aggregate Supply Disturbances,” American Economic Review, 79(4): 654-673.

 [6] Blundell, R., Preston, I., 1998, “Consumption Inequality and Income Uncertainty,”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(2): 603-640.

 [7] Boz, E., C. Daude and C. B. Durdu, 2008, “Emerging Market Business Cycles Revisited:
     Learning About the Trend,” FRB International Finance Discussion Paper No. 927.

 [8] Christiano, L., C. Ilut, R. Motto and M. Rostagno, 2007, “Signals: Implications for
     Business Cycles and Monetary Policy,” mimeo, Northwestern University.

 [9] Fernández-Villaverde, J., J. F. Rubio, T. Sargent and M. Watson, 2007, “A, B, C, (and
     D)’s for Understanding VARs,” American Economic Review, 97(3), 1021-1026.

[10] Galı́, J., 1992, “How Well Does the IS-LM Model Fit Postwar US Data?”, Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 107(2): 709-738.

[11] Galı́, J., 1999, “Technology, Employment and the Business Cycle: Do Technology Shocks
     Explain Aggregate Fluctuations?” American Economic Review, 89(1), 249-271.

[12] Galı́, J., 2008, Monetary Policy, Inflation and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to
    the New Keynesian Framework. Princeton University Press.



                                             39
[13] Jaimovich, N. and S. Rebelo, 2006, “Can News about the Future Drive the Business
     Cycle?” mimeo, Northwestern University.

[14] Leeper, E. M., T. B. Walker and S. S. Yang, 2009, “Fiscal Foresight and Information
     Flows,” NBER Working Paper 14630.

[15] Lorenzoni, G., 2009, “A Theory of Demand Shocks,”American Economic Review, forth-
     coming.

[16] Quah, D., 1990, “Permanent and Transitory Movements in Labor Income: An Expla-
     nation for ‘Excess Smoothness’ in Consumption,”Journal of Political Economy, 98(3),
     449-75.

[17] Quah, D., 1991, “The Relative Importance of Permanent and Transitory Components:
     Identification and Some Theoretical Bounds,” NBER Technical Working Papers 106.

[18] Rodriguez Mora, J., Schulstad, P., 2007, “The Effects of GNP announcements on Fluc-
     tuations of GNP Growth,” European Economic Review, 51(8), 1922-1940.

[19] Schmitt-Grohé, S. and M. Uribe, 2008, “What’s News in Business Cycles,” mimeo,
     Columbia University.

[20] Shapiro, M.D. and M.W. Watson, 1988, “Sources of Business Cycle Fluctuations,”
    NBER Macroeconomics Annual, MIT Press.

[21] Sims, C. and T. Zha, 2006, “Does Monetary Policy Generate Recessions?” Macroeco-
     nomic Dynamics, 10(2), 231-272.

[22] Sims, E., 2009, “Non-Invertibilities and Structural VARs,“ mimeo, Michigan.




                                           40
