NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FINANCIAL CRISIS AND THE PARADOX OF UNDER- AND OVER-REGULATION
Joshua Aizenman
Working Paper 15018
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15018

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2009

I would like to thank Maury Obstfeld, Dan Friedman, Ken Kletzer, Donald Wittman and the seminar
participants at UCSC for insightful comments; and Yi Sun for dedicated research assistance. All errors
are mine. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Joshua Aizenman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Financial Crisis and the Paradox of Under- and Over-Regulation
Joshua Aizenman
NBER Working Paper No. 15018
May 2009
JEL No. E02,F02,F15,F36,F42
ABSTRACT
This paper illustrates the paradox of prudential under-regulation in an economy that adopts financial
reform, a reform which exposes the economy to future financial crises. There is individual-uncertainty
about the crisis incidence, and the probability of the crisis is updated sequentially applying Bayesian
inference. Costly regulation can mitigate the probability of the crisis. We identify conditions where
the regulation level supported by the majority is positive after the reform, but below the socially optimal
level. Tranquil time, when the crisis would not take place, reduces the regulation intensity. If the spell
of no crisis is long enough, the regulation level may drop to zero, despite the fact that the socially optimal
regulation level remains positive. The less informative is the prior regarding the probability of a crisis,
the faster will be the drop in regulations induced by a no-crisis, good luck run. The challenges facing
the regulator are aggravated by asymmetric information, as is the case when the public does not observe
regulator’s effort. Higher regulator effort, while helping avoiding a crisis, may be confused as a signal
that the environment is less risky, reducing the posterior probability of the crisis, eroding the support
for costly future regulation. The other side of the regulation paradox is that crisis resulting with unanticipated
high costs may induce over-regulation and stagnation, as the parties that would bear the cost of the
over regulation are underrepresented in the decision making process. We also outline a regulatory
structure that mitigates the above concerns, including information disclosure; increasing the independence
of the regulatory agency from the political process; centralizing the regulatory process and increasing
its transparency; and adopting global standards of minimum prudential regulations and information
disclosure, enforced by the domestic regulator.

Joshua Aizenman
Department of Economics; E2
1156 High St.
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
jaizen@ucsc.edu

History is the sum total of things that could have been avoided.

Konrad Adenauer

No less than the tourist, the writer of history profits from maps.

Charles F. Mullett

Following the “lost development decade” of the 1980s, the attitude towards financial
integration of developing countries switched remarkably in the 1990s. The growing optimism
about the gains from globalization supported trade liberalizations, frequently coupled with
financial opening in Latin America, and to a lesser degree in Asia. Figure 1 plots the broad
patterns of financial integration, applying the Chinn-Ito index of de-jure financial openness (top
panel) and de-facto measures (lower panel, reporting the net and the gross foreign asset/GDP
ratios).1 While financial liberalization took off in the OECD in the 1980s, that decade was
marked by massive sovereign defaults and by growing financial isolation of developing countries.
In sharp contrast, in the 1990s developing countries joined the trend set by the OECD, increasing
their capital openness, a trend that continued globally until the mid 2006. Disaggregation reveals
the heterogeneity of the financial openness patterns of developing countries. Latin America
moved more assertively to embrace capital openness. In contrast, the increase in financial
openness in Asia has been timid, with reversal in financial openness taking place around the
onset of the East-Asian crisis of 1997-8. The attitude towards financial integration of the most
populated countries - China and India - remains guarded and skeptical. With a lag, these
changes in policies were associated with large increases of total foreign asset/GDP positions, and
with more modest changes in net foreign asset/GDP ratios (though these changes are more
pronounced for developing and emerging markets). Econometric evidence suggests the presence
of two way positive ‘Granger causality’ between de-facto and de-jure measures of financial
openness, in line with theoretical models outlining such effects.2

1

The choice of a de jure measure of capital account openness is driven by the motivation to look
into the policy intentions of the countries. The Chinn and Ito index (2008) is based on
information in the IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions
(AREAER). Specifically, it is the first standardized principal component of the variables that
indicate the presence of multiple exchange rates, restrictions on current account transactions and
on capital account transactions, and the requirement of the surrender of export proceeds. Higher
values of this index indicate that a country is more open to cross-border capital transactions. The
index is available for 171 countries for the period of 1970 through 2006.
2

See Aizenman and Noy (2009) for further analysis of such two-way positive feedback effects,
applying panel regressions and Geweke’s decomposition methodology.
2

Capital Market Openess

-1

0

kopen
1

2

3

based on Chinn-Ito Index

1970

1980

1990
year

2000

Emerging
OECD

2010

Other Developing

Other Developing Countries Capital Openness

based on Chinn-Ito Index

based on Chinn-Ito index

-2

-1

-1

-.5

kopen
0

kopen

0

.5

1

1

Emerging Market Capital Openness

1970

1980

1990
year

Emerging, Asia
Emerging, Other

2000

2010

1970

Emerging, LA

1980

1990
year

2000

Developing, Asia
Developing, Other

2010

Developing, LA

De-jure financial integration, Chinn Ito index, 1970-2007

Capital Market Openness
Based on de facto measures ( Total Foreign Asset / GDP )

0

-.8

.5

-.6

kopen
-.4

ew open
1
1.5

-.2

2

0

Capital Market Openness
Based on de facto measures (Net External Asset/GDP)

1970

1980

1990
year
Emerging
OECD

2000

2010

1970

Other Developing

1980

1990
year
Emerging
OECD

2000
Other Developing

De-facto financial integration; Net and total foreign asset/GDP, 1970-2006

Figure 1
De-jure and de-facto financial integration

3

2010

The differential path towards financial openness taken by Asia versus Latin America may
reflect the vigorous debate about financial opening. This deliberation is a reincarnation of the
earlier immiserizing growth literature, identifying conditions under which growth may be
welfare reducing in the presence of preexisting distortions. While financial opening increases
welfare when the only distortion is restricting intertemporal trade across countries, financial
opening may be welfare reducing in the presence of other distortions. An important example of
such a distortion is moral hazard, which frequently acts as an implicit subsidy to borrowing and
investment. Moral hazard arises when investors believe they will be bailed out of bad investment
by the taxpayer. This bailing out may be carried out by the treasury, the central bank, or by
international agencies [the IMF, World Bank, etc]. In these circumstances, the tax-payer
subsidizes the investment. A frequent rationale for the bailing out is the “too big to fail” doctrine
– the fear that allowing large borrowers to go under will trigger a systemic crisis.3
Less deliberated has been the rapid adoption of financial innovations and financial
deregulation in the OECD countries, being led by the US. Frequently, the presumption was that
the superior financial intermediation of the OECD implies that these innovations are welfare
improving, with negligible downside risk exposure. The prolonged spell of what was dubbed
“the great moderation” further reduced concerns about the downside risk associated with
financial intermediation, as was reflected by the remarkable decline in the market price of risk.
The moderation also reduced the appetite for regulation, with growing acceptance of
Greenspan’s seductive “market-stabilizing private regulatory forces” doctrine.4 Concerns about
the inherent principle-agent/moral hazard associated with financial intermediation were swept
aside, minimizing thereby the potential role of the regulator. The data also reveals high
persistency of the stances of countries towards financial integration -- the autoregressive
coefficient of AR(1) process fitted to the Chinn Ito index overtime is 0.84 for Emerging Asian,
3

The peril of moral hazard and financial fragility associated with financial liberalization was the
focus of McKinnon and Pill (1996), Demigüc-Kunt and Detragiache (1998), and Hellmann,
Murdock, and Stiglitz (2000). See Dooley and Shin (2000) and Bongini, Claessens, and Ferri
(2001) for empirical validations of the moral hazard interpretation in the context of the 1997-8
crisis in East Asia. An overview of these issues and the debate about the desirability of financial
opening can be found in and Aizenman (2004).
4

“As we move into a new century, the market-stabilizing private regulatory forces should
gradually displace many cumbersome, increasingly ineffective government structures.” Remarks
by Alan Greenspan, FED Chair, April 12, 1997.
4

and 0.99 for Emerging Latin American countries, 0.93 for non-Emerging Developing Asian and
1 for non Emerging Developing Latin American countries. The high co-movement of the Chinn
Ito index across countries, and the persistence of policies towards financial openness suggest a
pendulum dynamics towards financial integration. Indeed, the process of globalization increases
the interdependency of national capital markets, possibly leading to tighter co-movements of
policies and attitudes towards financial openness and other policy dimensions of globalization.
The unfolding global liquidity crisis illustrates vividly the universality of moral hazard,
and the notion that the “too big to fail” doctrine is shaping governments and central banks
policies in times of systemic crises. It also serves as a painful reminder of the risk of underregulating domestic and international financial intermediation, exposing the tax payer to
excessive risk taking that in due course would be subsidized by tax payers’ financed bailing outs.
The magnitude of the global crisis in terms of the exposure, the global distribution of toxic assets,
and the speed of deleveraging surprised most observers [as of April 2009, the IMF estimates the
global toxic assets that banks and financial institutions will have to dispose of or write down to
be about $4 trillion]. The high costs of the crisis suggest that the pendulum of financial
integration may shift towards reversal of financial globalization. Even if we recognize that
“Those who cannot learn from history are doomed to repeat it” (George Santayana), a necessary
condition for successful learning is understanding the forces accounting for the past. Simply
reversing the policy stances of the past twenty years would backfire as we may overshoot the
needed adjustment, inducing other distortions.
The purpose of this paper is to provide a map and explain the tendency to under regulate
in “good times,” and the risk associated with overshooting the adjustment called for, following a
financial crisis. Both under- and over-regulation may reflect the paradox of financial regulation:
the success of the prudential regulator or a prolonged period of economic tranquility lead to
complacency, reducing the demand for regulator’s services, inducing under regulation, which
leads to a financial calamity. While the identity of economic agents that benefit directly from
crisis avoidance is unknown, the cost and the cumbrance of regulations are transparent. Hence,
crises that have been avoided are imperceptible and are underrepresented in the political
discourse. The demand for regulation declines during prolonged good times, thereby increasing
the ultimate cost of eventual crises. The other side of the regulation paradox is the hazard of
over-regulating financial intermediation, in an environment where the identity of economic

5

agents that benefit directly from financial regulations is known, while the identity of successful
projects and the entrepreneurs that would not be financed due to over-regulation is unknown -they are unrepresented in the political discourse. These considerations suggest the need to strive
towards a golden-rule of Goldilocks prudential regulations.
We consider an economy that adopts a financial reform, a reform that exposes the
economy to a future crisis. There is individual-uncertainty about the crisis, and uncertainty
regarding the probability of future crises. The public’s initial prior is updated sequentially
applying a Bayesian inference. Costly regulation determined by a majority rule can mitigate the
probability of the crisis. We show that when the majority in the economy is partially exposed to
the crisis, and the efficacy level of regulation is high enough, the regulation level following the
reform is positive, but below the socially optimal level. Tranquil time, when the crisis would not
take place, reduces overtime the regulation intensity. If the spell of no crisis is long enough, the
regulation level may drop to zero, despite the fact that the socially optimal regulation level
remains positive. The less informative is the prior regarding the probability of a crisis, the faster
will be the drop in regulations induced by a no crisis good-luck run. The challenges facing the
regulator are aggravated by asymmetric information. This would be the case if the probability of
a crisis is reduced by regulator’s effort, but this effort is unobserved by the public. In these
circumstances, higher regulator effort, helping to avoid a crisis, may be confused as a signal that
the environment is less risky, reducing the posterior probability of the crisis. This in turn would
reduce the support for costly future regulation. Asymmetric information may put the regulator in
an odd position of damned if you don’t regulate today, damned tomorrow if you regulate today.
A crisis that results with unanticipated high costs, may induce over-regulation and
stagnation, as the parties that would bear the cost of the over regulation are under-represented in
the decision making process. We close the paper with an outline of a regulatory structure that
mitigates the above concerns. Improving information disclosure is needed to allow the regulator
real time assessment of systemic risk triggered by “too big to fail” concerns. Increasing the
independence of the regulatory agency from the political process would reduce the tendency to
under-regulate in good times. Centralizing the regulatory process and increasing its transparency
would mitigate the problems associated with asymmetric information. Adopting global
standards of minimum prudential regulations and information disclosure enforced by the
domestic regulator would mitigate the tendency to under-regulate in good times.

6

I.

FINANCIAL REFORMS, REGULATION AND INDIVIDUAL-SPECIFIC UNCERTAINTY

We outline a minimal model that allows tracing the dynamics of regulation in the
aftermath of a financial reform in the presence of individual-specific uncertainty. The key role
of individual-specific uncertainty in explaining the status quo-bias in the context of trade reform
was highlighted by Fernandez and Rodrik (1991), but seems to be overlooked in explaining the
dynamics of regulation in the aftermath of a financial reform. As the experience of the 1990s
vividly illustrated, financial reforms increase the economy’s exposure to costly financial crises,
events that are associated with asymmetric incidence among agents and sectors. The
intertwining of financial institutions operating with limited transparency frequently resulted in
nasty news, when agents found that they were far more exposed to the crisis than they expected.
The dynamics in our model are the outcome of an interaction between two ingredients. First,
agents update overtime their assessment of the probability of a crisis, possibly applying a
Bayesian inference. Second, regulation is costly. While the costs are shared by all agents, the
regulation intensity is determined by a majority rule. We study the dynamics of regulations
during a spell of no-crisis episodes in the aftermath of a reform until the crisis happens. We
focus on the case where the majority of agents face individual-specific uncertainty regarding
their exposure to crises’ incidences. We contrast it to a case where the intensity of regulation is
set in order to maximize the expected utility of the ‘average agent,’ a concept akin to the
expected discounted GDP net of regulation costs.
At time zero a policy reform takes place. The policy reform exposes the economy to a
risk of a financial crisis, which will reduce the income of the affected agents by τ. There is
uncertainty regarding the probability of such a crisis, and its incidence. We assume a recursive
structure, where the regulation intensity at time t impacts the probability of a crisis at time t + 1.
In the absence of regulation, the perceived probability at time zero of a crisis occurring at period
1 is P0,1 . Regulation associated with spending resources ρ 0 per agent at time zero reduces the
probability of a crisis from P0,1 to P0,1 ⋅ Q , Q(0) = 1; Q ≤ 1 . The regulation efficacy increases

with the spending: Q = Q( ρ0 ); Q ' < 0 .
To fix ideas, we assume that Q( ρ0 ) is a logistic function:

7

(1)

Q( ρ0 ) =

2 exp− υρ0
,
1 + exp − υρ0

where υ measures the efficacy of regulation. Hence, Q '( ρ0 ) = −υ

Q( ρ0 )
. Overtime,
1 + exp − υρ0

agents update the probability Pt ,t +1 in a Bayesian manner, so that no crisis in period zero would
induce a lower perceived probability of a crisis in period 2, P0,1 ≥ P1,2 . The same applies for an
arbitrary t: no crisis from period one to t, would imply Pt −1,t ≥ Pt ,t +1 . A detailed example of such
inference is provided in the Appendix.
The economy is populated by a large number of atomistic agents, a fraction ω of which
are fully exposed to the crisis [dubbed FE]. The remaining population is partially exposed
[dubbed PE] – each agent in the PE group is adversely affected by the crisis with probability q.
The income in period zero of all agents is normalized to 1 minus the per capita cost of the
regulation, ρ 0 . The time line is described in Figure 2. Financial reform takes places at the
beginning of period zero. Next, the authorities set the regulation intensity, ρ 0 . At the beginning
of period 1 the uncertainty regarding the crisis and its individual incidences is resolved. With
probability P0,1 ⋅ Q( ρ0 ) , a crisis will take place in period 1, reducing the income per capita of the
impacted agents to 1 − τ . With probability 1 − P0,1 ⋅ Q( ρ0 ) , no crisis will take place in period 1.

t = 1, No crisis
The public updates its prior to P1,2 ;
t=0
Reform takes place;
The regulator sets ρ 0

The regulator sets ρ1

Pr. 1 − P ⋅ Q

Pr. P ⋅ Q

t = 1, Crisis
Possible regime change; the public
updates its prior to P1,2 ; the

regulator sets ρ1
Figure 2: the time line, t = 0, 1

8

The key difference between the two groups is the individual’s risk of being exposed to
the crisis. In group FE, all are adversely exposed to crisis; whereas in group PE only a fraction q
< 1 are impacted, and there is individual uncertainty regarding each agent’s exposure. The
income profiles of the agents in each group are summarized in Table 1.

If no crisis occurs at time 1, the same scenario will repeat itself in period 1, updating the time
indices, leading to the following sequence in period 1 and 2
I.

Agents adjust downwards their prior of a crisis at time 2 to P1,2 , P0,1 ≥ P1,2 , anticipating
that the actual probability of the crisis taking place in period 2 is P1,2 ⋅ Q( ρ1 ) [the
updating follows the Bayesian inference outlined in the Appendix].

II.

The policy maker sets regulation intensity in period 1 at ρ1 . The income of the agents
in periods 2 and 3 can be seen in Table 1, updating the time indices forward by one
period.

III.

At the beginning of period 2 the uncertainty regarding the crisis and its individual
incidence is resolved. If no crisis takes place in period 2, the priors about the
probability of a crisis in period 3 are updated as described above, and the problem
repeats itself.
Table 1

Income and crisis incidence for the FE and PE groups, t = 0, 1
Group

Income in t = 0

FE

1 − ρ0

Income in t = 1

⎧1 − τ
⎪
⎨
⎪ 1
⎩

Share

crisis happens,
no crsis,

Pr

P0,1 ⋅ Q( ρ0 )

Pr 1 − P0,1 ⋅ Q( ρ0 )

ω
PE

Share
1- ω

1 − ρ0

⎧⎧1 − τ
⎪⎪
⎪⎨
⎨⎪
⎪⎩1
⎪1
⎩

for

fraction q
crisis happens, Pr P0,1 ⋅ Q( ρ 0 )

for

fraction 1 − q
no crisis, Pr

9

1 − P0,1 ⋅ Q( ρ0 )

If a crisis takes place, there may be a regime change impacting future regulations,
described in more detail in Section 3. In the absence of regime change, the sequence described
above continues with the proper adjustment of the prior regarding future crises. Agents are risk
neutral, maximizing their expected utility,

∑

∞
t =0

β t Ct . The recursive nature of the problem, and

the observation that regulation today impacts the probability of the crisis tomorrow reduces the
policy maker’s problem to a two period optimization.
We focus first on the optimal regulation in period zero, contrasting two cases. The first is
when the regulation intensity is determined by a planner maximizing the expected income of the
‘average agent,’ the second is when the regulation is determined by a majority rule.

Regulation Intensity Optimizing the Average Agent’s welfare
The policy maker sets the regulation intensity, ρ 0 , as to maximize the representative agents’
expected utility

(2)

⎡
⎡ω (1 − τ P0,1Q( ρ0 )) +
⎤⎤
Max ⎢1 − ρ0 + β ⎢
⎥⎥
⎢⎣
⎣(1 − ω )[q(1 − τ P0,1Q( ρ 0 )) + (1 − q)1]⎦ ⎥⎦ .

ρ0
Equivalently, the regulation is maximizing 1 − ρ0 + β [1 − τ P0,1 ⋅ Q( ρ0 )(ω + (1 − ω )q)] . An internal

solution with positive regulation will take place only if the marginal benefit of the first dollar
spent on regulation exceeds one: if −1 − τβ P0,1 ⋅ Q|'ρ0 =0 (ω + (1 − ω )q ) > 0 . Applying (1),
Q|'ρ0 =0 = −0.5υ , hence positive regulation will take place only if 0.5ντβ P0,1 (ω + (1 − ω )q) > 1 .

High enough regulation efficacy υ induces positive regulation. The critical level of regulation
efficacy associated with positive regulation depends negatively on the crisis probability P0,1 ;
crisis cost, τ; the discount factor, β; and the share of the agents exposed to the crisis, ω + (1 − ω )q .
Assuming an internal equilibrium, the FOC determining the regulation level set by the planner,

ρ S ,0 , is

10

(3) ρ S ,0

⎧ solution of
⎪
=⎨
⎪0
⎩

1 = − P0,1Qρ' 0 βτλs

if

0 < 0.5υβτλs − 1

where λs = ω + (1 − ω )q .
if

0 ≥ 0.5υβτλs − 1

Optimal regulation equates a marginal dollar spent on regulation to its marginal benefit: the drop
in the probability of a crisis; times the discounted cost of a crisis, βτ ; times the share of agents
exposed to the crisis, λs , λs = ω + (1 − ω )q .

Regulation Intensity set by Majority Rule

The economy is composed of two groups, hence there are two cases corresponding to this
scenario.
The fully exposed group forms the majority, as would be the case when ω > 0.5 . The regulation

intensity is determined by applying considerations akin to the case of a planer, (3), with the
modification that the share of the agents exposed to the crisis increases from λs = (1 − ω ) + ω q to

λFE = 1 .
The partially exposed group forms the majority, as would be the case when the individual

uncertainty dominates, ω < 0.5 . The regulation intensity is determined in a way akin to the
planer’s solution, (3), with the modification that the share of agents exposed to the crisis drops
from λs = (1 − ω ) + ω q to λPE = q . Consequently, if an internal equilibrium takes place (i.e.,
when ρ 0 > 0 ), the optimal regulation equates the marginal cost (one) with the marginal benefit,
⎧ω + (1 − ω )q
⎪
− P0,1Qρ0 βτλk ; where λk = ⎨1
⎪q
⎩
'

for

k=S

for k = FE .
for k = PE

Consequently, the regulation levels are ranked by the following claim:

Claim 1

With positive regulation, the regulation level set by the ‘social planner’ is below the level that is
optimal for the FE group, and above the level that is optimal for the PE group:

ρ FE ,0 > ρ S ,0 > ρ PE ,0 .

11

Discussion

The only difference between the FOC conditions determining optimal regulation is the
probability of the deciding group, λ, being exposed to crisis incidence. If the regulation is set by
group FE, the probability is 1, as all agents in that group are fully exposed. If the regulation is
determined by the PE group, this probability drops to q. The social planner attaches a
probability of crisis incidence that is a weighted average of the incidence affecting the two
groups: ω ⋅1 + (1 − ω )q . As q < ω ⋅1 + (1 − ω )q < 1 , the weight attached to the marginal benefit of
regulation is highest when the regulation is determined by a majority composed of the fully
exposed group (FE); the lowest when the regulation is determined by a majority composed of the
partially exposed group (PE); and in between these two when the regulation is determined by the
planner.

Applying the above discussion, the factors impacting the regulation intensity are summarized by
the following claim:

Claim II

In an internal equilibrium with positive regulation, the regulation rate increases the higher is the
perceived probability of a crisis; the higher are crisis costs; and the higher is the effectiveness of
regulation, υ . All these factors also increase the likelihood of positive regulation.

To get further insight, we review a simulation of an economy where individual-specific
uncertainty dominates, and the partially exposed agents are a majority (ω < 0.5). Suppose that
agents in the PE group are exposed to the crisis with probability half (q = 0.5), and that the
conditions for internal equilibrium are met: −1 + 0.5βντ q > 0 . Figure 3, panel (I) illustrates a
simulation where the share of the partially exposed agents is 0.7, and the probability P of a crisis,
in the absence of regulation, is half. The top bold curve corresponds to the net marginal benefit
of a social planner, and the solid curve to that of the PE decision maker. The optimal regulation

12

level is determined at the intersection of each curve with the horizontal axis.5 Group PE
overlooks the regulations’ benefits accruing to the fully exposed group, FE. Consequently, the
regulation set by the PE group is well below that of the social planner
[ ρ PE = 0.026 < ρ S = 0.0415 ].6 Figure 4 depicts the impact of the regulation on Q: regulation
intensity ρ PE = 0.026 cuts the probability of a crisis by about half, from 0.5 P to about 0.25 P.

S
S

PE

PE

ρ

ρ

Case I, P = 0.5

Case II, P = 0.25

Figure 3: The net marginal benefit of regulation and regulation intensity

The simulation corresponds to β = 0.95, υ = 50, τ = 0.25, q = 0.5, ω = 0.3 , drawing
−1 + βτ PQ ' q (solid) and −1 + βτ PQ '(ω + (1 − ω )q ) (bold) for varying ρ .

5

The marginal gain associated with increasing the regulation from the perspective of the planner
is the bold, top curve, plotting β [−τ 0,1 ⋅ P0,1 ⋅ Qρ' 0 (ω + (1 − ω )q)] − 1 . The marginal gain associated
with increasing the regulation from the perspective of the PE group is the lower curve, plotting
β [−τ P0,1 ⋅ Qρ' 0 q] − 1 . The social marginal benefit of regulation exceeds the marginal benefit
assessed by the PE, as ω + (1 − ω )q > q .
6
The vertical gap between the two curves, −τβ 0,1 ⋅ Qρ' 0 (1 − q ) , drops with the share of exposed
agents in the PE group. Thus, individual-uncertainty is a key factor accounting the gap between
the socially optimal regulation level and the regulation determined by group PE [if all agents are
fully exposed (q = 1), the majority would choose the socially optimal regulation level].
13

Q

ρ
Figure 4: regulation intensity and risk reduction

II. INTERTEMPORAL INFERENCE AND THE DYNAMICS OF UNDER-REGULATION
In this section we evaluate the intertemporal patterns of under regulation during a spell of
“good times,” a run with no financial crises. In the Appendix we outline a Bayesian inference
example where the prior information about crisis occurrence follows a beta pdf, with the prior
mean of the crisis occurring in period 1 being P0,1 =

a
; a, b > 0 . The coefficients a, b
a+b

reflect the prior information of the public regarding the mean and the variance of the probability
of a crisis. We show there that a run of “good luck” with no crises occurring in periods (1, 2, …,
t) would induce a posterior mean of Pt ,t +1 =

a
. Hence, a longer spell of good luck reduces
a+b+t

the perceived mean of a crisis’ next period.
Consequently, each period that the crisis is avoided; the probability P is adjusted
downward, shifting both curves in Figure 3 downward, reducing thereby the regulation intensity.
A long enough spell of no crisis may induce zero regulation, as would be the case if P drops from
0.5 to 0.25 in the above simulation. This situation is captured in panel II of Figure 3. The socially
optimal regulation is positive, yet the regulation level set by group PE would be
zero: ρ PE = 0 < ρ S = 0.02 . This simulation illustrates the following claim:

14

Claim 3

Suppose that the majority of the economy is partially exposed to the crisis. If the efficacy
level of regulation is high enough, the regulation level in period zero is positive, but below the
socially optimal level. The under-regulation drops with the share of exposed agents, q. Tranquil
time, when the crisis would not take place, reduces the regulation intensity. If the spell of no
crisis is long enough, the regulation level may drop to zero, despite the fact that the socially
optimal regulation level remains positive.

Discussion

Individual-uncertainty regarding crisis incidences leads to under regulation, with the
possibility of converging to zero regulation during long spells of no crisis, despite the fact that
it’s socially optimal to regulate. Consequently, uncertainty regarding the incidence of the crisis
leads to under-regulation, which increases the probability of the crisis above the socially
optimum level. If regulation reduces both the probability of a crisis and the intensity of a
realized crisis, then under-regulation may increase the depth of the ultimate crisis. Claim 3
illustrates the paradox of prudential regulation: the uncertainty regarding the identity of the
agents that benefit from crisis avoidance leads to under-regulation.
The impact of the precision of the prior information is summarized by the following
claim [derived in the Appendix]:

Claim 4

The less informative is the prior regarding the probability of a crisis, the faster will be the
drop in regulations induced by a “good luck” run.

Discussion

With less informative prior, the impact of a no crisis event is greater, as the agent
operates with greater initial ignorance. Thus, good luck runs are especially damaging in the
context of financial innovations. Arguably, this was the case of some of the recent financial
innovations in the US [new exotic derivatives, bundling, etc…]. Therefore, good luck runs are
more damaging in the aftermath of unprecedented financial reform, where the public is exposed
for the first time to new financial instruments.
15

The above discussion assumed transparency of the regulatory effort, where the public is
fully informed about it. The implications of regulation opacity and asymmetric information are
summarized in the following Claim [see the Appendix for the analysis]

Claim 5

Consider an economy with asymmetric information between the public and the regulator.
The regulator determines the regulation intensity, but the public gets only noisy signals about it.
A higher regulator effort which avoids a crisis may be confused as a signal that the environment
is less risky, reducing the posterior probability of the crisis, Pt ,t +1 below the level observed with
symmetric information [recall that P is the probability of the crisis in the absence of regulation].
This in turn may erode the future support for costly regulation.

Discussion

This example deals with the costs of asymmetric information regarding the

regulator effort. Higher effort helping in averting a crisis today would induce overconfidence,
leading the public to infer that the risk is lower than the actual one, as the public under weighs
the regulator’s effort. This in turn may reduce the support for costly future regulations, and
increase the ultimate cost of the crisis. Asymmetric information puts the regulator in the odd
position of damned if you do, damned if you don't. Probabilistically, with asymmetric
information the regulator would be dammed if he is not putting the effort today, as it may lead to
a crisis tomorrow. Yet, a regulator’s effort today may induce the public to overconfidence, as it
undervalues the regulator’s contribution to crisis avoidance, and overvalues the no-crisis event as
a signal reducing the posterior probability of a crisis, P. Such overconfidence may lead down the
road to a deeper crisis [see the appendix for a detailed example of this situation]. Centralized
regulation designed to reduce the confusion may mitigate the cost of asymmetric information.

16

III.

THE HAZARD OF OVERREGULATION

The onset of a crisis may change the above scenario in circumstances where the crisis
depth exceeds the anticipated one. This may happen if the crisis would lead to the unexpected
disappearance of markets for risk, implying that the realized cost of the crisis, τ, would be of a
higher order of magnitude than the anticipated one. A possible interpretation for the
disappearance of markets for risk is the emergence of Knightian uncertainty. This concept was
postulated by Frank Knight, dealing with situations where agents who were exposed to
quantifiable risks, drawn from known probability distribution, find that they operate in an
environment where the probability distribution of a random outcome is unknown [what was
perceived as “known unknowns,” is viewed now as “unknown unknowns”]. The aversion to
Kernighan uncertainty may account for the flight to quality and the large cost of the unfolding
present crisis, as well as for the costs of the 1997-8 East Asian crises, when prime borrowers (as
were viewed before the crisis) lost access to credit.7
A crisis that leads to costs of a higher order of magnitude than the anticipated ones may
induce a pendulum shift from under-regulation to overregulation. Interestingly, such
overshooting was avoided in the 1990s. Indeed, the opposite took place in various countries
(including Mexico and Korea): following the onset of the crisis, countries adjusted by increasing
their financial openness as part of a global trend of financial liberalization. This was probably
because the crises in the 1990s were localized, at times of global growth, when the affected
countries found that depreciation and higher exports facilitated the recovery. Today’s crisis is
globalized, being propagated globally from the US, leading to massive de-leveraging of OECD
exposure to developing countries. The global recession and the resulting drop in international
trade imply that, on average, exporting the adjustment would not work this time. The present
crisis exposes the fault lines of globalization, calling for domestic adjustment of policies and
regulations in the OECD. While it’s pre-mature to conclude regarding the ultimate regulatory
adjustment, the risk is that in the rush to regain credibility, we may overshoot the adjustment, or
adjust in the wrong direction.

7

See Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2008) and Blanchard’s guest article at the Economist
(January 29, 2009) for the role of Knightian Uncertainty in explaining flight to quality and the
disappearance of risk markets.

17

The argument about under-regulation following a financial reform may have a symmetric
counterpart dealing with over regulation following a financial calamity. In a system that
represses financial intermediation, the stake holders that would have benefited from financial
intermediation are under-represented in the decision making. This would be the case when there
is individual-uncertainty regarding the incidence of being a successful entrepreneur. We skip
modeling this situation, as it is analogues to Fernandez and Rodrik (1991). The main difference
between the case of over and under regulation is that in the first, the absence of crisis induces a
drop of the probability of a crisis, deepening overtime the under-regulation. In contrast, overregulation cuts the channels leading to the crisis, at a cost of reducing the actual output below the
potential. Over-regulation induces a static economy, where the benefit of crisis avoidance may
come with a larger cost of stagnation, a cost that may be underrepresented in the political
discourse.

18

IV. ON THE DESIGN OF BALANCED REGULATIONS
We close the paper with a discussion of regulatory changes needed to deal with the
challenges associated with under and over-regulation.8

Information Disclosure

A necessary condition for successful regulation is that the regulator should be informed
about the exposure to systemic risks. This requires having timely detailed information,
preferably on a confidential basis, about financial institutions whose size/GDP is deemed large
enough to be in the category of “too big to fail.” The lack of such information has been vividly
illustrated in the US.9 In the US, the regulator (i.e., the Federal Government) imposes stringent
disclosure requirements on the non-financial corporate sector, subject to strict confidentiality of
the micro-level data disclosed to the regulator. Curiously, there is no comparable information
disclosure requirement imposed on the financial sector. To illustrate, the Bureau of Economic
Analysis (BEA) does an annual survey of US direct investment abroad. The data collection is
confidential, and is based on mandatory surveys conducted by the BEA of all the establishments
above a critical size. It contains detailed confidential information, including direct investment,
employment data, R&D expenditures, trade in goods and services, and selected financial data.
This, and other data collected by federal agencies, provides the regulator with timely information
about the non-financial sector.
In contrast, in the decades before the crisis, there was no comparable attempt to collect
data dealing with exposure of the financial sector. As a result, the regulator was frequently in the
dark regarding the overall balance sheet exposure of investment banks, hedge funds, and other
non-commercial financial intermediaries. This information gap is troublesome, as the cost of
bailing out the financial system is frequently much higher than the costs of bailouts targeting the
non-financial, real sector. Such cost discrepancy reflects the quick diffusion of financial panic.
Furthermore, financial institutions tend to be more intertwined than the non financial corporate
sector, implying that a bankruptcy of a large enough financial institution may lead to large
8

See Barth, Lin, Ma, Seade and Song (2009) for a comprehensive empirical study of the impact
of differential bank regulations and supervision.
9
The crisis exposed the large systemic exposure of the US financial system to credit-default
swaps (CDSs), at levels that seemed to surprise both the public and the regulators [see the case of
AIG].
19

domino effects and systemic risks (see the massive bailout of AIG during the fall of 2008).
Hence, any serious regulatory reform should start with upgrading data collection, inducing
mandatory periodic confidential reports of the balance sheet exposure of all financial institutions
above a minimum size operating in the domestic market.

Independence of the regulatory agency from the political process and various pressure groups

In the presence of individual risk regarding the incidence of a crisis, there are costs associated
with designing regulations by a simple majority rule. Preferably, regulation should be the
responsibility of an independent body managed by civil servants aiming at the expected GDP,
with no sartorial biases. The logic for this independence is akin to the gains attributed to Central
Bank independence. In the presence of principle-agent problems, the regulator’s independence is
needed to avoid the wish of the regulated agents to minimize information disclosure. This
follows from the moral hazard involved, where the agent would prefer under-regulation as a way
to facilitate excessive risk taking subsidized by the tax payers. Indeed, observers noted the
bargaining clout of Wall Street as a contributing factor for the under regulation of the financial
system in the US.10

Centralizing the regulatory process

A fractured regulatory process has the risk of each agency focusing on its narrowest task,
viewing the need to deal with the big picture as beyond its mandate. Facing the challenges of
dealing with potential toxic assets, each regulatory agency would opt for “not in my
neighborhood” approach, preferring that other agencies deal with it. A fragmented regulatory
approach is damaging because with intertwining financial exposures, evaluating the systemic risk
requires combining all the pieces of the financial puzzle together. A centralized regulatory
10

See Rajan and Zingals (2003) and Rajan (2005) for insightful discussions of political economy
aspects of financial intermediation. They point out the hazard associated with the incumbent
ability to leverage the power of governmental regulation to protect incumbent’s economic
position. This comes frequently at the expense of the public interest.
Similar concerns were raised recently in the US: “The New York Fed is, by custom and design,
clubby and opaque. It is charged with curbing banks’ risky impulses, yet its president is selected
by and reports to a board dominated by the chief executives of some of those same banks.”
Becker and Morgenson, NYT, April 27, 2009.

20

process would also minimize the risk that a proactive financial system would attempt to arbitrage
between diverse regulatory agencies.
Effective regulation also benefits by increasing the quality of the signal provided by the
regulatory agency. The risk of fractured regulation is of increasing the opacity of the system,
making it harder for the public to assess the regulatory effort. As was shown in Claim 5, greater
opacity that leads to asymmetric information, distorts the regulatory process, and may magnify
future under-regulation.

Adopting global standards of minimum prudential regulations and information disclosure,
enforced by the domestic regulator.

The discussion in section 2 implies that the regulatory agency might face growing
pressure to under-regulate during spells of no crisis. Imposing global minimum standards
increases the costs of deregulation, as it involves deviating from an international treaty. Thereby,
such a treaty serves as a commitment devise, increasing the odds of resisting transitory domestic
pressure stemming for a ‘good luck’ run. Another rationale for the gains associated with
minimum prudential standards follows the theory of the second best: the incidence of the moral
hazard distortion associated with the ‘too big to fail’ doctrine increase with the magnitude of the
distorted activity. Under-regulation, in a country that is financially open, may induce regulatory
arbitrage, attracting capital inflows in search of higher returns induced by the higher implicit
subsidy provided in more under-regulated countries. Imposing minimum regulatory standards
would help in cupping and mitigating the costs of such speculative inflows.11 Arguably, the
large exposure of AIG to European and US banks reflected such regulatory arbitrage, where the
under-regulation of AIG allowed it to sell underpriced insurance contracts, insurance
arrangements that were de-facto subsidized by the US tax payers. These contracts were in the
form of a type of guarantee against default. As of June 2008, $307 billion of these contracts were
written on instruments owned by banks in America and Europe and designed to guarantee the
banks’ asset quality, thereby helping their regulatory capital levels [see AIG’s rescue, Size
matters, Sep 18th 2008, The Economist]. The shear size of AIG made these contracts more

attractive, as it increased the odds of a bailout. Foreign parties operating in more conservative
markets that did not offer such insurance (or markets that charged more for it) had the incentive
11

Further discussion on these issues is in Aizenman (2009)
21

to purchase the insurance offered by AIG, increasing thereby the short run profits of AIG, and
the long run costs to US tax payers.

To conclude, the challenge facing the global financial system is to reform the global
financial architecture to allow Goldilocks regulations, and mitigating the temptation to underregulate in spells of good time, preventing overregulation in the aftermath of a financial crisis.
The risk of not meeting these challenges is that affected countries will opt to reduce their
financial integration, some will overshoot the regulatory adjustment inducing lower future
growth, and other countries would remain exposed to the hazard of replaying crisis dynamics in
the future.

22

APPENDIX
In this Appendix we review a Bayesian inference problem leading to the results discussed in the
paper [see Zellner (1971) for detailed analysis of similar inference problems]. Assume that the
probability of the crisis is constant overtime. Hence, the probability of n independent draws
from the crisis distribution follows a discrete binomial pdf. Specifically, the probability of
observing during n periods (1, 2, .., n), of which m tranquil, no crisis events, and n-m crises
events is
(A1)

⎛n⎞
p(m | θ , n) = ⎜ ⎟ θ m (1 − θ ) n − m .
⎝m⎠

Equation (A1), viewed as a function of the unknown parameter θ , is the likelihood function.
Suppose that the prior information about the probability of crisis occurrence, θ , is summarized
the following beta pdf:
(A2)

p(θ ) = kθ a −1 (1 − θ )b −1 ; a, b > 0 ,

where k is a normalization constant [ k = Γ(a + b) / Γ(a )Γ(b) ]. Applying the properties of the
beta pdf, it follows that the prior mean of the crisis in period 1[ P0,1 in the notation of out paper,
for the case where Q = 1] is
(A3)

E (θ ) = a /(a + b) .

It can be shown that V (θ ) = ab /[(a + b) 2 (a + b + 1)] . Hence, the values of a and b reflect the
public’s prior information about the mean and the variance of crises occurrence.
Applying (A1) and (A2) and Bayes’ theorem, the posterior pdf for the crisis after n periods with
m crises realizations is a modified beta pdf:
(A4)

p(θ | n, m) = k 'θ a −1+ m (1 − θ )b −1+ n − m ; a, b > 0

where k ' is the modified normalization constant. The posterior mean of a crisis can be shown to
be
(A5)

E (θ | n, m) = (a + m) /(a + b + n) .

Thus, no crisis in period one result with a posterior probability of a crisis in period 2 of
P1,2 =

a
. Equation (A5) also imply that the posterior mean of a crisis after a good luck
a + b +1

spell of no crisis during periods 1, …t is E (θ | t ) = a /( a + b + t ) . Hence, the marginal impact of
another period of no crisis on the crisis probability is

23

(A6)

∂Pt ,t +1 / ∂t = −

Pt ,t +1
a+b+t

,

Recalling that V (θ ) = ab /[(a + b) 2 (a + b + 1)] , a more informative priors are associated with
higher a and b ( V (θ ) ⎯⎯⎯
→ 0 ). Thus, (A6) implies that less informative priors would
a ,b →∞
increase the impact of another period with no crisis on the posterior probability of a crisis
[Claim 4 in the paper].
We close this Appendix with overview of Claim 5. Suppose that the public has
incomplete information about the regulator efficacy. This would be the case if the actual
Q( ρ0 ) is impacted by regulatory effort, which is noisily observed by the public. For example,

suppose that the actual impact of the regulation intensity increases with the regulator effort, e,

(A7) Q( ρ0 , e) = Q( ρ0 )(1 − e) ,

where Q is the regulatory impact on P, as a function of regulatory cost and effort, ρ 0 , e ,
respectively. The public observes the regulation cost, ρ 0 , but has only a noisy indicator ε of the
regulator’s effort, ε = e + δ , where δ is the noise. The two components of ε are assumed to be
zero mean, independent, E (e) = E (δ ) = cov(e, δ ) = 0 , and uncorrelated with the factors
impacting the occurrence of a crisis in the absence of regulation.
In these circumstances, observing ε leads the public to infer that the expected regulatory
effort is
(A8)

E (e | ε ) = ε

V ( e)
.
V (e) + V (δ )

Higher noisiness of the information (i.e., higher V (δ ) / V (e) ), implies that a given
observed ε is associated with lower perceived regulatory effort. Observing ε , the public would
infer that the regulation function is
(A9)


Q p ( ρ0 , ε ) = Q( ρ0 )(1 − ε

V ( e)
).
V (e) + V (δ )


The actual “regulation function” observed by the regulator is Q a ( ρ0 , e) = Q( ρ0 )(1 − e) , where

upper indexes p and a indicates the public inferred Q and actual Q, respectively. Thus, the
public understates the impact of regulator’s effort by

24



(A10) Q a ( ρ0 , e) − Q p ( ρ0 , e) = Q( ρ0 )[δ

V (e)
V (δ )
−e
].
V (e) + V (δ )
V (e) + V (δ )

The public’s undervaluation the regulatory effort increases with the noisiness of the
information (i.e., V (δ ) / V (e) ), and with the realized effort e. Hence, greater regulatory effort
that prevents a crisis would induce the public to understate the role of the regulator, magnifying
the reduction in the perceived risk of a crisis. The asymmetric information about the actual
effort implies that if no crisis would take place in period 1, the posterior probability of a crisis in
period 2 will be lower than the one with symmetric information.
To illustrate, suppose that e and δ follow the simplest discrete distribution, each having
values (h, - h), with probability half. Hence, the observed ε has three possible values: 2h, -2h,
(corresponding to (e, δ ) = (h, h) or (−h, − h) , each pair having a probability 0.25); and 0, with
probability half (corresponding to (e, δ ) = (h, − h) or (−h, h) , each pair having a probability
0.25). Suppose that the regulator chooses the high effort e = h . With probability half, δ = h ,
hence ε = 2h , inducing the public to infer correctly the regulator effort. With probability half,

δ = − h , hence ε = 0 . Not having the full information about e and δ , the public notes that this
signal is consistent with either high or low effort ( e = h ; δ = − h or e = − h ; δ = − h ), each with
probability half. Thus, the public inferred expected effort, conditional on ε = 0 is:
E (e | ε = 0) = 0 .

Consequently, had the regulator follow the high effort enforcement (e = h), the public
would infer expected effort of 0.5h [ = (0.5*1+0.5*0)h], instead of the actual effort, h. The gap
between the actual and publics expected effort is the outcome of asymmetric information.
Consequently, had the regulator follow the high effort policy (e = h), the public expected
posterior in the absence of the crisis would be lower than the symmetric information
[ P1,2 = a /(a + b + 1) ] in states when the realized signal would be ε = 0 .
This example illustrates the distortion induced by asymmetric information regarding the
regulator effort. Higher effort helping in averting a crisis today would induce overconfidence,
leading the public to infer that the risk is lower than the actual one, as the public under weighs
the role of the regulator. This in turn would reduce the support for regulations in the future, and
may increase the ultimate cost of the crisis.

25

REFERENCES
Aizenman, Joshua. (2004). “Financial Opening: Evidence and Policy Options.” In Robert E. Baldwin, L.
Alan Winters, eds. Challenges to Globalization University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Aizenman, Joshua. (2009). “To Regulate Foreign or Domestic Intermediation?” Harvard International
Review 30 (4): 56-60.
Aizenman, Joshua and Ilan Noy. (2009). “Endogenous financial and trade openness,” Review of
Development Economics, 13(2), 175–189.
Barth, R. James, Chen Lin, Yue Ma, Jesus Seade and Frank M. Fong. (2009). “The Role of Bank
Regulation, Supervision and Monitoring in Bank Efficiency,” manuscript.
Bongini, Paola, and Stijn Claessens, and Giovanni Ferri. (2001). “The Political Economy of Distress in
East Asian Financial Institutions” Journal of Financial Services Research 19 (1): 5-25.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Arvind Krishnamurthy. (2008). “Collective Risk Management in a Flight to
Quality Episode,” The Journal of Finance, 63 (5), 2195-2230.
Dooley, P. Michael and Inseok Shin. (2000). “Private inflows when crises are anticipated: a case study of
Korea,” NBER Working Paper No. 7992, Cambridge, MA, USA.
Demirguc-Kent, Asli and Detragiache, Enrica. (1998). “Financial Liberalization and Financial Fragility”,
Policy Research Working Paper Series 1917, The World Bank, Washington DC.
Fernandez Raquel and Dani Rodrik. (1991). “Resistance to Reform: Status Quo Bias in the Presence of
Individual-Specific Uncertainty” The American Economic Review, (81) 5: 1146-1155.
Hellmann E. Thomas, Kevin C. Murdock, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. (2000). "Liberalization, Moral Hazard in
Banking and Prudential Regulation: Are Capital Requirements Enough?" American Economic
Review, 90 (1): 147-165.
McKinnon R. I.; and H. Pill. (1996): “Credible Liberalizations and International Capital Flows: The
Overborrowing Syndrome.” In Takatoshi Ito and Anne O. Krueger, eds. Financial deregulation
and integration in East Asia. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Rajan, G. Raghuram. (2005). “Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier?” Proceedings,
Jackson Hole symposium. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City: 313-369.
Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales. (2003). Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists. New York: Crown
Business Division of Random House.
Zellner, Arnold. (1971). An introduction to Bayesian inference in Econometrics. Wiley, New York.

26

