                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY AND REDEVELOPMENT OF OLD INDUSTRIAL
                               LAND

                                           Hilary Sigman

                                        Working Paper 15017
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15017


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2009




I am grateful to Deepa Bhat and Leah Traub for excellent research assistance and to Anna Alberini,
Howard Chang, Kathleen Segerson, David Simpson, Richard Stewart, and workshop participants at
MIT, Yale, Rutgers, the NBER, the EPA, and CELS for comments. This working paper was developed
under STAR Research Assistance Agreement No. R831777 awarded by the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency. It has not been formally reviewed by the EPA. The views expressed in this document are
solely those of the author and the EPA does not endorse any products or commercial services mentioned
in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Hilary Sigman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Environmental Liability and Redevelopment of Old Industrial Land
Hilary Sigman
NBER Working Paper No. 15017
May 2009
JEL No. K13,K32,Q53,R14

                                               ABSTRACT

Many communities are concerned about the reuse of potentially contaminated land ("brownfields")
and believe that environmental liability is a hindrance to redevelopment. However, with land price
adjustments, liability might not impede the reuse of this land. Existing literature has found price reductions
in response to liability, but few studies have looked for an effect on vacancies. This paper studies variations
in state liability rules — specifically, strict liability and joint and several liability — that affect the
level and distribution of expected private cleanup costs. It explores the effects of this variation on
industrial land prices and vacancy rates and on reported brownfields in a panel of cities across the
United States. In the estimated equations, joint and several liability reduces land prices and increases
vacancy rates in central cities. Neither a price nor quantity effect is estimated from strict liability. The
results suggest that liability is at least partly capitalized, but does still deter redevelopment.


Hilary Sigman
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
and NBER
sigman@econ.rutgers.edu
    Many communities seek to encourage the redevelopment of sites that are idle or under-used
because of potential contamination (known as “brownfields”). Redevelopment of these sites is
desirable because they are a disamenity and seen as a substitute for use of relatively pristine land
(sometimes known as “greenfields”), which reduces open space and requires construction of new
infrastructure. A survey by the U.S. Conference of Mayors (USCM) found about 25,000 brown-
field sites in the 205 cities that responded (USCM, 2002).
    Environmental liability — in particular, the threat of being compelled to pay for cleanup of
contamination — is perceived as a significant barrier to redevelopment. The respondents to the
USCM survey cited liability as second only to lack of cleanup funding as the major obstacle to
redevelopment. In 2001, Congress passed the Small Business Liability Relief and Brownfields
Revitalization Act, which funded and codified an existing EPA grant and loan program for cleanup
of brownfields and included several provisions to reduce the presumed liability deterrent. Reuse of
contaminated land remains an active issue for state and federal policy in the U.S. and abroad.
    Despite the perception of a problem, the economics literature raises theoretical questions about
the impact of liability on redevelopment (Boyd et al., 1996; Segerson, 1993, 1994). Much of the
policy discussion fails to consider real estate price adjustments in face of expected liability and
thus may overstate the deterrent to redevelopment. Empirical questions about the role of liability
also remain. Urban and industrial decline long predates modern environmental laws, so liability
is at most a partial explanation for under-used industrial land. Previous literature has explored the
effect of liability on prices (e.g., Jackson, 2002; Alberini et al., 2006). However, only a few studies
focus on “mothballing” of land (Schoenbaum, 2002; Howland, 2000, 2004) or the deterrent to
redevelopment (McGrath, 2000). This earlier research uses the level of contamination at a site to
measure the extent of liability. This approach potentially confounds the variation in liability with
other spatial heterogeneity.1
    In this paper, I use panel data on cities across the US to estimate the effects of variation in
environmental liability on prices and vacancy rates of industrial land. Most industrial land is
  1 For example, Schoenbaum (2002) finds a positive association between land values and brownfield status in Balti-

more.


                                                        1
potentially contaminated (Noonan and Vidich, 1992) and thus may be affected by liability, even
if it is not formally designated as a brownfield.2 The variation in liability comes from differences
in state liability regimes, including whether they rely on strict liability and on joint and several
liability. As explained below, these regimes affect the level and the distribution of expected private
cleanup costs. States adopted and rescinded both forms of liability in the period in question. The
changing rules allow me to identify the effects of liability rules with fixed effects for other spatial
heterogeneity.
    I find a negative effect of joint and several liability on industrial real estate prices in central
cities (with estimates of the reduction in prices from 16 to 26 percent) and a positive effect of
joint and several liability on industrial vacancy rates, which is also confined to central cities. One
cannot reject no effect of strict liability on either prices or vacancy rates. Tests do not find evidence
of policy endogeneity for either the price or vacancy equations, lending support to the estimated
coefficients. No substitution of greenfields is observed in states with high liability.
    In addition to the industrial real estate market data, this paper analyzes the one national data
set on reported brownfields acreage, the USCM survey mentioned above. Reported brownfield
acreage is higher with joint and several liability, but not with strict liability. This analysis provides
confirmation of the main effect on a different set of cities, over a different span of time, and with a
different definition of affected land.
    The outline of the paper is as follows. The next section discusses reasons that liability may
deter redevelopment, even with price adjustment. It also advances hypotheses about the effects of
alternative liability rules. Section 2 describes the data on state liability rules and industrial real
estate markets. Section 3 presents estimated coefficients for industrial land prices and vacancy
rates and tests for problems with the results because of serial correlation or endogeneity of liability
rules. Section 4 describes the data set assembled for the USCM’s brownfields survey and results
from equations estimated on these data. A final section briefly concludes with policy implications.
   2 Noonan and Vidich (1992) report that land used for “heavy industrial manufacturing” has a probability of con-

tamination of 88% and “light industrial manufacturing” and “industrial parks” have 75% probabilities. Conversely,
nonindustrial land, especially public facilities and commercial land, may account for 30% of reported brownfields
(Wernstedt et al., 2004).


                                                        2
1      Liability as a deterrent to redevelopment

Under the federal Superfund and most state programs, liability for cleanup of contaminated sites
may be imposed on a number of parties, including past and present owners of the site, as well as
parties who contributed or transported contaminants to the site.3 The purchaser of land bears the
risk of liability should the site turn out to be contaminated. In addition, the original owner may
not find its liability eliminated by the sale, given the inclusion of past landowners among the liable
parties.
     The previous literature suggests three reasons that liability might not just lower land prices,
“capitalizing” liability, but also deter property sales or redevelopment. First, sellers of land and
potential buyers may have asymmetric information about the level of contamination and the nature
of the required cleanup. As Boyd et al. (1996) and Segerson (1994) argue, the resulting adverse
selection may be a source of underuse of old industrial land. Although insurance for buyers’
cleanup costs has become increasingly available, this market too is likely to be imperfect. Second,
Boyd et al. describe “imperfect detection,” in which the government (and potentially even the
owner) does not know about contamination until redevelopment, and “imperfect enforcement,” in
which the government does not enforce cleanup liability for idle sites. With imperfect detection or
enforcement, sale of the property or requests for development permits may cause the owner to bear
cleanup costs it could otherwise escape. If the cost of cleanup exceeds the value of the site clean,
the property may go undeveloped. Third, in her models, Segerson (1993, 1994) shows that shifting
liability to buyers can result in inefficiently low sales when sellers may be judgment proof.
     In the empirical analysis, variation in the extent of liability derives from the two rules used
to impose liability: whether liability is strict and whether it is joint and several. Both these rules
likely raise expected private clean-up costs.
     Strict liability means that any action that causes contamination may give rise to liability; by
    3 Since 1986, the federal Superfund program has allowed an “innocent landowner” defense, which exempts pur-
chasers who did not know the parcel was contaminated, made “all appropriate inquiry,” and exercised due care once
contamination was discovered. However, courts have applied various criteria for allowing this defense and in practice
have rarely found it applicable. The Brownfields Act clarifies these concepts (in particular, regulations issued in 2005
define “all appropriate inquiry”) and may increase the frequency and reliability of this defense.


                                                           3
contrast, negligence (or “at fault”) rules trigger liability only if the defendant failed to meet the
legal standard of care (however the state defines this concept) in avoiding or cleaning up contam-
ination. Strict liability thus should increase expected private cleanup costs by expanding the set
of sites at which private parties may be held liable. Strict liability also lowers the information
requirements for the government and thus its costs of bringing suit, reinforcing the incentives from
higher expected awards.4
    Joint and several liability may raise expected liability for developers. When some parties are
judgment proof, joint and several liability obliges solvent parties to pick up “orphan shares,” costs
attributable to parties that have gone or might go bankrupt. These costs would be paid by the
government under non-joint, “several only,” liability, so private costs are higher with joint and
several liability. Probst et al. (1995) estimate a 14% average orphan share at federal Superfund
sites (excluding entirely orphan sites), so the cost differential may be substantial. Even if PRPs are
not judgment proof, Chang and Sigman (2007) find that a sale raises private costs under joint and
several liability (through a variety of effects of increasing the number of defendants) and thus that
this specific form of liability is a particular problem.



2      Data

2.1     State liability rules

All U.S. states have “superfund” programs that impose liability for cleanup of contaminated sites
not covered by the federal Superfund or the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA).
States vary in the nature of the liability rules they apply.5
    The longest history of these policies is available from a series of approximately biennial stud-
    4 Previous   papers find evidence of higher precaution with strict liability — reduced spills (Alberini and Austin,
1999b, 2002) and fewer violations of hazardous waste laws (Stafford, 2003). These results are consistent with expected
liability costs that are higher with strict liability, although strict liability may also increase liability even if it does not
increase precaution.
    5 Landowners and other parties face two liability regimes, the regime in their state and the federal law. However,

state liability, which addresses sites that do not qualify for cleanup under the federal Superfund program, may be the
relevant liability threat for run-of-the-mill industrial sites.


                                                               4
       Table 1: Liability rules in states with industrial real estate market data, 1989–2000
 State           Joint & several Strict            State               Joint & several Strict

 Alabama       Never                   Never          Mississippi          Began              Began
 Arizona       Ended                   Ended          Missouri             Never              Always
 Arkansas      Began                   Began          Nebraska             Never              Ended
 California    Never                   Always         Nevada               Never              Began
 Colorado      Never                   Never          New Hampshire        Always             Always
 Connecticut   Always                  Always         New Jersey           Always             Always
 Delaware      Began                   Began          New Mexico           Began              Began
 DC            Ended                   Ended          New York             Began              Began
 Florida       Always                  Always         North Carolina       Began              Began
 Georgia       Began                   Began          Ohio                 Temporary          Temporary
 Hawaii        Began                   Always         Oklahoma             Began              Began
 Idaho         Never                   Never          Oregon               Always             Always
 Illinois      Temporary               Temporary      Pennsylvania         Always             Always
 Indiana       Always                  Always         Rhode Island         Always             Always
 Iowa          Always                  Always         South Carolina       Always             Always
 Kansas        Temporary               Began          Tennessee            Ended              Ended
 Kentucky      Began                   Began          Texas                Always             Always
 Louisiana     Always                  Always         Utah                 Never              Always
 Maine         Always                  Always         Vermont              Always             Always
 Maryland      Temporary               Always         Virginia             Never              Began
 Massachusetts Always                  Always         Washington           Always             Always
 Michigan      Always                  Ended          Wisconsin            Began              Ended

Source: Based on ELI surveys.

ies from 1989 through 2000 by the Environmental Law Institute (ELI) (see Pendergrass, 2001).
ELI surveys the state for its policy and says it captures not just the state’s statute, but its current
interpretation by the government. Table 1 reports the status of the two liability rules in the states
with real estate market data from 1989 to 2000. The majority of transitions are permanent, at least
as far as the data extend. The policies change as a result of legislative, judicial, and administrative
decisions, including “tort reform” initiatives (Campbell, Kessler, and Shepherd, 1998).
    The two liability rules are correlated, but do deviate spatially and over time. Although 96% of
observations with joint and several liability have strict liability (see Table 2), 60% of observations
without joint and several liability have strict liability; thus, it is possible to distinguish the effect of
this rule, but principally in the several-only regime. More importantly for the fixed effects analysis,

                                                     5
transitions between the rules do not always occur in tandem. From 1989 to 2000, ELI reports that
thirteen states adopted joint and several liability; of these thirteen, only five adopted strict liability
at the same time (some already had it). Two states and the District of Columbia report eliminating
joint and several liability; of these, only the District of Columbia also eliminated strict liability.
Similar unmatched transitions occur in the strict liability group.


2.2     Land data

The Society of Industrial and Office Realtors’ (SIOR) annual Comparative Statistics of Industrial
and Office Real Estate Markets has data for many U.S. cities on prices of industrial real estate and
vacancies. These data are available annually beginning in the early 1980s. All of the 75 largest
cities (by employment) and some smaller cities are in the SIOR data. Figure 1 shows the central
cities with data for any period, classified by their average vacancy rate. The data are the expert
opinions of local realtors rather than transaction data. Reliance on experts may add noise because
of the influence of respondents’ heterogeneity, but may also reduce the noise in price data that a
few large sales might have generated in some of the smaller urban areas.
    The SIOR reports separate information for central city and suburban locations. Suburban land
is less likely to be contaminated than central city land and thus provides a comparison.6 In addition,
a frequent argument for brownfield redevelopment is that firms would otherwise use suburban sites.
The suburban data permit a direct test of this hypothesis, if firms substitute suburban sites within
the same state as the urban sites they reject. If they substitute sites in more distant suburban areas,
however, this approach will not register the substitution.
    Table 2 reports mean prices and vacancy rates for industrial land for the central city and subur-
ban data sets. Prices are lower with joint and several liability in both the central cities and suburbs.
However, vacancy rates are only higher with joint and several liability in central cities; suburban
vacancy rates are essentially the same across the two sets of cities.
   6A  number of suburban observations have been discarded, however, because the areas in question span more than
one state, so the liability regime is ill-defined.




                                                       6
                            #S
                            S#
                                     S
                                     #
                        S
                        #
                                                                             S
                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                            S
                                                                                                                                            #
                                     S
                                     #                                                   S
                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                    S#S
                                                                                                                      #             # S
                                                                                                                                    S     #S
                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                   S
                                                                                                                   #S
                                                                                                                    #             S
                                                                                                                                  # S   #S
                                                                                                                                       #S
                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                             S
                                                                             #
                                                                                       # S
                                                                                       S    #S#S
                                                                                               # #S
                                                                                                  #                                 S
                                                                                                                                    ###S
                                                                                                                                     S
                                                                                                                                     S
                                                                                                                                     #
                            S
                            #                    S
                                                 #                                      S
                                                                                        #S  # S
                                                                                           #S        S
                                                                                                     #S
                                                                                                      #S#S                     #S
                                                                                                                               S #
                  S
                  #S#                                                         # S
                                                                              S #                        #                        #S
                                                                                                                                  S#
                  S
                  #S#                                    S
                                                         #                                  S
                                                                                            #   S
                                                                                                #  S
                                                                                                   #                           #S
                                                                                                                               S#
                                                                                         S
                                                                                         # S    #
                        S
                        #                                S
                                                         #                       S
                                                                                 # S
                                                                                   # S
                                                                                     #       S
                                                                                             #                              S
                                                                                                                            #S
                                                                                                          S
                                                                                                          #                   #
                                 #
                                 S                                       S
                                                                         #
                                                                                                      S
                                                                                                      #        S
                                                                                                               #           S
                                                                                                                           #
                        #S
                        S#S
                          #S#                                                                                      S
                                                                                                                   #
                                                     S
                                                     #                   S
                                                                         #           S
                                                                                     #                     S
                                                                                                           #
                           S
                           #             S
                                         #                   S
                                                             #                               S
                                                                                             #                 S
                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                      S
                                                                                                      #                    S
                                                                                                                           #
                                             S
                                             #                                                                         S
                                                                                                                       #
                                                     S
                                                     #                   S
                                                                         #           # S
                                                                                     S # S
                                                                                         #             S
                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                     S
                                                                                                     #S#           S
                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                 S
                                                                                 #               S
                                                                                                 #                     S
                                                                                                                       #
                                                                     S
                                                                     #
             Vacancy rate                                                                                                      S
                                                                                                                               #
                                                                         S
                                                                         #                                                     S
                                                                                                                               ##
          #S      Less than 7.5%                                                                                               S
           #S     7.5-15%
            #S    More than 15%




          Figure 1: Central cities in the SIOR data set, by average vacancy rate




Table 2: Summary statistics for industrial real estate markets, by joint and several liability
                                           All obs        Without J&S          With J&S
                                       Mean St dev Mean St dev Mean St dev
 Central city site price (2000$/sq ft)   3.38      5.63    4.13      5.51     2.85      5.67
 Suburban site price (2000$/sq ft)       2.48      3.45    3.91      5.56     1.87      1.61
 Central city vacancy rate               9.97      8.10    9.34      6.37 10.40         8.97
 Suburban vacancy rate                   8.10      5.27    8.15      5.93     8.07      4.93
 Joint and several liability              .82         –        0         –       1          –
 Strict liability                         .63         –     .60          –     .96          –




                                                                 7
3      Econometric analysis: Industrial real estate markets

Table 3 contains estimates of the coefficients αL from equations of the form


                           Log(pit ) = Li(t−1) αL + βt + γi + f (Eit , Git ,Vit ) + uit ,                        (1)


where pit is the price or the vacancy rate and Li(t−1) is a vector of state liability rules.7 The equa-
tions also include time fixed effects βt , and either city fixed effects, γi , or region fixed effects. Some
equations include additional explanatory variables: Eit are economic conditions (city population,
unemployment rate, and manufacturing share of employment), Git are government variables (high-
way density and real estate taxes), and Vit are measures of state environmental policy (the number
of contaminated site lawyers, the League of Conservation Voters score for the state’s House delega-
tion, and the abatement cost index from Levinson (2000)). The explanatory variables are described
in the appendix. Equations without city fixed effects also include variables for the legacy of con-
tamination (historical manufacturing employment and reported contaminated site density). All the
equations have a log-log functional form.


3.1     Prices

In Table 3, neither strict nor joint and several liability has a statistically significant effect on prices
when the equations are run without city effects in column (1). When city fixed effects are included
in column (2), the point estimates remain similar, but the coefficient on joint and several liability
is now statistically significant at 5%. Prices are 16% lower (based on the coefficient of -.169) with
joint and several liability than without, suggesting substantial capitalization of expected private
cleanup costs. This price reduction is similar to the value of cleanup liability relief (16% of site
value) in the stated-preference study by Wernstedt et al. (2004). When time varying covariates are
added in column (3), the absolute value of the coefficient falls and it is no longer statistically sig-
    7 The equations use a one-year lagged value of ELI-reported liability rules to try to capture the planning window
for transactions. It is unclear what point in the year the ELI survey reflects.



                                                         8
                          Table 3: Estimates of the effects of liability rules

                                                   Center city                               Suburbs
                                                                                           Log      Log
                                      Log(Price)             Log(Vacancy Rate)            (Price)   (Vac
                                                                                                    Rate)
                                (1)       (2)      (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)      (8)

 Joint and several liability   -.124    -.169 -.092         .400      .362        .326     .032      .045
                               (.119)   (.082) (.065)      (.131)    (.136)      (.132)   (.057)    (.100)
 Strict liability               .041     .024 -.042         -.317     -.232       -.206    -.058     .094
                               (.123)   (.094) (.087)      (.118)    (.131)      (.132)   (.056)    (.119)
 Geographic fixed effect       Region    City      City    Region     City       City      City     City
 Other explanatory var?         Yes      No        Yes      Yes       No         Yes       Yes      Yes
 R-squared                      .52        –         –      .17        –           –        –         –
 R-squared (within)               –       .06      .11       –        .11         .12      .19       .27
 Number of cities                91        97       92      100       107         101      106       104
 Number of observations         522       592      525      661       749         667      753       722

Notes: Standard errors (in parentheses) adjusted for clustering at the city level.
       All equations also include year dummies.




                                                   9
nificant, although the point estimate remains negative.8 Thus, these equations offer some support
for capitalization of joint and several liability.
    The coefficient on strict liability is counter-intuitively positive and is not statistically significant
in any price equation in Table 3. The failure to find effects of strict liability on prices (and below,
on vacancy rates), may indicate that this form of liability is in fact no more stringent than the
alternative negligence rules. If the standard of care required to avoid negligence is high relative
to the distribution of care actually taken, negligence rules protect few parties from liability.9 The
equations were also run with an interaction term between the strict liability and joint and several,
but the coefficient on this interaction was not individually statistically significant in any equation
for price or vacancy rate.
    Timing may be a concern for these and other equations: a prospective property developer will
care about current and expected future liability. Current liability rules will be a component of
expectations both for their direct effect (cleanup is likely to be required immediately before devel-
opment can begin) and for their indications about the future. However, unobserved expectations
about the future may also play a role. If rules change over time, developers respond to expected fu-
ture rules that differ less across states than current rules; failure to measure expected future policy
results might would result in coefficients closer to zero than the coefficients would be on permanent
rules.10
   8 The  number of observations drops from column (2) to (3), but the effect on the joint and several liability results
from the inclusion of the population variable, rather than the change in the data set.
    9 These results could be consistent with earlier studies that find effects of strict liability on current precautions

(Alberini and Austin, 1999b, 2002; Stafford, 2003). The analysis here compares the distribution of past precaution
with the current standard of care. Current precaution levels may be enough higher that the standard of care is now
relevant.
   10 One quick check for timing effects is removing cities in states that temporarily changed rules in the study period;

these are cities in Maryland, Kansas, Illinois, and Ohio. Although only a small number of observations are dropped,
they are potentially influential with the “within” estimator. Dropping these observations does not markedly change the
point estimates on either liability rule.




                                                          10
3.2    Vacancy rates

Columns (4) through (6) in Table 3 report the coefficients αL when the dependent variable is
the vacancy rate in central cities. Both liability variables have statistically significant coefficients
without city fixed effects in column (4). Joint and several liability has a positive sign, suggesting
that industrial land is more likely to be vacant when private liability is greater. Strict liability
has a counterintuitive negative coefficient in column (4). In the equations with fixed effects, the
effect of joint and several liability continues to be statistically significant at 5%, with only a small
reduction in its magnitude as additional controls are added. The counter-intuitive coefficient on
strict liability, however, is no longer statistically significant when city fixed effects are included, so
may be an artifact of unobserved geographic heterogeneity.
   These results support the view that land price adjustments are insufficient to offset the costs
imposed by environmental liability. The coefficient of .326 on joint and several liability in column
(6) corresponds to a 39% increase in vacancy rates in the presence of joint and several liability or
a reduction in occupied land of 4%. Since the difference is only between a less extensive form
of liability and a more extensive form of liability, the results suggest that environmental liability
overall is a substantial source of vacancy.


3.3    Suburban results

Columns (7) and (8) of Table 3 report the effect of liability on price and vacancy rate (respectively)
estimated on suburban data. The results suggest no effect of either liability rule on either outcome
variable in suburban locations: the point estimates of αL are all very close to zero and none are sta-
tistically significant. These estimates have two implications. First, they support the interpretation
of the earlier results as the effect of environmental liability, rather than some regional economic or
regulatory condition with which it is correlated; such other conditions would affect suburbs as well.
Second, they fail to support the hypothesis that suburban sites within the same state are substitutes
for central city sites when liability discourages development of the latter.



                                                   11
3.4     Robustness tests

Retroactive liability. In addition to the two liability rules addressed in the table, state liability
rules also vary in whether liability may be retroactive. Retroactive liability requires firms to pay
for cleanup from activities that predate the cleanup law. Data on this dimension of liability are
only available beginning in 1995, with few transitions, so a fixed effects analysis of the variable is
impossible.
    Adding a variable for retroactive liability to the cross-sectional equations (and restricting the
analysis to 1995 through 2000) does not yield a statistically significant coefficient on retroactive
liability for either price or vacancy rate. Retroactive liability has a very small coefficient (-.02) on
vacancy rates; the coefficients on the other liability rules remain about the same as in column (4)
in Table 3 (but the coefficient on strict liability is not statistically significant at 5%).


Serial correlation within a state.             The equations rely on discrete changes in liability rules in a
subset of states and are thus subject to a standard concern about “difference-in-differences”: serial
correlation in errors within a state may bias the estimated standard errors. In particular, Bertrand
et al. (2004) argue that ordinary tests may dramatically over-reject the hypothesis that the policy
has zero effect. The earlier equations address this issue with standard errors that are clustered by
city, but the standard errors may still be biased because of the small number of policy transitions.
    For this reason, the hypothesis tests were re-constructed using a “pairs cluster bootstrap-t,”
a method suggested by Cameron et al. (2008).11 The economic conclusions from the bootstrap
analysis do not differ from those in Table 3. The coefficients on joint and several liability are
statistically significant for both price and vacancy rate in central cities. All the remaining αL are
not statistically significant with the bootstrapped t-distributions.
  11 A first stage equation on city-level data was used to calculate state unexplained variation by year, which is then the

dependent variable for a panel analysis of state policies. This state panel equation is subject to the cluster bootstrap-
t. Samples are repeatedly drawn with replacement from the set of state histories in the data set and used to find an
empirical distribution of the t-statistics for the coefficients. Because it is based on the data, this empirical distribution
does not require assumptions about the nature of the serial correlation and addresses the small sample issues. The point
estimates of the coefficients differ slightly because of somewhat different treatment of heterogeneity in the unbalanced
panel, but are similar to those reported above.



                                                            12
Endogeneity of liability rules. Nonrandom assignment of liability regimes is another concern.
In particular, more extensive liability may be correlated with other characteristics that make states
less hospitable to development. Although fixed effects can address unobserved heterogeneity
across places, time-varying unobserved heterogeneity in a given place remains a potential problem.
Endogeneity might also derive from reverse causality. The brownfields issue has not been raised
in discussion of liability reform outside the economics literature, however, so reverse causality is a
less likely source of endogeneity than unobserved heterogeneity.
      To address this concern, the equations were estimated with an instrumental variables approach,
using three instruments suggested by previous literature.12 When these instruments are used to
test for exogeneity of the liability rules, the Hausman test fails to reject exogeneity for either strict
liability or joint and several liability in the fixed effects equations. The test statistic is low for the
price equations and moderate for the vacancy rate equations.13



4       Econometric analysis: Reported brownfields

The analysis above considers the entire industrial real estate market, taking the view that liability
may affect any used industrial land whether or not it is formally a brownfield. This section analyzes
a more limited data set with information on reported brownfields.


4.1       Data on reported brownfields

Surveys conducted by the U.S. Conference of Mayors (USCM) provide the best available national
data on brownfields. Respondents to the USCM surveys range from the largest cities to towns of
    12 First,
            Alberini and Austin (1999a) find that the number of mining establishments in the state predicts adoption of
strict liability. Second, Alberini and Austin (2002) find that the lagged frequency of accidental spills affects adoption
of liability rules; they hypothesize that states react to a flurry of accidents by toughening their liability regimes. Current
accidental spills at active facilities should not affect the brownfields problem, which involves past contamination, and
thus may be a suitable instrument for this analysis. Third, Campbell et al. (1998) use total lawyers per capita in a state
as an instrument in their analysis of the economic effects of tort reform, which often restrict joint and several liability.
The appendix provides more detail on construction of the instruments.
   13 According to the Hausman tests, endogeneity of the liability rules does remain a reasonable possibility in the

vacancy rate equations. When the central city vacancy rate equations are rerun with instrumental variables, the coeffi-
cients on both joint and several and strict liability are positive, but standard errors are very large.


                                                             13
           Table 4: Summary statitics for brownfields data, by joint and several liability
                                               All observations Without J&S With J&S
       Median of brownfield acres                            100             100           116
       Mean of brownfield acres                              723             375           829
       Standard deviation of brownfield acres              3964              727         4509
       Percent joint and several liability                  76.5               0           100
       Percent strict liability                             85.3            78.7          87.3



about 10,000 people. The USCM surveyed municipalities annually between 1997 and 1999 and
again in 2002. The total number of reporting cities/towns available for analysis is 376; 25% of the
locales are present in three or more years. The survey does not attempt to impose consistency in
the definition of brownfields.14
    The brownfields data was matched with the ELI data on liability regimes. Unfortunately, the
narrow time range of the USCM surveys limits the study to cross-sectional identification of the
effects of liability rules. During the relevant period, the ELI data on liability rules are available
only in 1997 and 2000, with only one transition in liability rules (Arizona eliminated strict liability
after 1997). The 2002 data extrapolates 1999 values for the liability rules.
    Table 4 reports summary statistics for the brownfields data. In the full data set, the cities
report an average of 723 acres of brownfield sites. Although the mean brownfield acres in the joint
and several cities is much larger, the distributions of acres appear almost identical until the 95th
percentile, where the joint and several cities include a few cities reporting tens of thousands of
acres. Both groups have medians (reported in the first row of Table 4) of about 100 brownfield
acres.15
  14 The  brownfields data show positive correlation with the vacancy rate data studied earlier. Although it is difficult
to match the individual observations because of different samples and city definitions, the state average vacancy rate
has a correlation of .4 with the state brownfield acres per capita in 1997 and in 2002.
   15 Dropping cities reporting more than 10,000 acres did not substantively change the estimates in the next subsection.




                                                          14
                     Table 5: Estimates of liability effects on brownfield acreage
                                                          Dependent variable:
                                                         Log(Brownfield acres)
                                                             (1)      (2)      (3)
                        Joint and several liability         .462     .690     .639
                                                           (.205)   (.313)   (.332)
                        Strict liability                   -.141    -.062     -.147
                                                           (.206)   (.249)   (.268)
                        Log(City population)                .806     .776     .801
                                                           (.090)   (.090)   .(097)
                        Region effects?                     No       Yes      Yes
                        Other explanatory variables?        No       No       Yes
                        R-squared                           .21      .24      .25
                        Number of cities                    376      376      366
                        Number of observations              678      678      663

Notes: Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered at the city level.
       All equations also include year effects.




4.2    Results for reported brownfields

Table 5 shows the results of equations with the log of reported brownfield acreage in a city as
the dependent variable. The reported equations pool the data with city-level clustering of errors;
city random effects models yielded very similar estimates. The equation in column (1) of Table 5
includes only liability variables, the size of the city (from the USCM survey), and year dummies.
The effect of joint and several liability is positive and statistically significant. As before, there is
no statistically significant effect of strict liability.
    To explore the influence of other geographic heterogeneity on the results, columns (2) and (3)
add first region fixed effects (for the nine Census Regions) and then covariates for economic con-
ditions and government activities in the city. Inclusion of this additional geographic heterogeneity
increases the point estimate on joint and several liability, so at least these forms of heterogeneity
do not seem to bias the liability coefficients upward. With the full set of covariates, however, the
joint and several liability coefficient is only statistically significant at the 10% level.

                                                      15
    The effects of joint and several liability in Table 5 are large. The coefficient of .639 in column
(3) corresponds to 90% more brownfields with joint and several liability than without. By com-
parison, the earlier estimates suggested 39% higher vacancy rates. Brownfields sites have higher
expected contamination levels, so liability rules should have greater impact on these sites than a
typical vacant site.



5    Conclusions

The empirical analysis in this paper suggests that joint and several liability not only drives down
industrial real estate prices, but also increases the vacancy of industrial land. Both price and quan-
tity effects are found only in central cities where land is most contaminated and not in suburban
areas. The estimated equations show neither a price or a quantity effect from strict liability: stan-
dards for due care may be too high or too uncertain for negligence rules to provide much liability
protection. The paper also estimates equations on a separate data set of brownfields reported by
cities to a national survey. These equations provide additional support for the conclusion that joint
and several liability discourages redevelopment, whereas strict liability does not.
    Thus, although liability is at least partially capitalized, it still deters redevelopment. Deterrence
may result from a general inefficiency from liability, such as adverse selection or the judgment-
proof problem. It may also be specific to joint and several liability. With any of these causes,
the results provide an argument for reducing reliance on joint and several liability. However, joint
and several liability does have advantages that should be weighed against these costs. It gives the
government greater resources for cleanup and may facilitate settlement (Chang and Sigman, 2000).
A targeted approach that protects only buyers from joint and several liability might therefore be
better than broader liability relief.




                                                   16
A     Explanatory and instrumental variable construction
Industrial real estate market data set:

 Liability variables: The ELI surveys are for 1989, 1990, 1991, 1993, 1995, 1997, 2000 (Pender-
     grass, 2001). For the econometrics, continuity in liability rules is assumed for intervening
     years (1992, 1994, 1996, 1998-99) when no change is reported. When the reports indicate a
     change, liability regime variables are missing for intervening years. Because the ELI survey
     does not specify the time of year, the equations use a one-year lag of liability variables to
     represent the liability status at the time when transactions were planned. Thus, the remaining
     observations begin in 1990.

 Unemployment rate and manufacturing share of employment: The Bureau of Labor Statistics
    (BLS) provides data by city on unemployment rates, manufacturing employment, and to-
    tal employment. Wheaton and Torto (1990) find that manufacturing employment plays an
    important role in industrial real estate demand.

 Population: The population for the metropolitan area is from the Census; the entire metropolitan
     area is used, regardless of whether the area is center city or suburbs

 Highway density: The Federal Highway Administration provides annual city-level data on high-
     way miles that can be used to calculate a time-varying measure of highway density for each
     urban area.

 Real estate taxes: SIOR provides an estimate of real estate taxes per square foot beginning in
     1994.

 Contaminated site lawyers per capita: Full-time equivalent lawyers in the state superfund pro-
     gram, from ELI, divided by state population.

 League of Conservation Voters score: The average League of Conservation Voters (LCV) score
     for the House delegation of the state. The LCV score (which ranges from 0 to 100) rep-
     resents the share of a legislator’s votes on selected measures that the LCV considers pro-
     environment. As a measure of environmental sentiment, LCV scores have the virtue of
     varying over time and of perhaps reflecting the position of the median voter in the state (in
     contrast, for example, to environmental group membership, which focuses on the upper tail).
     I use House rather than Senate scores because the House scores usually average more indi-
     vidual legislators’ data, reducing noise, and can adjust more rapidly to changes because of
     the potential for faster turnover in the House.

 Pollution abatement cost index: Levinson (2000) adjusts the data from the U.S. Census survey on
      Pollution Abatement Costs and Expenditures (PACE) for the two-digit industry composition
      in the state. The resulting index has the advantage of varying over time and capturing not just
      legislative differences between states but also differences in monitoring and enforcement. A
      major disadvantage is that it ends in 1994 when the Census stopped conducting its annual
      survey. The series is linearly extrapolated for later years.



                                                 17
 Contaminated site density: The variable includes sites on the Comprehensive Environmental Re-
     sponse, Compensation, and Liability Information System (CERCLIS) and sites that on the
     the no Further Remedial Action Planned (NFRAP) list. Both inventories have a field for
     SMSA, but it is rarely filled in, so the variable aggregates sites to the SMSA level by county
     (using the 1990 SMSA definitions).

 Historical manufacturing employment: Decennial county level data from 1940 through 1970 are
      averaged and divided by land area to create a measure of the past spatial intensity of manu-
      facturing for the city. Counties were aggregated to the SMSA level.

 Instruments for liability rules: Three instruments are used: (i) the number of large mining estab-
      lishments by state. This variable is from the Census of Mineral Industries for 1992 and 1997,
      with forward and backward imputation for the remaining years. (ii) Number of spills aggre-
      gated by state and year from the raw Emergency Response Notification System (ERNS) data.
      To follow Alberini and Austin, I restrict the count of spills to those that occurred at fixed fa-
      cilities (as opposed to transportation accidents, dumping, and other categories). (iii) Total
      lawyers per capita in state. The American Bar Association reports the number of lawyers in
      a state at irregular intervals (four times over the period of the data); missing years have been
      linearly interpolated.

Explanatory variables for brownfields (USCM) data:

 Population: Figures are reported by the survey respondents and so are specific to the reporting
     locale.

 Unemployment rates and manufacturing share of employment: County data from BLS. The
    USCM locales were matched to one or more counties based on populated place names.
    For a few places where the populated place spans multiple counties, these variables are the
    average over these counties.

 Density of suspected contaminated sites and historical manufacturing: As discussed earlier and
     merged by county.

 Environmental policy measures: State contaminated site lawyers and LCV scores as above. The
     pollution abatement cost index used previously as a measure of environmental stringency
     would have to be entirely extrapolated for this data set, so is not used.




                                                  18
References
Alberini, Anna and David Austin. On and Off the Liability Bandwagon: Explaining State Adop-
    tions of Strict Liability in Hazardous Waste Programs, Journal of Regulatory Economics 15
    (1999), 41–63.

Alberini, Anna and David H. Austin. Strict Liability as a Deterrent in Toxic Waste Management:
    Empirical Evidence from Accident and Spill Data, Journal of Environmental Economics and
    Management 38 (1999), 20–48.

Alberini, Anna and David Austin. Accidents Waiting to Happen: Liability Policy and Toxic
    Pollution Releases, Review of Economics and Statistics 84 (2002), 729–41.

Alberini, Anna, Alberto Longo, Stefania Tonin, Francesco Trombetta, and Margherita Turvani.
    The Role of Liability, Regulation and Economic Incentives in Brownfield Remediation: Ev-
    idence from Surveys of Developers, Regional Science and Urban Economics, 35 (2005),
    327–51.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. How Much Should We Trust
     Differences-in-Differences Estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (2004), 249–
     25.

Boyd, James, Winston Harrington and Molly K. Macauley. The Effects of Environmental Liabil-
    ity on Industrial Real Estate Development, Journal of Real Estate Economics and Finance
    12 (1996), 37–58.

Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller. Bootstrap-Based Improvements
   for Inference with Clustered Errors. Review of Economics and Statistics, 90 (2008), 414–27.

Campbell, Thomas J., Daniel P. Kessler, and George B. Shepherd. The Link Between Liabil-
   ity Reforms and Productivity: Some Empirical Evidence, Brookings Papers on Economic
   Activity: Microeconomics (1998), 107–37.

Chang, Howard F. and Hilary Sigman. Incentives to Settle under Joint and Several Liability: An
    Empirical Analysis of Superfund Litigation, Journal of Legal Studies, 29 (2000), 205–36.

Chang, Howard F. and Hilary Sigman. The Effect of Joint and Several Liability under Superfund
    on Brownfields. International Review of Law and Economics 27 (2007), 363–84.

Howland, Marie. The Impact of Contamination on the Canton/Southeast Baltimore Land Market,
   Journal of the American Planning Association 66 (2000), 411–20.

Howland, Marie. The Role of Contamination in Central City Industrial Decline Economic Devel-
   opment Quarterly 18 (2004), 207–18.

Jackson, Thomas O. Environmental Contamination and Industrial Real Estate Prices, Journal of
    Real Estate Economics Research 23 (2002), 180–99.



                                             19
Levinson, Arik. An Industry-Adjusted Index of State Environmental Compliance Costs in Be-
    havioral and Distributional Effects of Environmental Policy (Carlo Carraro and Gilbert E.
    Metcalf, editors), 2000.

McGrath, Daniel T. Urban Industrial Land Redevelopment and Contamination Risk, Journal of
   Urban Economics 47 (2002), 414–42.

Noonan, Frank and Charles A. Vidich. Decision Analysis for Utilizing Hazardous Waste Site
   Assessments in Real Estate Acquisition, Risk Analysis 12 (1992), 245–51.

Pendergrass, John A. An Analysis of State Superfund Programs: 50-State Study, 2000 Update,
    Washington, DC: Environmental Law Institute, 2001.

Probst, Katherine N., Don Fullerton, Robert E. Litan, and Paul R. Portney. Footing the Bill for
    Superfund Cleanups: Who Pays and How? Washington, DC: Resources for the Future, 1995.

Schoenbaum, Miriam. Environmental Contamination, Brownfields Policy, and Economic Rede-
    velopment in an Industrial Area of Baltimore, Maryland. Land Economics 78 (2002), 60–71.

Segerson, Kathleen. Liability Transfers: An Economic Assessment of Buyer and Lender Liabil-
    ity, Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 25 (1993), S46–S63.

Segerson, Kathleen. Property Transfers and Environmental Pollution: Incentive Effects of Alter-
    native Policies, Land Economics 70 (1994), 261–72.

Stafford, Sarah L. Assessing the Effectiveness of State Regulation and Enforcement of Hazardous
     Waste, Journal of Regulatory Economics 23 (2003), 27–41.

US Conference of Mayors. Recycling America’s Land: A National Report on Brownfields Rede-
    velopment, Volume IV USCM, 2002.

Wernstedt, Kris, Lauren Heberle, Anna Alberini and Peter Meyer. The Brownfields Phenomenon:
    Much Ado about Something or the Timing of the Shrewd? Resources for the Future Discus-
    sion Paper, 2004.

Wernstedt, Kris, Peter B. Meyer, and Anna Alberini. Attracting Private Investment to Contam-
    inated Properties: The Value of Public Interventions, Journal of Policy Analysis and Man-
    agement 25 (2006), 347–69.

Wheaton, William C. and Raymond G. Torto. An Investment Model of Demand and Supply of
   Industrial Real Estate, AREUEA Journal 18 (1990), 530–48.




                                             20
