                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DIRECT AND INDIRECT EFFECTS OF TEENAGE BODY WEIGHT ON ADULT
                                 WAGES

                                              Euna Han
                                          Edward C. Norton
                                           Lisa M. Powell

                                        Working Paper 15027
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15027


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2009




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Euna Han, Edward C. Norton, and Lisa M. Powell. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Direct and Indirect Effects of Teenage Body Weight on Adult Wages
Euna Han, Edward C. Norton, and Lisa M. Powell
NBER Working Paper No. 15027
June 2009
JEL No. I1,J31

                                              ABSTRACT

Previous estimates on the association between body weight and wages in the literature have been contingent
on education and occupation. This paper examines the direct effect of BMI on wages and the indirect
effects operating through education and occupation choice, particularly for late-teen BMI and adult
wages. Using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 data, we show that education is the
main pathway for the indirect BMI wage penalty. The total BMI wage penalty is underestimated by
18% for women without including those indirect effects. Whereas for men there is no statistically significant
direct BMI wage penalty, we do observe a small indirect wage penalty through education.


Euna Han                                              Lisa M. Powell
Institute for Health Research                         Institute for Health Research and Policy
and Policy (MC 275)                                   University of Illinois at Chicago
University of Illinois at Chicago                     1747 W. Roosevelt Road
1747 West Roosvelt Road, Room 449                     Rm 558, MC275
Chicago, Illinois 60608                               Chicago, IL 60608
eunahan@uic.edu                                       powelll@uic.edu

Edward C. Norton
Department of Health Management and Policy
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
School of Public Health
109 S. Observatory Drive, M3108 SPH II
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2029
and NBER
ecnorton@umich.edu
                                      I. INTRODUCTION

Over the past few decades, the prevalence of obesity has risen dramatically in the United States.

One-third of American adults were reported to be obese in 2003-2004 (Odgen et al., 2006).

Given these trends, there is great interest in the economic consequences of obesity. Many

economic studies have recently reported finding a negative effect of body mass index (BMI) or

obesity on labor market outcomes, such as hourly wages, particularly for women (Averett and

Korenman, 1996; Pagan and Davila, 1997; Cawley, 2004; Baum and Ford, 2004; Conley and

Glauber, 2005; Norton and Han, 2008; Han, Norton, and Stearns, 2009) and the probability of

employment (Sarlio-Lahteenkorva and Lahelma 1999; Cawley 2000; Paraponaris, Saliba, and

Ventelou, 2005; Tunceli and Williams 2006; Garcia and Quintana-Domeque 2007; Lundborg et

al. 2007; Morris 2007; Norton and Han, 2008; Han, Norton, and Stearns, 2009).

     Economists are especially interested in understanding why BMI or obesity may affect labor

market outcomes. Most explanations are conditional on having a job, and may explain either

differences in initial wages or in wage growth. In this study, we provide empirical evidence on

the BMI wage penalty stemming from two indirect pathways—education and occupation

choices—compared to the direct effect which conditions on education and occupation.

     In particular, we focus on the effect of BMI in the late teenage years (late teen BMI) on

future wages in the early thirties (adult wages). Many important decisions that affect future

employment and wages are made during the late teens. These decisions include education and

job sector choices (Norton and Han, 2008). By examining the relationship between BMI in the

early part of the life-cycle (i.e., the late teenage years) and future education and employment and

occupation outcomes in the early thirties, we are able to identify whether different levels in the

stock of education or sorting into different occupations is a potential path that explains the BMI




                                                 3
wage penalty. That is, the wage penalty for obese individuals or people with higher BMI may not

be fully caused by employers’ or customers’ distaste for contemporaneously overweight or obese

adults or lower productivity, but additionally may be related to characteristics (here, the stock of

education or occupation choices) associated with BMI in the late teenage years. Therefore, we

distinguish the effect of late teen BMI from the effect of contemporaneous BMI in the early

thirties, by which time people have usually accumulated their full stock of education.

     Our study contributes to the previous literature by empirically testing whether individuals

make choices for their career paths based on their BMI status prior to job search. We examine

the extent to which individuals with different late teen BMI have different labor market

outcomes, particularly, hourly wages, in their early thirties, and whether such differences may be

attributable to education and occupation choice among service, sales, managerial or professional

specialty, administrative support or clerical, or blue-collar jobs. This helps to understand how

late teen BMI may affect adult labor market outcomes, either directly (conditional on education

and occupation) or indirectly through education and occupation choices. Further, we quantify the

relative contributions of these indirect factors on the wage penalty for increasing BMI.

     We also build on a hypothesis from the psychology literature about the importance of social

interactions (Frieze et al. 1990; Martel and Biller 1987). The lack of accumulation of some

forms of human capitalsuch as interpersonal skills or perseverancemay be due to stigma or

lack of self-image during the teenage years. We control for whether an occupation requires

social interactions using the Dictionary of Occupational Titles in addition to Census occupation

codes. The aggregate Census occupational codes generate occupation categories based on

overall characteristics of each occupation (Pagan and Davilla 1997; Baum and Ford 2004). Given

that occupations in the same Census classification can have different requirements for social




                                                  4
interaction with customers or colleagues, this additional control may partly explain the BMI

wage penalty.

     Our results suggest that higher BMI for both women and men in their late teenage years

decreases the stock of education acquired by the early thirties which affects wages and the lower

stock of education affects occupation choice which also affects wages. We find that late teen

BMI does not generally affect occupation choice in the early thirties with the exception among

women of reducing the likelihood of being in blue-collar occupations and occupations requiring

social interactions.

     Finally, we show that previous studies on the BMI wage penalty for women that condition

on employment and occupation choice underestimate the total effect by 19% given that we

estimate a 0.18 percent indirect reduction (90% CI: [0.032, 0.32]) in wages in addition to a 0.78

percent (90% CI: [0.18, 1.38]) direct BMI wage penalty from a one-unit increase in late teen

BMI. For men, no observed direct BMI wage penalty is found. Also for men, whereas we do find

a statistically significant indirect effect of teen BMI on wages through education and through

education on occupation choice, the total indirect effect does not achieve statistical significance.



                                    II. PREVIOUS LITERATURE

Several studies have linked BMI or obesity to labor market outcomes, mostly wages. Most of

those studies find a negative contemporaneous effect of BMI or obesity on hourly wages for

women, but no significant effect for men (Cawley 2004; Averett and Korenman 1996; Conley

and Glauber 2005; Baum and Ford 2004; and Han, Norton, and Stearns 2009). For women, the

wage penalty for a unit increase in BMI is found not only for their own earnings and

occupational prestige measured by Duncan’s Socioeconomics Index, but also their spouses’




                                                  5
earnings and occupational prestige as in Conley and Glauber (2005). The direction and the

magnitude of the effects are different by race within each gender, and one study by Cawley

(2004) finds obesity penalties for wages for only white women. Also, the often-reported negative

relationship between the BMI and wages is larger in occupations requiring interpersonal skills

with presumably more social interactions as in Han, Norton, and Stearns (2009).

     We have found only a handful of studies investigating the effect of BMI or obesity on the

extensive margin of the labor market, such as employment or occupation choice. For example,

Morris (2007) estimates a negative relationship between obesity and the probability of

employment for British people for both genders. Morris also highlights the importance of

separately identifying being out of the labor force from unemployment, so we also do this.

Paraponaris and colleagues (2005) report that a one standard deviation increase of BMI from the

mean at age 20 raises the percentage of time spent unemployed during the working years and

lowers the probability of employment after a period of unemployment for both men and women.

Cawley (2000) indicates no statistically significant effect of obesity on limitations on the amount

of paid work, types of paid work, or probability of employment. Pagan and Davila (1997)’s study

reports that both obese men and women are less likely to sort into managerial, professional and

technical occupations among fourteen Census occupation categories.

     A few papers seek to disentangle the supply side from the consumer side effect in the

association of obesity on labor market penalties at the extensive margin. Harper (2000) shows a

positive effect of being physically attractive on the probability of employment for women,

particularly on the probability of working in managerial or professional specialty and clerical

occupations. However, the study finds neither occupational sorting into customer-oriented

occupations caused by physical attractiveness nor a wage penalty for non-attractive women




                                                 6
working in customer-oriented jobs. Carpenter (2006) compares the employment rate for obese

people to normal-weight people before (1988) and after (1999) a 1993 court case, Cook vs.

Rhode Island. In that case, obesity is ruled to be covered under the Rehabilitation Act of 1973

and the Americans with Disabilities Act for the first time by a federal appeals court. The data

show that the employment rate increased 4% for obese women and 2% for obese men compared

to their respective non-obese counterparts after the court case, but no effect for overweight men

and morbidly obese women.

     We found only one paper estimating the effect of obesity on educational achievements. A

study by Sabia (2007) reports that white women have a GPA penalty for being obese, whereas

non-white women and men do not. The author uses parent-reported self-classification for obesity

as an IV for adolescent BMI. The study results suggest that the often-reported wage penalty for

obesity may partially be due to low human capital. However, if parents’ self-classification for

obesity reflects the level of their self-esteem or time preference, it should not be excluded from

their children’s educational achievement, and therefore, would not serve as a good instrument.



                  III. MECHANISMS FOR THE BMI WAGE PENALTY

The direct BMI wage penalty may operate primarily through discrimination by employers who

want to avoid obese employees who may have lower productivity or higher health care costs as

suggested by Baum and Ford (2004) and Bhattacharya and Bundorf (2005). Concerns about

customers’ distaste for overweight or obese employeesparticularly in sales industriesmay

also make employers shun overweight or obese employees. Although we do not test these direct

pathways for the BMI or obesity wage penalty in this study, these mechanisms have been

supported in some of the previous literature. For example, Everett (1990) and Puhl and Brownell




                                                 7
(2001) demonstrated that employers perceived obese persons as unfit for public sales positions

and as more appropriate for telephone sales involving little face-to-face contact.

     The overall BMI wage gap also may indirectly stem in part from choices made prior to

being hired into a particular job. If the extent of BMI or obesity is an observed trait of less

investment in future health due to a high discount rate, then overweight or obese teenagers may

also be less likely to invest in their human capital, and accordingly achieve a lower stock of

education by the time they participate in the labor market in their adult years. The extent of the

wage penalty for high BMI would then be expected to decrease once the relationship is estimated

contingent on the stock of education.

     Regardless of time preferences, individuals may choose their career paths to optimize their

labor market outcomes in their initial job search. For example, a person who enjoys conversation

may consider a sales job rather than working alone as a computer programmer. Similarly,

overweight or obese individuals may sort into occupations in which their body weight status does

not lower their marginal productivity. A teenager may take a signal from the market that their

BMI status could be detrimental in their marginal productivity in some jobs such as sales,

managerial or professional jobs, or occupations requiring social interactions with customers or

colleagues. The optimal choice in this case would be to choose a career path that minimizes such

potential adverse outcomes. Again, the estimated extent of the wage penalty would then be

expected to diminish once the association is estimated conditional on occupation.

     Further, teenagers with high BMI, regardless of the reasons for the high BMI, may

encounter stigma with regard to their stature and poor self-esteem, which affects the

accumulation of interpersonal skills or perseverance for social interactions. The lack of such

human capital formation may hinder their performance in their jobs, and contribute to the BMI




                                                  8
wage penalty. However, testing this indirect channel is challenging because the empirical work

needs to distinguish the lack of interpersonal skills from the individuals’ purposeful choice of

occupation given their interpersonal skills.

     Finally, a form of statistical discrimination may underlie the indirect BMI wage penalty. If

overweight or obese teenagers presciently observe smaller returns to human capital for

overweight or obese people, then they may logically invest less in their human capital (see

Persico, Postlewaite, and Silverman (2004) for an explanation applied to height). This

mechanism, based on statistical discrimination, may be empirically tested, for example, by

regressing wage on the years of schooling and its interaction with BMI or an obesity indicator.



                                                IV. EMPIRICAL MODELS

The objective of the empirical work is to provide evidence on the extent of the effects of BMI in

the late teenage years between age 16 and 20 on long-term wages in the early thirties directly and

indirectly through education and occupation choice.

     Following established conceptual frameworks that include BMI as a predictor of wages as

in Cawley (2004) and Han, Norton, and Stearns (2009), we present an empirical model that

predicts wages as a function of BMI (the direct effect), education and occupation choice (indirect

effects of BMI), and other factors. Following the labor literature, we take the logarithm of wages

and estimate separate models for men and women. The main model is

      ln(Wagei 2 ) = γ 0 + γ BMI BMI i1 + γ ∆BMI ( BMI i 2 − BMI i1 ) + γ Educ Educi 2 (BMI i1 )
                    + γ Occ _ Census OccCensi 2 (BMI i1 , BMI i 2 − BMI i1 , Educi 2 (BMI i1 ))                   (1)
                    +γ   Occ _ SI
                                    OccSI i 2 (BMI i1 , BMI i 2 − BMI i1 , Educi 2 (BMI i1 )) + γ X i 2 + ε i 2
                                                                                                  X




where the subscripts i , 1 , and 2 stand for individual, time 1 at the late teenage years between

age 16 and 20, and time 2 in the early thirties (hereafter also referred to as early career),


                                                               9
respectively. The γ ’s are parameters to be estimated, and ε denotes the error term. Educ is a

continuous variable measuring the highest grade completed. OccCens is a vector of dummy

variables measuring occupation choice among service, sales, managerial or professional

specialty, administrative support or clerical jobs, with blue-collar jobs as the reference category

based on aggregate Census occupational codes. OccSI is a dichotomous indicator for jobs

requiring social interactions with colleagues or customers based on the Dictionary of

Occupational Titles. Other covariates known to affect wages, such as demographics and the

regional unemployment rate, are denoted by X.

     We include the change in BMI (the third term in equation (1) above) in our specification to

control for an omitted variable bias caused from a correlation of employment or occupation with

contemporaneous BMI that is correlated with lagged BMI. We, however, are not interpreting the

estimate for the change in BMI ( γ ∆BMI ) given that it is not the main regressor.

     The effect of a unit change in late teen BMI on the logarithm of wages in the early career

stage is the full derivative of the logarithm of wages in the early career with respect to late teen

BMI, taking into account the indirect effect of late teen BMI through education and occupation

choice in the early career. The full derivative is

d ln(Wage) 2 ∂ ln(Wage) 2  ∂ ln(Wage) 2 ∂Educ 2         
            =            +            ×                
   dBMI 1       ∂BMI 1       ∂Educ 2     ∂BMI 1          
                   ∂ ln(Wage) 2 ∂OccCens2      ∂ ln(Wage) 2 ∂OccSI 2 
               +              ×              +            ×                                    (2)
                   ∂OccCens2      ∂BMI 1        ∂OccSI 2        ∂BMI 1 
                   ∂ ln(Wage) 2 ∂OccCens2       ∂Educ 2   ∂ ln(Wage) 2 ∂OccSI 2 ∂Educ 2       
               +              ×              ×          +            ×           ×           
                   ∂OccCens2     ∂Educ 2         ∂BMI 1   ∂OccSI 2      ∂Educ 2   ∂BMI 1     

     The first term on the right hand side is what the prior literature conventionally estimates as

the direct effect of BMI on log wages controlling for both education and occupation choice. The

next term estimates the indirect effect of BMI on log wages that operates through education. The


                                                  10
third and fourth terms are the indirect BMI wage penalties through occupation choice, measured

as the Census occupational categories (the third term) and the occupational characteristics of

requiring social interactions with customers or colleagues (the fourth term). The last two terms

account for the effect of BMI on wages through education on occupation choice. Although

equation (2) shows derivatives, we actually compute incremental effects when the variables are

not continuous. We directly obtain marginal effects from the parameter estimates for linear

models (wage and education equations), but the marginal effects are calculated and the

corresponding standard errors are bootstrapped for nonlinear discrete choice models (occupation

choice). Equation (2) shows that reporting the BMI wage penalty based on only the first term of

Equation (2) would underestimate the magnitude of the total effect, if BMI decreases education

attainment and promotes selecting lower-paying occupations, and higher stock of education and

certain occupations have a positive effect on wages. We calculate the extent of the under-

reported indirect effects out of the total effect (i.e., (5 indirect effects)/(total effect)).

      Only the first term of the partial derivatives in equation (2) can be estimated from equation

(1). To calculate the other terms, we estimate models to predict education and occupation

choice. We begin by assessing the effect of late teen BMI on the stock of education accumulated

by the time an individual reaches their early 30s using OLS. We specify education as the years of

schooling completed by the early thirties as a function of late teen BMI and other factors in the

early thirties.

         Educi 2 = α 0 + α BMI BMI i1 + α X X i 2 + η i 2                                        (3)

where the α ’s are the parameters to be estimated, η denotes the error term, and other variables

are defined as before. If individuals with higher late teen BMI have higher discount rates, they

are likely to accumulate a lower stock of education. Alternatively, teenagers may invest less in



                                                        11
their education rationally if they observe lower return on education for people with higher BMI.

Both scenarios suggest that α BMI is negative.

     Next, we estimate reduced form multinomial logit models of the effect of late teen BMI on

occupation choice in the early career based on the Census occupational codes (equation (4)) and

the Dictionary of Occupational Titles for the requirement of social interaction (equation (5)).,

     OccCens i 2 = δ 0 + δ BMI BMI i1 + δ Educ Educ i 2 (BMI i1 ) + δ ∆ ( BMI i 2 − BMI i1 ) + δ X X i 2 + ν i 2 (4)

     OccSI i 2 = β 0 + β BMI BMI i1 + β Educ Educi 2 (BMI i1 ) + β ∆ ( BMI i 2 − BMI i1 ) + β X X i 2 + ς i 2 (5)

where the δ ’s and β ’s are the parameters to be estimated, ν and ς denote the error terms, and

other variables are as defined before. Teenagers with higher BMI are likely to have a lower

stock of education as aforementioned and, therefore, higher BMI is expected to reduce the

likelihood of being in for managerial and professional occupations, or occupations requiring

social interactions with customers or colleagues through the BMI effect (expected negative signs

on δ BMI and β BMI ) and the education effect (expected positive signs on δ Educ and β Educ ). The

hypothesized direction of the late teen BMI estimate remains the same under an alternative

assumption that teenagers make occupation choice to maximize marginal productivity regardless

of their stock of education.

     After estimating equations (1), (3), (4), and (5), we can fill in values for equation (2) to

estimate the full derivative of wages in the early career with respect to late teen BMI. We

bootstrap the standard errors of all calculations based on equation (2).

     We control for the time between the late teen BMI measurement and the early adult wage

measurement across all the estimations to address the possibility that the effects of the late teen

BMI may change with duration between the two measurements. We also control for the average

age at which the late teen BMI is measured in all the estimation to account for potential


                                                       12
variations in the effect of the late teen BMI at different ages between 16 and 20.

     For all the estimations, we control for state-level labor market characteristics, including per

capita average income, the Consumer Price Index, and the unemployment rate in the resident’s

area at the time of survey. State-level macroeconomic conditions control for time-varying

macroeconomic shocks at the state level that could affect both individual health conditions and

participation in the labor market (Ruhm, 2000; Ruhm, 2004).

     Across all estimations, the late teen BMI measurement precedes the measurements for

dependent variables as in Averett and Korenman (1996), Gortmaker et al. (1993), and Norton

and Han (2008). This partly addresses the endogeneity problem of the late teen BMI. As

aforementioned, controlling for the change in BMI between the late teenage years and the early

thirties also partly accounts for the omitted variable bias because late teen BMI may be

endogenous through its correlation with contemporaneous BMI which is correlated with labor

market outcomes.

     The previous literature on obesity and labor market outcomes has tried to control for the

endogeneity of obesity using instrumental variables (Averett and Korenman, 1996; Conley and

Glauber, 2005; Cawley, 2004; Behrman and Rosenzweig, 2001; Norton and Han, 2008) or fixed

effect models (Averett and Korenman, 1996; Conley and Glauber, 2005; Cawley, 2004;

Behrman and Rosenzweig, 2001, Han, Norton, and Stearns, 2009). However, we do not use

those techniques. Some of those instruments in the previous studies, such as genetic information

as in Norton and Han (2008) and mean BMI in the respondent’s area of residence as in Morris

(2006, 2007), are not available in the NLSY79. Other previously used instruments, including

sibling’s BMI, lagged self BMI, own child’s BMI, are not clearly excluded in the wage

regression, and therefore, we do not use them. In addition, risky behaviors, such as smoking, and




                                                13
drinking may proxy time preference, and controlling for these might mitigate the remaining

endogeneity of late teen BMI as argued in Norton and Han (2008). However, those variables are

not available in NLSY79.

     Finally, we should note that we report a wage equation conditional on employment, and the

results in the wage equation are all conditional on employment and do not generalize to all

people in and out of the work force.. Many studies of hourly wages in the labor force estimate

Heckman selection models to control for the unconditional effect on wages. However, Heckman

selection models require identifying instruments, which should be correlated with the propensity

to participate in the labor force, but not correlated with other explanatory variables in the wage

equations. There are no plausible variables in the NLSY79 that satisfy these conditions. Models

that have no such identifying variables rely solely on functional form for identification, and are

notoriously unstable (Puhani, 2000; Dow and Norton, 2003).



                                               VI. DATA

National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79)

Data drawn from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79) are used for this

study. The NLSY79 is a nationally-representative sample of 12,686 young men and women who

were 14 to 22 years of age when first surveyed in 1979. Blacks, Hispanics, and economically

disadvantaged non-black and non-Hispanics were over-sampled. The cohort was interviewed

annually from 1979 through 1994 and biennially from 1996 onwards (U.S. Department of Labor,

2001). Four years of data (1981, 1982, 1985, and 1986) were pooled to create BMI in the late

teenage years, and data from seven years (1989, 1990, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1996, and 1998) were

pooled to create the samples for this study.




                                                 14
     The final estimation sample is obtained after restricting our sample to those observations

with BMI available in their late teenage years; labor market outcomes available in their early

thirties (2,613 and 2,712 observations for women and men, respectively); and, excluding those in

their early 30s who were pregnant within a year from the time of the interview including

pregnant at the time of the interview (2,196 women and 2,712 men are remained), or had missing

data in other covariates in the estimation models (2,145 women and 2,052 men remained) . Only

observations for employed persons with occupation information were used for log hourly wages

(1,514 women and 1,721 men from 2,145 women and 2,052 men).



Dependent Variable: Wages, Education, and Occupation choices

The four primary dependent variables in this study are wages, the stock of education, occupation

choice based on the Census occupational classification and occupation choice with respect to

occupations requiring social interactions as defined by the Dictionary of Occupational Titles

(DOT). These four outcomes are defined at age 30 when possible (drawn from the 1989 through

1998 waves of the data); we filled any missing values with information until age 34.

     Wages are measured by the hourly rate of pay at the current job (CPS job). We deflate

hourly wages to year 2000 dollars. For the stock of education, we use a continuous measure of

the years of schooling completed.

     We identify individuals out of the labor force separately from those who are unemployed

but actively seeking employment. For the employed, we categorize individuals by their

occupational characteristics. Employment and occupational choice have the following seven

categories:

     1) out of labor force;




                                                15
     2) unemployed but actively seeking employment;

     3) employed in service occupations;

     4) employed in managerial or professional specialty occupations;

     5) employed in sales occupations;

     6) employed in administrative support or clerical occupations; and

     7) employed in blue-collar occupations.

We adopt the aggregate occupational categories in the 1980 Census occupational classification

system (U.S. Census Bureau, 1996). A blue-collar occupation is an aggregate category of the

following census occupational categories: technicians and related support; farming, forestry, and

fishing; precision production, craft, and repair; and operators, fabricators, and laborers.

     Further, we categorize occupations by whether they require social interaction with

customers or colleagues. The dependent variable is defined by the following four categories:

     1) out of the labor force;

     2) unemployed but actively seeking jobs;

     3) employed in occupations requiring social interactions with customers or colleagues; and

     4) employed in occupations not requiring social interactions with customers or colleagues.

We use the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT) to identify occupations requiring social

interactions with customers or colleagues as in Hamermesh and Biddle (1994) and Han, Norton,

Stearns (2009). The DOT was developed for standardizing occupational information by the U.S.

Employment Service. In the DOT, blocks of jobs were assigned 9-digit occupational codes based

on the nature of the work performed and the demands of such work activities upon the workers.

Among the nine digits of each DOT code, the fifth digit reflects the relationship to people, which

has nine categories: mentoring, negotiating, instructing, supervising, diverting, persuading,




                                                 16
speaking-signaling, serving, and taking instructions-helping (Office of Administrative Law

Judges Law Library, 1991). We include all but the last (taking instructions-helping) as an

indicator that interpersonal interaction is an important aspect of an occupation, and thus, social

interactions with customers or colleagues are required.

     The summary statistics presented in Table 1 show that by one’s early career, a man earns on

average $14.55 per hour at his current job, and a woman earns $10.80 (all in 2000 dollars). The

stock of education is similar between women and men, and the average years of schooling

completed is approximately 13 years. Approximately 15% of women are out of labor force in

their early thirties, whereas only 6% of men are out of labor force at the same age. The

unemployment rate in the early 30s is 5% for both genders. The majority of employed women in

their early thirties have either managerial or professional specialties occupations (33%) or

administrative support or clerical occupations (25%). For men, the most frequent aggregate

occupational category in their early thirties is blue-collar occupations (48%), followed by

managerial or professional specialty occupations (27%). The proportion of occupations requiring

social interactions in the early career is almost even for both genders at 51%.

     Adult wages are slightly lower for those who were obese as teenagers versus those who

were not for both women ($9.60 versus $10.93) and men ($13.12 versus $14.94). Obese

teenagers of both genders eventually complete a half a year less of years of schooling compared

to non-obese teenagers. Those who were obese teenagers are more likely to be out of labor force

in their early thirties than non-obese teenagers (16% versus 14% for women and 7% versus 6%

for men). Fewer women, who were obese teenagers compared to non-obese teenagers, sort

themselves out of managerial or professional specialty jobs (29% versus 33%), sales jobs (7%

versus 10%), or blue-collar occupations (12% versus 15%). For men, the distribution of




                                                 17
occupation choice between obese and non-obese teenagers are similar to women except that

obese male teenagers are more likely to sort into blue collar occupations than their non-obese

counterparts (summary statistics by teenage obesity status are not shown).



Explanatory Variable of Interest: BMI in the late teenage years

The variable of primary interest is BMI in the late teenage years, defined as self-reported weight

in kilograms divided by self-reported height in meters squared. In the NLSY79, height

information was collected only three times, in 1981, 1982, and 1985, whereas a respondent’s

current weight was collected in every round of the survey used for this study. Because the

respondents were between 20 and 28 years old in 1985, height in 1985 was used as the

respondents’ adult height following Cawley (2004) on the assumption that height typically stops

changing by those ages.

     To define BMI for individuals in their late teenage years, we took an average of a person’s

BMI at age between 16 and 20 years old. Average BMI in the late teenage years is 24.22 for

women and 26.32 for men with a range of 16 to 58 (see Table 1).



Other Control Variables

Other covariates include change in BMI between the late teenage years and the early thirties,

age, race, education level (years of schooling), marital status (married versus non-married), the

number of children, the elapsed time from the latest pregnancy to the time of interview

(indicators for being pregnant within 2 years, 4 years, and 6 years from the time of interview

with not being pregnant within 6 years from the time of interview as the reference), highest grade

completed by parents, height in meters, AFQT scores, and regional variables. We removed




                                                18
variation in age by restricting the outcome measured in the early 30s and BMI in the late teenage

years. On average, BMI increased by 2 units for women and 1 unit for men between the late

teenage years and their early 30s. Approximately sixty percent of the sample in the early 30s was

non-Hispanic White, and a quarter was non-Hispanic Black for both genders. More than one-half

of the sample (61% of women and 56% of men) was married at the time of interview. The

majority lived in urban areas (see Table 1).

     The regional variables include the following variables: urban/rural status of the

respondents’ residential area, four regional areas in the US (South, Midwest, West, and

Northeast as the reference), and unemployment rate in the residential area (larger than 12%,

between 9−12%, between 6−9% with less than 6% as the reference). The unemployment rate in

the residential area is at the metropolitan area level for the respondents residing in a metropolitan

area. Otherwise, the unemployment rate is the state unemployment rate (not including Census

metropolitan areas) in which the respondent resides, and this information was obtained from U.S.

Department of Labor (2001). We also control for contextual macroeconomic conditions by

including the following state-level covariates: total number of private businesses per 10,000

capita, per capita average income in $1,000 deflated by yearly GDP by state, and the Consumer

Price Index. The state level variables were obtained from the Census County and City Data

Books by the U.S. Census Bureau (2000).



                                               VI. RESULTS

Background evidence on the effects of BMI, education and occupation on wages.

In Table 2, we begin by presenting empirical evidence on the underlying mechanisms in the

relationship between late teen BMI and adult wages. In a regression of hourly wages in the early




                                                 19
30s on late teen BMI and individual and regional characteristics with a constant term, a one-unit

increase of BMI in the late teenage years is associated with a decrease in hourly wages of 0.92

percent for women. However, the extent of the wage penalty gradually decreases as we further

control for the stock of education and occupation choice in the early 30s. The extent of the direct

BMI wage penalty for women decreases to 0.80 and 0.83 percent, respectively, after controlling

for the stock of education and occupation choice. Finally, the magnitude of the direct BMI wage

penalty for women falls to 0.78 percent when we control for both the stock of education and

occupation choice as shown in Model 4 (see left section in Table 2). Although the estimates are

not statistically different across the four models, these results for women provide empirical

support for our hypothesis that occupation choice and the stock of education may explain part of

the observed lasting wage penalty for BMI in the late teenage years. It should be noted that

the purpose of the estimation is to motivate further analyses that empirically quantify the extent

of the indirect BMI wage penalty through education and occupation choicenot to test the

statistical differences on the direct BMI wage penalty in the four regressions. No significant

direct BMI wage penalty is found for men regardless of model specifications (see right section in

Table 2). The control for the change in BMI throughout the 20s does not have a statistically

significant association with hourly wages in the early thirties for either women or men.

   There is a relatively large association between wages and the stock of education and

occupation choice for both men and women. As shown in Model 4 in Table 2, having one

additional year of schooling is associated with an increase in hourly wages by 2.4 and 3.6

percents for women and men, respectively. We also find that women and men, respectively, earn

14.0 and 17.1 percent higher hourly wages in managerial or professional specialty occupations

compared to blue-collar occupations (the reference), whereas service occupations are associated




                                                20
with a 41.0 and 12.2 percent decrease in hourly wages for women and men, respectively (see

Table 2).


Stock of education in the early thirties

Our study findings on the relationship between BMI in the late teenage years and the stock of

education acquired by the early 30s show that higher BMI in the late teenage years is associated

with a statistically significant reduction in years of schooling acquired by the early thirties for

both women and men. As shown in Table 3, a one-unit increase in BMI in the late teenage years

decreases the highest grade completed in the early thirties by 0.025 and 0.024 units for women

and men, respectively.



Employment and occupation choice in the early thirties

As for the employment and occupation choice in the early 30s, the results presented in Table 4

show that the effect of BMI in the late teenage years does not have a statistically significant

effect on the long-term occupation choice based on the Census occupational classification in the

early 30s overall. As an exception, we find that a one-unit increase in late teen BMI for women

reduces the likelihood of being in a blue-collar occupation by 0.38 percentage points. The results

also suggest that the lasting wage penalty in the early career for late teen BMI operates mainly

through education. As expected, a year increase of the years of schooling completed raises the

likelihood of having managerial or professional specialty occupations by 6.9 and 5.5 percentage

points for women and men, respectively. On the other hand, for women, an additional year of

education completed reduces the likelihood of having service occupations (by 1.8 percentage

points), sales occupations (by 0.82 percentage points), and administrative support or clerical

occupations (by 3.4 percentage points). Men with one additional year of education completed


                                                  21
also are less likely to be out of the labor force and unemployed but actively seeking jobs by 1.2

and 1.3 percentage points, respectively, and also less likely to have blue-collar occupations by

6.7 percentage points and more likely to be in managerial or professional specialty occupations

by 5.5 percentage points (see Table 4).

     We also present multinomial results for occupation choice with respect to occupations

requiring social interactions as defined by the Dictionary of Occupational Titles in Table 5. Late

teen BMI has a negative effect on the probability of having occupations requiring social

interactions for women to the extent that a one-unit increase of late teen BMI reduces the

probability of being in occupations requiring social interactions by 0.43 percentage points. The

association between the change in BMI and the likelihood of having an occupation requiring

social interactions is not distinguishable from zero for either women or men. For men, the

highest level of education is positively associated with having occupations not requiring social

interactions by 2.5 percentage points (see Table 5).



The extent of the direct and indirect BMI wage penalty

Finally, in Table 6, we decompose the long-term wage penalty in the early career to quantify the

direct effect and indirect effects of BMI in the late teen years that operate through education and

occupation channels. For the direct BMI wage penalty, estimates in Table 2 show that a one-unit

increase of late teen BMI decreases hourly wages by 0.78 percent for women after controlling for

education and occupation choice. For men, however, there is no statistically significant direct

BMI wage penalty conditional on education and occupation choice.

     For women, in addition to the 0.78 percent (90% CI: [0.18, 1.38]) direct BMI wage penalty,

we estimate an additional 0.18 percent reduction (90% CI: [0.032, 0.32]) in wages due to a one-




                                                22
unit increase in late teen BMI resulting from the following indirect effects: 1) a 0.060 percent

(90% CI: [0.014, 0.11]) decrease through the BMI effect on the stock of education; 2) a 0.050

percent (90% CI: [0.013, 0.088]) decrease due to reduced education which in turn affects

occupation choice based on the Census occupational classification; 3) a 0.00098 percent decrease

due to reduced education which in turn affects occupation choice with respect to occupations

requiring social interactions based on the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT); 4) a 0.045

percent decrease due to the BMI effect on occupation choice based on the Census occupational

classification; and,5) a 0.0019 percent decrease due to the BMI effect on occupation choice with

respect to occupations requiring social interactions as defined by DOT (see Table 6).

     Whereas similar to the previous literature we do not find a direct BMI wage penalty for

men, we do find a statistically significant indirect BMI wage penalty stemming from education

and occupation choice operating through education. The total indirect effect of late teen BMI on

hourly wages is estimated to reduce wages by 0.11 percent by adding up the estimates in the

following pathways: 1) a 0.086 percent (90% CI: [0.020, 0.15]) decrease through the BMI effect

on the stock of education; 2) a 0.024 percent (90% CI: [0.0086, 0.041]) decrease due to reduced

education which in turn affects occupation choice based on the Census occupational

classification; 3) a 0.0011 percent decrease due to reduced education which in turn affects

occupation choice with respect to occupations requiring social interactions based on the

Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT); 4) a 0.0081 percent decrease due to the BMI effect on

occupation choice based on the Census occupational classification; and,5) a 0.0057 percent

increase due to the BMI effect on occupation choice with respect to occupations requiring social

interactions as defined by DOT. Note, however, that whereas some of the components of the

total indirect effect are statistically significant, the estimated total indirect effect for men does




                                                   23
not achieve statistical significance (see Table 6).

     Thus, we estimate a total 0.96 percent (90% CI: [0.29, 1.62]) decrease in wages for women

resulting from each additional unit of late teen BMI where the indirect effect is 0.18 percent

(90% CI: [0.032, 0.32]) which represents 19% (0.18 out of 0.96) of the estimated total BMI wage

penalty. For men, we estimate a 0.11 percent decrease in wages indirectly for an additional unit

of late teen BMI, albeit statistically not significant, which is originated from the negative

relationship between late teen BMI and education.



                                          VI. CONCLUSIONS

We extend the existing literature by showing that the BMI wage gap in a given job stems in part

from the indirect effect of BMI in the late teenage years on choices related to both education and

occupation in early career. The indirect relationship between BMI and wages is driven by 1) the

effect of late teen BMI on education which affects wages and 2) the effect of late teen BMI on

education which, in turn, affects occupation choice which affects wages. The results show that

higher late teen BMI leads to lower levels of accumulated education in the early thirties for both

genders. However, late teen BMI is generally not found to be associated with occupation choice

in the early thirties in either Census base or DOT base with a few exception for women. The

effects of late teen BMI for women and men affects their choices for occupation in the early

thirties mainly through investments in education.

     The finding that late teenage women with a higher BMI have lower wages at age 30

deserves further discussion. In particular, what is the mechanism through which this may

operate? We give three possible explanations. The first story is one of statistical discrimination.

In this scenario, BMI is correlated with other permanent characteristics, such as the discount rate.




                                                  24
Although BMI does not directly affect productivity, because it is observable, employers use it

when setting initial wages. Over time, good workers reveal themselves and are paid more. On

average though, many workers with high late teen BMI will be not good workers because of their

discount rate and earn low wages throughout their career. However, we find that an interaction

term between the years of schooling and a dummy variable indicator of obesity (BMI larger than

30) in an hourly wage regression is not statistically significant, which may imply that the

statistical discrimination may not fully explain the late teen BMI wage penalty.

     A second story is statistical. We essentially include both past and current BMI (actually

past BMI and the change in BMI), which are positively correlated. When two correlated

variables are included in a regression, the dominant one often is the one measured with less error.

Past BMI may have lower measurement error if weight swings are wider in middle age, making a

single BMI measurement a somewhat random snapshot of a volatile process driven by binges,

diets, bouts of good intentions followed by relapses. If this story is correct, then late teen BMI

may be a better measure of permanent body type due to lower measurement error.

     Finally, fate may be revealed early. By age 18 many people may already be headed down

their life path. Some have entered fine universities, others are pregnant or in jail. BMI may be

correlated with these different paths. To the extent that future wages are predictable by age 18,

and socioeconomic status and education are related to late teen BMI, then this early fate view

will be true.

     The endogeneity of late teen BMI, our primary variable of interest, is partly controlled for

in the estimation because it precedes the measurements for outcome variables. However, we

acknowledge that our estimation results should be taken cautiously given that the models may

not fully account for the potential endogeneity of BMI. Omitted variables related to both BMI




                                                 25
and labor market outcomes will still cause endogeneity bias for late teen BMI, and unobserved

individual-level heterogeneity, such as time preference is an example of such variables. If obese

teenagers have a higher discount rate, estimated coefficients in the wage regression without

encountering the endogeneity of late teen BMI would be biased downwards. Note that, however,

we estimate a reduced form model, and accordingly, the endogeneity of other covariates such as

the stock of education is less of concern in this paper.

     We do not control for selection into the labor market in this study. We acknowledge that

estimating hourly wages conditional on working may underestimate the BMI wage penalty if

teenagers with higher BMI are likely to be out of labor force or unemployed. However, our

estimates on occupational choice which includes both out of labor force and unemployed

categories show statistically non-significant effects of late teen BMI on the likelihood of being

out of labor force or unemployed. This may imply that the extent of bias of our wage estimates

conditional on working may not be substantial.

     We improve the previous literature by measuring occupations requiring social interactions.

Note, however, that we do not differentiate skills requiring social interaction with colleagues

from the skills requiring social interaction with customers. High BMI or obesity may cause a

wage penalty in jobs requiring interactions with customers but may not have an effect on wages

in jobs requiring interactions only with colleagues. If teenagers with high BMI could observe a

wage penalty for their body mass, they might have more incentive to develop job skills to

compensate the BMI effect.

     Finally, we argue that a significant portion of the effect of BMI on labor market outcomes

may occur prior to employment and, indeed, we show that previous studies that estimate the BMI

wage penalty conditional on education and occupation underestimate the penalty for women. Our




                                                 26
results for women show a total 0.96 percent decrease in wages resulting from each additional

unit of late teen BMI with the indirect effects stemming from education and occupation choices

making up 19% of the total estimated BMI wage penalty. We do not find a significant direct

BMI wage penalty for men nor has one been found in the previous literature. However, we do

find that each additional unit of late teen BMI for men decreases hourly wages via indirect

pathways through education and occupation choice operating from education by 0.086 and 0.024

percent, respectively. These results suggest that in order to fully capture the relationship between

BMI and labor market outcomes researchers need to account for the early part of the life-cycle

when individuals make important choices such those related to human capital formation.




                                                 27
REFERENCES

Averett S, Korenman S. “The economic reality of the beauty myth.” Journal of Human

   Resources 31, 1996, 304-330.

Baum CL, Ford WF. “The wage effects of obesity: a longitudinal study.” Health Economics 13,

   2004, 885-899.

Bhattacharya J, Bundorf MK. “The incidence of the health care costs of obesity”. NBER Working

   Paper 11303, May 2005.

Carpenter CS. “The effects of employment protection for obese people.” Industrial Relations

   45(3), 2006, 393-415.

Cawley J. “An instrumental variables approach to measuring the effect of body weight on

   employment disability.” Health Services Research 35(5), 2000, 1159-1179.

Cawley J. “The impact of obesity on wages.” Journal of Human Resources 39(2), 2004, 451-474.

Conley D, Glauber G. “Body mass and economic status”. NBER working paper 2005, # 11343.

Everett M. “Let an overweight person call on your best customers? Fat chance.” Sales and

   Marketing Management 142, 1990, 66–70.

Garcia J, Quintana-Domeque C. “Obesity, Employment, and Wages in Europe. In: Kristian

   Bolin and John Cawley (eds.).” The Economics of Obesity, Advances in Health Economics

   and Health Services Research 17, 2007, 187-218.

Frieze IH, Josephine EO, and Good DC. “Perceived and actual discrimination in the salaries of

   male and female managers”. J Appl Soc Psychology 20, 1990, 46-47.

Hamermesh DS, Biddle JE. “Beauty and the labor market.” The American Journal or Economic

   Review 84(5), 1994, 1174-1194.

Han E, Norton EC, Stearns SS. “Weight and wages: Fat versus lean paychecks”. Health




                                              28
   Economics. Forthcoming 2008.

Harper B. “Beauty, structure and the labour market: A British cohort study.” Oxford Bulletin of

   Economics and Statistics 62, 2000, 771-800.

Lakdawalla D, Philipson T. “Labor Supply and Weight.” Journal of Human Resources 42(1),

   2007, 85–116.

Lundborg P et al. ”Obesity and Occupational Attainment Among the 50+ of Europe. In: Kristian

   Bolin and John Cawley (eds.)”. The Economics of Obesity, Advances in Health Economics

   and Health Services Research 17, 2007, 219-252.

Martel LF, Biller HB. “Statues and stigma: the biopsychosocial development of short males”.

   Lexignton, Mass; Lexington Books. 1987.

Morris S. “The impact of obesity on employment.” Labour Economics 14, 2007, 413-433.

Norton EC, Han E. “Using genetic information to identify causal effects of obesity.” Health

   Economics 17, 2008, 1089-1104.

Puhl R, Brownell KD. “Bias, discrimination, and obesity.” Obesity Research 9, 2001, 788–805.

Office of Administrative Law Judges Law Library. U.S. Department of Labor. Dictionary of

   Occupational Titles. Fourth edition, revised 1991. Accessed at March 11, 2005 from

   http://www.oalj.dol.gov/libdot.htm.

Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Curtin LR et al. “Prevalence of overweight and obesity in the United

   States, 1999-2004.” JAMA 295(13), 2006, 1549-1555.

Pagan JA, Davila A. “Obesity, occupational attainment, and earnings.” Social Science Quarterly

   78(3), 1997, 756-770.

Paraponaris A, Saliba B, Ventelou B. “Obesity, weight status and employability: empirical

   evidence from a French National Survey.” Economics and Human Biology 3(2), 2005, 241-




                                              29
   258.

Persico N, Postlewaite A, and Silverman D. “The effect of adolescent experience on labor market

   outcomes: The case of height.” Journal of Political Economy. 112(5), 2004, 1019-1053.

Puhani PA. “The Heckman correction for sample selection and its critique”. Journal of Economic

   Surveys 14(1), 2000, 53–68.

Ruhm CJ. “Are Recessions Good For Your Health?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (2),

   2000, 617-650.

Ruhm CJ. “Maternal employment and adolescent development.” NBER working paper 2004,

   #10691.

Sabia JJ. “The effect of body weight on adolescent academic performance.” Southern Economic

   Journal 73 (4), 2007, 871-900.

Sarlio-Lahteenkorva S, Lahelma E. “The association of body mass index with social and

   economic disadvantage in women and men.” International Journal of Epidemiology 28(3),

   1999, 445-449.

Tunceli K, Li KM, Williams LK. “Long-term effects of obesity on employment and work

   limitations among US adults, 1986 to 1999.” Obesity 14(9), 2006, 1637-1646.

U.S. Census Bureau. Current Population Survey, March 1996. Access at March 27, 2005 from

   http://www.census.gov/apsd/techdoc/cps/mar96/append_b.html

U.S. Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce. County and City Data Book: 2000. Access

  at March 27, 2005 from http://www.census.gov/prod/www/ccdb.html.

U.S. Department of Labor. NLSY79 users’ guide: A guide to the 1979-2000 National

   Longitudinal     Survey   of   Youth.   2001.   Accessed   at   March    11,   2005     from

   http://www.bls.gov/nls/79guide/2001/nls79g0.pdf.




                                              30
Table 1. Weighted summary statistics
                                                             Women             Men
Variables                                                  Mean  SD        Mean    SD          Range
Dependent variables
   Hourly wages                                            10.80   9.12    14.55   12.78     [1, 660.69]
   Stock of education: highest grade completed             13.46   2.35    13.13   2.51        [3, 20]
  Occupation choice based on Census
  occupational code
     Out of labor force                                    0.15    0.35    0.06    0.23        [0, 1]
     Unemployed                                            0.05    0.22    0.05    0.21        [0, 1]
     Employed                                              0.80    0.45    0.89    0.34        [0, 1]
        Service                                            0.18    0.39    0.11    0.31        [0, 1]
        Managerial or professional specialties             0.33    0.47    0.27    0.44        [0, 1]
        Sales                                              0.09    0.29    0.08    0.27        [0, 1]
        Administrative support/clerical                    0.25    0.43    0.06    0.23        [0, 1]
        Blue-collar                                        0.15    0.36    0.48    0.5         [0, 1]
  Occupation choice based on
  the Dictionary of Occupation Titles
     Occupation requiring social interaction               0.51    0.50    0.50    0.50        [0, 1]
Independent variable of interest
  BMI in the teenage years between age 16 and 20           24.22   4.32    26.32   4.38    [15.62, 57.66]
Race
  White                                                    0.56    0.49    0.57     0.49         [0, 1]
  Black                                                    0.26    0.44    0.25     0.43         [0, 1]
  Hispanic                                                 0.18    0.38    0.18     0.38         [0, 1]
Highest grade completed by mother                          10.98   3.15    11.11   3.15         [0, 20]
Highest grade completed by father                          10.98   3.88    11.17   3.84         [0, 20]
Married                                                    0.61    0.49    0.56     0.50         [0, 1]
Number of children                                         1.48    1.10    1.01     1.11         [0, 3]
AFQT scores                                                41.10   27.23   41.28   29.39        [1, 99]
Height (meters)                                            1.63    0.07    1.78     0.08     [1.22, 1.98]
BMI in the early thirties − BMI in the late teenage        2.27    4.77    0.97     4.27   [-16.67, 23.84]
year
Pregnancy
   Being pregnant within 2 years from the time of          0.23    0.42    N/A     N/A         [0, 1]
   interview
   Being pregnant between 2-4 years from the time          0.29    0.45    N/A     N/A         [0, 1]
   of interview
   Being pregnant between 4-6 years from the time          0.35    0.48    N/A     N/A         [0, 1]
   of interview
   Not being pregnant within 6 years from the time         0.13    0.38    N/A     N/A         [0, 1]
   of interview
Mean age for the late teen BMI observation                 18.66   0.6     18.64   0.6       [17, 19.5]
Time between the teen BMI observation and the              11.8    0.99    11.71   0.85     [10.5, 16.5]
adult wage observation



                                                      31
Regional variables
  Unemployment rate: < 6%                            0.40    0.49     0.40     0.49        [0, 1]
  Unemployment rate: 6-9%                            0.41    0.49     0.41     0.49        [0, 1]
  Unemployment rate: 9-12%                           0.10    0.30     0.11     0.32
  Unemployment rate: > 12%                           0.09    0.28     0.08     0.27        [0, 1]
  Number of private businesses per 10,000 at        250.59   22.46   251.17   23.29   [205.35, 362.10]
  the state-level
  State per capita average yearly income in         21.90    2.57    21.99    2.51     [15.42, 30.12]
  $1,000
  The Consumer Price Index                          1.51     0.06    1.51     0.06      [1.39, 1.58]
  West                                              0.19     0.39    0.20     0.40         [0, 1]
  North-central                                     0.25     0.43    0.26     0.44         [0, 1]
  South                                             0.40     0.49    0.36     0.48         [0, 1]
  Urban                                             0.80     0.40    0.81     0.40         [0, 1]
N                                                   2,145            2,052




                                               32
Table 2. OLS estimation results of log hourly wages in the early career on BMI in the late
teenage years, the stock of education, and occupation choice in early career
Selected point estimates                 Women (N=1,514)                                Men (N=1,721)
                              Model 1 Model 2      Model 3      Model 4  Model 1     Model 2    Model 3    Model 4
  Late teen BMI              -0.0092** -0.0080* -0.0083**       -0.0078*  0.0007      0.0025     0.0017     0.0028
                              (0.0043) (0.0041) (0.0040)        (0.0040) (0.0035)    (0.0034) (0.0034)     (0.0034)
  Adult BMI −                  -0.005   -0.0037    -0.0037       -0.0034  0.0021      0.0039     0.0024     0.0036
    Late teen BMI             (0.0036) (0.0035)    (0.0034)     (0.0034) (0.0038)    (0.0038) (0.0037)     (0.0037)
  Highest grade completed              0.0503***               0.0237**             0.0510***             0.0364***
                                        (0.0100)                (0.0107)             (0.0086)              (0.0092)
  Managerial or professional                      0.1709***    0.1395***                       0.2323*** 0.1707***
    specialties                                    (0.0477)     (0.0501)                        (0.0390)   (0.0422)
  Service                                        -0.4155***   -0.4095***                      -0.1107*** -0.1219***
                                                   (0.0594)     (0.0591)                        (0.0420)   (0.0411)
  Sales                                            -0.1047       -0.1007                        0.1050*     0.0877
                                                   (0.0675)     (0.0673)                        (0.0609)   (0.0606)
  Administrative                                   -0.0694       -0.0617                        -0.0108    -0.0335
    support/clerical                               (0.0484)     (0.0475)                        (0.0561)   (0.0571)
  Occupation requiring                              0.0446        0.0445                         0.0226     0.0188
    social interaction                             (0.0358)     (0.0357)                        (0.0317)   (0.0316)
Note:
a. All models control for the following covariates: age, race, marital status (married versus non-
   married), the elapsed time from the latest pregnancy to the time of interview (indicators for
   being pregnant within 2 years, 4 years, and 6 years from the time of interview with not being
   pregnant within 6 years from the time of interview as the reference), highest grade completed
   by parents, height in meters, AFQT scores, and regional variables, which include urban/rural
   status of the respondents’ residential area, four regional areas in the US (South, Midwest,
   West, and Northeast as the reference), unemployment rate in the residential unit (larger than
   12%, between 9-12%, between 6-9% with less than 6% as the reference), total number of
   private businesses per 10,000 capita at the state level, per capita average income in $1,000
   deflated by yearly GDP by state, and the Consumer Price Index.
b. Standard errors for the marginal effects are in the parentheses.
c. Unit of observation is person.
d. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                   33
Table 3. The marginal effect of the BMI at the late teenage years on the years of schooling
completed in early career in OLS
Dependent variable: Years of schooling        Women         Men
completed
Late teen BMI                                -0.0254**    -0.0236**
                                              (0.0123)    (0.0108)
N                                              2,145       2,052
Notes from Table 2 all apply.




                                               34
Table 4. The marginal effect of BMI at the late teenage years on occupation choice in early career in a multinomial logit model
Selected point estimates                                  Outcome variable: employment and occupational choice categories
                                         Out of      Unemployed      Service     Managerial /     Sales       Administrative   Blue-collar
                                       labor force     but in the                professional                    support /
                                                      labor force                 specialty                       clerical
Women (N=2,145)
  Late teen BMI                          0.0000         0.0003        0.0017       0.0019         0.0010         -0.0010       -0.0038**
                                        (0.0023)       (0.0012)      (0.0022)      (0.0022        0.0016          0.0023         0.0017
   Adult BMI − Late teen BMI            0.0035*         -0.0012       -0.0017      -0.0040*       -0.0025        0.0042*          0.0017
                                        (0.0018)       (0.0011)      (0.0016)      (0.0021         0.0016         0.0024           0.0015
   Years of schooling completed         -0.0002         -0.0033     -0.0180***    0.0685***      -0.0082**      -0.0340***        -0.0049
                                        (0.0052)       (0.0026)      (0.0048)       0.0050         0.0035         0.0049           0.0043

Men (N=2,052)
  Late teen BMI                          0.0013         -0.0020       -0.0005       0.0000        -0.0017        -0.0004          0.0033
                                        (0.0013)       (0.0015)      (0.0021)       0.0021         0.0016         0.0012          0.0028
   Adult BMI − Late teen BMI            -0.0026*       0.0027**       -0.0018       0.0011         0.0014         0.0011         -0.0018
                                        (0.0015)       (0.0012)      (0.0018)       0.0022         0.0018         0.0015          0.0029
   Years of schooling completed         -0.0123*      -0.0132**       -0.0058     0.0552***       -0.0080        -0.0014       -0.0667***
                                        (0.0063)       (0.0057)      (0.0083)       0.0099         0.0058         0.0057          0.0116
Notes from Table 2 all apply.




                                                                   35
Table 5. The marginal effect of BMI at the late teen years on occupation choice in the early career
by the requirement of social interactions with customers or colleagues in a multinomial logit
model
 Independent variable of interest        Outcome variable: employment and occupational choice
                                                                 categories
                                          Out of       Unemploye       Employed      Employed at
                                        labor force d but in the            at       Occupations
                                                       labor force Occupation        not requiring
                                                                       s requiring       social
                                                                          social      interactions
                                                                      interactions
 Women (N=2,145)
   Late teen BMI                         -0.0003        0.0003         -0.0043*          0.0043
                                        (0.0021)       (0.0012)        (0.0025)        (0.0031)
   Adult BMI − Late teen BMI            0.0036**        -0.0012         -0.0013         -0.0011
                                        (0.0018)       (0.0011)        (0.0024)        (0.0024)
   Highest grade completed               -0.0039       -0.0046*         -0.0002         0.0087
                                        (0.0050)       (0.0025)        (0.0062)        (0.0060)

 Men (N=2,052)
  Late teen BMI                          0.0014          -0.0019        0.0030          -0.0026
                                        (0.0015)        (0.0014)       (0.0031)        (0.0032)
   Adult BMI − Late teen BMI             -0.0025       0.0027**        -0.0006          0.0004
                                        (0.0016)        (0.0012)       (0.0030)        (0.0030)
   Highest grade completed             -0.0091***     -0.0094***       -0.0070        0.0254***
                                        (0.0029)        (0.0027)       (0.0064)        (0.0059)
Notes from Table 2 all apply.




                                                36
Table 6. Decomposition of the long-term wage penalty in early career for BMI in the late teen
years: quantification of the direct effect and indirect effects operating through education and
occupation channels.
 Indirect and direct BMI wage penalty                            Women           Men
 Channels of the indirect effects
      Education                                                -0.00060** -0.00086**
                                                                (0.00028)     (0.00040)

      Occupation choice: measured as the Census             -0.00045      -0.000081
      occupational categories                               (0.0012)      (0.00060)

      Occupational characteristics of requiring social       -0.00019     0.000057
      interactions with customers or colleagues             (0.00031)     (0.00015)

      Education through occupation choice measured as      -0.00050** -0.00024**
      the Census occupational categories                    (0.00023) (0.000097)

      Education through Occupational characteristics of    -0.0000098 -0.000011
      requiring social interactions with customers or      (0.000015) (0.000022)
      colleagues

      Sum of indirect effects                               -0.0018**      -0.0011
                                                            (0.00087)     (0.00086)

 Direct effect                                              -0.0078**         0.0028
                                                             (0.0036)        (0.0037)

 Total                                                      -0.0096**         0.0016
                                                             (0.0040)        (0.0037)
Note:
a. Standard errors, calculated from bootstrapping, are in the parentheses.
b. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                37
