NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TECHNOLOGY INNOVATION AND DIFFUSION AS SOURCES OF OUTPUT AND
ASSET PRICE FLUCTUATIONS
Diego A. Comin
Mark Gertler
Ana Maria Santacreu
Working Paper 15029
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15029

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2009

We appreciate the helpful comments of Marianne Baxter, Paul Beaudry, John Campbell, Larry Christiano,
Jordi Gali, Bob King, John Leahy, Martin Lettau, Monika Piazzesi, Martin Schneider, and seminar
participants at the Boston Fed, Brown, Boston University, NBER Summer Institute, University of
Valencia, University of Houston, Harvard Business School, Swiss National Bank, CEPR-CREI and
NBER-EFG meeting. We appreciate the excellent research assistance of Albert Queralto. Financial
assistance from the C.V. Starr Center and the NSF is greatly appreciated. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Diego A. Comin, Mark Gertler, and Ana Maria Santacreu. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Technology Innovation and Diffusion as Sources of Output and Asset Price Fluctuations
Diego A. Comin, Mark Gertler, and Ana Maria Santacreu
NBER Working Paper No. 15029
June 2009
JEL No. E2,E3
ABSTRACT
We develop a model in which innovations in an economy’s growth potential are an important driving
force of the business cycle. The framework shares the emphasis of the recent ”new shock” literature
on revisions of beliefs about the future as a source of fluctuations, but differs by tieing these beliefs
to fundamentals of the evolution of the technology frontier. An important feature of the model is that
the process of moving to the frontier involves costly technology adoption. In this way, news of improved
growth potential has a positive effect on current hours. As we show, the model also has reasonable
implications for stock prices. We estimate our model for data post-1984 and show that the innovations
shock accounts for nearly a third of the variation in output at business cycle frequencies. The estimated
model also accounts reasonably well for the large gyration in stock prices over this period. Finally,
the endogenous adoption mechanism plays a significant role in amplifying other shocks.

Diego A. Comin
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
dcomin@hbs.edu
Mark Gertler
Department of Economics
New York University
269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
mark.gertler@nyu.edu

Ana Maria Santacreu
Department of Economics
New York University
New York, NY 10012
ams458@nyu.edu

1

Motivation

A central challenge to modern business cycle analysis is that there are few if any
significant primitive driving forces that are readily observable. Oil shocks are perhaps
the main example. But even here there is controversy. Not all recessions are preceded
by major oil price spikes and there is certainly little evidence that major expansions
are fueled by oil price declines. Further, given its low cost share of production, there
is debate over whether in fact oil shocks alone could be a source of major output
swings. Credit conditions have been a key factor in some of the postwar recessions,
including the current one, but not in all.
Motivated by the absence of significant observable shocks, an important paper
by Beaudry and Portier (2004) proposes that news about the future might be an
important source of business cycle fluctuations. Indeed, the basic idea has its roots in
a much earlier literature due to Beveridge (1909)), Pigou (1927), and Clark (1934).
These authors appealed to revisions in investor’s beliefs about future growth prospects
to account for business cycle expansions and contractions.
As originally emphasized by Cochrane (1994), however, introducing news shocks
within a conventional business cycle framework is a non-trivial undertaking. For example, within the real business cycle framework the natural way to introduce news
shocks is to have individual’s beliefs about the future path of technology fluctuate.
Unfortunately, news about the future path of technology introduces a wealth effect
on labor supply that leads to hours moving in the opposite direction of beliefs: Expectation of higher productivity growth leads to a rise in current consumption which
in turn reduces labor supply.
Much of the focus of the “news shock” literature to date has been on introducing new propagation mechanisms that deliver the correct cyclical response of hours.
Beaudry and Portier (2004) introduce a two sector model with immobile labor between the sectors. Jaimovich and Rebelo (2006) introduce preferences which dampen
the wealth effect on labor supply. However, as Chrisiano, Cosmin, Motto, and Rostagno (2007) note, these approaches have difficulty accounting for the high persistence
of output fluctuations, as well as the volatility and cyclical behavior of stock prices.
These authors instead propose a model based on overly accommodative monetary
policy.
2

In this paper we follow the “news shock” literature in developing a framework
that emphasizes revisions in beliefs about future growth prospects as key factor in
business fluctuations. The framework differs, however, in that news is tied directly
to the evolution of fundamentals that govern these prospects. In particular, growth
prospects depend on an exogenously evolving technology frontier. The technologies
in the frontier eventually will be used in production. A shock to the growth rate
of potential technologies, accordingly, provides news about the future path of the
technology frontier.
Unlike in the standard model, however, news about future technology is not simply
news of manna from heaven. As in Comin and Gertler (2006), the new technologies
have to be adopted prior to being used in production. The firms’ investments in
adopting new technologies leads to a shift in labor demand when the news shock
hits the economy. For reasonable parametrizations, this substitution effect offsets
the wealth effect generating a boom in output, investment consumption and hours
worked. This endogenous and procyclical movement of adoption is consistent with
the cyclical patterns of diffusion found in Comin (2009). Further, because diffusion
of new technologies takes time, the cyclical response to our news shock is highly
persistent.
In addition to affecting the propagation of the innovation shock, the endogenous
diffusion mechanism also works to amplify and propagate other conventional disturbances to the economy, such as exogenous movements in total factor productivity or
shocks to the cost of capital investments. Thus the mechanism we develop is potentially also relevant to business fluctuations driven primarily by factors other than
news about future technological prospects.
Finally, our framework also broadly captures the cyclical pattern of stock price
movements. Conventional models have problems generating large procyclical movements in stock prices. In these models the value of the firm is the value of installed
capital.1 One immediate problem is that, in the data, the relative price of capital
tends to move countercyclically. Of course, by introducing some form of adjustment
costs, it is possible to generate procyclical movements in the market price of installed
capital. However, absent counterfactually high adjustment costs, it is very difficult
1

One important deviation from this is Hall (2000) that argues that much of the run up in the
second half of the 90s does not correspond to the value of installed capital.

3

to generate empirically reasonable movements in market prices of capital.
Unlike with standard macro models, in our framework firms have the right to
the profit flow of current and future adopted technologies, in addition to the value
of installed capital. Revisions in beliefs about this added component of expected
earnings allow us to capture both the high volatility of the stock market and its
lead over output. Further, because the stock market in our model is anticipating the
earnings from projects that are productive only when they are adopted in the future,
the price-earnings ratio is mean reverting, as is consistent with the evidence.2
Of course, it would be problematic that our model generated the high volatility we
observe in price-earnings ratios by inducing an overly volatile or persistent earnings
growth process. This is not the case. The first order auto-correlation and standard deviation of earnings growth in the model are approximately in line with the
data. This then begs for the question of how, a model such as ours without cyclical variation in risk premia, can produce highly volatile price-earning ratios without
overly volatile or persistent processes for dividend growth. The answer is simple: Our
process of endogenous slow adoption of technologies induces a process for earnings
growth that has a small but highly persistent component. This component generates
low frequency fluctuations in the capital share and in earnings growth. Standard
models with calibrated processes for earnings growth miss this component and hence
have problems inducing large fluctuations in price-earnings ratios. Our macro model,
instead, endogenously generates this component due to the endogenous technology
adoption process. Reassuringly, when looking at the US macro data we also observe
similar low frequency volatility in the capital share and in earnings growth.
Before proceeding we should mention a few closely related papers in the literature.
Beaudry, Collard, and Portier (2007) emphasize the expansionary effect of unproductive expenditures in purchasing the rights to new technologies. In our model, instead,
the expenditures in technology adoption affect the speed of diffusion of technologies.
More generally, there are important differences in the details of the technology and
adoption process, as well as the empirical implementation. In addition, we emphasize the implications for stock prices, as well as output and investment dynamics.
Iraola and Santos (2007) and Pastor and Veronesi (2008, forthcoming) also study the
implications of the arrival of new technologies for the stock market. We differ from
2

See for example, Campbell and Shiller (1989).

4

their analysis in the details of the technology and adoption process, as well as in the
empirical implementation.
In section 2 we present a simple expository model to introduce the endogenous
technology adoption mechanism and our innovation shock as a prelude to an estimated
model that we present in section 4. The model adds to a relatively standard real
business model an expanding variety of intermediate goods which determines the
level of productivity. Though intermediate goods arrive at an exogenous rate, how
many can be used in production depends on the agents’ adoption decisions. In section
3 we calibrate the model and analyze the impact of a shock to the evolution of new
technologies. As we noted, assuming rational expectations, this shock reveals news
about the economy’s future growth potential.
In section 4, we move to an estimated model. We combine our model of endogenous
technology adoption with a variant of the standard quantitative macroeconomic model
due to Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2007).
We differ mainly by having technological change endogenous whereas in the standard
model it is exogenous. Section 5 reports the estimates for a sample period covering
1984:1 to 2008:2. Overall, we show that the main findings from the calibrated model
are robust to an estimated model that provides a reasonable fit of the data. In
addition, our ”news/innovation” shock is an important driver of business fluctuations.
In particular, it explains 27 percent of output growth (32 percent of HP filtered
output).
In section 6 we analyze the implications for the stock market. We show that,
broadly speaking, the model captures the overall volatility of stock prices, as well
as the co-movement with output. We also show that the model is consistent with
a number of findings from the empirical finance literature. Somewhat surprisingly,
it can account for the run-up of stock prices in the mid 1990s and also some of the
decline preceding the most recent recession. Concluding remarks are presented in
section 7.

2

Baseline Model

Our baseline framework is a variation of the Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell
(2000) (GHK) business cycle model that features shocks to embodied technological
5

change, as well as a variable utilization rate of capital. We formulate the process
of technological change more explicitly and also allow for endogenous technology
adoption.

2.1

Resource Constraints

Let Yt be gross final output, Ct consumption, It investment, Gt government consumption, Ht technology adoption expenses, and Ot firm overhead operating expenses.
Then output is divided as follows:
Yt = Ct + It + Gt + Ht + Ot

(1)

In turn, let Jt be newly produced capital and δt be the depreciation rate of capital.
Then capital, Kt , evolves as follows:
Kt+1 = (1 − δt )Kt + Jt

(2)

Next, let Ptk be the price of this capital in units of final output which is our numeraire.
Then,
Jt = (Ptk )−1 µ̄k It
where µ̄k is a weighted markup in the capital goods sector to be characterized below.
A distinguishing feature of our framework is that Ptk evolves endogenously. One key
source of variation is the pace of technology adoption, which depends on the stock
of available new technologies, as well as overall macroeconomic conditions, as we
eventually describe.

2.2

Production

There are two production sectors: one for new capital, Jt , and one for output, Yt .
Within each in sector there are several stages of production.
New capital
A continuum of Ntk monopolistically competitive firms produce differentiated final capital goods. The aggregate Jt is a CES composite of a continuum of these

6

differentiated goods as follows:
Jt =

Z

Ntk

Jt (r)

1
µk

dr

0

!µk

, with µk > 1,

(3)

where Jt (r) is the output produced by the r th final capital goods producer. Free
entry determines Ntk , as we describe below. The parameter µk is inversely related to
the price elasticity of substitution across new capital goods.
To produce a differentiated capital good, r, a producer combines new structures
(Jts (r))

and new equipment (Jte (r)) as follows:

Jt (r) = γ̄ (Jts (r))γ (Jte (r))1−γ , with γ ∈ (0, 1) and γ̄ = [γ γ (1 − γ)1−γ ]−1

(4)

We distinguish between equipment investment and other forms of investment,
which we generically label “structures”, for two reasons. First, as emphasized in
GHK, embodied technology change influences mainly equipment investment, making
it important to disentangle the different forms of capital. Second, over our sample
there have been significant fluctuations in both commercial and residential structures
that a more likely due to factors such as credit conditions and taxes changes than
technological change. By introducing an independent disturbance to structures we
can capture these factors, at least in a reduced form way.
Formally, the r th capital producer can obtain a unit of structures from Ptst units
st
of final output, where pst
t (≡ log(Pt )) evolves exogenously according to:
st st
st
pst
t = ρ pt−1 + εt

where εst is a stationary first order disturbance. Generally speaking, pst
t , reflects any
factors that could affect the cost of producing structures.
To produce equipment, the r th capital producer uses the Akt intermediate capital
goods that have been adopted up to time t. In particular, let Itr (s) the amount of
intermediate capital from supplier s that final capital producer r demands. Then,
equipment Jte (r) is the following CES composite:
Jte (r) =

Z

Akt

1
θ

Itr (s) ds

0

7

!θ

, with θ > 1.

(5)

where the parameter θ is inversely related to the price elasticity of substitution across
intermediate capital goods. The evolution of Akt depends on the endogenous technology adoption process that we describe shortly. Observe that there are efficiency gains
in producing new equipment from increasing Akt . These efficiency gains are ultimately
what creates the incentive to adopt new technologies, as we discuss below.
Intermediate capital goods, in turn, use final output as input. To produce one
unit of an existing type of intermediate capital goods, a supplier uses one unit of
final output, which fixes the marginal cost at unity. Because the supplier has a bit of
market power it can charge the final capital goods producer a fixed markup which,
given the CES structure, equals θ.
Output
The composite Yt is a CES aggregate of the output of Nty differentiated final goods
producers. Let Yt (j) is the output of producer j. Then:
!µ
Z y
Nt

1

Yt (j) µ dj

Yt =

, with µ > 1,

(6)

0

where µ is inversely related to the price elasticity of substitution across goods. As in
the capital goods sector, entry and exit determines the number of firms operating.
As do final capital goods firms, final output goods firms use differentiated intermediate inputs. Let Ytj (s) the amount of an intermediate good that final goods firm
j employs from supplier s and let Ayt denote the total number of intermediate inputs.
Then
Yt (j) =

Z

Ayt

0

1
Ytj (s) ϑ ds

!ϑ

(7)

Just as with capital goods, an expanding variety of intermediate output goods increases the efficiency of producing final output goods. As we show, this efficiency
gain will be reflected in total factor productivity. Similarly, just as with Akt , the
evolution of Ayt will depend on endogenous technology adoption.
Intermediate goods used in the output sector are produced using the following
Cobb-Douglas technology:
Yt (s) ≡

Z

Nty

Ytj (s)dj = Xt (Ut (s)Kt (s))α (Lt (s))1−α

0

8

where Xt is the level of disembodied productivity, Ut denotes the intensity of utilization of capital, and Kt (s) and Lt (s) are the amount of capital and labor rented
(hired) to produce the sth intermediate good.
We assume that xt (≡ log(Xt )) evolves as follows
xt = xt−1 + ςt

(8)

where ςt is first order serially correlated innovation. Given that total factor productivity will depend on Xt , Nty and Ayt , the model allows for both exogenous and
endogenous movements in total factor productivity. By estimating the model in section 5, we let the data tell the relative importance of each.
Finally, following Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huffman (1988), we further assume
that a higher rate of capital utilization comes at the cost of a faster depreciation rate,
δ. The markets where firms rent the factors of production (i.e. labor and capital) are
perfectly competitive.
Free entry
We now characterize the free entry decision that determines the number of producers in the final capital and output goods sectors, Ntk and Nty ,respectively: We assume
that the per period operating cost of a final goods producer in sector s, ost is
k

ost = bs P t Kt , for s = {y, k}

(9)

k

where bs is a constant and P t is the wholesale price of capital. That is, in order to
have balanced growth, the operating costs grow with the replacement value of the
capital stock, a measure of the technological sophistication of the economy. In any
period, the producer profits must cover this operating cost. Everything else equal,
firm profits are decreasing in the total number of firms. Accordingly, free entry pins
down both Ntk and Nty .

2.3

Technology

The efficiency of production depends on the exogenous productivity variables (Xt ,
and Pstk ) and on the number of ”adopted” intermediate goods in the production of
capital, Akt , and final output, Ayt . We characterize next the process that governs the
evolution of these variables.
9

New intermediate goods
Prototypes of new intermediate goods arrive exogenously to the economy. Upon
arrival, they are not yet usable for production. In order to be usable, a new prototype
must be successfully adopted. This, however, involves a costly investment that we
describe below.
Let Zts denote the total number of intermediate goods in sector s (for s = {k, y}).
at time t. Note that Zts includes both previously adopted goods and “not yet adopted”
prototypes. The law of motion for Zts is as follows:
s
Zt+1
= (χ̄s χξt s + φ)Zts

(10)

where φ is the fraction of intermediate goods that do not become obsolete, and χt
determines the stochastic growth rate of the number of prototypes and is governed
by the following AR(1) process
log χt = ρ log χt−1 + εt
where εt is a white noise disturbance.
Note that the shock to the growth rate of intermediate goods is the same across
sectors. However, the effect of the shock on the stock of technologies within a sector,
measured by the slope coefficient χ̄s and the elasticity ξs , differs across sectors. Here
we wish to capture the idea of spillovers in the innovation process: Innovations that
lead to new equipment often make possible new disembodied innovations. For example, the IT revolution made possible e-commerce. It also accelerated the offshoring
process and improved the efficiency of inventories management, and so on.
Evidence of this spillover appears in the data: At medium frequencies, movements
in relative equipment prices are correlated with movements in TFP. As we show
shortly, given that a component of TFP in our model is exogenous, we can calibrate
ξs to capture this correlation.
We emphasize that in this framework, news about future growth prospects, captured by innovations in χt , govern the growth of potential new intermediate goods.
Realizing the benefits of these new technologies, however, requires a costly adoption
process that we turn to next.
Adoption (Conversion of Z to A)
10

At each point in time a continuum of unexploited technologies is available to
be adopted. Through a competitive process, firms that specialize in adoption try
to make these technologies usable. These firms, which are owned by households,
spend resources attempting to adopt the new goods, which they can then sell on
the open market. They succeed with an endogenously determined probability λst ,
for s = {k, y} . Once a technology is usable, any producer can use it in production
immediately.
Note that under this setup there is slow diffusion of new technologies on average
(as they are slow on average to become usable) but aggregation is simple as once a
technology is in use, all firms have it. Consistent with the evidence (e.g. Comin,
2009), we obtain a pro-cyclical adoption behavior by endogenizing the probability λst
that a new technology becomes usable, and making it increasing in the amount of
resources devoted to adoption at the firm level.
Specifically, the adoption process works as follows. To try to make one prototype
usable at time t + 1, an adopting firm spends hst units of final output at time t. Its
success probability λst is given by
λst = λ̄s (Γst hst )ρλ
s

with λ̄ > 0, 0 < ρλ 1, and where Γt is a factor that is exogenous to the firm, given by
Γst = Ast /ost
We presume that past experience with adoption, measured by the total number of
projects adopted Ast , makes the process more efficient. In addition to having some
plausibility, this assumption ensures that the fraction of output devoted to adoption
is constant along the balanced growth path.
The value to the adopter of successfully bringing a new technology into use vts , is
given by the present value of profits from operating the technology. Profits πts arise
from the monopolistic power of the producer of the new good. Accordingly, given
that βΛt,t+1 is the adopter’s stochastic discount factor for returns between t + 1 and
t, we can express vts as



s
vts = πts + φEt βΛt,t+1 vt+1
.

(11)

If an adopter is unsuccessful in the current period, he may try again in the subsequent periods to make the technology usable. Let jts be the value of acquiring an
11

innovation that has not been adopted yet. jts is given by
s
s
jts = max
−hst + Et {βΛt,t+1 φ[λst vt+1
+ (1 − λst )jt+1
]}
s
ht

Optimal investment in adopting a new technology is given by:
h
i
s
s
s
1 = Et βΛt,t+1 φρλ λ̄ (Γst )ρλ (hst )ρλ −1 vt+1
− jt+1

(12)

(13)

s
s
It is easy to see that hst is increasing in vt+1
− jt+1
, implying that adoption expendi-

tures, and thus the speed of adoption, are likely to be procyclical. Note also that the
choice of hst does not depend on any firm specific characteristics. Thus in equilibrium,
the success probability is the same for all firms attempting adoption.

2.4

Households

The household sector is reasonably standard. In particular, there is a representative
household that consumes, supplies labor and saves. It may save by either accumulating capital or lending to innovators and adopters. The household also has equity
claims in all monopolistically competitive firms. It makes one period loans to adopters
and also rents capital that it has accumulated directly to firms.
Let Ct be consumption. Then the household maximizes the present discounted
utility as given by the following expression:
#
"
∞
1+ζ
X
(L
)
t+i
Et
β i ln Ct+i − µw
1
+ζ
i=0

(14)

with ζ > 0. The budget constraint is as follows:
Ct = Wt Lt + Πt + [Dt + Ptk ]Kt − Ptk Kt+1 + Rt Bt − Bt+1 − Tt

(15)

where Πt reflects the profits of monopolistic competitors paid out fully as dividends to
households, Bt is total loans the households makes at t − 1 that are payable at t, and
Tt reflects lump sum taxes which are used to pay for government expenditures. The
household’s decision problem is simply to choose consumption, labor supply, capital
and bonds to maximize equation (14) subject to (15).
For the calibrated model we keep the preference parameters β and µw fixed. Once
we turn to estimation in section 5 we allow these parameters to follow stationary
stochastic processes in order to achieve identification.
12

2.5

Symmetric equilibrium

We defer to the Appendix the formal definition of equilibrium, as a complete characterization of all the relationships. Here we just present the main equations to highlight
some key differences with the basic real business cycle (RBC) model., as well as the
variation proposed by GHK.
In the canonical RBC model, capital is the only endogenous state. Here there are
two additional endogenous states, the stocks of adopted technologies in the output
and capital production sectors, Ayt and Akt , respectively. The relevant equations of
motion are thus given by:
Kt+1 = (1 − δ(Ut ))Kt + (Ptk )−1 µ̄k It ,

(16)

Ast+1 = λst [Zts − Ast ] + φAst , for s = {k, y} .

(17)

with
Ptk

=µ

k

k
(Ntk )−(µ −1)

γ
Ptst



1−γ

k −(θ−1)
At

θ
 s s ρλ
At ht
s
s
λt = λ̄
ost

(18)
(19)

and where the evolution of the stock of new technologies in each sector, Zts , is given
by equation (36). Note that also in contrast to both the RBC model and GHK, the
relative price of capital depends positively on the stock of adopted technologies in
the capital goods sector, as measured by Akt , as well as the degree entry, measured
by Ntk . In addition, the fraction of unadopted technologies that come on line, λst ,
depends on endogenously determined adoption expenditures, hst , and is likely to vary
procyclically, as equation (13) suggests.
In turn, aggregate production, consumption/saving, and factor market equilibria
are given by
Yt = Xt (Ayt )
Et {βCt /Ct+1 · [α

ϑ−1

(Nty )

µ−1

(Ut Kt )α L1−α
t

Yt+1
k
+ (1 − δ(Ut+1 )Pt+1
]/Ptk } = 1
µKt+1

(1 − α)

Yt
= µµw Lζt /(1/Ct )
Lt
13

(20)

(21)
(22)

α

Yt
= µδ ′ (Ut )Ptk Kt
Ut

(23)

and where equation (1) gives the economy-wide resource constraint. In contrast to
the standard formulation (with variable utilization of capital), total factor productivity is endogenous and depends on both the stock of adopted technologies is the
output sector, Ayt , as well as the degree of entry, Nty . Thus not only does embodied technological change depend on adoption and cyclical entry, the same it true for
disembodied technological change.
We can now get a sense of how “news” about technology plays out in this model. In
our model, the news is about future technological prospects (i.e., future values of Zt ),
as opposed to future technology per se. For those prospects to be realized, resources
need to be invested in adopting these potential technologies. As a result, the news
shock sparks a contemporaneous rise in aggregate demand driven by the desire to
speed up adoption (32). Output increases to meet the rise in demand via three channels: a rise in the utilization rate, increased entry, and a rise in hours worked. Two
factors work to offset the standard wealth effect, which produces a decline in hours in
the standard model. First, the response of utilization and entry to increased demand
(stemming from increased adoption expenditures) raises the marginal productive labor, everything else equal, enhancing the rise in labor demand. Second, given that
adoption expenditures are effectively a form of saving, consumption increases by less
than it might otherwise in the standard model, as households substitute some current consumption for increased investment in technology. This moderating of the
consumption rise, dampens the negative wealth effect on labor supply.
As we illustrate in the next section, in contrast to the standard model, news about
improved technological prospects increases current output, hours and consumption.
Endogenous technology adoption plays a critical role, along with endogenous utilization of capital. Endogenous entry improves the quantitative performance, but is not
needed for the main qualitative arguments regarding the cyclical responses to news
about future technological prospects. Finally, given that there are rents associated
with both adopted and prospective technologies, there are as well implications for the
cyclical behavior of assets prices. However, we defer a discussion of asset prices until
section 6.

14

3

Model Simulations of “Innovation” Shocks

In this section we present simulations of the impact of a shock to the growth rate of
prospective new technologies. As we have been noting, one can interpret this shock as
capturing news about the economy’s growth potential. Our goal here is to elucidate
the basic mechanisms. Thus, we work with a calibrated version of our simple baseline
model. In the subsequent section we enrich the model to enable it to capture short
run cyclical dynamics and also to estimate most the model parameters..

3.1

Calibration

The calibration we present here is meant as a reasonable benchmark. The model’s
behavior is robust to modest variations around this benchmark.
To the extent possible, we use the restrictions of balanced growth to pin down
parameter values. Otherwise, we look for evidence elsewhere in the literature. There
are a total of eighteen parameters. Ten appear routinely in other studies. The other
eight relate to the adoption processes and also to the entry/exit mechanism. Table
1 reports the value for these parameters. We defer the discussion of the calibration
of the standard parameters and of the more trivial non-standard parameters to the
Appendix.
There two key sets of parameters that are specific to our model. The first is the
sectoral elasticity parameter in equation (36) that governs sensitivity of the growth
rate of potential new technologies to movements in the exogenous disturbance χt .We
normalize the elasticity for the creation of new capital goods technologies, ξk , to unity.
The elasticity for the creation of new output goods technologies, ξy , affects the correlation between TFP growth and the growth rate of the relative price of equipment,
particularly at medium and low frequencies where cyclical factors are less important.
We can accordingly use information about this co-movement at medium and low
frequencies (i.e. cycles with periods between 8 and 50 years, following Comin and
Gertler (2006)).to pin down ξy . In particular, our model implies that the covariance
between medium term growth in TFP, and the relative price of equipment, and their
variances depend on the variance of χt , the variance of xt (the exogenous component
of TFP) and ξy . Hence, we can use these three moments in the data to identify ξy .
This yields an estimate for ξy of approximately 0.6. Our results are quite robust to
15

variation in ξy between 0.5 and 0.8.
The second set of parameters are the two that govern the technology adoption
process in equation lambda (19) , λ̄s and ρλ . λ̄s governs the average adoption lag and
ρλ governs the elasticity of adoption with respect to adoption investments. We set
λ̄s so that the average adoption lag is approximately 5 years which is a reasonable
benchmark within the productivity literature (e.g. Mansfield, 1989). We set ρλ to 0.9
to match a time series regression of the rate of decline in the relative price of capital
on US adoption expenditures measured by development costs by the NSF.3

3.2

Model Simulations

We now analyze the effect of a positive shock to the growth rate of new technologies.
To compare with the literature, we first consider a variation of the model that eliminates the key features we have introduced.. In particular we suppose that technology
diffusion is instantaneous and exogenous and that firm entry and exit is shut off. In
this case, our experiment closely mimics the ”news” shock scenario analyzed in the
literature: The expected increase in the arrival of new technologies leads to an expected increase in the growth rate of productivity that is independent of any actions
that individual firms or households make.4 As Figure 1 shows, the increase in the
expected new technology arrival rate initially reduces labor supply and output. At
work is the wealth effect, noted by Cochrane (1994) and many others.
We next return to our baseline model by adding back the relevant features. In
this instance, as Figure 2 shows, the increase in the expected technology arrival rate
produces an initial increase in both output and hours. Now the increase in expected
productivity growth is not simply manna from heaven. Rather, it may be realized
only if resources are devoted to technology adoption. Further, the more resources
are devoted, the faster the technology will be adopted. The initial increase in labor
demand in part reflects an intertemporal substitution effect: Because more labor and
capital is needed for adoption in the future, it is optimal to build up the capital stock
3

This estimate is consistent with the very high pro-cyclicality of the speed of adoption estimated

by Comin (2009).
4
The arrival of new technologies simulaneously affects both future disembodied and embodied
technological change, as in our baseline model. The results are qualitatively the same if the shock
just affects one type of technology change or the other.

16

today, before the technologies come in line. The associated rise in capital utilization
and entry increases the marginal product of labor, everything else equal, contributing
to the increase in labor demand. This in turn leads to an increase in real wages and
labor supply.
What is key to producing a positive co-movement between output and expected
technology growth is the combination of slow diffusion and costly adoption. We
illustrate this point in Figure 3 by examining the response of output and hours for
different variations of the model. The top panel is our baseline. In the second panel
we keep endogenous adoption but remove entry and exit. As the figure shows, the
output and hours responses is weaker than in the baseline case, but qualitatively the
same. One other difference, is that consumption declines initially. By contrast, the
agglomeration effect from entry in our baseline boosts output sufficiently to introduce
an increase in consumption. In the bottom panel we also remove endogenous adoption.
New technologies diffuse exogenously at the same rate as in the steady state of our
baseline. As the panel shows, output and hours decline at the onset of the shock, as
in the conventional literature. Thus it appears that within our framework endogenous
technology adoption is key to getting the right co-movement.
Though we do not report the results here, endogenous entry alone does not generate the right quantitative co-movements in response to innovation shocks.5 Entry
interacts with endogenous adoption to magnify the overall response of real activity.
Intuitively, the agglomeration effects from entry expand output and investment, which
in turn raises profitability and enhances the incentives to adopt.
Finally, it is the case, as in Comin and Gertler (2006), that the endogenous technology feature of our model introduces a significant propagation mechanism that
operates over the medium term. The acceleration in the speed of adoption after a
news shock improves the overall efficiency of production of capital and output as reflected, respectively, by the medium and long term fluctuations of the relative price
of capital and TFP.
As we show in section 5, the mechanism we have just outlined propagates not only
the innovation shock but also other shocks that may disturb the economy.
5

The impulse response functions for this case are reported in the extended estimated model below.

17

4

An Extended Model for Estimation

In this section we generalize our model and then estimate it. We add some key features
that have proven to be helpful in permitting the conventional macroeconomic models
(e.g. Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2007)) to
capture the data. Our purpose here is twofold. First we wish to assess whether the
effects of our news shock that we identified in our baseline model are robust in a
framework that provides an empirically reasonable description of the data. Second,
by proceeding this way, we can formally assess the contribution of our innovation
shock as we have formulated them to overall business cycle volatility.

4.1

The Extended Model

The features we add include: habit formation in consumption, flow investment adjustment costs, nominal price stickiness in the form of staggered price setting, and a
monetary policy rule.
To introduce habit formation, we modify household preferences to allow utility to
depend on lagged consumption as well as current consumption in the following simple
way:
Et

∞
X
i=0

"

1+ζ

β i bt+i ln(Ct+i − υCt+i−1) − µw
t+i

(Lt+i )
1+ζ

#

(24)

where the parameter υ, which we estimate, measures the degree of habit formation.
In addition, the formulation allows for two exogenous disturbances: bt is a shock to
household’s subjective discount factor and µw
t is a shock to the relative weight on
leisure. The former introduces a disturbance to consumption demand and the latter
to labor supply. Adding flow adjustment costs leads to the following formulation for
the evolution of capital:
Kt+1 = (1 − δt )Kt + Jt 1 − η



Jt
−1
(1 + gK )Jt−1

2 !

(25)

with Jt = (Ptk )−1 µ̄k It . η, another parameter we estimate, measures the degree of
adjustment costs and gK is the steady state growth rate of capital.. We note that
the adjustment costs are external and not at the firm level. Capital is perfectly
18

mobile between firms. In the standard formulation (e.g. Justiniano, Primiceri, and
Tambalotti (2008)), the relative price of capital is an exogenous disturbance. In our
model it is endogenous. As equation (52) suggests, Ptk depends inversely on the
volume of adopted technologies Akt and the cyclical intensity of production of new
capital goods, as measured by Ntk .
We model nominal price rigidities by assuming the final output goods producing
firms (6)) set nominal prices on a staggered basis. For convenience, we now restrict
entry in this sector and instead fix the number of these firms at the steady state value
N. Following Smets and Wouters (2007) and Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti
(2008), we used a formulation of staggered price setting due to Calvo (1983), modified
to allow for partial indexing. In particular, every period a fraction 1 − ξ are free to
optimally reset their respective price. A fraction ξ instead adjust price according to
a simple indexing rule based on lagged inflation. Let Pt (j) be the nominal price of
firm j ′ s output, Pt the price index and Πt−1 = Pt /Pt−1 the inflation rate. Then, the
indexing rule is given by:
Pt+1 (j) = Pt (j) (Πt )ιp (Π)1−ιp

(26)

where Π and ιp are parameters that we estimate: the former is the steady state rate of
inflation and the latter is the degree of partial indexation. The fraction of firms that
are free to adjust, choose the optimal reset price Pt∗ to maximize expected discounted
profits given by.
∞
X

P∗
Et
ξ s β s Λt,s {[ t
Pt+s
s=0

s
Y

ιp

1−ιp

(Πt+j ) (Π)

j=0

!

]Yt+s (j) − Wt+s Nt+s (j) − Dt+s Kt+s (j)}
(27)

given the demand function for firm j’s product (obtained from cost minimization by
final goods firms):
−µ
Pt (j) µ−1
) Yt
(28)
Pt
Given the law of large numbers and given the price index, the price level evolves

Yt (j) = (

according to
Pt = [(1 − ξ)(Pt∗)

µ−1
µ

+ ξ(Pt−1 )

µ−1
µ

µ

] µ−1

(29)

Finally, define Rtn as the nominal rate of interest, defined by the Fisher relation
Rt+1 = Rtn Et Πt+1 . The central bank sets the nominal interest rate Rtn according to a
19

simple Taylor rule with interest rate smoothing, as follows:
 n ρr  φp  φy !1−ρr
Rt−1
Rtn
Πt
Yt
=
exp(µmp,t )
Rn
Rn
Π
Yt0

(30)

where Rn is the steady state of the gross nominal interest rate and Yt0 is trend output,
and µmp,t is an exogenous shock to the policy rule.
Including habit formation and flow investment adjustment costs give the model
more flexibility to capture output, investment, and consumption dynamics. We include nominal rigidities and a Taylor rule for two reasons. First, doing so allows us to
use the model to identify the real interest rate which enters the first order conditions
for both consumption and investment. The nominal interest rate is observable but
expected inflation is not. However, from the model we identify expected inflation.
Second, with nominal rigidities, the market real interest rate need not equal the flexible price equilibrium real rate of interest (i.e. the ”natural rate of interest”.) This
will permit the model to simultaneously account for the relatively smooth behavior
of observed market real interest rates and relatively volatile behavior of asset prices,
as section 6 makes clear.6
We emphasize that the critical difference in our framework is the endogenous component of both embodied and disembodied productivity. The standard model treats
the evolution of both of these phenomena as exogenous disturbances. In our model the
key primitive is the innovation process. Shocks to this process influence the pace of
new technological opportunities which are realized only by a costly adoption process.

5

Estimation

5.1

Data and Estimation Strategy

We estimate the model using quarterly data from 1984:I to 2008:II on seven key
variables in the US economy: output, consumption, equipment investment, nonequipment investment, inflation, nominal interest rates and hours The Appendix
describes the sources and transformations of the data used in the estimation.
6

One widely employed friction that we do not add is nominal wage rigidity. While adding this
feature would help improve the ability of the model in certain dimensions, we felt that at least for
this initial pass at the data, the cost of added complexity outweighed the marginal gain in fit.

20

The model contains seven structural shocks. Five appear in the standard models:
the household’s subjective discount factor, the household’s preference for leisure, government consumption; the monetary policy rule, and the growth rate of TFP. The
key new shock in our model is the disturbance to the growth rate of potential new
intermediate capital goods, which we refer to as an ”innovation” shock. As we have
been noting, since this shock signals opportunities for future growth, it is also similar
in spirit to a ”news shock”. Finally, we allow for an exogenous shock to the cost
of producing non-equipment investment, but are agnostic about the deep underlying
source of this shock.
We continue to calibrate the parameters of the embodied technology process. However, as in the standard quantitative macroeconomic framework we estimate the rest
of the parameters of the model, using Bayesian techniques, as in An and Schorfheide
(2007)

5.2

Priors and Posterior Estimates and Model Fit

Table 2 presents the prior distributions for the structural parameters along with the
posterior estimates. Tables 3 presents the same information for the serial correlation
and standard deviation of the stochastic processes. To maintain comparability with
the literature, for the most part we employ the same priors as in Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2008). Overall, the parameter estimates are very close to what
has been obtained elsewhere in the literature (e.g. Smets and Wouters (2007), Primiceri, Schaumburg, and Tambalotti (2006), and Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti
(2008) ).
To get a sense of how well our model captures the data, Table 4 presents the
standard deviations of several selected variables in our model and in two reasonable
competing alternatives. These are as follows: The first is our model but with endogenous adoption shut off. The second is a version of the conventional DSGE model.
In particular, we make diffusion instantaneous, shut off entry, and also eliminate
the distinction between equipment and structures. In effect, this alternative model
is identical to Primiceri, Schaumburg, and Tambalotti (2006) and very similar to
Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005), and Smets and Wouters (2007), though
without wage rigidity (in order to be comparable to our baseline model). Overall, our

21

baseline model is in line with the data while the two alternatives do a poorer job in
matching the volatility of output and investment and (for the model with exogenous
adoption) hours worked. More formally, Table 5 shows that of the three alternatives,
the marginal likelihood for our baseline model is highest. Intuitively, the endogenous
adoption structure allows for more flexible lag dynamics, which improves the ability
of the model to fit the data.
To assess how important the innovation shock is as a business cycle driving force,
Tables 6 and 7 report the contribution of each shock to the unconditional variance
of output, consumption and equipment and structures investment and hours worked.
We explore the variance decomposition both for the growth rate (Table 6) and the
HP filtered level (Table 7).
The innovation shock accounts for 27 percent of output growth fluctuations and
32 in HP filtered output. It is of nearly equal importance to the neutral technology
shock, which accounts for 43 percent of fluctuations in output growth and 34 percent
in HP filtered output. Investment shocks combined, however, account for more the
half the high frequency variation in output, in keeping with the findings of Justiniano,
Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2008). The difference in our model is that we disentangle
shocks to equipment versus non-equipment investment and also endogenize the pace
of technological change. The shock to non-equipment investment is the third most
important in explaining approximately 11 percent of output growth fluctuations, and
25 percent of HP filtered output. The other 4 shocks seem much less important in
explaining output fluctuations, representing a combined 20 percent of output growth
fluctuations and less than 9 percent of HP filtered output.

5.3

Estimated Impulse Response Functions

Next we analyze the impulse responses to our innovation/news shock using the estimated model. Figure 2 presents the results for our model (solid line) and for the
version with exogenous adoption (dashed line).7 As Figure 4 shows ,the qualitative
patterns are very similar to what we obtained from the calibrated model. The economy with exogenous adoption experiences a recession in response to a positive news
shock. In contrast, in our model, there is a positive and prolonged response of output,
7

Just to be clear, the version with exogenous adoption has also endogenous entry, as our model.

22

investment, consumption and hours worked.
In contrast to the simple calibrated model we analyzed earlier, the responses of
output and investment in the estimated model are humped-shaped, reflecting the
various real frictions such as investment adjustment costs that are now present. The
response of hours relative to output, however, is somewhat weaker. The introduction of the various frictions has likely dampened the overall hours response. This is
somewhat mitigated in conventional models by incorporating wage rigidity.
The speed of technology adoption (first panel in the third row) strongly reacts to
the arrival of news about future technology. This is the case because of the sharp
increase in the value of new adopted technologies in response to the news shock
(second panel in the third row). As we shall see below, this mechanism plays a key
role in inducing fluctuations in the stock market.
The estimated model not only delivers a plausible response to the innovation shock,
but does so to the other shocks as well. Figures 5 and 6 report the impulse response
functions of our baseline model to the structures shock and to the neutral technology
shock (solid lines). (To save space we only report results for the major shocks, but the
responses to the other shocks are reasonable as well.) As with a positive news shock,
a positive shock to TFP or to structures leads to an increase in output, hours, investment and adoption expenses. In response to a TFP shock, consumption, initially,
experiences a very small decline due to the large substitution effect introduced by
technology adoption and entry. After, that, consumption increases. For the shock to
structures, instead, consumption is pro-cyclical. It is also worth noting that, because
these shocks induce pro-cyclical fluctuations in the value of adopted technologies,
they also generate large, pro-cyclical fluctuations in the speed of adoption of new
technologies.
In Figures 5 and 6 we also report (in dashed lines) the impulse responses to the
structures TFP shocks of the version of our model with exogenous adoption (i.e.
constant λs , for s = {k, y}). One striking observation from this figures is that the
response of the models to these shocks is significantly more muted when adoption
is exogenous than when it is endogenous. Accordingly, the endogenous adoption
mechanism greatly amplifies the model’s response not only to the news shock but also
to the other shocks considered here. Thus, even in instances where our innovation
shock is not the key driving force, the endogenous technology mechanism we have
23

characterized may be relevant.

5.4

Historical Decompositions

To get a better feel for the role of our innovation shock and the two other major shocks,
structure and TFP, in output fluctuations, we present a historical decomposition of
the data. Figure 7 present three panels. Each plots the contribution to output growth
the model implies for one of the three major shocks. The top panel reports results
for the innovation shock, the middle for the structures shock, and the bottom for the
TFP shock.
As the top panel indicates, the innovation shock contributes significantly to cyclical
output growth. In particular, the shock seems to play a prominent role in recessions
and early stages of the expansions. As one might expect, it also appears to play a
role in the late 1990s period of high output and productivity growth.
The structures shock is very important in the recession of the early 1990s and
also the period of slow growth at the end of our sample, which just precedes the
most recent recession. These results are consistent with the role that the contraction
in commercial structures played in the 1990s recessions and the collapse of housing
investment in the very recent period. In each instance, of course, credit conditions
likely influenced the slowdown in structures. In this respect, our structures shock
may capture in a reduced form way the influence of credit conditions. A more explicit
modeling of this phenomenon would be of interest, though.

6
6.1

The Stock Market
Theory

In standard macro models, the market value of corporations is equal to the value
of installed capital. This creates a serious challenge for these models. Since capital
is a stock, the short run evolution of the value of installed capital is driven by the
dynamics of the price of installed capital, which for reasonable adjustment costs is
not very different from the price of new capital. In the data, the price of new capital
is countercyclical and moves approximately as much as output. The stock market,

24

however, is strongly pro-cyclical and moves about ten times more than output. A
theory that equalizes the two variables will have to be inconsistent with the empirical
behavior of at least one of the two.
Unlike standard macro models, in our framework firms have the rights to the profit
flows from selling current and future adopted technologies. Thus, the market value
of companies is given by the present discounted value of these profits in addition to
the value of installed capital. Formally, the value of the stock market Qt is composed
of four terms as shown in (31).
Value of installed capital

z }| {
Ptinsk Kt

Qt =

Value of adopted technologies

+

}|
{
X z
Ast (vts − πts )

s={k,y}

Value of existing not adopted technologies

+

(31)

}|
{
X z
(jts + hst )(Zts − Ast )

s={k,y}



Value of future non-adopted technologies

z
}|
{
∞
 X X

s
s
+ Et 
βΛt,t+1+i jt+1+i
(Zt+1+i
− φZτs+i )
s={k,y} i=0

where Ptinsk is the value of a unit of installed capital in the firm (i.e. the shadow value
of a unit of capital to the firm). We note that Iraola and Santos (2007) have previously
derived a similar expression for stock market value, also based on a framework in the
spirit of Comin and Gertler (2006).
The first term in (31) captures the fact that the market values the capital stock
installed in firms. The second term reflects the market value of adopted intermediate
goods that are currently used to produce new capital and output. The third term
corresponds to the market value of existing intermediate goods which have not yet

been adopted. The final term captures the market value of the intermediate goods
that will arrive in the future. The rents associated with the arrival of these prototypes
also have a value which is priced in by the market.
Of course, only the first term appears in conventional models. It is the last three
terms, however, that account for the enhanced volatility of asset prices within our
framework. Unlike the first term, the last three are highly pro-cyclical since both
current and future profits as well as the flow of current and future technologies increase
sharply in booms and decline (relative to trend) in recessions. While the shadow value
of a unit of installed capital is procyclical, the replacement cost is countercyclical.
25

Indeed, the estimates of our model will suggest that overall the value of installed
capital is countercyclical on average. Thus it is the terms that reflects the value
of current and expected future technologies that ultimately account for the strong
procyclical volatility of asset prices within our framework.8,9

6.2

Impulse responses of Stock Market Variables

Figure 8 plots the responses of the stock market and its components to the news
shock. The stock market jumps as soon as the news about the future technology
hits the economy. In particular, following the same positive news shock that led
output to increase initially by about 5% (Figure 4), stock prices increase by about 10
times more. This boom in the stock market occurs despite the fact that the value of
installed capital (third panel in first row, Figure 9) declines driven by the decline in
the relative price of capital (second panel in first row) which, as in the data moves
roughly as much as output (Comin and Gertler, 2006). What drives the stock market
boom is the expectation of higher profits from selling intermediate goods in both the
near term and over the long run.
The output and investment booms drive up the demand for intermediate goods.
The persistence of the output and investment responses to the shock induces higher
profits per adopted intermediate good not only upon impact but also in the future.
Furthermore, the growth rate of the number of adopted intermediate goods also increases. This is the case for two reasons. First, adoption intensity jumps in response
to the increase in the market value of an adopted intermediate good. As a result,
unadopted intermediate goods become usable in production more quickly. Second,
with the innovation shock, the rate at which unadopted intermediate goods arrive in
the economy increases. Hence, the number of intermediate goods that can potentially
8

Quantitatively, the most important terms to explain the evolution of the stock market are the
value of adopted technologies.
9
Greenwood and Jovanovic (1999) and Hobjin and Jovanovic (2001) argue that the decline in
stock market value during the 70s was driven by the arrival of new technologies that led to a decline
in the market value of incumbent companies that were going to become uncompetitive in the new
technological era. Unlike the 70s, the innovations that arrived in the 90s and 2000s made incumbent
companies more productive. Indeed, many of the applications of the new technologies were developed
by incumbent companies (e.g. Internet Explorer, the iphone or the ipod).

26

be adopted also increases. Though, the arrival of these new technologies does not affect output immediately, it is immediately reflected in the stock market, Qt . Figure
8 illustrates this phenomenon: There are sharp immediate increases in the value of:
adopted technologies (first panel in second row); existing technologies that have not
been adopted (second window in second row); and the technologies that have not
arrived in the economy yet (third panel in second row).
There are other interesting observations from Figure 9. First, the response of the
stock market to the shock is persistent. This is the case because of the persistence
in the responses of output, investment and in the number of current and future
intermediate goods.10 Second, the stock market leads output. Intuitively, this is the
case because the stock market value at t incorporates the value of future profits which
strongly co-move with future output. The response of output, instead is hump-shaped
as a result of the frictions that impede a full adjustment in response to the shock.
As we show below, the lead of the stock market over GDP is a salient feature of the
data.
Our model also has implications for the evolution of the price-dividend ratio. The
natural definition of dividends from (31) is capital rental income plus profits from
the sale of intermediate goods minus adoption expenses.11 We find that the pricedividend ratio is mean reverting (Figure 9, first panel third row). Intuitively, this is
the case because the market’s response to the shock declines after the initial impact.
In contrast, the slower response of output leads to a more persistent evolution of
the profits of intermediate goods producers which are a key component of dividends.
As a result, the price-dividend ratio is mean reverting , which is consistent with the
evidence in the literature.12
So far we have focused on the responses of the stock market to a positive news
shock. However, the market responds very similarly to all the other shocks we have
considered in the estimation. Consequently, all the findings uncovered for the innovation shock also hold for these other shocks. To save space, we just report the
10

Of course, the persistence of the shock also contributes towards the persistence of Qt . However,

a significant share of the persistence in Qt is endogenous to the model as will be more clear from the
impulse responses to the price of capital and TFP shocks which have significantly less persistence
than the news shock.
11
Note that the profits for final output and capital producers are equal to the entry costs.
12
See for example, Campbell and Shiller (1989).

27

responses to the shocks that were most important in the variance decomposition: the
shock to the price of structures and the TFP shock. The market responses to these
shocks are reproduced in Figures 9.
The last row in Tables 6 and 7 report the importance of each shock for the evolution
of the stock market value both in first differences (Table 6) and HP filtered (Table
7). The most significant shock when using first differences is the TFP shock which
explains 84% of the variance with the innovation shock in a distant second (with
15%). For the HP-filtered stock market, the importance of the TFP shock declines
to 42% and the contribution of the innovation shock increases to 52%.
Note that in our model stock prices lead movements in TFP. This is also true
for movements in stocks prices that are orthogonal to TFP, which is consistent with
the evidence in Beaudry and Portier (2004). In particular, within our model the
innovation shock does not affect current measured TFP nearly as much as it affects
it in the future. Stock prices, instead, rise immediately. (Compare Figures 4 and 8.)
It is also the case that other shocks generate this pattern. For example, a shock to
structures also influences expected future productivity due to the endogenous diffusion
mechanism. Again, stock prices increase immediately, consistent with the BP finding.
(Compare Figures 5 and first row of Figure 9).

6.3

Unconditional moments: Model vs. Data

How well does the model fare in matching the stock market in the data? To answer
this question, we first compare some basic unconditional moments in the model and
in the data (Table 8). Specifically, we simulate 1000 runs of the estimated model
each 98 quarters long and compute the volatility and first order autocorrelation of
the first differences and HP filtered levels of the stock market and dividends. Then
we compare these moments with various data counterparts. For the stock market, we
use both the market value of all stocks traded in the US markets and the S&P500
both deflated by the GDP deflator.13 It is harder to find the right data counterpart
to the dividends in our model. We report two different variables. The dividends
13

When computing the market value of publicly-traded companies we do not consider the market
value of corporate debt due to lack of data on this component of the value of companies.

28

distributed by publicly traded companies14 and the compensation to capital from the
NIPA tables, both seasonally adjusted.15 .
The first finding is that, the volatility of the stock market in the model is approximately two thirds of the volatility in the data. That is true both when comparing
the model with the market value and with the S&P500. For example, the average
standard deviation of stock market growth in the model is 5.2% while in the data it
is 7.7% both for the growth of the market value and of the S&P500.
This gap in the volatility between the model and the data is almost reassuring
since our model abstracts from countercyclical risk premia which many authors have
stressed is an important component of high frequency fluctuations in the stock market.
In particular, Campbell and Shiller (1989) show that revisions in expectations about
future dividend growth from simple VAR models cannot account for the observed
variation in price-dividend ratios. On the other hand, our model suggests that the
contribution of cyclical movements in profits to overall stock market volatility is surely
greater than what much of the literature has suggested.
Interestingly, our model is consistent with the Campbell-Shiller tests. Specifically,
when conducting a Campbell-Shiller test on data simulated from our model we also
find that revisions in expected future dividend growth, when expected future dividends are computed using the simple VARs in CS, only account for a small fraction of
the fluctuations in price-dividend ratios of the simulated series.16 Since in our model
none of the fluctuations in the price-dividend ratio are driven by fluctuations in risk
premia, this shows that the CS test surely underpredicts the contribution of expected
dividend growth to asset price fluctuations. In other words, in our model, and surely
in the world too, the dynamics of dividends are rather complex. The simple VARs
used by CS cannot properly capture this complexity and, as result, the expected
dividend growth series from the VAR forecast are much less volatile than if a more
sophisticated model of the economy was used. (Below we comment on what features
of the dividend growth process are not captured by the VARs.)
14

Specifically, we follow Campbell and Shiller (1989) and compute the dividends from the value

weighted returns including and excluding distributions from COMPUSTAT.
15
That is income minus compensation to employees.
16
Specifically, using the simple one lag 2-variable VAR in Campbell and Shiller (1988) in 1000
(98 quarters-long) simulations, the ratio of predicted over actual standard deviation of the (log)
price-dividend ratio is 0.24 with a 95 confidence interval of (0.11, 0.46).

29

Our model does not perform as well in reproducing the volatility of dividends.
In the model, the average standard deviation of dividend growth is 1.27% while the
data counterparts are much more volatile (8.7% for the dividends of publicly traded
companies). This difference is in part due to the gap between the model and data
definition of dividends. In particular, the model measure includes rental income to
capital while the data does not. The NIPA measure of dividends includes rental
payments to capital and its volatility (2.1%) is closer to the model.
Table 8 also reports the first order autocorrelation of the stock market variables.
We find that the average persistence of both the stock market and dividends in the
model simulations are very similar to the data both in growth rates and HP-filtered.
These findings raise the question of how a model such as ours, which does not incorporate time-varying risk, can generate large fluctuations in the price-earnings ratio
without overly volatile or persistent earnings growth. The answer to this question is
that our process of endogenous slow adoption of technologies induces a process for
earnings growth that has a small but highly persistent component. This component
generates low frequency fluctuations in the capital share and in earnings growth. We
illustrate this in Table 8 where we report the volatility of medium term fluctuations
in earnings growth. These fluctuations correspond to cycles with periods of length
between 8 and 50 years. The main observation is that both in the data and in the
model there are significant medium term fluctuations in earnings/dividends growth.
In the data the standard deviation of these fluctuations is slightly higher. For NIPA,
the standard deviation is 0.0032. In our model, the mean standard deviation is 0.0015
with a 95% confidence interval of (0.0006, 0.0027). Using COMPUSTAT, the volatility is higher (around, 0.01). Further, in the historical series generated from our model,
earnings growth is quite highly correlated with the actual data over the medium term.
The correlation with NIPA is 0.72 and with COMPUSTAT is 0.61.
One important driver of these low frequency fluctuations in earnings growth in
our model is the low frequency variation in the capital share. Our model is also
able to generate variation in the capital share consistent with the data (see Table 8).
Specifically, the standard deviation of the medium term fluctuations in the log capital
share in the US is 0.018. In our simulations the average standard deviation is 0.025
with a 95% confidence interval of (0.0096, 0.03).
Fluctuations in the capital share are important to match the inability of current
30

price dividend ratios to forecast future dividend growth. In particular, Beeler and
Campbell (2008) show that a drawback of the long-run predictability models of Bansal
and Yaron (2004) and Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2007) is that in these models the
price-dividend ratio overpredicts consumption growth fluctuations. The endogenous
fluctuations in the capital share reflect the wedge that exists in our model between
consumption and income. While, in our model, output may increase significantly in
response to expansionary shocks, consumption does not increase as much since agents
find that the shocks also increase the return to other activities such as adopting new
technologies, increasing the capital stock or entering in the production of final capital
goods. As a result, current price-dividend ratios do not predict so well consumption
growth over the short and medium term.
This is illustrated in Table 9. The first column reports the effect of the pricedividend ratio on cumulative consumption growth in the data over three horizons (4,
12 and 20 quarters). The second column reports the same coefficient using the historical evolution of the price-dividend ratio as predicted by our model. The difference
between the estimates in these two columns are not only statistically insignificant
but very close to zero. In the third column, we report the same coefficients when
using the 1000 simulations from our model both for consumption growth and for the
price-dividend ratio. Now the average point estimates are quite far from the point
estimates in the first two columns but these are well inside the 95% confidence interval. Based on this we conclude that our model does a fair job in reproducing the
long-run predictability tests.
Another difficulty encountered by many asset pricing models is the difficulty of
explaining simultaneously the volatility of stock prices and the risk-free rate. When
they explain the former they tend to generate a risk-free rate that is too volatile. This
is not the case in our model. The standard deviation of the real interest rate in the
quarterly data is 0.0056 while the average standard deviation in our 1000 simulations
is 0.0061 with a 95% confidence interval of (0.0053, 0.007). Intuitively, our estimated
model has nominal price rigidities and short term nominal rates set by a Taylor rule.
Thus, the observed market real rate is not overly volatile. What is volatile is the
unobserved “natural rate of interest”, i.e. the real rate that would arise if prices were
perfectly flexible.
Table 8 also reports the moments for the stock market series generated from a
31

model with a conventional real and monetary sector similar to Justiniano, Primiceri,
and Tambalotti (2008). Overall, this model fails to account for the volatility of stock
prices. In particular, while the average volatility of stock market growth in our model
is 5.2% and of the HP-filtered stock market value is 6.3%, the equivalent statistics
from this alternative model are both 2%. Hence, the more conventional model is
unable to generate the observed large fluctuation in asset prices.
In addition to the variance and autocorrelation, another important feature of the
stock market in the data is that it leads output, unconditionally. This is illustrated
in Figure 10 which plots the cross-correlogram of HP-filtered output and the stock
market value in the data. Overall, the model captures the lead in the stock market.
Specifically, it plots the average cross-correlogram of output and the stock market
in the 1000 runs of our model together with the 95% confidence interval. As in
the data, the stock market in the model strongly co-moves contemporaneously with
output. Further, there is a lead of about one quarter of the stock market over output
which is also consistent with the data.
The pattern of co-movement of the stock market and output is another dimension
where our model differs from the conventional framework. Figure 10 also plots the
average cross-correlogram between output and the stock market for this model. Two
observations are worth making. First, the contemporaneous co-movement between
output and the stock market is negative rather than positive. This is driven by the
shocks to the relative price of capital which, as in Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2008) are an important source of fluctuations when this model is estimated.
A shock that reduces the price of capital, causes an output expansion but, despite
the presence of adjustment costs, a reduction in the price of installed capital. Since
capital is fixed in the short run, this shock causes a decline in the value of the capital
stock which is the stock market in this model. Second, the co-movement pattern
between output and the stock market in this model does not capture the observed
lead of the stock market over output.

6.4

Historical evolution of the stock market

How closely does the stock market value predicted by the model given the estimated
shocks track the actual evolution of the US stock market? Figure 11 plots the evo-

32

lution of the predicted and actual (real) value of the stock market together with the
S&P500 deflated using the GDP deflator. The stock market value in the data is the
value of all publicly-traded companies deflated also by the GDP deflator.
The finding is that, to a first order, the predicted stock market value tracks fairly
closely the actual series. In particular, the model captures the relatively slow growth
between 1984 and 1994, the acceleration starting in 1994-95.17 The peak takes place
in 2001 rather than in 2000. Then there is a small decline though not nearly as
pronounced as in the 2001 crash. The model also captures the recovery until the end
of 2007. Finally, it captures the decline in the stock market in 2008.
Beyond the qualitative patterns, the model does a surprisingly good job in capturing the magnitude of the run up during the second half of the 90s. While the (real)
US stock market went from a value of $2.59 trillion in 1984:I18 to $18.28 trillion in
2000:I, our model predicts an increase from $2.59 trillion to $16.68 trillion in 2001:I.
The similarity of these increases is somewhat surprising, given that we have not used
any information from the stock market to estimate the model.
The predictions of the model for the evolution of the stock market in 2008 are also
worth noting. In particular, the model predicts a decline in the stock market value
of 18% which is approximately half of the decline that experienced the S&P500. It
is important to stress, though, that our model abstracts from financial factors that
appear to be relevant in the sharp decline in stock prices since October 2008. Further,
the data used in the estimation of the model and identification of the shocks runs
only until the second quarter of 2008. It is interesting though that the macroeconomic
conditions identified in the estimation were sufficient to generate such a significant
drop in asset prices in the context of our model.

7

Conclusions

We have modified a conventional business cycle model to allow for changes in the
rate of growth of new technologies and endogenous technology diffusion. An ”innovation” shock has the flavor of a news shocks because it influences expectations of
17

The most important component in (31) to account for the upward trend during the second half

of the 90s is the value of adopted innovations.
18
All these figures are in 2000 US dollars.

33

future growth without affecting current productivity. As we, show, with endogenous
diffusion, news about future growth prospects produces movements in current output
and hours that is positively correlated with the news. In this way the paper addresses
a conundrum in the literature, originally identified by Cochrane (1994). We also find
that in an estimated version of the model, the innovation shock accounts for nearly
a third of the variation of output fluctuations, and even more at the business cycle
frequencies. The model also accounts surprisingly well for asset price movements, at
least relative to most other business cycle models.
Our endogenous technology diffusion mechanism is also relevant to other disturbances besides innovation shocks. For example, the mechanism amplifies and propagates the impact of a shock to structures on the movement of both output and
asset prices. As we noted, our structures shock, which affects both residential and
non-residential investment may in a reduced form sense partly capture movements
in credit frictions. Indeed, our historical decomposition suggests that this structures
shock was important in both the 1990-91 recession and the period leading up to
the current recession, episodes where disruptions in credit markets appear to have
affected structures investment. Even though the initiating disturbance does not involve technology, the endogenous diffusion mechanism works to propagate the effects
of the shock on output and the stock market. Explicitly modeling the interactions
between credit marker frictions and our endogenous diffusion mechanism, we think,
is an important next step to take.

34

A

Appendix

A.1

Symmetric Equilibrium

This section describes the complete set of equations that determine the symmetric
equilibrium.19
A symmetric equlibrium in this economy is defined as an exogenous stochastic
sequence, {Xt , Gt , Pstk , ξt }∞
t=0 , an initial vector {An0 , Zn0 , Kn0 }, a sequence of paramee s
ters, a sequence of prices {Ptk , P̄tk , Petk }∞
t=0 , endogenous variables , {Yt , Ct , Λrt+1 , It , It , It ,
s
Jt , Ut , Lt , hst , Nty , Ntk , vts , jts , πtk , πty λst } for s = {k, y}, and laws of motion {Ast+1 , Zt+1
, Kt+1 }∞
t=0

such that,
s
• The state variables {Ast+1 , Zt+1
, Kt+1 }∞
t=0 satisfy the laws of motions in equations

(34) to (36)
• The endogenous variables solve the producers and consumers problems in equations (37) to (54)
• Feasibility is satisfied in equations (32) and (33)
• Prices are such that the markets clear
The equilibrium relations of this economy are:
Resource Constraint:
Entry Costs

}|
{
z
Adoption Costs
}|
{
X z
µk − 1
Ptk Jt µ − 1
s
s s
Yt +
I
+
(Z
−
A
)h
Y t = C t + Gt + k +
t
t
t
t
µ̄
µ
µk

(32)

s={k,y}

Aggregate production:
Yt = Xt (Ayt )ϑ−1 (Nty )µ−1 (Ut Kt )α L1−α
t
where total factor productivity, Xt (Ayt )
intermediate output goods

ϑ−1

(Nty )

µ−1

, depends on the stock of adopted

Ayt .

Evolution of endogenous states, Kt and Ayt and Akt :
19

Note that there are 23 equations and 23 variables.

35

(33)

Kt+1 = (1 − δ(Ut ))Kt + (PtK )−1 µ̄k It ,
where µ̄k ≡

µk θ
is
θγ+(1−γ)

(34)

the average markup in the production of new capital.
µ̄k ≡

µk θ
θγ + (1 − γ)

Ast+1 = λst [Zts − Ast ] + φAst , for s = {k, y} .

(35)

and where the evolution of the stock of new technologies in each sector, is
s
Zt+1
= (χ̄s χξt s + φ)Zts

(36)

Factor market equilibria for Lt , and Ut :
(1 − α)

α

Yt
= µµw Lζt /(1/Ct )
Lt

Yt
= µδ ′ (Ut )PtK Kt
Ut

(37)

(38)

New Capital:
Let Ite denote the amount output devoted to producing equipment and Its denote
the amount devoted to structures. Then the optimal pricing of equipment, and structures capital goods and final capital goods implies that
Ptk Jt
= θIte + Its
µk

(39)

θIte
1−γ
=
s
It
γ

(40)

Jt = (Ptk )−1 µ̄k It

(41)

where from cost minimization:

and

Consumption/Saving:
Et {βΛt,t+1 · [α

Yt+1
K
+ (1 − δ(Ut+1 )Pt+1
]/Ptk } = 1
µKt+1
36

(42)

where
Λrt+1 = Ct /Ct+1

(43)

Optimal adoption of innovations in sector s = {k, y} :

with






Ast ′ Ast s
s
s
h
vt+1 − jt+1
1 = φβEt Λt+1 s λ
ot
ost t

and



s
vts = πts + φβEt Λt+1 vt+1

where

(45)

1
It
πtk = (1 − )(1 − γ) k
θ
At µk

(46)

1 Yt
πty = (1 − ) y
ϑ At µ

(47)


 s

s
jts = −hst + φβEt Λt+1 λst vt+1
+ (1 − λst )jt+1

ρ
Ast hst λ
= λ̄
ost
Free entry into production of final goods and final capital goods:
λst

(48)



(49)

µ − 1 Yt
= oyt
µ Nty

(50)

s

µk − 1 It
= okt
µk Ntk
Relative price of retail and wholesale capital
γ K 1−γ
k
PtK = µk (Ntk )−(µ −1) PstK
Pet

where PetK is equal to

PetK = θ Akt
and the wholesale price of capital is
K

(44)

P t = θ(1−γ) Akt

−(θ−1)

−(1−γ)(θ−1)

(52)

(53)

PstK

γ

The exogenous variables, {Xt , Gt , Pstk , ξt }∞
t=0 , follow an AR(1) process.

37

(51)

(54)

A.2

Calibration

We begin with the standard parameters. A period in our model corresponds to
a quarter. We set the discount factor β equal to 0.98, to match the steady state
share of investment to output. Based on steady state evidence we also choose the
following numbers: (the capital share) α = 0.35; (the equipment share) (1 − γ) =
0.17/0.35; (government consumption to output) G/Y = 0.2; (the depreciation rate)
δ = 0.015; and (the steady state utilization rate) U = 0.8.20 We set the inverse of the
Frisch elasticity of labor supply ζ to unity, which represents an intermediate value for
the range of estimates across the micro and macro literature. Similarly, we set the
elasticity of the change in the depreciation rate with respect to the utilization rate,
(δ ′′ /δ ′ )U at 0.15 following Rebelo and Jaimovich (2006). Finally, based on evidence
in Basu and Fernald (1997), we fix the steady state gross valued added markup in
the final output, µ, equal to 1.1 and the corresponding markup for the capital goods
sector, µk , at 1.15.
We next turn to the “non-standard” parameters. To approximately match the
operating profits of publicly traded companies, we set the gross markup charged by
intermediate capital (θ) and output goods (ϑ) to 1.4 and 1.25, respectively. Following
Caballero and Jaffe (1993), we set φ to 0.99, which implies an annual obsolescence
rate of 4 percent. The steady state growth rate of the relative price of capital, depends
on χ̄k , the markup θ, the obsolescence rate and ξk . We normalize ξk to 1. To match
the average annual growth rate of the Gordon quality adjusted price of equipment
relative to the BEA price of consumption goods and services (-0.035), we set χ̄k to
3.04 percent.
The growth rate of GDP in steady state depends on the growth rate of capital and
on the growth rate of intermediate goods in the output sector. To match the average
annual growth rate of GDP per working age person over the postwar period (0.024)
we set χ̄y to 2.02 percent.
For the time being, we also need to calibrate the autocorrelation of the shock to
future technologies. When we estimate the model, this will be one of the parameters
we identify. One very crude proxy of the number of prototypes that arrive in the
20

We set U equal to 0.8 based on the average capacity utilization level in the postwar period as
measured by the Board of Governors.

38

economy is the number of patent applications. The autocorrelation of the annual
growth rate in the stock of patent applications is 0.95. This value is consistent with
the estimate we obtain below and is the value we use to calibrate the autocorrelation
of χt .
We now consider the parameters that govern the adoption process. We use two
parameters to parameterize the function λs (.) as follows:
 s s ρλ
At ht
s
s
λt = λ̄
ost
These are λ̄s and ρλ . To calibrate these parameters we try to assess the average
adoption lag and the elasticity of adoption with respect to adoption investments.
Estimating this elasticity is difficult because we do not have good measures of adoption
expenditures, let alone adoption rates. One partial measure of adoption expenditures
we do have is development costs incurred by manufacturing firms trying that make
new capital goods usable, which is a subset of the overall measure of R&D that
we used earlier. A simple regression of the rate of decline in the relative price of
capital (the relevant measure of the adoption rate of new embodied technologies in
the context of our model) on this measure of adoption costs and a constant yields
an elasticity of 0.9. Admittedly, this estimate is crude, given that we do not control
for other determinants of the changes in the relative price of capital. On the other
hand, given the very high pro-cyclicality of the speed of adoption estimated by Comin
(2009), we think it provides a plausible benchmark value.
Given the discreteness of time in our model, the average time to adoption for any
intermediate good is approximately 1/λ + 1/4. Mansfield (1989) examines a sample
of embodied technologies and finds a median time to adoption of 8.2 years. However,
there are reasons to believe that this estimate is an upper bound for the average
diffusion lag . First, the technologies typically used in these studies are relatively
major technologies and their diffusion is likely to be slower than for the average
technology. Second, most existing studies oversample older technologies which have
diffused slower than earlier technologies.21 For these reasons, we set λ̄s to match an
average adoption lag of 5 years and a quarter.22
21
22

Comin and Hobjin (2007) and Comin, Hobjin, and Rovito (????).
It is important to note that, as shown in Comin (2009), a slower diffusion process increases

39

We next turn to the entry/exit mechanism. We set the overhead cost parameters
so that the number of firms that operate in steady state in both the capital goods
and final goods sector is equal to unity, and the total overhead costs in the economy
are approximately 10 percent of GDP.

A.3

Data

The vector of observable variables is:
[∆logYt

∆logCt

∆logIte

∆logIts

Rt

Πt

log(Lt )]

Following Smets and Wouters (2007), and Primiceri, Schaumburg, and Tambalotti
(2006) and Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2008), we construct real GDP by
diving the nominal series (GDP) by population and the GDP Deflator. Real series
for consumption and investment in equipment and structures are obtained similarly.
Consumption corresponds only to personal consumption expenditures of non-durables
and services; while non-equipment investment includes durable consumption, structures, change in inventories and residential investment. Labor is the log of hours of
all persons divided by population. The quarterly log difference in the GDP deflator
is our measure of inflation, while for nominal interest rates we use the effective Federal Funds rate. Because we allow for non-stationary technology growth, we do not
demean or detrend any series.

the amplification of the shocks from the endogenous adoption of technologies because increases the
stock of technologies waiting to be adopted in steady state. In this sense, by using a higher speed of
technology diffusion than the one estimated by Mansfield (1989) and others we are being conservative
in showing the power of our mechanism.

40

References
[1] Sungbae An and Frank Schorfheide. Bayesian analysis of dsge models. Econometric Reviews, 2007.
[2] Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron. Risks for the long run: Estimation and inference.
mimeo, Duke University, 2007.
[3] Ravi Bansal and Amir Yaron. Risks for the long run. Journal of Finance, 2004.
[4] Susanto Basu and John G. Fernald. Returns to scale in u.s. production: Estimates and implications. Journal of Political Economy, 1997.
[5] Paul Beaudry, Fabrice Collard, and Frank Portier. Gold rush fever in business
cycles. mimeo, University of British Columbia, 2007.
[6] Paul Beaudry and Frank Portier. An exploration into pigou’s theory of cycles.
Journal of Monetary Economics, 2004.
[7] Beeler and Campbell. The long-run risks model and aggregate asset prices: An
empirical assessment. mimeo, Harvard University, 2008.
[8] William H. Beveridge. Unemployment: A problem of industry. Longmans, Green,
and Co., 1909.
[9] Ricardo J. Caballero and Adam B. Jaffe. How high are the giants’ shoulders: An
empirical assessment of knowledge spillovers and creative destruction in a model
of economic growth. NBER Macroeconomics Annual, O. J. Blanchard and S.
Fischer editors, MIT press, 1993.
[10] John Campbell and Robert J. Shiller. The dividend ratio model and small sample
bias : A monte carlo study. Economic Letters, 1989.
[11] Lawrence J. Chrisiano, Illut Cosmin, Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno.
Monetary policy and stock market boom-bust cycles. mimeo, Northwestern University, 2007.

41

[12] Lawrence J. Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans. Nominal
rigidities and the dynamic effects of a shock to monetary policy. Journal of
Political Economy, 2005.
[13] John M. Clark. Strategic factors in business cycles. NBER, 1934.
[14] John Cochrane. Shocks. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,
1994.
[15] Diego Comin. On the integration of growth and business cycles. Empirica, 2009.
[16] Diego Comin and Mark Gertler. Medium-term business cycles. American Economic Review, 2006.
[17] Diego Comin and Bart Hobjin. Lobbies and technology diffusion. Review of
Economics and Statistics, 2007.
[18] Diego Comin, Bart Hobjin, and Emilie Rovito. A new approach to measuring
technology with an application to the shape of diffusion curves. Journal of
Technology Transfer, 2008.
[19] Jeremy Greenwood, Zvi Hercowitz, and Gregory W. Huffman. Investment, capacity utilization, and the real business cycle. The American Economic Review,
1988.
[20] Jeremy Greenwood, Zvi Hercowitz, and Per Krusell. The role of investmentspecific technological change in the business cycle. European Economic Review,
2000.
[21] Jeremy Greenwood and Boyan Jovanovic. The it revolution and the stock market.
AEA Papers and Proceedings, 1999.
[22] Robert E. Hall. e-capital: The link between the labor market and the stock
market in the 1990s. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2000.
[23] Bart Hobjin and Boyan Jovanovic. The it revolution and the stock market:
Evidence. American Economic Review, 2001.

42

[24] Miguel Angel Iraola and Manuel Santos. Productivity and stock returns. Work
in progress, 2007.
[25] Nir Jaimovich and Sergio Rebelo. Can news about the future drive the business
cycle? mimeo, Northwestern University, 2006.
[26] Alejandro Justiniano, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti. Investment
shocks and business cycles. CEPR discussion paper No. 6739, 2008.
[27] Edwin Mansfield. The diffusion of industrial robots in japan and the united
states. Research Policy, 1989.
[28] Lubos Pastor and Pietro Veronesi. Technological revolutions and stock prices.
American Economic Review, 2008, forthcoming.
[29] Arthur C. Pigou. Industrial fluctuations. Macmillan and Co., 1927.
[30] Giorgio E. Primiceri, Ernst Schaumburg, and Andrea Tambalotti. Intertemporal
disturbances. NBER working paper No. 12243, 2006.
[31] Frank Smets and Raf Wouters. Shocks and frictions in u.s. business cycles: A
bayesian dsge approach. American economic Review, 2007.

43

Standard Parameters

Value

β

0.98

δ

0.015

G/Y

0.2

α

0.35

αs

0.17/0.35

ζ

1

θ

0.7

θ̄

0.8

U

0.8

(δ′′ /δ′ )U

0.15

µ

1.1

µw

1.2

µk

1.15

Non-standard Parameters

Value

χ̄y

so that growth rate of y=0.024/4

χ̄k

so that growth rate of pK
et =-0.035/4

φ
λ¯y
λ¯k

0.99

ρλ

0.9

ξy

0.6

so that λy =0.2/4
so that λk =0.2/4

Table 1: Calibrated parameters

Prior

Posterior

Parameter

Distribution

max

mean

5%

95%

υ

Beta (0.50,0.10)

0.502

0.565

0.104

0.952

ρr

Beta (0.65,0.10)

0.642

0.623

0.518

0.800

ξ

Beta (0.5,0.10)

0.565

0.557

0.366

0.758

ιp

Beta (0.5,0.10)

0.488

0.487

0.280

0.694

η

Normal (1.00,0.50)

1.305

1.185

0.818

1.510

φp

Gamma (1.70,0.30)

1.707

1.944

1.226

2.746

φy

Gamma(0.125,0.10)

0.079

0.082

0.062

0.106

ζ

Gamma (1.20,0.10)

1.193

1.344

1.150

1.516

δ′′ U
δ′

Gamma (0.10,0.10)

0.025

0.022

0.003

0.043

Table 2: Prior and Posterior Estimates of Structural Coefficients

Coefficient

Prior
Distribution

max

Posterior
mean

5%

95%

ρb
ρm
ρw

Beta (0.25 0.05)

0.235

0.230

0.185

0.284

Beta (0.25,0.05)
Beta (0.35,0.10)

0.248
0.346

0.247
0.349

0.186
0.331

0.301
0.364

ρ
ρg

Beta (0.95,0.15)
Beta (0.6,0.15)

1.000
0.349

0.999
0.894

0.999
0.893

0.999
0.894

ρst
σrd

Beta (0.95,0.15)
IGamma(0.25, ∞)

1.000
0.285

0.999
0.292

0.999
0.255

0.999
0.337

σw
σg

IGamma (0.25, ∞)
IGamma (0.25, ∞)

0.254
0.252

0.263
0.267

0.254
0.248

0.272
0.287

σb
σm

IGamma (0.25, ∞)
IGamma (0.25 ∞)

0.252
0.251

0.261
0.268

0.227
0.191

0.296
0.352

σx
σs

IGamma (0.25, ∞)
IGamma (0.25, ∞)

0.253
0.306

0.277
0.206

0.269
0.164

0.287
0.245

Table 3: Prior and Posterior Estimates of Shock Processes

Observable

Data

Endogenous

Exogenous

Benchmark

∆Yt

0.50

0.63

0.78

1.18

∆Ite
∆Its

2.92

2.91

2.24

1.40

∆Ct

2.80
0.33

2.77
0.43

2.18
0.31

2.00
0.40

∆Lt

0.66

0.60

0.30

0.66

Table 4: Standard deviations in data and alternative models
Specification

Log Marginal

Benchmark

1906

Exogenous Adoption
Endogenous Adoption

2092
2337

Table 5: Log-Marginal Density Comparison

Observ.

Gov.

Lab.Sup.

Int.Pref.

Innov.

Neutr.Tech.

Inves.

Mon.Pol.

∆Yt

3.45

0.38

9.94

27.15

42.57

10.62

5.89

∆Ite
∆Its

0.07

0.08

0.74

49.36

35.15

13.67

0.93

∆Ct

0.08
0.16

0.09
1.70

0.83
19.38

33.53
18.05

42.05
40.03

22.13
9.43

1.29
11.25

∆Lt
∆Qt

1.61
0.27

32.34
0.59

0.99
0.01

13.69
14.83

49.04
84.14

1.64
0.16

0.69
0.00

Table 6: Variance Decomposition

Observ.

Gov.

Lab.Sup.

Int.Pref.

Innov.

Neutr.Tech.

Inves.

Mon.Pol.

Yt
Ite

1.45
0.07

0.21
0.06

3.84
0.62

32.29
35.52

34.24
38.00

24.78
24.03

3.19
1.71

Its

0.08

0.07

0.72

36.92

39.93

20.64

1.65

Ct
Lt

0.31
2.09

3.61
35.87

16.91
0.75

15.93
20.06

25.60
29.16

24.31
11.24

13.33
0.84

Qt

4.10

1.85

0.11

51.83

41.68

0.18

0.26

Table 7: Variance Decomposition (HP Filtered)

Data
Growth rate stock market value

a

Volatility
Our Model
Conven. Model

0.077

Data
-0.04

0.052
(0.045, 0.059)

0.021
(0.018, 0.024)

(-0.25, 0.17)

Growth rate S&P500

0.077

-0.03
(-0.24, 0.17)

HP-filtered stock market value

0.103

0.71
(0.53, 0.88)

HP-filtered S&P500

Autocorrelation
Our Model Conven. Model

0.063

0.02

(0.049, 0.079)

(0.016,0.023)

0.107

0
(-0.2, 0.19)

-0.18
(-0.35, -0.01)

0.67

0.45

(0.49,0.8)

(0.27, 0.6)

-0.36

-0.25

(-0.51, -0.2)

(-0.43, -0.06)

0.3
(0.04, 0.49)

0.46
(0.25, 0.64)

0.76
(0.61, 0.91)

Dividend growth (COMPUSTAT), s.ab

0.087

Profit growth (NIPA)
HP-filtered dividends (COMPUSTAT), s.a

0.0127

0.014

(0.0107, 0.014)

(0.012, 0.016)

0.022

-0.24

0.072

(-0.67, 0.18)
0.29
0.0106
(0.009, 0.0127)

HP-filtered profits (NIPA)

-0.56
(-0.83, -0.29)

0.0134
(0.011, 0.016)

0.022

(0.06, 0.52)
0.53
(0.28, 0.82)

Medium termc dividend growth (COMPUSTAT), s.a

0.011

0.99
(0.97,1)

Medium term profit growth (NIPA), s.a
(Log) capital share
Medium term (log) capital share

0.0015

0.001

0.99

0.99

(0.0006, 0.0027)

(0.0005,0.002)

(0.99,1)

(0.99,1)

0.0031

0.99

0.025

0.93

0.39

0.0186

0.041

0.03

(0.97,1)
0.83

(0.019, 0.082)

(0.027,0.037)

(0.7,0.96)

(0.81,0.99)

(0.18,0.58)

0.03
(0.0096, 0.063)

0.01
(0.027,0.037)

0.99
(0.97,1)

0.99
(0.99,1)

0.99
(0.99,1)

Table 8: Volatility of Stock Market variables
a

In the stock market data, the period is 1984:I to 2008:II
Seasonally Adjusted
c
Medium term variables are computed by applying Band Pass filter that isolates fluctuations with periods between 8 and 50 years
b

Horizon (in quarters)

Dataa

Model Historical series

Model simulated series

4

0.001

-0.0025

-0.0028

12

(-0.0087, 0.0107)
0.0034

(-0.008, 0.0029)
-0.0037

(-0.0288, 0.0154)
-0.0484

(-0.0174, 0.024)

(-0.015, 0.007)

(-0.1352, 0.0352)

0.0031
(-0.0194, 0.025)

-0.004
(-0.02, 0.012)

-0.0985
(-0.2094, 0.0351)

20

a

Coefficient reported is β from the following regression:

P

T
τ =1

∆ct+τ = α + βxt + εt , where xt is the

price-dividend ratio and T is the horizon.

Table 9: Long-run predictability of consumption growth

Y

L

C

0.2

0.2

0.2

0

0

0.1

−0.2

0

5

10

15

20

−0.2

0

5

P

10

15

20

0

0

5

TFP

k

10

15

20

15

20

I

0

0.4

0.5

−0.05

0.2

−0.5

0
−1
−0.1

0
0

5

10

15

20

0

5

A

10

15

20

15

20

−1.5

0

5

10

Z

k

k

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

0
0

5

10

15

20

0

5

10

Figure 1: Impulse responses to an innovation shock in conventional model (immediate
diffusion)

Y

L

C

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.15

0.15

0.15

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.05

0.05

0.05

0

0

5

10

15

20

Pk

0

0.2

−0.05

0.15

−0.1

0.1

−0.15

0.05
0

5

10

5

15

20

0

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1
0
5

10

20

0

5

15

20

10

15

20

15

20

15

20

I

1
0.5
0

5

10

15

20

0

0

5

10
λk

Zk

0.4

0

15

1.5

Ak

0

10
TFP

0

−0.2

0
0

3
2
1

0

5

10

15

20

0

0

5

10

Figure 2: Impulse responses to an innovation shock in baseline model (slow diffusion, endogenous adoption)

Y

L

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0
0

5

10

15

20

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0

5

10

15

20

0

0

5

10

15

20

0

5

10

15

20

5

10

15

20

0.02

0.02

0

0

−0.02

0

5

10

15

20

−0.02

0

Figure 3: Robustness: Impulse responses to innovation shock. Top row: baseline model
(slow diffusion, endogenous adoption). Middle row: baseline model without entry. Bottom
row: baseline model without endogenous adoption.

Y

L

C

0.05
0.2

0.2

0

0

0

−0.2

−0.2
0

5

10

15

20

−0.05

0

5

Pk

10

15

20

0

5

TFP

10

15

20

15

20

15

20

I
1

0
0.1
0.05

−0.1

0

0
−0.2

0

5

10

15

20

−0.05

0

5

Ak

10

15

20

−1

0

5

0.5

0.2

0

0.1

10
λ

Zk

k

2

1

0
−0.5

0

5

10

15

20

0

5

10

15

20

0

0

5

10

Figure 4: Estimated impulse responses to innovation shock, our model (solid) and model
with entry and exogenous adoption (dashed).

Y

L

C

0

0
0

−0.1

−0.1
−0.05

−0.2

−0.2
−0.1
0

5

10

15

20

0

5

Pk

10

15

20

0

5

TFP

10

15

20

15

20

15

20

I
0

0.4

0
−0.1

0.2

−1

−0.2
0

0

5

10

15

20

0

5

A

10

15

20

−2

0

−0.5

0

−2

5

10

15

20

−0.1

0

5

10

10
λk

0.1

0

5

k

0

−1

0

Z

k

15

20

−4

0

5

10

Figure 5: Estimated impulse responses to structures shock, our model (solid) and model
with entry and exogenous adoption (dashed).

Y

L

C

0.1
0.2

0.2

0.1

0.05

0.1

0

−0.1

0
−0.1

0
0

5

10

15

20

0

5

Pk

10

15

20

2

−0.2

0

1

5

10

15

20

−0.5

0

5

Ak

10

15

20

0

0

5

0.1

0.5

0

15

20

10

15

20

15

20

λ

Zk

1

10
I

0.5

0

5

TFP

0

−0.4

0

k

6
4
2

0
0

5

10

15

20

−0.1

0

5

10

15

20

0

0

5

10

Figure 6: Estimated impulse responses to TFP shock, our model (solid) and model with
entry and exogenous adoption (dashed).

2
1
0
−1
−2
2

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

1
0
−1
−2
2
1
0
−1
−2

Figure 7: Historical decomposition of output growth. Data in dotted green and counterfactual in solid blue, for innovation shock (first panel), structures shock (second panel), and
TFP shock (third panel)).

Stock market

Rel. price cap.

Installed cap.

0
0.4

0.05
0

−0.05

0.3

−0.05
−0.1

0.2

−0.1
−0.15

0.1
0

0

5

10

15

20

−0.2

−0.15
0

5

Adopted

10

15

20

−0.2

0

Unadopted

1.5

5

10

15

20

Future unadopted

0.4
0.4

0.3

1

0.3
0.2
0.2

0.5
0

0.1
0

5

10

15

20

0

0.1
0

5

10

15

20

0

0

5

10

15

20

Price−Dividend ratio
0.4
0.2
0
−0.2

0

5

10

15

20

Figure 8: Impulse responses to innovation shock for stock market value and its components:
installed capital (first row, third column), adopted technologies (second row, first column),
unadopted technologies (second row, second column), and future unadopted technologies
(second row, third column).
Stock market

Installed cap.

0

0.4

−0.5

0.2

Price−Dividend ratio
0
−0.5
−1

−1

0

5

10

15

20

0

0

5

Stock market

10

15

20

0

10

15

20

1.5

0

0.6

1

−0.2

0.4

5

Price−Dividend ratio

Installed cap.

0.8

0.5

0.2
0

−1.5

−0.4
0

5

10

15

20

0

5

10

15

20

0

0

5

10

15

20

Figure 9: Impulse responses of stock market variables to positive shock to structures (first
row) and TFP (second row).

Corr(yt,stockt+k), both series HP−filtered
1
Model
Data
Conventional model

0.5

0

−0.5
−5

−4

−3

−2

−1

0

1

2

3

4

5

k

Figure 10: Corr(yt, stockt+k ) in the data (first panel), our model (second panel), and
conventional model (third panel).
Stock market value
1500

Model
Data
S&P500 (right scale)

1000
10

500

0

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

0

Figure 11: Stock market value in model (solid blue), data (dotted green) and S&P500
(triangled red, right axis).

