NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DESIGNING CLIMATE MITIGATION POLICY
Joseph E. Aldy
Alan J. Krupnick
Richard G. Newell
Ian W.H. Parry
William A. Pizer
Working Paper 15022
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15022

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2009

The authors are grateful to Carolyn Fischer, Roger Gordon, Charles Kolstad, and Brent Sohngen for
helpful comments on an earlier draft. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Joseph E. Aldy, Alan J. Krupnick, Richard G. Newell, Ian W.H. Parry, and William A.
Pizer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Designing Climate Mitigation Policy
Joseph E. Aldy, Alan J. Krupnick, Richard G. Newell, Ian W.H. Parry, and William A. Pizer
NBER Working Paper No. 15022
June 2009
JEL No. H23,Q48,Q54
ABSTRACT
This paper provides an exhaustive review of critical issues in the design of climate mitigation policy
by pulling together key findings and controversies from diverse literatures on mitigation costs, damage
valuation, policy instrument choice, technological innovation, and international climate policy. We
begin with the broadest issue of how high assessments suggest the near and medium term price on
greenhouse gases would need to be, both under cost-effective stabilization of global climate and under
net benefit maximization or Pigouvian emissions pricing. The remainder of the paper focuses on the
appropriate scope of regulation, issues in policy instrument choice, complementary technology policy,
and international policy architectures.

Joseph E. Aldy
Resources for the Future
1616 P Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036
aldy@rff.org

Ian W.H. Parry
Resources for the Future
1616 P Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036
parry@rff.org

Alan J. Krupnick
Resources for the Future
1616 P Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036
krupnick@rff.org

William A. Pizer
Resources for the Future
1616 P Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036
billy.pizer@gmail.com

Richard G. Newell
Nicholas School of the Environment
Duke University
Box 90227
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
richard.newell@duke.edu

Designing Climate Mitigation Policy
Joseph E. Aldy, Alan J. Krupnick, Richard G. Newell,
Ian W.H. Parry, and William A. Pizer ∗
1. Introduction
Global warming is one of the most critical, and also most daunting, challenges facing
policymakers in the twenty-first century. Assessing a globally efficient time path for pricing or
controlling greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions is difficult enough, with huge scientific
uncertainties, disagreement over the ultimate goals of climate policy, and disagreement over
which countries should bear most responsibility for emissions reductions. On top of this,
domestic policy design is inherently difficult because of multiple, and sometimes conflicting,
criteria for policy evaluation. And at an international level, there are multiple approaches to
coordinating emissions control agreements. What might a rational policy response for such an
enormously complex problem look like?
This paper attempts to provide some broad answers to this question, and pinpoint the
main sources of controversy, by pulling together key findings from diverse literatures on
mitigation costs, damage valuation, policy instrument choice, technological innovation, and
international climate policy. Our aim is to do this in a highly succinct fashion, so the
nonspecialist can quickly get up to speed on the key issues without getting drawn into the details.
We begin with the broadest issue of how much action to price or control GHGs is
warranted in the near and longer term at a global level. There are two distinct approaches to this
question. The cost-effectiveness approach acknowledges that policymakers typically have some
ultimate target for limiting the amount of projected climate change or atmospheric GHG
accumulations, and the question is what policy trajectory might achieve alternative goals at
minimum economic cost while accounting for practical constraints, such as incomplete

∗

Joseph E. Aldy is now on leave from RFF, serving as special assistant to the president on energy and the
environment; his work on this paper was completed while he was a full-time fellow at RFF. Alan J. Krupnick is a
senior fellow at RFF. Richard G. Newell is a professor at the Nicholas School of the Environment, Duke University,
Durham, NC. Ian W.H. Parry is a senior fellow at RFF. William A. Pizer is the deputy assistant secretary for
environment and energy at the Treasury Department; his work on this paper was completed while he was a full-time
senior fellow at RFF.

1

international coordination. The other approach is to weigh the benefits and costs of slowing
climate change, which introduces highly contentious issues in damage valuation, dealing with
extreme climate risks, and intergenerational discounting.
The second part of the paper deals with issues in the implementation of climate policy. At
a domestic (U.S.) level these include a comparison of alternative emissions control instruments
and how they could be designed to simultaneously promote administrative ease and minimize
efficiency costs in the presence of other policy distortions, abatement cost uncertainty, and
possible distributional constraints. We discuss the extent to which additional policies are
warranted to promote the development and deployment of emissions-saving technologies, and
we briefly summarize emerging literature on alternative international policy architectures. A
final section discusses key areas for future research.
2. Policy Stringency
2.1. Emissions Pricing to Stabilize Global Climate
The cost-effectiveness approach to global climate policy uses models of the economic
and climate systems (known as integrated assessment models) to estimate the emissions price
trajectory that minimizes the discounted worldwide costs of emissions abatement, subject to a
climate stabilization target, and possibly other, practical constraints like delaying developing
country participation. These models range from bottom-up engineering–economic models with
considerable detail on adoption and use of energy technologies, to computable general
equilibrium models with a more aggregated and continuous structure that better represents
demand responses, capital dynamics, and factor substitution. Many models are hybrids
containing substantial technological detail in the energy sectors and more aggregate
representation in others. Typically the suite of existing and emerging technologies is taken as
given, though some models capture induced innovation through learning-by-doing, and a few
have incorporated R&D-based technological change (e.g., Goulder and Matthai 2000, Popp
2006).
A variety choice of model structure choices affect cost estimates, including decisions
about foresight, trade sensitivities, capital mobility, and sectoral disaggregation, which influence
opportunities for cost-effective abatement across time and space. However, the choice of model
structure is generally less important than assumptions about future baseline data and technology
options. Future mitigation costs are highly sensitive to business-as-usual (BAU) emissions,
which depend on future population and Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth, the energy
2

intensity of GDP, and the fuel mix. They also depend on the future availability and cost of
emissions-saving technologies like nuclear and renewable power, carbon capture and storage,
and alternative transportation fuels. Considerable uncertainty surrounds all of these factors.
Given the difficulty of judging which models give the most reliable predictions, we
discuss a representative sample of results, beginning with studies that assume emissions
reductions are efficiently allocated across countries and time and use the least expensive
technological options. This is known as “where, when, and how” flexibility. These studies,
summarized in Table 1, are from the U.S. Climate Change Science Program (CCSP, Product
2.1A), based on results from the IGSM, MERGE, and MiniCAM models (see Clarke 2007 et al.
for model details), and from the Stanford Energy Modeling Forum’s EMF-21 study (reported in
de la Chesnaye and Weyant 2006), which draws on results from 16 energy–economic model
teams.
2.1.1. Reference Scenarios
Global CO2 emissions from fossil fuels have grown from about 2 billion (metric) tons in
1900 to current levels of about 30 billion tons and, in the absence of mitigation policy, are
projected to at least double from 2000 levels by the end of the century (Table 1). The huge bulk
of the projected future emissions growth is in non–Annex 1 (nonindustrial) countries—emissions
from these countries overtake those from Annex 1 (industrial) countries in the models by around
2020 to 2030.1 These rising emissions trends reflect growing energy demand from population
and real income growth that will outweigh energy- and emissions-saving technological change—
traditional fossil fuels still account for around three-quarters of global primary energy
consumption by 2100 (Clarke et al. 2007, Table TS1).2
About 45 percent of CO2 releases are immediately absorbed by the upper oceans and
terrestrial biosphere, while the remainder enters the atmosphere and is removed by the ocean and
terrestrial sinks only very gradually (IPCC 2007). The longer-term rate of removal of CO2 from

1

The 1990 U.N. Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) grouped countries into either Annex 1 or
non–Annex 1 according to their per capita income at that time. Only Annex 1 countries agreed to reduce emissions
under the 1997 Kyoto Protocol.
2

Land-use changes currently contribute about an additional 5.5 billion tons of CO2 releases (primarily through
deforestation in developing countries for agriculture and timber), though these sources are projected to grow at a
much slower pace than fossil fuel emissions (IPCC 2007). Land-use CO2 emissions are not priced in the models in
Table 1.

3

the atmosphere is around 1 percent a year (i.e., CO2 has an expected atmospheric residence time
of about a century or more), and even this very gradual decay rate might decline as oceans
become more saturated with CO2. Stabilizing atmospheric CO2 concentrations over the very long
term essentially requires elimination of fossil fuel and other GHG emissions.
Atmospheric CO2 concentrations increased from preindustrial levels of about 280 parts
per million (ppm) to 384 ppm in 2007 and are projected to rise to around 700–900 ppm by 2100
(Table 1). Accounting for non-CO2 GHGs, such as methane and nitrous oxides from agriculture
and other sources, and expressing them on a lifetime warming equivalent basis increases the
projected gap between future atmospheric GHG concentrations and preindustrial levels by
around 25–30 percent (Clarke et al. 2007, Table TS1). Total GHG concentrations in CO2
equivalents are projected to reach 550 ppm (i.e., roughly double preindustrial levels) by around
midcentury.
To date, globally averaged surface temperature is estimated to have risen by 0.74°C
between 1906 and 2006, with most of this warming due to rising atmospheric GHG
concentrations, as opposed to other factors like changes in solar radiation, volcanic activity, and
urban heat absorption (IPCC 2007). Figure 1, from IPCC (2007), shows projected steady state
warming levels associated with different stabilization levels for atmospheric GHG concentrations
(the climate system takes several decades to fully adjust to changing concentration levels due to
heat diffusion processes in the oceans). If atmospheric GHG concentrations were stabilized at
550 ppm, the likely global temperature increase above preindustrial levels is 2.0−4.5°C, with a
best estimate of 3.0°C, while if CO2 equivalent concentrations were stabilized at 650 ppm, mean
projected warming would be 3.5°C, with a likely range of 2.5−5.5°C. The “likely ranges” refer to
a roughly 66 percent confidence interval, based on sensitivity analysis from scientific models.
The fundamental concern is that warming might greatly exceed these levels due to poorly
understood feedbacks not represented in these models, such as heat-induced releases of methane
stored under the oceans and in the permafrost (Harvey and Zhen 1995).
2.1.2. Least-Cost Pricing
Most political debate has focused on climate stabilization targets that are approximately
consistent with limiting atmospheric CO2 concentrations to either 450 or 550 ppm (with other
GHGs included, the corresponding CO2 equivalent concentrations would be somewhat less or
somewhat greater than double preindustrial levels). The studies in Table 1 examine globally costeffective emissions pricing trajectories that are approximately consistent with these goals, that is,

4

marginal abatement costs are equated across all emissions sources (including non-CO2 GHGs),
across countries, and across different periods of time.3
Across the models and stabilization scenarios in Table 1, CO2 emissions prices rise
steadily (beginning around 2012) at approximately 5 percent, which is roughly equal to the
consumer discount rate plus the atmospheric CO2 decay rate (Peck and Wan 1996). However,
one striking feature in Table 1 is the considerable variation across models within a stabilization
scenario, reflecting different assumptions about future BAU emissions growth and future
availability of carbon-saving technologies. The other striking feature is the dramatic differences
between the 550 and 450 ppm CO2 stabilization targets. In the 550 ppm case, CO2 prices are
about $5–30 and $10–100 per ton in 2025 and 2050, respectively, with emissions 15–40 percent
and 15–55 percent above 2000 levels at these dates, respectively. In the 450 ppm case, CO2
prices are about 3–14 times those in the 550 ppm case to midcentury, while emissions are 0–15
percent and 35–50 percent below 2000 levels in 2025 and 2050, respectively.4
Although GDP losses may be an unreliable proxy for efficiency losses when climate
policies compound preexisting policy distortions (see below), we discuss them here as they are
the least common denominator reported by the modeling groups.5 Under the 550 ppm CO2 target,
most models project global GDP losses (from reducing both CO2 and non-CO2 GHGs) of less
than 1 percent out to 2050, though some models suggest GDP losses could reach 2–3 percent by
this date. In present value terms these GDP losses amount to about $0.4–12 trillion out to 2050
when applied to a world GDP that is $60 trillion and growing (Newell 2008, 12). Under the 450
ppm CO2 target, cumulative GDP losses are about 1.0–2.5 percent and 1.5–5.5 percent in 2025
and 2050, respectively, or about $8–43 trillion in present value from 2010 to 2050.
Under both the 450 and 550 ppm stabilization scenarios the energy system is transformed
over the next century (though at very different rates) through energy conservation, improved
energy efficiency, and particularly through reductions in the carbon intensity of energy use. Most
of the emissions reductions in the first two to three decades occur in the power sector, largely

3

We focus on CO2 concentrations, given that models use different conventions for measuring CO2 equivalents for
other GHGs.

4

Some analysts express prices per ton of carbon rather than CO2. To convert to $ per ton of carbon, multiply by the
ratio of molecular weights, 44/12=3.67.
5

GDP losses may also understate efficiency losses because they include changes in regional investment, which
often increase in the near term in climate policy simulations.

5

through the progressive replacement of traditional coal plants by coal with carbon capture and
storage, natural gas, nuclear, and renewables (wind, solar, and biomass), though the projected
fuel mix is highly sensitive to assumptions about the relative costs and availability of future
technologies (e.g., it is not clear to what extent practical and safety obstacles will constrain
nuclear power and whether carbon capture and storage technologies will prove viable).6
As for U.S. CO2 emissions, in the reference case they increase by about 30–100 percent
above 2000 levels (of approximately 6 billion tons) by midcentury (Table 1). Under the 550 ppm
target, emissions initially rise, fall to roughly 2000 levels by 2050, and fall rapidly thereafter.
Under the 450 ppm target, U.S. emissions are rapidly reduced to roughly half 2000 levels by
2050. U.S.-specific GDP losses are not reported in the studies in Table 1, but allocating a quarter
of the global cost to the United States (based on its share in global GDP) implies a present value
cost to the United States through midcentury of about $0.1–3 trillion (0–1 percent of the present
value of GDP) for the 550 ppm target and $2–11 trillion (1–3 percent of present value GDP) for
the 450 ppm target.7
2.1.3. Deviations from Least-Cost Pricing
Aside from the uncertainty surrounding modeling assumptions, a key problem with the
studies in Table 1 is that they assume globally efficient abatement policies. More likely,
particularly given the “common but differentiated responsibilities” recognized in the UNFCCC,
participation in global mitigation efforts among major emitters in developing countries will be
delayed, causing marginal abatement costs to differ across regions. For a given climate
stabilization scenario, to what extent does this affect worldwide abatement costs and appropriate
policies in developed countries like the United States?
Edmonds et al. (2008) explore these issues by assuming Annex 1 countries agree to
impose a harmonized emissions price starting in 2012, China joins the agreement at a later date,
and other countries join whenever their per capita income reaches that of China at the time of
6

In part, the transition away from coal reflects the disproportionately large impact of emissions pricing on coal
prices. A $10 price per ton of CO2 in the United States would increase 2007 coal prices to utilities by about 60
percent, wellhead natural gas prices by 9 percent, retail electricity and crude oil prices by 7 percent each, and
gasoline prices by 3 percent (from Clarke et al. 2007, Table TS5, and www.eia.gov).
7

U.S.-specific models project emissions price ranges that are broadly consistent with those in Table 1. For example,
analyses by Paltsev et al. (2007), EPA (2008), EIA (2008a), and CRA International (2008) project emissions prices
of around $40–90 per ton of CO2 in 2025 for climate legislation that would reduce U.S. CO2 emissions by about 20
percent below 2000 levels by that date.

6

China’s accession. In one scenario, they assume new entrants immediately face the prevailing
Annex 1 emissions price, while in another the emissions price for late entrants converges
gradually over time to the Annex 1 price. The analysis accounts for emissions leakage, that is,
the increase in emissions in nonparticipating countries due to the flight of energy-intensive firms
from participating countries, and also the increased use of fuels in nonparticipating countries as
decreased demand from participating countries puts downward pressure on world fuel prices.
Under the 550 ppm target, even if China joins between 2020 and 2035, the implications
for Annex 1 policies can be significant but are not that striking. Compared with the globally
efficient policy (with a globally harmonized price at all times), near-term Annex 1 emissions
prices rise from between a few percent and 100 percent under the different scenarios, and
discounted global abatement costs are higher by 10–70 percent. However, under the 450 ppm
target, essentially all of the foregone earlier reductions in non–Annex 1 countries must be offset
by additional early reduction in Annex 1 countries (rather than more global abatement later in the
century). This can imply dramatically higher near-term Annex 1 emissions prices, especially
with longer delay and lower initial prices for late entrants. Under these scenarios, discounted
global abatement costs are about 30–400 percent higher than under globally efficient pricing, and
near- and medium-term emissions prices can be an order of magnitude larger if China’s
accession is delayed until 2035.
A further key point from Edmonds et al. (2008) is the potentially large shift in the global
incidence of abatement costs, underlying the disincentives for early developing country
participation. In the globally efficient policy, developing countries bear about 70 percent of
discounted abatement costs out to 2100—gross of any compensation payments—while they bear
“only” 17–34 percent of global abatement costs when China’s accession occurs in 2035 and new
entrants face lower starting prices.
Finally, insofar as possible, pricing non-CO2 GHGs is also important. According to
modeling results in de la Chesnaye and Weyant (2006), GDP costs are 20–50 percent larger
when only CO2, as opposed to all, GHGs are priced, for the same overall limit on atmospheric
GHG concentrations. This reflects opportunities for large-scale, low-cost options for non-CO2
abatement in the first half of this century, though practical difficulties in pricing other GHGs are
not factored into the models (see below).
2.1.5. Summary
There is a large difference in the appropriate starting prices for GHG emissions,
depending on whether the ultimate objective is to limit atmospheric CO2 concentrations to 450 or
7

550 ppm—targets that are approximately consistent with keeping the eventual, mean projected
warming above today’s temperatures to 1.5oC or 2.5oC, respectively (assuming non-CO2 GHGs
are also priced). The 450 ppm target implies emissions prices would need to reach around $40–
90 per ton of CO2 by 2025, while the 550 ppm target implies prices would need to rise to $3–25
by that date. Securing early and widespread participation in an international emissions control
regime can also be critical for containing costs under the 450 ppm target, while under the 550
ppm target there is greater scope for offsetting the effect of delayed participation through greater
emissions reductions in the latter half of the century. Given the considerable difference in GDP
losses at stake between the two targets ($8–43 trillion in present value under cost-effective
pricing out to 2050 compared with $0.4–12 trillion), it is important to carefully assess what
starting prices might be consistent, from an efficiency perspective, with the benefits of slowing
climate change.
2.2. Welfare-Maximizing Emissions Pricing
2.2.1. Marginal Damage Estimates
Estimates of the marginal damages from emissions begin with a point estimate of
contemporaneous damages from a given amount of future warming, usually occurring around
2100. At first glance, total damage estimates from multiple studies appear to be in roughly the
same ballpark for a given amount of warming. According to the representative estimates shown
in Figure 2, world damages are in the range of about 1–2 percent of GDP for a warming of 2.5 oC
above preindustrial levels, though some estimates are close to zero or even negative, particularly
for market impacts (the prospects for negative costs diminishes with greater warming). For
warming of about 4.0 oC, damages are typically in the order of 2–4 percent of world GDP.
However, there are huge inconsistencies across these studies as they reach dramatically different
conclusions about the size of market and nonmarket damage categories and expected
catastrophic risks (Figure 2).
Very few studies attempt to value the damages from more extreme warming scenarios,
given so little is known about the physical impacts of large temperature changes. Two exceptions
are Nordhaus and Boyer (2000) and Stern (2007), who put total damages at 10.2 percent and
11.3 percent of world GDP for warming of 6.0 oC and 7.4 oC, respectively, though these figures
are largely based on extrapolations and subjective judgment. Again, there is little consistency
across the estimates. In Nordhaus and Boyer (2000) catastrophic risks and market damages
account for about 60 and 40 percent of expected total damages, respectively, with nonmarket

8

impacts roughly washing out, while in the Stern estimate nonmarket impacts account for about
half of damages.
Marginal damage estimates are inferred by using assumptions about
emissions/concentration relationships, climate adjustment and sensitivity, climate damages
(inferred from a point estimate by using functional form assumptions), and discount rates. Tol
(2009) conducts several meta-analyses of marginal damage estimates, reporting a median of $4–
20 per ton of CO2, and a mean of $28–35 per ton across the different analyses (studies within a
meta-analysis are not independent, however, often drawing from the same sources and from each
other). Although individual estimates are highly divergent, most are on the low side. Especially
striking is the difference between Stern (2007) at $85 and Nordhaus (2008) at $8 per ton of
CO2—a difference largely dependent on discount rate assumptions (see below). Most estimates
of near-term Pigouvian taxes (i.e., marginal damages at the optimized level of emissions) are
similar to marginal damage estimates at uncontrolled (i.e. existing) emissions levels, though
Stern (2007) pp. 344 is an exception.8
There is some consensus that marginal damages grow over time at around 2–3 percent a
year (approximately the rate of growth in output potentially affected by climate change), or at
about half the rate as under cost-effective emissions pricing associated with an atmospheric
concentration target. Marginal damages increase with the extent of warming over time
(suggesting a faster rate of increase), but an offsetting factor is that warming is a concave
(logarithmic) function of atmospheric GHG concentrations. Although atmospheric CO2
concentrations ultimately reach 650 ppm in the twenty-second century in Nordhaus’s (2008)
optimal policy, imposing a constraint that CO2 concentrations cannot exceed 550 ppm has only a
modest effect on the emissions price trajectory out to 2050. In short, optimal near- and mediumterm emissions prices in Nordhaus (2008) are in the same ballpark with those for cost-effective
stabilization of CO2 concentrations at 550 ppm, while starting prices in Stern (2007) are broadly
consistent with cost-effective prices to stabilize CO2 concentrations at 450 ppm or lower.

8

Some of the differences in marginal damage estimates in the literature also reflect different assumptions about the
year for which emissions are being priced, the extent of future warming from GHG accumulations, and reporting in
different year’s dollars.

9

2.2.2. Controversies in Marginal Damage Assessment
Differences in marginal damage estimate in the literature are largely explained by
fundamentally different approaches to discounting rather than differences in total damages from
a given amount of warming (Nordhaus 2007). However, the valuation of catastrophic and
noncatastrophic damages is also highly contentious. We take each of these issues in turn.
Discounting. Stern (2007) uses a discount rate on future consumption of 1.4 percent. This
is based on the prescriptive approach, which decomposes the discount rate on the consumption
of future generations into the pure rate of time preference and the product of the growth rate in
consumption (assumed to be 1.3 percent in that study) and the elasticity of marginal utility with
respect to consumption (assumed to be 1). Choosing a value for the pure rate of time preference,
the rate at which the utility of future generations is discounted just because they are in the future,
is viewed as a strictly ethical judgment. And ethical neutrality, in this approach, essentially
requires setting the pure rate of time preference essentially equal to zero9 (the fact that
individuals over their lifetime prefer early utility to later utility is not viewed as an argument for
discounting one generation over another). Discriminating against people just because they are in
the future is viewed as being akin to discriminating against people in the present generation just
because they live in different countries (Heal 2009).10
In contrast, Nordhaus (2008) uses a consumption discount rate of about 5 percent. This is
based on the descriptive approach, which argues that we can do no better than using observed
market rates as these reveal preferences, as best we understand them, and reflect the return
earned by a broad range of private and public investments—the opportunity cost against which

9

Note that Stern (2007) assume a pure rate of time preference of 0.1 percent (rather than zero) based on the
possibility that the human race may not survive.
10

Besides ethical arguments, Sterner and Persson (2008) argue for discounting the nonmarket impacts of climate
change (e.g., ecosystem loss) at below market rates. This is because the value of nonmarket goods (which are
essentially fixed in supply) rises over time relative to the value of market goods (for which supply increases along
with demand), assuming market and nonmarket goods are imperfect substitutes for one another. However, gauging
the substitution elasticity between market and nonmarket goods, and how this elasticity may change over coming
decades, is especially challenging. In addition, changing relative prices over time and discounting are distinct
conceptual issues that are ideally treated separately.

10

other, even intergenerational, investments ought to be measured.11 Proponents of the descriptive
approach view discounting at market rates as essential for meaningful, consistent policy analysis
and to avoid perverse implications in other policy contexts (e.g., Nordhaus 2007).
Catastrophic Risks. The second critical source of controversy in marginal damage
assessment is the treatment of extreme, catastrophic risk. Although Nordhaus and Boyer (2000)
and Stern (2007) include catastrophic risks in their damage assessments, the numbers were best
viewed as highly speculative placeholders until more sophisticated analyses became available.
Nordhaus and Boyer (2000) put the annual costs from catastrophic risks at 1.0 percent and 6.9
percent of world GDP for warming levels of 2.5oC and 6.0oC, respectively. These figures are
based on assumptions that catastrophic climate change would permanently wipe out 25 percent
of world GDP with a 1.0 percent and 6.9 percent probability at these warming levels,
respectively, where these probabilities are based on a (subjective) expert elicitation survey. In his
central case, Stern (2007) assumes the chance of catastrophic climate change is zero up to a
warming of about 5oC, beyond which the annualized risk of regional GDP losses of 5–20 percent
rises by about 10 percent for each additional 1oC of warming.
Weitzman (2009a) takes a radically different perspective, contending that smallprobability, extreme events may render Pigouvian tax assessment futile. In particular, if the
probability of increasingly catastrophic outcomes falls more slowly than marginal utility rises in
those outcomes (with diminished consumption), then the certainty-equivalent marginal damage
from current emissions becomes infinite. These conditions apply if the probability distribution
for climate sensitivity is a fat-tailed t-distribution (i.e., approaches zero at a less than exponential
rate) and utility is a power function of consumption. Although marginal utility is probably not
unbounded, Weitzman (2009a) shows that with probabilities of a 20oC temperature change
inferred from IPCC (2007), and assuming this temperature change would lower world
consumption to 1 percent of its current level, expected catastrophic damages could easily dwarf

11

Although there are many market rates, from the long-term pretax real return to equities (about 7 percent) to the
after-tax return to government bonds (about 2 percent), much of this variation depends on whether we are looking
for a rate to discount investments or intertemporal consumption choices. Converting all values into their
consumption equivalents, and discounting at the consumption rate of interest, narrows the possible range of choice
(see, e.g., Lind 1982). In fact McGratten and Prescott (2003) suggest that the divergence in effective rates of return
is actually small, with an average real debt return during peacetime over the last century of almost 4 percent and the
average equity return somewhat under 5 percent.

11

noncatastrophic damage estimates. This conclusion applies even if this warming occurs more
than a century from now and conventional discount rates are applied.12
There are several possible responses to the Weitzman critique. One is that there is
disagreement as to whether the probability distribution for climate sensitivity is fat- or thintailed. If the distribution is thin-tailed, Newbold and Daigneault (2008) and Pindyck (2008) find
that the willingness to pay to avoid the low-probability of extreme global warming is well under
3 percent of consumption (rather than infinitely large), under most parameter values.
A second response is that setting a more modest Pigouvian tax now does not preclude the
possibility of a midcourse policy correction, involving a rapid phasedown in global emissions if
future observations and evidence suggest that we are heading toward a global catastrophe (e.g.,
Yohe and Tol 2009). This argument critically assumes that policymakers can avoid a
catastrophic outcome in the future through limiting future additions to atmospheric
accumulations—it breaks down if avoiding a catastrophe in the future would require reversing
previous atmospheric accumulations.
A third response is that a costly, rapid stabilization of atmospheric GHG concentrations is
a highly inefficient way to address the very small probability of catastrophic outcomes if a
portfolio of last-resort technologies could be successfully developed and deployed, if needed, to
prevent runaway warming. These include “air capture” technologies for removing GHGs out of
the atmosphere and “geoengineering” technologies for modifying the global climate.13 Moreover,
R&D efforts can be led by one or several countries, avoiding the challenges endemic in
organizing a rapid emissions phasedown among a large number of emitters with widely differing
interests. Nonetheless, analysts are divided on the case for public support for R&D into lastresort technologies, which is virtually nonexistent at present. One objection is the possibility that
relying on last-resort technologies could undermine efforts to initiate emissions mitigation
12

The IPCC report provides probability distributions from 22 scientific studies. Combining these distributions,
Weitzman (2009a) suggests that there is a 5 percent and 1 percent probability that eventual warming from a
doubling of CO2 equivalent concentrations will exceed 4.5°C and 7.0°C respectively. However, making an
(extremely crude) adjustment for the possibility of feedback effects (e.g., heat-induced releases of sequestered
methane from the permafrost), he infers a distribution where the probability that eventual temperature change
exceeds 10°C and 20°C is 5 percent and 1 percent, respectively.
13

Besides rapid reforestation programs, air capture might involve bringing air into contact with a sorbent material
that binds chemically with CO2 and extraction of the CO2 from the sorbent for underground, or other, disposal.
Geoengineering technologies include, for example, deflection of incoming solar radiation through shooting particles
into the stratosphere or blowing oceanic water vapor to increase the cover of reflective, bright clouds.

12

programs—a type of moral hazard. The other is that geoengineering (though not air capture)
technologies could have extreme downside risks (e.g., from overcooling the planet or radically
altering precipitation patterns) that may be difficult to evaluate prior to widespread deployment.
Whether effective institutions could be developed to prevent unilateral deployment of climate
modification technologies prior to rigorous assessment of their risks is also unclear (e.g., Barrett
2008; Victor 2008).
In short, the implications of extreme catastrophic risks for emissions pricing remain
highly unsettled in the literature. So long as there is still some positive likelihood that the climate
sensitivity function is fat-tailed—a possibility that Weitzman (2009b) argues cannot be ruled
out—then catastrophic risks can still swamp noncatastrophic impacts, depending on the shape of
the utility function. Conceivably, midcourse corrections in emissions pricing may come too late
to prevent a catastrophe, given that atmospheric GHG accumulations are irreversible, that it may
take several decades for the full warming impacts of higher concentrations to be realized, and
given the possibility of tipping points in the climate system. And the future viability of last-resort
technologies is highly uncertain at present. All of these issues—the nature and extent of damages
from extreme warming, the possibility of future, midcourse corrections for near- and mediumterm emissions pricing, and the efficient balance between mitigation and investment in last-resort
technologies—are in urgent need of study.
Noncatastrophic Impacts. Although on a different scale than catastrophic risks,
controversies abound in the valuation of noncatastrophic impacts from future climate change.
These include damages to world agriculture, costs of increased storm intensity and protecting
against rising sea levels, health impacts from heat waves and the possible spread of vector-borne
disease, loss of ecosystems, and so on. Box 1 provides a very brief summary of attempts to value
these damage categories (see Eber and Krupnick 2009 for a more detailed discussion). However,
due to the rapid outdating of prior research, daunting methodological challenges, and the small
number of economists working on Pigouvian tax assessment, the valuation literature on
aggregate, noncatastrophic damages remains highly inconsistent and poorly developed, as a few
examples illustrate (see also Hanemann 2008).
Damage assessments find worldwide agricultural impacts are anything from a net gain of
about 0.1 percent to a net loss of 0.2 percent of GDP for warming of about 2.5oC occurring in

13

2100, but these figures are at odds with more recent evidence suggesting larger net losses.14
Similarly, the most recent evidence on ice melting suggests that sea level rises over the next
century may be more extreme than the 25–60 cm projected by IPCC (2007) and assumed in most
previous damage assessment work (Box 1). And estimates that damages to ecosystems amount to
about 0.1–0.2 percent of world GDP seem inconsistent with the projection by Fischlin et al.
(2007) that 20–30 percent of the world’s species (an enormous amount of natural capital) faces
some (though possibly slight) extinction risk.
More generally, scientific models cannot reliably predict local changes in average
temperature, temperature variability, and precipitation, all of which are critical to crop yields.
The baseline for impact assessment decades from now is highly sensitive to assumptions about
regional development (including the ability to adapt to climate change), future technological
change (e.g., the development of climate- and flood-resistant crops), and other policies (e.g.,
attempts to eradicate malaria or integrate global food markets). Controversies surround the
valuing of nonmarket effects (e.g., the value of mortality in poor countries, or how much people
in wealthy countries value ecosystem preservation in poor countries). At best there is little
evidence on additional risks, such as extreme local climate change (e.g., from shifting monsoons
and deserts), large sea level rises that could occur if the West Antarctic ice sheets melt, and
broader health effects (e.g., malnutrition from food shortages, the net effects of milder winters
and hotter summers, and diarrhea if droughts reduce safe drinking water supplies). Most of the
impact assessment literature is based on extrapolations from U.S. studies—country-specific
studies that account for local factors (e.g., the ability to adapt farm practices to changing climate)
have only recently begun to emerge. Finally, worldwide results mask huge disparities in regional
burdens, and there is disagreement on how to aggregate impacts across regions with very
different per capita income.15

14

For example, Schlenker et al. (2005) suggest that the output of some crops in the United States could fall by as
much as 70 percent by 2100, under warming in the absence of mitigation policy. Cline (2007) suggests BAU losses
of agricultural output in developing countries in the order of 30 percent, while Guiteras (2008) estimates agricultural
losses of 30–40 percent for India.
15

Most studies aggregate regional impacts by using weights equal to the region’s share in world GDP or world
population. More generally, use of distributional weights can increase total damage estimates up to about 300
percent (e.g., Pearce 2005).

14

2.2.3. Further Issues Posed by Uncertainty
Finally, we touch on some additional complications for emissions pricing posed by
stochastic discount rates, risk aversion, and irreversibility.
In estimating the discounted value of future damages from additional emissions, the
standard approach is to treat the future time path of discount rates, and hence discount factors
applied to future damages, as nonstochastic. However, the discount factor is a convex function of
the future discount rate, so allowing for uncertainty about a given expected value for the discount
rate increases the discount factor (especially for more distant future periods), and hence the
present discounted value of future damages (Weitzman 1998). This issue turns out to be
empirically important. In particular, Newell and Pizer (2003) estimated that uncertainty over
future discount rates (inferred from historical evidence for the United States) almost doubles
estimates of Pigouvian emissions taxes for a given (mean) discount rate.
Leaving aside extreme risks, should Pigouvian tax estimates include a premium reflecting
risk aversion to uncertainty over future global warming damages (i.e., concavity in the utility
function)? A risk premium would be appropriate if the marginal utility of consumption, net of
climate damages, were larger in high-damage cases, in which case a mean-preserving increase in
the spread of possible damage outcomes increases expected disutility. However, if gross
consumption is greater in high-damage scenarios (e.g., because rapid technological advance
leads to both high consumption and high emissions rates), then the marginal utility of
consumption net of damages is lower, and possibly even lower than marginal utility in lowdamage states. Simulations by Nordhaus (2008, ch. 7) suggest this might in fact be the case,
implying the risk premium is actually negative, though empirically small.
Finally, we return to the issue of irreversibility and future learning, in particular whether
there is an option value (which should be reflected in the current emissions price) gained from
delaying atmospheric GHG accumulations until more is known about how much damage they
will cause. Option values arise if delaying additions to the atmospheric GHG concentration
increases the potential welfare gains in the future from responding to new information on the
seriousness of global warming. If damages are linear in atmospheric GHG concentrations, which
may be a reasonable approximation in the absence of threshold effects, changes in the inherited
concentration level do not affect the marginal damage schedule from additional, future
accumulations. In this case, the welfare effects of policy interventions at different time periods
are decoupled (at least from the damage side), and there is no option value. Moreover, to the
extent that current abatement involves (nonrecoverable) sunk investments in emissions-saving

15

technologies, there is an option value from delaying long-lived emissions-saving investments
until more is known about the benefits of emissions reductions (Kolstad 1996a). For these
reasons, theoretical analyses suggest that the prospect of future learning justifies less near-term
abatement (Kolstad 1996b; Fisher and Narain 2003). However, as already noted, the critical
exception to this is when there is a possibility of crossing a catastrophic threshold in atmospheric
concentrations prior to future learning, which is essentially nonreversible given the
nonnegativity constraint on future emissions (Pindyck 2007).
2.2.4. Summary
Most estimates of near-term Pigouvian taxes (or marginal damages) are in the order of
about $5–25 per ton of CO2. This range is in the same ballpark as near-term emissions prices
consistent with least-cost stabilization of atmospheric CO2 concentrations at 550 ppm. These
prices represent a lower bound on appropriate policy stringency. Much higher Pigouvian tax
estimates (that are consistent with 450 ppm, or even more stringent, CO2 stabilization targets) are
implied with a zero rate of pure time preference, though analysts are strongly divided on this
issue. Much higher prices may also be warranted on the grounds of extreme catastrophic risks,
depending on the shape of the climate sensitivity distribution, which is uncertain. Even the
reliability of noncatastrophic damages risks is an open question. But the bottom line is that,
whether moderate or aggressive emissions pricing would be efficient at present largely hinges on
one’s view of discounting, whether radical midcourse corrections in response to learning about
catastrophic risks are feasible, and the prospects for development of last-resort technologies.
3. Policy Design
3.1. Choice and Design of Domestic Emissions Control Instruments
Debate over the choice of domestic emissions control instruments is no longer primarily
about the superiority of market-based approaches over traditional forms of regulation (like
technology mandates), but rather between the two market-based alternatives, emissions taxes and

16

cap-and-trade systems.16 In a world where the emissions externality is the only market distortion
and there is no uncertainty, either instrument could achieve the first-best outcome if the
emissions cap at each date equals the emissions that would result under the Pigouvian tax.
Whether allowances are auctioned or given away for free has distributional consequences but
does not affect efficiency in this setting, so long as firm behavior does not influence their future
allowance allocations. If firms were free to bank and borrow emissions allowances, the policies
would still be equivalent, if the permit trading ratios across different time periods were
equivalent to the ratio of Pigouvian emissions taxes at those dates (Kling and Rubin 1997).
The equivalence between the two instruments potentially breaks down in the presence of
preexisting tax distortions, when distributional impacts are a concern, and when there is
uncertainty. Despite these complications, to a large extent permit systems can be designed to
mimic the effect of a tax, and vice versa, and therefore the choice of instrument per se is less
important than whether the chosen instrument is well designed (Goulder 2009). Aside from
policy stringency, key design features relate to the point and scope of regulation, the allocation
of policy rents, and possible provisions to limit price volatility.
3.1.1. Point and Scope of Regulation
Either a CO2 tax or cap-and-trade system can be imposed upstream where fuels enter the
economy according to a fuel’s carbon content or, as in the European trading program, to
downstream emitters at the point where fuels are combusted.17 For a given total emissions
reduction, the estimated costs of downstream programs out to 2030 are not dramatically larger

16

Market-based instruments equalize marginal abatement costs across all abatement opportunities within the firm,
across heterogeneous firms, across production sectors, and across households and firms by establishing a uniform,
nationwide emissions price (Dales 1968; Kneese and Bower 1968; Baumol and Oates 1971; Montgomery 1972). In
contrast, for example, a requirement that all electric utilities generate a fraction of their power from renewables will
not achieve any of these efficiency conditions. Some opportunities at the firm level (e.g., substituting natural gas and
nuclear power for coal) are not exploited; marginal costs will differ across heterogeneous power companies;
household electricity prices will not reflect the cost of the remaining (unpriced) emissions; and abatement
opportunities outside of the power sector are unexploited.
17

Regulating CO2 emissions at upstream facilities would likely involve fewer than 3,000 entities in the United
States (coal mines or large burning coal facilities, oil refineries, and natural gas processors) while a purely
downstream approach that regulates only large stationary emitters (primarily electricity generators and industrial
sources) would likely involve about 10,000 entities (Hall 2007).
If introduced at the same points in the economy, CO2 taxes and cap-and-trade systems are likely to have
very similar administrative costs. Under cap-and-trade, costs also include those from administering trading markets
as well as the transactions costs of the trades themselves, though these are relatively small (Stavins 1995).

17

than those for comprehensive upstream systems—about 20 percent larger according to Goulder
(2009)—even though downstream programs cover only about half of total U.S. and E.U. CO2
emissions. This is because the huge bulk of low-cost abatement opportunities are (at least
initially) in the power sector. Moreover, the infeasibility of monitoring emissions from vehicles,
home heating fuels, and small-scale industrial boilers in a downstream system can be largely
addressed through midstream measures targeted at refined transportation and heating fuels,
which further narrows the cost discrepancy between upstream and downstream systems.
There are two further differences between upstream and downstream programs. One is
that upstream systems must be combined with a crediting system to encourage development and
downstream adoption of carbon capture and storage technologies at coal plants and industrial
sources. The tax credit should equal the amount of carbon sequestered (measured by continuous
emissions monitoring systems) times the emissions price. The other is that, at least for the United
States where many states retain cost-of-service regulation in the power sector, the opportunity
cost of freely allocated emissions allowances to electric utilities in a downstream system may not
be passed forward into higher generation prices. As a result, incentives for electricity
conservation could be a lot weaker than in comparable upstream programs (where higher fuel
prices can be passed forward), or in downstream programs with full allowance auctioning,
resulting in a significant loss in cost-effectiveness (Burtraw et al. 2001).
Should regulations cover the embodied carbon content in products imported from
countries with no emissions controls? If embodied carbon is not covered, there is a risk of
international emissions leakage. Although very difficult to predict, some estimates suggest that
as much as 15–25 percent of U.S. CO2 reductions could be offset by higher emissions in other
countries if they do not have comparable emission policies (Gupta et al. 2007; Ho et al. 2008).
The problem is most significant for downstream, energy-intensive firms competing in global
markets (e.g., chemicals and plastics, primary metals, petroleum refining), where reduced
production at home may be largely offset by increased production in other countries with higher
emissions intensity than in the United States (Fischer and Fox 2007, 2009). One possible
response is to impose taxes, or permit requirements, according to the embodied carbon of
imported products (and symmetrical rebates for exporters). Another would be to subsidize the
output of leakage-prone industries (according to Fischer and Fox [2009] the financial cost of
offsetting the cost of direct emissions liabilities would be about 6 percent of emissions tax
revenues), or equivalently, grant them output-based allocations of free emissions allowances. But
either approach may run afoul of free trade obligations, and neither addresses leakage due to

18

reductions in global fuel prices, which is responsible for the majority of the overall leakage rate
in some models (Babiker and Rutherford 2005; Ho et al. 2008; Fischer and Fox 2009).
Certain non-CO2 GHGs are easily monitored (e.g., vented methane from underground
coal mines, fluorinated gases used in refrigerants and air conditioners) and could be directly
integrated into a CO2 mitigation program through taxes, or permit trading ratios, reflecting their
relative lifetime warming potential. Other gases are far more difficult to monitor and are
probably better incorporated, insofar as possible, through offset provisions, where the onus falls
on the individual entity to demonstrate valid reductions relative to a credible baseline. For
example, methane from landfills and livestock waste might be collected by using an
impermeable cover, and flared or used in onsite power generation, while nitrous oxide might be
reduced through changes in tilling and fertilizer use (e.g., Shih et al. 2006; Hall 2007).
Finally, CO2 abatement through forest carbon sequestration (e.g., from reducing
deforestation, reforesting abandoned cropland and harvested timberland, modifying harvest
practices to reduce soil disturbance) appears to be relatively cost-effective. According to Stavins
and Richards (2005), in the United States as much as 1.8 billion tons of CO2 a year (almost 30
percent of U.S. fossil fuel CO2 emissions) might be sequestered at a cost of up to about $20 per
ton of CO2. Coupling a domestic mitigation program with offset provisions for forest carbon
sequestration will require measuring regional forest inventories to establish baselines, monitoring
changes in forest use (through remote sensing and ground-level sampling) relative to the
baseline, and inferring the emissions implications of these changes based on sampling of local
tree species and age. However, even if these monitoring challenges can be overcome, further
problems remain. One is that, without an international program covering major forested
countries, domestic reductions can be offset through emissions leakage as reduced domestic
timber production increases world timber prices.18 Another is that sequestered carbon in trees is
not necessarily permanent if trees are later cut down, decay, or burn, requiring assignment of
liability to either the offset buyer or seller for the lost carbon.
3.1.2. Allocation of Policy Rents
In their traditional form, emissions taxes raise revenues for the government, while capand-trade systems create rents for firms receiving allowance allocations for free. However,
18

Even within a country, studies suggest leakages rates could be quite high unless the entire forest sector is included
in the program (e.g., Murray et al. 2004, Sohngen and Brown 2004).

19

through allowance auctions, cap-and-trade systems can generate comparable revenues to a tax,
while rents can be provided under a tax through inframarginal exemptions for emissions or
carbon content. Under either instrument, the fraction of policy rents accruing to the government
rather than private firms, and whether revenues are used for cutting distortionary taxes or other
purposes, can be of considerable importance, for both efficiency and distributional reasons.
Preexisting Tax Distortions and Fiscal Considerations. The implications for emissions
control policies of preexisting tax distortions in factor markets have received considerable
attention in the broader environmental economics literature (e.g., Bovenberg and Goulder 2002),
though these distortions are typically not integrated into energy–climate models. This raises two
issues: to what extent is there a cost savings from policies that raise revenues and use them to
offset distortionary taxes like income and payroll taxes, and to what extent might there be a bias
in estimates of climate policy costs from models that ignore prior tax distortions?
The efficiency gain from recycling revenues in other tax reductions (relative to returning
them lump sum or leaving policy rents in the private sector) is simply the amount of revenue
raised times the marginal excess burden of taxation (i.e., the efficiency loss from an increase in
that tax per extra dollar of revenue raised). Although there is uncertainty over behavioral
responses in factor markets, a typical assumption is that the marginal excess burden of income
taxes is around $0.25 for the United States, or perhaps as high as $0.40 if distortions in the
pattern of spending created by tax preferences (e.g., for employer medical insurance or
homeownership) are taken into account (e.g., Parry and Bento 2000). For modest carbon policies,
the efficiency gain from revenue recycling can be large relative to the direct efficiency cost of
the policy, or Harberger triangle under the marginal abatement cost schedule. For example, if a
$20 tax on U.S. CO2 emissions (currently about 6 billion tons) reduces annual emissions by 10
percent, the Harberger triangle is $6 billion, while the revenue-recycling benefit is around $30–
40 billion per year.
However, this does not necessarily mean that revenue-neutral CO2 taxes, or auctioned
allowance systems, produce a “double dividend” by reducing the costs of the broader tax system
in addition to slowing climate change. There is a counteracting, “tax-interaction” effect (e.g.,
Goulder 1995). Specifically, the (policy-induced) increase in energy prices drives up the general
price level, which reduces real factor returns, and thereby (slightly) reduces factor supply and
efficiency. Most analytical and numerical analyses find that the tax-interaction effect exceeds the
revenue-recycling effect, implying no double dividend, and that abatement costs are actually
higher due to the presence of preexisting tax distortions. A rough rule of thumb from these
models is that the costs of revenue-neutral emissions taxes are about 15 percent greater than the
20

direct cost due to interactions with prior tax distortions, implying the optimal tax is 15 percent
lower than the Pigouvian tax (e.g., Bovenberg and Goulder 2002).19 However, the cost increase
is far more substantial for policies that do not exploit the revenue-recycling effect (i.e., cap-andtrade with free allowance allocation or CO2 taxes with revenues not used to increase economic
efficiency). According to cost mark-up formulas derived in Goulder et al. (1999), the increase
exceeds 100 percent when the emissions reduction is below 30 percent.20
More generally, there are many ways that carbon policy revenues might be used, such as
funding technology programs, climate adaptation projects, deficit reduction, energy efficiency
programs, rebates to electricity consumers, and any number of complex adjustments to the tax
system, though the efficiency implications of these recycling options have received little
attention in the literature. Although in recent years there has been a dramatic shift away from
free to largely auctioned permit systems in actual and proposed carbon policies, in some cases it
is unclear how the revenues will be spent.21 Therefore, unless legislation accompanying carbon
policies specifies offsetting reductions in other distortionary taxes, whether and to what extent
this shift implies a large reduction in the costs of carbon policies is unclear.
Distributional Considerations. The distributional impacts of emissions control policies
are potentially important for both equity and political feasibility.

19

Other CGE models representing a broader range of taxes, tariffs, and terms of trade effects find that a carbon
policy with revenue recycling can have negligible or even positive effects on domestic welfare (e.g., Fischer and
Fox 2007). Given these multiple pre-existing distortions, then, grandfathering can be even more costly.
20

There are some caveats here. One is that the proportionate increase in abatement costs may be much smaller in
other countries if tax wedges in factor markets are smaller than those in the United States, or if labor markets are
dominated by institutional wage setting (e.g., Bosello et al. 2001). Another caveat is that the tax-interaction effect is
weaker if, due to regulated pricing and/or differences in baseload and peak generation technologies, emissions prices
are not fully passed forward into higher electricity prices for households (Bento and Jacobsen 2007; Parry 2005).
Finally, the revenue-recycling effect can dominate the tax-interaction effect when income tax preferences distort the
pattern of spending (in addition to factor markets) and when a disproportionately large share of revenues are used to
cut taxes on capital, as opposed to labor; see Parry and Bento (2000) and Bovenberg and Goulder (1997),
respectively.
21

For example, in the first two phases of the E.U.’s CO2 trading program (2005–2007 and 2008–2012), over 95
percent of the allowances were given away free to existing emissions sources. However, partly in response to the
large windfall profits estimated to have been earned by power companies, the plan is to transition to full allowance
auctions by 2020, with the decision on how to use revenues largely left to the member states (Sijm et al. 2006; CEC
2008). In the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative in the United States, covering power sector CO2 emissions from
ten northeastern and midatlantic states, allowances are auctioned with revenues earmarked for energy efficiency and
other clean technology programs.

21

On equity grounds, the difference between (revenue-neutral) CO2 taxes/auctioned
allowances and freely allocated allowance systems can also be quite striking. Under the latter
policy, permit rents are reflected in higher firm equity values, and therefore (through dividend
and capital gains income) ultimately accrue to shareholders, who are concentrated in upper
income groups. In fact, Dinan and Rogers (2002) estimated that, for a 15 percent reduction in
CO2 emissions, U.S. households in the lowest-income quintile would be worse off on average by
around $500 per year, while households in the top-income quintile reap a net gain of around
$1,000 (i.e., increased stockholder wealth overcompensates this group for higher energy prices).
This inequitable outcome could be avoided under emissions taxes and auctioned allowance
systems if revenues were recycled in income tax reductions, somewhat tilted toward lowerincome groups, to offset the effect of their disproportionately higher budget shares for energy
goods (e.g., Metcalf 2009).
As regards political feasibility, compensation for adversely affected industries may also
be part of the political deal-making needed to first initiate, and then progressively tighten,
emissions controls (e.g., Ellerman 2005). Compensation through free allowance allocation or tax
relief may be required for both formally regulated sectors and other sectors vulnerable to higher
energy prices (e.g., firms competing in global markets with limited ability to absorb higher
energy costs caused by upstream regulation). However, given the tension between providing
industry compensation and the fiscal and (household) equity reasons for raising revenue, it is
important to understand how much compensation would be needed to keep firms whole. At least
for a moderately scaled CO2 permit system, only about 15–20 percent of allowances are needed
to compensate energy-intensive industries, on the whole, for their loss of producer surplus, so the
huge bulk of the allowances could still be auctioned (Bovenberg and Goulder 2001; Smith et al.
2002).22 Although there are reasons for phasing out compensation over time, firms may still be

22

However, Burtraw and Palmer (2008) find that due to heterogeneity in net compliance costs across firms, a much
larger fraction of allowance value would be necessary to fully compensate all individual firms, due to
overcompensation for other firms.

22

amenable to this if they receive excess compensation in the early years of the program (e.g.,
Stavins 2007).23
On the other hand, political feasibility may be influenced as much by desires to maintain
levels of economic activity and employment than just profits. Free allocations to preserve
shareholder value do little to preserve competitiveness and deter leakage, since marginal cost
pressures are unaffected. Updated, output-based allocations lower variable costs, as opposed to
fixed costs, and thereby mitigate competitiveness effects, with benefits passed on to consumers,
rather than just producers (Fischer and Fox 2009). However, such instruments can be counterproductive if applied beyond trade-sensitive energy intensive manufacturing to sectors in which
higher prices are an effective means for signaling conservation (as in electricity or refined
petroleum products). Furthermore, it must be emphasized that the benefits of revenue recycling,
increasing the real wage and lowering the costs of capital, accrue to all sectors in the economy
and improve domestic competitiveness across the board.
3.1.3. Price Volatility
One reason CO2 taxes and cap-and-trade systems may produce different outcomes, even
when comparably designed, stems from uncertainty over future abatement costs reflecting, for
example, uncertainty over baseline emissions in the absence of policy, energy prices,
technological advances, and substitutes for fossil fuels.
Price versus Quantity Instruments in Their Pure Form. If the goal is welfare
maximization, abatement cost uncertainty strongly favors emissions taxes over cap-and-trade
systems in their pure form. This is most easily seen in a static setting where the marginal benefits
from emissions abatement are assumed constant and known. In this case, a Pigouvian emissions
tax automatically equates marginal benefits to marginal abatement costs, regardless of the
position of the marginal abatement cost schedule. In contrast, with emissions capped to equate
marginal benefits with ex ante expected marginal abatement costs, ex post abatement will either

23

One reason for phasing out allowance allocations is that they must initially be based on a firm’s historical
emissions rates (prior to program implementation), which may be viewed as increasingly unfair as firms grow or
contract at different rates, or change their fuel mix, over time. However, any updating of baselines based on firm
performance will likely introduce distortions in firm behavior (Rosendahl 2008). Free allowance allocation may also
retard the exit of inefficient firms from an industry if firms lose their rights to future allocations if they go out of
business.

23

be too high or too low depending on whether the marginal abatement cost schedule is higher or
lower than expected (Weitzman 1974; Roberts and Spence 1976; Yohe 1978).
This basic result carries over to a dynamic context with a sequence of annual (Pigouvian)
taxes or emissions caps, and where environmental damages depend on the accumulated
atmospheric stock of emissions. Here, we have strong reasons to believe that the marginal
benefits from global emissions reductions are essentially constant over a significant range, as
abatement in any one year has minimal impact on the atmospheric stock. In fact, with abatement
cost uncertainty, simulation analyses suggest that discounted welfare gains under (globally
imposed) CO2 taxes might be several times those under (equivalently scaled) permits (e.g., Pizer
2003; Hoel and Karp 2002). A qualification to this is that the welfare advantage of taxes is less
pronounced if abatement cost shocks persist over time (Newell and Pizer 2003) and the
emissions cap can be adjusted in response to those shocks (e.g., Karp and Zhang 2005). While
not explicitly quantified in the literature, we would expect a global emissions tax, growing at
approximately the interest rate, to have a substantial cost advantage over an equivalently scaled
set of annual emissions caps, when the policy objective is least-cost stabilization of global
climate rather than welfare maximization. Unlike the situation under the tax, discounted marginal
abatement costs at different dates diverge under fixed emissions caps and cost uncertainty.
Stabilizing Allowance Prices. Emissions price volatility under cap-and-trade systems can
be contained by allowing firms to bank permits when permit prices (and marginal abatement
costs) are low and borrow permits from future periods when prevailing prices are high. In fact, if
1-for-1 banking and borrowing were completely unlimited and costless, expected allowance
prices would rise at the interest rate, and the system would be largely equivalent to that of an
emissions tax growing at the interest rate (Newell et al. 2005). Alternatively, through
establishing appropriate ratios for trading permits across time, the allowance price trajectory
could mimic the growth in marginal emissions damages, or the Pigouvian tax, over time (e.g.,
Kling and Rubin 1997).
In fact, most existing cap-and-trade systems (e.g., the federal SO2 and NOx programs and
regional CO2 programs in the United States and the E.U.’s CO2 program) now incorporate
banking provisions, though in response to concerns about default risk, borrowing is typically not
permitted or is subject to an interest penalty and/or quantitative limits. Fell et al. (2008) estimate
that banking and borrowing provisions contained in leading U.S. climate proposals obtain about
one-quarter to one-half of the cost savings from emissions taxes over equivalent cap-and-trade
systems without these provisions.

24

An alternative approach is to limit price volatility through a “safety valve,” where the
government sells additional permits at a fixed price to prevent allowance prices from rising
above a ceiling price (e.g., Jacoby and Ellerman 2004). Expected welfare under this policy is
maximized by essentially designing it to mimic a Pigouvian tax—that is, by setting the safety
valve price equal to marginal emissions damages and the emissions cap tight enough so the
safety valve binds nearly all the time (Pizer 2003). Intermediate cases (with higher safety valve
prices and/or less stringent caps) generate intermediate welfare gains between those of the pure
tax and emissions quota. A further alternative is a symmetric safety valve (or price collar), which
combines a price ceiling with a price floor (Burtraw et al. 2009). This approach encourages
additional abatement when allowance prices are low (to offset reduced abatement when
allowance prices are high) and offsets the potentially harmful impacts of the price ceiling on
incentives to invest in emissions-saving technologies.
According to Fell et al. (2008), on an annualized basis the cost savings to the United
States between emissions taxes and fixed emissions quotas is about $4 billion for an emissions
price of around $20 per ton of CO2 (with intermediate cases like safety valves, symmetric safety
valves, and banking and borrowing provisions yielding intermediate cost savings).
One final twist in the comparison of alternative instruments is that the price flexibility
afforded by a cap-and-trade system with (unhindered) allowance borrowing and banking could
actually be advantageous from a social welfare perspective, when there is learning about future
damages, and emissions taxes (or safety valves) are only adjusted at discrete intervals (Murray et
al. 2009).24 Under the former policy, new information about damages will be immediately
reflected in the time path of current and expected future allowance prices, as speculators
anticipate an adjustment of future emissions targets in response to that information. In contrast, it
may take some time before emissions taxes, or price floors and ceilings accompanying cap-andtrade programs, can be adjusted to reflect this new information, leaving emissions prices
suboptimal during the period of policy stickiness.

24

Uncertainty over the marginal benefit schedule, in the absence of learning, would not affect the choice between
emissions taxes and cap-and-trade because, on average, cumulated emissions reductions, and hence expected
environmental benefits, are the same under both instruments (e.g., Stavins 1996). This assumes marginal benefits
and costs are uncorrelated, which is plausible, for the most part, as uncertainty over the former is largely driven by
scientific factors while uncertainty over the latter largely reflects economic factors. The main caveat to this, already
discussed, is the is the possibility that the marginal utility of consumption may vary across different damage states.

25

3.2. Promoting Technology Development and Diffusion
Several studies have demonstrated the central role that the availability and cost of
advanced energy technologies play in determining the future costs of GHG emissions targets
(e.g., Clarke et al. 2006; Edmonds et al. 2000; Gillingham et al. 2008). For example, Clarke et al.
(2006) found that accelerated technology development can reduce discounted global abatement
costs by 50 percent or more. Establishing a price on CO2 emissions is the single most important
policy for encouraging the innovation and adoption of emissions-saving technologies. However,
additional measures to promote applied R&D, more basic research, and technology deployment
may be justified to the extent they address market failures at different stages of the innovation
process.25
3.2.1. R&D Policy
One market failure stems from the inability of private sector inventors or innovators to
fully appropriate spillover benefits to other firms that might copy a new technology, imitate
around the technology if it is under patent, or otherwise use knowledge about the technology to
advance their own research programs (Jaffe et al. 2003; Popp et al. 2009). Numerous empirical
studies suggest that technology spillovers cause the (marginal) social return to (commercial)
R&D to be several times the (marginal) private return.26
The appropriability problem implies that R&D incentives will be suboptimal, even under
Pigouvian emissions pricing. One response would simply be to set emissions prices at a level
higher than warranted by the climate externality. However, this would generate efficiency losses
from excessive short-term abatement and would not differentiate incentives across technologies
that might face very different market impediments. In fact, no single instrument—either
emissions pricing or R&D incentives—can effectively correct both the emissions externality and

25

Fischer (2008) discusses how the extent to which public support for R&D depends on the extent to which the
emissions externality is priced.
26

For example, see Griliches (1992), Mansfield (1985), and Jones and Williams (1998). Although there is a
possibility of excessive competition for a given amount of innovation rent, analogous to the excessive competition
for open-access resources, this problem is generally thought to be dominated by the imperfect appropriability effect
(Griliches 1992). In fact, the problem of suboptimal innovation incentives may be especially severe for GHG-saving
technologies compared with commercial technologies. For example, skepticism over long-term commitments to
emissions pricing, and the desirability of retaining policy discretion to respond to future scientific knowledge,
undermine the durable and substantial incentives needed for encouraging GHG-saving technology investments with
high up-front costs. Nonetheless, over a long horizon, the potential global efficiency gains from correcting the R&D
market failure appear to be smaller than those from correcting the CO2 emissions externality (Parry et al. 2003).

26

the knowledge appropriability problem: using one instrument alone may involve considerably
higher costs than employing two complementary instruments (Fischer and Newell 2008; Goulder
and Schneider 1999).27
Unfortunately, available literature provides limited guidance on the design of
complementary R&D instruments. It is not clear which instrument among, for instance, research
subsidies, strengthened patent rules, or technology prizes, is most efficient, as this depends on
the magnitude of technology spillovers, the scope for monopoly pricing under patents, and
asymmetric information between governments and firms about the expected benefits and costs of
research (e.g., Wright 1983). And just how much or how fast we should be pushing applied R&D
is also unclear, given uncertainty about the likelihood that research will lead to viable
technologies and the potential for short-term crowding out of other socially valuable research
elsewhere in the economy (e.g., Nordhaus 2002; Goulder and Schneider 1999).
3.2.2. Basic Research
Appropriability problems are most severe for more basic research, which is largely
conducted by universities, other nonprofits, and federal labs, mostly through central government
funding. While it is not practical to assess the efficient allocation of funding across individual
programs, Newell (2008, 32) suggests that a doubling of U.S. federal climate mitigation research
spending (currently about $4 billion a year) is consistent with plausible assumptions about the
rate of return on such spending. To avoid crowding out, this could be phased in with a
progressive expansion of the supply of engineering and science college graduates.
3.2.3. Deployment Policy
In principle there are several possibilities for market failures at the technology
deployment stage. For example, through learning-by-doing, early adopters of a new technology
(e.g., a cellulosic ethanol plant) may lower production costs for later adopters (e.g., van Bentham
et al. 2008). But since the potential for these spillovers may vary greatly depending on industry
structure, the maturity of the technology, and so forth, any case for early adoption subsidies

27

Studies that compare R&D incentives under alternative emissions control policies (e.g., Milliman and Prince
1989; Jung et al. 1996; Fischer et al. 2003) find relatively little difference between (equivalently scaled) emissions
taxes and permit systems, so long as the potential for technological innovation is modest during the period for which
instruments are fixed. However, these studies are deterministic; the impact of emissions price volatility under capand-trade systems on reducing R&D incentives has received little empirical attention.

27

needs to be considered on a case-by-case basis. Another possibility is consumer undervaluation
of energy efficiency, which is a key rationale for regulations governing auto fuel economy and
household appliances. However, the consumer valuation hypothesis (in effect, that consumers
excessively discount energy savings from more efficient technologies) has now been debated,
inconclusively, for three decades (e.g., Gillingham et al. 2009). Other market imperfections
might include asymmetric information between project developers and lenders, network effects
in large integrated systems, and incomplete insurance markets for liability associated with
specific technologies.
However, due to a lack of solid empirical evidence, little can be said with confidence
about the magnitude of these market failure possibilities and thus the degree to which they
warrant additional policy interventions. This is an important area for future study, given the
significant degree of current policy interest in energy policy (e.g., subsidies and mandates for
renewable electricity and transport fuels, automobile fuel economy, and energy-efficient lighting
and equipment).
3.3. International Policy Design
Proposed architectures for international emissions control regimes can be loosely
classified into those based on (1) bottom-up approaches that progressively integrate regional
initiatives versus top-down, globally negotiated approaches, and (2) cap-and-trade systems
versus systems of emissions taxes (e.g., Aldy and Stavins 2007). There is disagreement over
which type of architecture is most desirable and most likely to emerge in practice. In the bottomup approach, norms for participation might evolve from small groups of countries launching
regional programs that progressively expand and integrate, or by explicit linking of domestic
cap-and-trade programs (e.g., Carraro 2007; Jaffe and Stavins 2008; Victor 2007). Alternatively,
countries might regularly pledge emissions reductions with periodic reviews by a formal
institution (e.g., Schelling 2007; Pizer 2007). Here we focus on top-down approaches, given that
advocates of rapid climate stabilization tend to favor internationally binding commitments.
The most daunting challenge is designing an architecture that encourages participation
among the world’s largest GHG emitters—the Kyoto framework failed to do this as non–Annex
1 countries, including China, Brazil, South Africa, Mexico, and Indonesia, had no emissions

28

control obligations, while the United States withdrew from the agreement.28 Broad participation
is needed—at least over the longer term and possibly also the near term under a stringent climate
stabilization target (see above)—to promote the cost-effectiveness of any international agreement
and limit concerns about international competitiveness and emissions leakage. Participation of
developing countries through the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), as at present, does not
reduce global emissions—it only lowers the cost to developed countries of meeting their
emissions goals by allowing firms to purchase (lower-cost) emissions reductions in developing
countries on a project-by-project basis. Moreover, there is considerable concern that some CDM
credits may not represent truly additional reductions, due to the difficulty of establishing a
baseline against which reductions can be measured, in which case the CDM serves to increase
global emissions (e.g., Keeler and Thompson 2008; Rosendahl and Strand 2008).
To be successful, each country must perceive an emissions control agreement as
equitable in terms of sharing the burden of global mitigation costs. Usually this means that
industrial countries bear a disproportionately greater cost burden due to their higher per capita
income and greater contribution to historical GHG accumulations.29 In contrast, as noted above,
under a globally cost-effective pricing agreement with no side payments, developed countries
may bear two-thirds or more of gross discounted global abatement costs over the next century.
Negotiations are further hampered, under a Kyoto type of framework, by the need to agree on
emissions quotas for every participating country, and to periodically renegotiate these quotas,
which can be contentious if economies expand at different rates during interim periods.
Frankel (2009) offers a global cap-and-trade proposal that addresses equity through
imposing no cost burden on developing countries in the early years, and subsequently a cost
burden comparable to those previously borne by others at a similar stage of economic
development. Global cost-effectiveness is preserved, and emissions leakage avoided, by
establishing a harmonized emissions price by immediately incorporating all countries into the
global trading system, with low-income countries initially allocated emissions caps equal to their

28

China’s CO2 emissions now exceed those for the United States, while India’s exceed those of Japan (EIA 2008b,
Table A10). In fact, 50 non–Annex 1 countries now have per capita income greater than that of the poorest Annex 1
countries.

29

There is some dispute over historical responsibilities, however. Although industrial countries are responsible for
about 80 percent of historical fossil fuel emissions, when releases from land-use changes are taken into account
Mueller et al. (2007) suggest that poor countries are responsible for 45 percent of the increase in atmospheric CO2
accumulations.

29

projected emissions. Effectively, the pattern of stringent and lax quota allocations among
developed and developing countries creates a system of side payments from developed countries
(who are net permit buyers) which overcompensates developing countries (who are net permit
sellers) for the costs of their (inframarginal) emissions reductions. Furthermore, negotiations are
greatly simplified by the establishment of simple formulas that automatically start reducing
developing country quotas once their per capita income, or per capita emissions, cross certain
thresholds.
A globally harmonized CO2 tax can be designed to essentially replicate this cap-and-trade
system, so there appears to be little reason, in this regard, for preferring one instrument over the
other. Instead of agreeing on a global emissions cap, and how it adjusts over time, countries
would need to agree on a harmonized tax rate, and how this rate is increased over time. And
instead of negotiating over rules relating quota allocations to the evolution of per capita income
(or emissions) over time, countries would need to agree on rules for explicit side payments
related to a country’s per capita income (or emissions).
However, under either the cap-and-trade or tax-based approach, there is an obvious
tension between compensating developing nations and policy stringency. For example, Jacoby et
al. (2008) estimate that under a global policy that stabilizes CO2 concentrations at
(approximately) 450 ppm, compensation for developing countries would entail (explicit or
implicit) side payments by the United States of at least $200 billion in 2020 under different
burden sharing arrangements (or ten times current U.S. development assistance). This appears to
call into question the credibility of such compensation schemes. Even with less than full
compensation, the international transfers are of unprecedented scale. In this regard, granting
these countries initial quota allocations equal to their BAU emissions is unnecessarily high to
entice participation, as it provides roughly twice the compensation needed to cover abatement
costs (in the absence of other distortions, excess compensation is the value of the allowances sold
to other countries less the integral under the marginal abatement cost curve).
As regards verification of policies, one potential problem with an emissions tax is that
countries may undermine its effect through changes in other energy taxes. In principle, countries
might be pressured to adjust their emissions tax rate to offset changes in other energy tax
provisions on the basis of periodic reviews of country tax systems, and progress on emissions
reductions, by an independent agency like the International Monetary Fund. Measuring other
energy tax provisions in terms of their equivalent tax (or subsidy) on CO2 would be contentious,
however, because of opaque systems of tax preferences for energy investments, the possible role
of energy taxes in correcting other externalities like local pollution and road congestion, and the
30

possibility of nontax regulations that further penalize or subsidize energy (e.g., fuel economy and
renewable portfolio standards, energy price regulations). On the other hand, most countries have
established tax ministries that would be able to implement a new tax on (the carbon content of)
fossil fuels. In contrast, many developing countries may lack the capacity to enforce permit
requirements and property rights due to weak environmental agencies and judicial institutions.
Finally, although not incorporated in most energy–climate models, the forest sector
appears to offer some of the least expensive opportunities for cutting back CO2 emissions. For
example, under a 550 ppm CO2 stabilization target, Tavoni et al. (2007) estimate that
unrestricted use of forest sinks can contribute one-third of total abatement by 2050, and thereby
decrease the required price on CO2 emissions by around 40 percent. This is mainly achieved
through avoided deforestation in tropical forests, though according to Tavoni et al. (2007) it
could be sustained in the second half of the century through aforestation and enhanced forest
management. Emissions credits for slowed deforestation were not permitted under the 1997
Kyoto framework, but since then analysts have become somewhat more optimistic about the
feasibility of integrating deforestation into an international emissions control regime, despite the
practical challenges noted above (e.g. DeFries et al. 2006). However, national programs have so
far limited the use of these offsets, and broad participation among major tropical forest regions in
any agreement would be critical to avoid the risk of serious emissions leakage.
3.4. Summary
A revenue-neutral CO2 tax has multiple desirable properties from an efficiency
standpoint. Although allowances can be auctioned, and emissions price volatility contained, why
implement a more elaborate cap-and-trade system if its purpose is to largely mimic the
advantages of a tax? A likely answer is that political factors appear to favor the latter instrument
(e.g., Goulder 2009). Emissions taxes, at least in the United States, appear to be highly
unpopular, while cap-and-trade systems are popular among environmental advocates given their
focus on binding emissions targets. They also have active supporters in the financial sector, who
see cap-and-trade systems as an opportunity. But whichever instrument is chosen, getting the
design details right is critical for cost-effectiveness, especially broad coverage of emissions,
raising and efficiently using revenues, and containing price variability.
While most analysts agree that efficiency would be enhanced by complementing
mitigation policies with additional policies to promote basic and applied research into emissionssaving technologies at government, university, and private institutions, the level of support and
the specific instruments that should be employed are far less clear. And there is little consensus
31

about the case for further policy intervention at the technology deployment stage—this depends
on the specifics of the industries or processes involved and assumptions about consumer
behavior that are in need of further study.
At an international level, the choice between cap-and-trade and emissions taxes is also
nuanced. Either system can be globally cost-effective and accommodate transfers to developing
countries. And while cap-and-trade systems are immune to the possibility of offsetting changes
in the broader energy tax system, they may face larger implementation obstacles in developing
countries. The biggest problem in transitioning away from the CDM toward an integrated global
emissions trading system is the possibility of a large gap between the compensation that might be
demanded by developing countries in exchange for their participation and the amount of
compensation that developed countries are willing to provide—a gap that could be especially
large under rapid atmospheric stabilization targets. Finally, integration of carbon forest
sequestration into international emissions control agreements is potentially important for
containing mitigation costs.
4. Research Priorities
While a great deal has been learned about climate policy design over the last couple of
decades, much work remains to be done to cover many critical gaps in the literature.
Energy–climate models provide some rough bounds on the near-term emissions pricing
trajectories and associated GDP losses implied by climate stabilization scenarios, and the range
of uncertainty may narrow as more is learned about the costs of new technologies and behavioral
responses to emissions pricing. Nonetheless, there are many research priorities in this area, such
as trying to narrow disagreement over BAU emissions assumptions (e.g., through better
population projections), improving the representation of endogenous technological change and
prior policy distortions in the models, quantifying the benefits of major technological
breakthroughs to guide R&D efforts, and further exploring the cost and distributional
implications of deviations from globally efficient emissions pricing.
Some of the biggest challenges facing climate economists are to develop and apply
methodologies for valuing the wide array of market and nonmarket impacts across different
regions, time periods, and scenarios for climate change (ecological, health, and extreme sea level
impacts, in particular, are poorly understood). However, in terms of shedding more light on
whether there is a solid economic basis for aggressive, as opposed to more moderate, near-term
emissions pricing, the most critical issues in need of study appear to be the nature and magnitude

32

of damage risks from extreme warming scenarios and the extent to which the possibility of
future, midcourse corrections and the deployment of last-resort technologies in response to future
learning lowers the near-term emissions price. More research on discounting might also be
valuable, for example, exploring the implications for discounting of tax and other distortions in
international capital markets.
On the design of domestic mitigation schemes, one topic badly in need of study, given
the potentially large revenues from carbon policies, is the efficiency and distributional
implications of the diverse array of options for revenue use. Additional research priorities
include the design of practical, cost-effective provisions to address international emissions
leakage and incorporate incentives for abatement of non-CO2 GHGs and forest carbon
sequestration.
As regards complementary technology policy, research is needed on both the appropriate
level, and the relative efficiency, of alternative instruments to encourage technology
breakthroughs as well as the amount and composition of basic energy R&D. Empirical research
(e.g., on consumer valuation of energy efficiency) is also needed to ascertain the extent of
additional market failures that might justify additional regulations to raise energy efficiency or
promote new technology deployment. From a positive research perspective, further work is also
needed on the interactions, and possible redundancies, among increasingly prevalent climateand energy-related regulatory interventions (e.g., in the transportation sector this would include
interactions between carbon policies, fuel taxes, fuel economy standards, low-carbon fuel
standards, vehicle purchase subsidies, and subsidies and mandates for alternative fuels).
Finally, a critical issue at the international level is the design of rules for accession and
graduated responsibilities for developing countries that are widely perceived as being fair, while
at the same time minimizing deviations from cost-effective emissions pricing and finding an
acceptable balance of transfers from developed to developing countries.

33

References
Adams, R. M., C. Rosenzweig, R. M. Peart, J. T. Ritchie, B. A. McCarl, J. D. Glyer, R. B. Curry,
J. W. Jones, K. J. Boote, and L. H. Allen Jr. 1990. Global Climate Change and US
Agriculture. Nature 345 (6272): pp. 219-24.
Aldy, J.E., and R.N. Stavins (eds.). 2007. Architectures for Agreement: Addressing Global
Climate Change in the Post-Kyoto World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Babiker, Mustafa H., and Thomas F. Rutherford. 2005. The Economic Effects of Border
Measures in Subglobal Climate Agreements. The Energy Journal 26(4): 99–126.
Barrett, Scott. 2008. The Incredible Economics of Geoengineering. Environmental and Resource
Economics 39: 45–54.
Baumol, William J., and Wallace E. Oates. 1971. The Use of Standards and Prices for Protection
of the Environment. Swedish Journal of Economics 73: 42–54.
Bento, Antonio, and Mark Jacobsen. 2007. Ricardian Rents, Environmental Policy, and the
"Double Dividend" Hypothesis. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
53(1): 17–31.
Bosello, Francesco, Carlo Carraro, and Marzio Galeotti. 2001. The Double Dividend Issue:
Modeling Strategies and Empirical Findings. Environment and Development Economics
6(1): 9–45.
Bovenberg, A. Lans, and Lawrence H. Goulder. 1997. Costs of Environmentally Motivated
Taxes in the Presence of Other Taxes: General Equilibrium Analyses. National Tax
Journal 50: 59–88.
Bovenberg, A. Lans, and Lawrence H. Goulder. 2001. Neutralizing the Adverse Industry Impacts
of CO2 Abatement Policies: What Does It Cost? In Behavioral and Distributional Effects
of Environmental Policy, edited by C. Carraro and G. Metcalf. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 45–85.
Bovenberg, A. Lans, and Lawrence H. Goulder. 2002. Environmental Taxation and Regulation.
In Handbook of Public Economics, edited by A. Auerbach and M. Feldstein. New York:
North Holland.Burtraw, Dallas, Karen Palmer, Ranjit Bharvirkar, and Anthony Paul.
2001. The Effect of Allowance Allocation on the Cost of Carbon Emission Trading.
Discussion paper 01-30. Washington, DC: Resources for the Future.

34

Burtraw, D. and Palmer, K. 2008. Compensation Rules for Climate Policy in the Electricity
Sector. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 27(4):819-847.
Burtraw, Dallas, Karen Palmer, and Danny Kahn. 2009. A Symmetric Safety Valve. Discussion
paper 09-06. Washington, DC: Resources for the Future.
Carraro, C. 2007. Incentives and Institutions: A Bottom-Up Approach to Climate Policy. In
Architectures for Agreement: Addressing Global Climate Change in the Post-Kyoto
World, edited by J.E. Aldy and R.N. Stavins. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
161–172.
CEC (Commission of the European Communities). 2008. 20 20 by 2020: Europe's Climate
Change Opportunity. Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament,
the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee, and the Committee of the
Regions.
Clarke, Leon E., James A. Edmonds, Henry Jacoby, Hugh M. Pitcher, John M. Reilly, and
Richard G. Richels. 2007. Scenarios of Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Atmospheric
Concentrations. Washington, DC: U.S. Climate Change Science Program.
Clarke, Leon E., M. Wise, M. Placet, C. Izaurralde, J. Lurz, S. Kim, et al. 2006. Climate Change
Mitigation: An Analysis of Advanced Technology Scenarios. Richland, WA: Pacific
Northwest National Laboratory.
Cline, William R. 2007. Global Warming and Agriculture: Impact Estimates by Country.
Washington, DC: Center for Global Development.
CRA International. 2008. Economic Analysis of the Lieberman–Warner Climate Security Act of
2007 Using CRA's MRN-NEEM Model. Summary of Findings, April 8.
http://216.133.239.2/pdf/040808_crai_presentation.pdf.
Dales, J.H. 1968. Pollution, Property, and Prices. Toronto, Ontario: University of Toronto Press.
DeFries, R., F. Achard, S. Brown, M. Herold, D. Murdiyarso, B. Schlamadinger, and C. de
Souza Jr. 2006. Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Deforestation in Developing
Countries: Considerations for Monitoring and Measuring. Rome: Global Terrestrial
Observing System.
de la Chesnaye, F., and John Weyant (eds.). 2006. Multi-Greenhouse Gas Mitigation and
Climate Policy. The Energy Journal, Special Issue.

35

Dinan, Terry M., and Diane L. Rogers. 2002. Distributional Effects of Carbon Allowance
Trading: How Government Decisions Determine Winners and Losers. National Tax
Journal 55: 199–222.
Eber, Michael, and Alan J. Krupnick. 2009. Valuing Climate Damages. Unpublished manuscript.
Washington, DC: Resources for the Future.
Edmonds, Jae, Leon Clarke, Joshua Lurz, and Marshall Wise. 2008. Stabilizing CO2
Concentrations with Incomplete International Cooperation. Climate Policy 8(4): 355–
376.
Edmonds, Jae, Joseph M. Roop, and Michael J. Scott. 2000. Technology and the Economics of
Climate Change Policy. Arlington, VA: Pew Center on Global Climate Change.
EIA. 2008a. Energy Market and Economic Impacts of S. 2191, the Lieberman–Warner Climate
Security Act of 2007. Report SR/OIAF/2008-01. Washington, DC: Energy Information
Administration, U.S. Department of Energy.
EIA. 2008b. International Energy Outlook 2008. Washington, DC: Energy Information
Administration, U.S. Department of Energy.
Ellerman, A. Denny. 2005. US Experience with Emissions Trading: Lessons for CO2. In Climate
Policy and Emissions Trading After Kyoto, edited by Bernd Hansjugren. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
EPA. 2008. EPA Analysis of the Lieberman–Warner Climate Security Act of 2008 (S. 2191).
Washington, DC: Office of Air Programs, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Fankhauser, Samuel. 1995. Valuing Climate Change: The Economics of the Greenhouse.
London, UK: Earthscan Publications.
Fell, Harrison, Ian A. MacKenzie, and William A. Pizer. 2008. Prices versus Quantities versus
Bankable Quantities. Discussion paper 08-32. Washington, DC: Resources for the Future.
Fischer, Carolyn. 2008. Emissions Pricing, Spillovers, and Public Investment in Environmentally
Friendly Technologies. Energy Economics 30 (2): 487-502.
Fischer, Carolyn, and Alan K. Fox. 2007. Output-Based Allocation of Emissions Permits for
Mitigating Tax and Trade Interactions. Land Economics. Forthcoming.
Fischer, Carolyn, and Alan K. Fox. 2009. Combining Rebates with Carbon Taxes: Optimal
Strategies for Coping with Emissions Leakage and Tax Interactions. Discussion paper 0902. Washington, DC: Resources for the Future.
36

Fischer, Carolyn, and Richard G. Newell. 2008. Environmental and Technology Policies for
Climate Mitigation. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 55(2): 142–
162.
Fischer, Carolyn, Ian W.H. Parry, and William A. Pizer. 2003. Instrument Choice for
Environmental Protection When Technological Innovation is Endogenous. Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 45: 523–545.
Fischlin, A., G.F. Midgley, J. Price, R. Leemans, B. Gopal, C. Turley, M. Rounsevell, P. Dube,
J. Tarazona, and A. Velichko. 2007. Ecosystems, Their Properties, Goods, and Services.
In Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of
Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, edited by M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden,
and C.E. Hanson. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 211–72.
Fisher, Anthony C., and Urvashi Narain. 2003. Global Warming, Endogenous Risk, and
Irreversibility. Environmental and Resource Economics 25: 395–416.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. 2009. An Elaborated Proposal for Global Climate Policy Architecture:
Specific Formulas and Emission Targets for All Countries in All Decades. Discussion
paper. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Project on International Climate Agreements, Harvard
University.
Gillingham, Kenneth T., Richard G. Newell, and William A. Pizer. 2008. Modeling Endogenous
Technological Change for Climate Policy Analysis. Energy Economics 30(6): 2734–
2753.
Gillingham, Kenneth, Richard G. Newell, and Karen Palmer. 2009. Energy Efficiency
Economics and Policy. RFF Discussion Paper 09-13, Resources for the Future,
Washington, DC. Forthcoming in the Annual Review of Resource Economics.
Goulder, Lawrence H. 1995. Environmental Taxation and the “Double Dividend”: A Reader's
Guide. International Tax and Public Finance 2(2): 157–183.
Goulder, Lawrence H. 2009. Carbon Taxes versus Cap-and-Trade. Working paper. Stanford,
CA: Department of Economics, Stanford University.
Goulder, Lawrence H., and Koshy Matthai. 2000. Optimal CO2 Abatement in the Presence of
Induced Technological Change. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
39: 1–38.

37

Goulder, Lawrence H., and Stephen H. Schneider. 1999. Induced Technological Change and the
Attractiveness of CO2 Emissions Abatement Policies. Resource and Energy Economics
21: 211–253.
Goulder, Lawrence H., Ian W.H. Parry, Roberton C. Williams, and Dallas Burtraw. 1999. The
Cost-Effectiveness of Alternative Instruments for Environmental Protection in a SecondBest Setting. Journal of Public Economics 72: 329–360.
Griliches, Zvi. 1992. The Search for R&D Spillovers. Scandinavian Journal of Economics 94
(supplement): S29–S47.
Guiteras, Raymond. 2007. The Impact of Climate Change on Indian Agriculture. Working paper.
Cambridge, MA: Department of Economics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Gupta, S., D.A. Tirpak, N. Burger, J. Gupta, N. Höhne, A.I. Boncheva, G.M. Kanoan, C.
Kolstad, J.A. Kruger, A. Michaelowa, S. Murase, J. Pershing, T. Saijo, and A. Sari. 2007.
Policies, Instruments and Co-operative Arrangements. In Climate Change 2007:
Mitigation. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, edited by B. Metz, O.R. Davidson, P.R.
Bosch, R. Dave, and L.A. Meyer. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Hall, Daniel. 2007. Mandatory Regulation of Nontraditional Greenhouse Gases: Policy Options
for Industrial Process Emissions and Non-CO2 Gases. In Assessing U.S. Climate Policy
Options, edited by Raymond Kopp and William A. Pizer. Washington, DC: Resources for
the Future, 183–188.
Hanemann, Michael. 2008. Climate Change Policy: A View from California. Discussion paper.
Berkeley, CA: Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics, University of
California, Berkeley.
Hansen, James. 2007. Scientific Reticence and Sea Level Rise. Environmental Research Letters
2: 1–6.
Harvey, L.D. Danny, and Huang Zhen. 1995. Evaluation of the Potential Impact of Methane
Clathrate Destabilization on Future Global Warming. Journal of Geophysical Research
100(D2): 2905–2926.
Heal, Geoffrey. 2009. Climate Economics: A Meta-Review and Some Suggestions for Future
Research. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 3(1): 4–21.

38

Ho, Mun, Richard D. Morgenstern, and Jhih-Shyang Shih. 2008. Impact of Carbon Price Policies
on U.S. Industry. Discussion paper 08-37. Washington, DC: Resources for the Future.
Hoel, Michael, and Larry S. Karp. 2002. Taxes Versus Quotas for a Stock Pollutant. Resource
and Energy Economics 24: 367–384.
IPCC. 2007. Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group
I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Jacoby, Henry D., and A. Denny Ellerman. 2004. The Safety Valve and Climate Policy. Energy
Policy 32(4): 481–491.
Jacoby, Henry D., Mustafa H. Babiker, Sergey Paltsev, and John M. Reilly. 2008. Sharing the
Burden of GHG Reductions. Discussion paper. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Project on
International Climate Agreements, Harvard University.
Jaffe, Adam B., Richard G. Newell, and Robert N. Stavins. 2003. Technological Change and the
Environment. In Handbook of Environmental Economics (vol. 1), edited by K.G. Maler
and J.R. Vincent. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier Science, 217–223.
Jaffe, Judson, and Robert N. Stavins. 2008. Linking a U.S. Cap-and-Trade System for
Greenhouse Gas Emissions: Opportunities, Implications, and Challenges. Working paper
08-01. Washington, DC: AEI Center for Regulatory and Market Studies.
Jones, Charles I., and John C. Williams. 1998. Measuring the Social Return to R&D. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 113: 1119–35.
Jung, C., K. Krutilla, and R. Boyd. 1996. Incentives for Advanced Pollution Abatement
Technology at the Industry Level: An Evaluation of Policy Alternatives. Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 30: 95–111.
Karp, Larry S., and Jiangfeng Zhang. 2005. Regulation of Stock Externalities with Correlated
Abatement Costs. Environmental and Resource Economics 32: 273–300.
Keeler, Andrew G., and Alexander Thompson. 2008. Industrialized-Country Mitigation Policy
and Resource Transfers to Developing Countries: Improving and Expanding Greenhouse
Gas Offsets. Discussion paper. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Project on International
Climate Agreements, Belfer Center, Harvard University.
Kling, Catherine L., and Jonathan Rubin. 1997. Bankable Permits for the Control of
Environmental Pollution. Journal of Public Economics 64(1): 101–115.
39

Kneese, Allen V., and Blair T. Bower. 1968. Managing Water Quality: Economics, Technology,
Institutions. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins Press.
Kolstad, Charles D. 1996a. Fundamental Irreversibilities in Stock Externalities. Journal of
Public Economics 60: 221–233.
Kolstad, Charles D. 1996b. Learning and Stock Effects in Environmental Regulation: The Case
of Greenhouse Gas Emissions. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
31: 1–18.
Lind, R. 1982. A Primer on the Major Issues Relating to the Discount Rate for Evaluating
National Energy Options. In Discounting for Time and Risk in Energy Policy, edited by
R. Lind. Washington, DC: Resources for the Future.
Mansfield, Edwin. 1985. How Fast Does New Industrial Technology Leak Out? Journal of
Industrial Economics 34: 217–33.
McGrattan, E., and E.C. Prescott. 2003. Average Debt and Equity Returns: Puzzling? The
American Economic Review 93(2): 392–397.
McMichael, Anthony J., Diarmid Campbell-Lendrum, Sari Kovats, Sally Edwards, Paul
Wilkinson, Theresa Wilson, Robert Nicholls, Simon Hales, Frank Tanser, David Le
Sueur, Michael Schlesinger, and Natasha Andronova. 2004. “Global Climate Change,” in
Comparative Quantification Of Health Risks: Global and Regional Burden of Disease
Attributable to Selected Major Risk Factors. Majid Ezzati, Alan D. Lopez, Anthony
Rodgers and Christopher J. L. Murray eds. Geneva: World Health Organization.
Mendelsohn, Robert and James Neumann. 1999. The Impacts of Climate Change on the
American Economy. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Mendelsohn, Robert, William D. Nordhaus, and D. Shaw. 1994. The Impact of Global Warming
on Agriculture: A Ricardian Analysis. American Economic Review 84(4): 753-71.
Mendelsohn, Robert, A. Dinar, and A. Sanghi. 2001. The Effect of Development on the Climate
Sensitivity of Agriculture. Environment and Development Economics 6(1): 85-101.
Mendelsohn, Robert and L. Williams. 2004. Comparing Forecasts of the Global Impacts of
Climate Change. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change 9: 315-333
Mendelsohn, Robert and L. Williams. 2007. Dynamic Forecasts of the Sectoral Impacts of
Climate Change. In Michael E. Schlesinger et al. (eds)., Human-Induced Climate
Change: An Interdisciplinary Assessment, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, MA.
40

Metcalf, Gilbert E. 2009. Designing a Carbon Tax to Reduce U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions.
Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 3(1): 63–83.
Milliman, S.R., and R. Prince. 1989. Firm Incentives to Promote Technological Change in
Pollution Control. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 17: 247–265.
Montgomery, W. David. 1972. Markets in Licenses and Efficient Pollution Control Programs.
Journal of Economic Theory 5: 395–418.
Mueller, Benito, Niklos Hoehne, and Christian Ellerman, 2007. Differentiating (Historic)
Responsibilities for Climate Change. www.oxfordclimatepolicy.org
Murray, Brian C., Bruce A. McCarl, and Heng-chi Lee. 2004. Estimating Leakage from Forest
Carbon Sequestration Programs. Land Economics 80(1):109-124.
Murray, Brian C., Richard G. Newell, and William A. Pizer. 2009. Balancing Cost and
Emissions Certainty: An Allowance Reserve for Cap-and-Trade. Review of
Environmental Economics and Policy 3(1): 84–103.
Newbold, Stephen C., and Adam Daigneault. 2008. Climate Response Uncertainty and the
Expected Benefits of Greenhouse Gas Emission Reductions. Unpublished manuscript.
Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Newell, Richard G. 2008. A U.S. Innovation Strategy for Climate Change Mitigation.
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Newell, R.G. and W.A. Pizer. 2003. Discounting the distant future: How much do uncertain rates
increase valuations? Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 46(1):52–71.
Newell, Richard G., and William A. Pizer. 2003. Regulating Stock Externalities Under
Uncertainty. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 45: 416–432.
Newell, Richard G., William A. Pizer and Jiangfeng Zhang. 2005. Managing Permit Markets to
Stabilize Prices, Environment and Resource Economics 31(2): 133-157
Ng, Wei-Shiuen and R. Mendelsohn, 2005. The Impact of Sea Level Rise on Singapore.
Environment and Development Economics 10: 201-15.
Nicholls, Robert J., Richard S.J. Tol, and Athanasios T. Vafeidis. 2008. Global Estimates of the
Impact of a Collapse of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet: An Application of FUND. Climatic
Change 91(1–2): 171–191.

41

Nordhaus, William D. 1991. To Slow or Not to Slow: The Economics of the Greenhouse Effect.
Economic Journal 101 (407): 920-37.
Nordhaus, William D. 2002. Modeling Induced Innovation in Climate-Change Policy. In
Technological Change and the Environment, edited by Arnulf Grubler, Nebojsa
Nakicenovic, and William Nordhaus. Washington, DC: Resources for the Future, 182–
209.
Nordhaus, William D. 2007. A Review of the Stern Review on the Economics of Climate
Change. Journal of Economic Literature 45(3): 686–702.
Nordhaus, William D. 2008. A Question of Balance: Weighing the Options on Global Warming
Policies. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Nordhaus, William D., and J. Boyer. 2000. Warming the World: Economic Models of Global
Warming. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Olsthoorn, Alexander A., Peter E. van der Werff, Laurens M. Bouwer, and David Huitema.
2008. Neo-Atlantis: The Netherlands Under a 5-m Sea Level Rise. Climatic Change 9(1–
2): 103–122.
Paltsev, Sergey, John M. Reilly, Henry D. Jacoby, Angelo C. Gurgel, Gilbert E. Metcalf, Andrei
P. Sokolov, and Jennifer F. Holak. 2007. Assessment of U.S. Cap-and-Trade Proposals.
Report No. 146. Cambridge, MA: MIT Joint Program on the Science and Policy of
Global Climate Change.
Parry, Ian W.H. 2005. Fiscal Interactions and the Costs of Pollution Control from Electricity.
RAND Journal of Economics 36: 849–869.
Parry, Ian W.H., and Antonio M. Bento. 2000. Tax Deductions, Environmental Policy, and the
“Double Dividend” Hypothesis. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
39: 67–96.
Parry, Ian W.H., William A. Pizer, and Carolyn Fischer. 2003. How Large Are the Welfare
Gains from Technological Innovation Induced by Environmental Policies? Journal of
Regulatory Economics 23: 237–255.
Pearce, David W. 2005. The Social Cost of Carbon. In Climate Change Policy, edited by Dieter
Helm. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

42

Peck, S.C., and Y.H. Wan. 1996. Analytic Solutions of Simple Greenhouse Gas Emission
Models. In Economics of Atmospheric Pollution, edited by E.C. Van Ierland and K.
Gorka. New York: Springer Verlag, Ch. 6.
Pindyck, Robert S. 2007. Uncertainty in Environmental Economics. Review of Environmental
Economics and Policy: 1: 45–65.
Pindyck, Robert S. 2008. Uncertainty, Extreme Outcomes, and Climate Change Policy. Paper
presented at the National Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute,
Environmental and Energy Economics. July 2008, Cambridge, MA.
Pizer, William A. 2003. Combining Price and Quantity Controls to Mitigate Global Climate
Change. Journal of Public Economics 85: 409–434.
Pizer, William A. 2007. Practical Global Climate Policy. In Architectures for Agreement:
Addressing Global Climate Change in the Post-Kyoto World, edited by J.E. Aldy and
R.N. Stavins. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 280–314.
Popp, David. 2006. Innovation in Climate Policy Models: Implementing Lessons from the
Economics of R&D. Energy Economics 28: 596–609.
Popp, David, Richard G. Newell, and Adam B. Jaffe. 2009. Energy, the Environment, and
Technological Change. NBER Working Paper 14832, Cambridge, MA. Forthcoming in
the Handbook of Economics of Technical Change. North Holland.
Reilly, J. M et al. 2001. Agriculture: The Potential Consequences of Climate Variability and
Change for the United States. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Roberts, M.J., and M. Spence. 1976. Effluent Charges and Licenses Under Uncertainty. Journal
of Public Economics 5(3–4): 193–208.
Rosendahl, Knut Einar. 2008. Incentives and Prices in an Emissions Trading Scheme with
Updating. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 56: 69–82.
Rosendahl, Knut Einar, and Jon Strand. 2008. Simple Model Frameworks for Explaining
Inefficiency of CDM. Unpublished manuscript. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Schelling, Thomas. 2007. Epilogue: Architectures for Agreement. In Architectures for
Agreement: Addressing Global Climate Change in the Post-Kyoto World, edited by J.E.
Aldy and R.N. Stavins. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 343–349.

43

Schlenker, Wolfram, W. Michael Hanemann, and Anthony C. Fisher. 2005. Will U.S.
Agriculture Really Benefit from Global Warming? Accounting for Irrigation in the
Hedonic Approach. American Economic Review 95(1): 395–406.
Shih, Jhih-Shyang, Dallas Burtraw, Karen Palmer, and Juha Siikamäki. 2006. Air Emissions of
Ammonia and Methane from Livestock Operations. Discussion paper 06-11. Washington,
DC: Resources for the Future.
Sijm, J., K. Neuhoff, and Y. Chen. 2006. CO2 Cost Pass-Through and Windfall Profits in the
Power Sector. Climate Policy 6(1): 49–72.
Smith, Anne E., Martin E. Ross, and W. David Montgomery. 2002. Implications of Trading
Implementation Design for Equity-Efficiency Tradeoffs in Carbon Permit Allocations.
Working paper. Washington, DC: Charles River Associates.
Sohngen, Brent and S. Brown. 2004. Measuring Leakage from Carbon Projects in Open
Economies: A Stop Timber Harvesting Project as a Case Study. Canadian Journal of
Forest Research 34: 829-839.
Sohngen, Brent, Robert Mendelsohn, and Roger Sedjo, 2001. A Global Model of Climate
Change Impacts on Timber Markets. Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics 26
(2): 326-43.
Stavins, Robert N. 1995. Transactions Costs and Tradable Permits. Journal of Environmental
Management and Policy 29: 133–148.
Stavins, R.N. 1996. Correlated Uncertainty and Policy Instrument Choice. Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 30: 218–232.
Stavins, R.N. 2007. A U.S. Cap-and-Trade Proposal to Address Global Climate Change.
Discussion paper 2007-13. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Stavins, Robert N., and Kenneth Richards. 2005. The Cost of U.S. Forest-Based Carbon
Sequestration. Report. Arlington, VA: Pew Center on Global Climate Change.
Stern, Nicholas. 2007. The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Sterner, Thomas, and U. Martin Persson. 2008. An Even Sterner Review: Introducing Relative
Prices into the Discounting Debate. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 2(1):
61–76.

44

Tavoni, Massimo, Brent Sohngen, and Valentina Bosetti. 2007. Forestry and the Carbon Market
Response to Stabilize Climate. Energy Policy 35: 5346–5353.
Tol, Richard S. J. 1995. The Damage Costs of Climate Change: Toward More Comprehensive
Calculations. Environmental and Resource Economics, 5(4): 353-74.
Tol, Richard S. J. 2002. Estimates of the Damage Costs of Climate Change. Part 1: Benchmark
Estimates. Environmental and Resource Economics 21(1): 47-73.
Tol, Richard S. J. 2009. The Economic Effects of Climate Change. Journal of Economic
Perspectives. Forthcoming.
van Benthem, Arthur, Kenneth Gillingham, and James Sweeney. 2008. Learning-by-Doing and
the Optimal Solar Policy in California. The Energy Journal 29(3): 131–151.
Victor, David. 2007. Fragmented Carbon Markets and Reluctant Nations: Implications for the
Design of Effective Architectures. In Architectures for Agreement: Addressing Global
Climate Change in the Post-Kyoto World, edited by J.E. Aldy and R.N. Stavins.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 133–160.
Victor, David G. 2008. On the Regulation of GeoEngineering. Oxford Review of Economic
Policy 24(2): 322–336.
Weitzman, M. 1974. Prices vs. Quantities. Review of Economic Studies 41(4): 477–491.
Weitzman, Martin. 1998. Why the Far-Distant Future Should be Discounted at its Lowest
Possible Rate. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 36: 201–208.
Weitzman, Martin, L. 2009a. On Modeling and Interpreting the Economics of Catastrophic
Climate Change. Review of Economics and Statistics 91(1): 1–19.
Weitzman, Martin, L. 2009b. Reactions to the Nordhaus Critique. Discussion paper. Cambridge,
MA: Department of Economics, Harvard University.
Wright, Brian D. 1983. The Economics of Invention Incentives: Patents, Prizes, and Research
Contracts. American Economic Review 73(4): 691–707.
Yohe, Gary W. 1978. Towards a General Comparison of Price Controls and Quantity Controls
Under Uncertainty. The Review of Economic Studies 45(2): 229–38.
Yohe, G., 2000. Assessing the Role of Adaptation in Evaluating Vulnerability to Climate
Change. Climatic Change 46(3): 371-90.

45

Yohe, Gary, and Richard S.J. Tol. 2009. Precaution and a Dismal Theorem: Implications for
Climate Policy and Climate Research. In Risk Management in Commodity Markets,
edited by H. Geman. New York: Wiley Press. Forthcoming.

Tables and Figures

Box 1. Valuation of Noncatastrophic Climate Damages
(for Warming of 2.5oC or Thereabouts Occurring Around 2100)

Agriculture. Estimates of consumer and producer surplus losses in agricultural markets from predicted
changes in regional temperature and precipitation use evidence on crop and climate sensitivity from
laboratory experiments and on the sensitivity of land values or farm performance to climate variables
from regression analyses (e.g., Adams et al. 1990; Reilly et al. 2001; Mendelsohn et al. 1994). Laboratory
studies can control for confounding factors like soil quality and the fertilizing effect of higher CO2
concentrations, while regression analyses account for farm-level adaptation (e.g., changes in crop variety
and planting and harvesting dates). Worldwide agricultural impacts are built up by using extrapolations
from U.S. studies, adjusting for differences in local agricultural composition and climate, and, more
recently, country-specific evidence that captures local factors like adaptive capability. Overall, worldwide
agricultural impacts are relatively modest, anything from a net gain of about 0.1 percent of GDP to a net
loss of about 0.20 percent (Eber and Krupnick 2009). Estimates are not independent, as studies often draw
from the same sources and from each other. Studies show a pattern of gains in high latitude and temperate
regions (like Russia), where current temperatures are below optimum levels for crop growth,
counteracting damages in tropical regions, where current temperatures are already higher than optimal.
For example, studies suggest that agricultural damages for India would be disproportionately large
(Mendelsohn et al. 2001; Guiteras 2007; Cline 2007).
Sea level. The annualized costs of future global sea level rises, due to thermal expansion and melting of
sea ice, have been estimated by combining projections of which coastal regions will be protected with
engineering data on the costs of dikes, sea walls, beach replenishment, etc., as well as losses from
abandoned or degraded property in unprotected areas. Some studies assume efficient behavior by local
policymakers in their choice of which areas to protect and at what time, while others assume all currently
developed areas will be protected (Yohe 2000). Nordhaus (2008) also includes an estimate of property
losses from increased storm intensity due to greater wind speed and waves coming off a higher water
level; whether storms will also become more frequent in future with more humid air is unsettled in the
literature (IPCC 2007). Worldwide impacts have been extrapolated from U.S. evidence, adjusting for the
fraction of local land area in close proximity to the coast, though recently there have been some local
studies that account for the slope and elevation of coastal land and prospective population growth (e.g.,
Ng and Mendelsohn 2005 on Singapore). Overall, estimates are relatively modest; for example, they
amount to 0.32 of world GDP in Nordhaus (2008).
These estimates are based on sea level rises of around 25–60 cm over the next century, as projected by the
IPCC (2007). However, some scientists project that sea levels could increase by several meters by 2100

46

due, in particular, to melting of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (e.g., Hansen 2007). This would have major
impacts on New York, Boston, Miami, London, Tokyo, Bangladesh, the whole of the Netherlands, and so
on, and would completely inundate several small island states. Based on extrapolations from sea level
protection costs in Holland, the global costs of this more extreme sea level rise may be at least an order of
magnitude or more greater than for a moderate sea level rise, especially if coastal protection cannot be
constructed expeditiously (Nicholls et al. 2008; Olsthoorn et al. 2008). Another possibility is that
warming may cause changes in ocean circulation patterns. However, IPCC (2007) projects that warming
from climate change will dominate any cooling effect on Europe from a weaker Gulf Stream.
Other market sectors. Less attention has been paid to other market sectors, though studies suggest their
impacts are relatively minor. With most forests along the increasing part of the inverted-U relation
between forest productivity and temperature, Sohngen et al. (2001) find positive overall impacts from
warming on global timber markets. Most studies find a net loss for the energy sector, as increased costs
for space cooling dominate savings in space heating (e.g., Mendelsohn and Neumann 1999). Impacts on
water availability also tend to be negative, as increased evaporation reduces freshwater supplies, and the
value of these losses is compounded with greater demand for irrigation (Mendelsohn and Williams 2007).
Health. As regards nonmarket effects, there have been some attempts to quantify future health damages.
For example, using statistical evidence on climate and disease, Nordhaus and Boyer (2000) put health
risks from the possible spread of vector-borne diseases like malaria at 0.10 percent of world GDP.
Broader health risks are even more speculative. According to McMichael et al. (2004), there were
166,000 excess deaths worldwide in 2000 from climate change to date. Of these, “only” 16 percent were
from malaria, 46 percent reflected greater malnutrition due to food shortages, another 28 percent reflected
more diarrhea cases as droughts reduced safe drinking water supplies and concentrated contaminants,
while 7 percent were from temperature extremes (most in Southeast Asia). However, malnutrition
projections are extremely sensitive to assumptions about whether, over the next century, currently
vulnerable regions develop, become more integrated into global food markets, and are able to adopt
hardier crops. And increased incidence of water-borne illness may, or may not, be counteracted by future
development and adoption of water purification systems. Monetizing mortality effects is also contentious
as there are very few direct estimates of the value of a statistical life for poor countries.
Ecosystems. All aspects of future climate change are potential stressors to natural systems. Combining
projections of ecosystems at risk from climate change with evidence on the medicinal value of plants and
willingness to pay for species and habitat preservation, Fankhauser (1995) and Tol (1995) put the value of
ecosystem loss in 2100 at 0.21 percent and 0.13 percent of world GDP, respectively. Nordhaus and Boyer
(2000) put the combined risks to natural ecosystems and climate-sensitive human settlements at 0.17
percent of world GDP in 2100, assuming the capital value of vulnerable systems is 5−25 percent of
regional output, and an annual willingness to pay equal to 1 percent of capital value. These estimates are
highly speculative, given that very little is known about ecological impacts and how people value large
scale (as opposed to marginal) ecosystem loss.

47

TABLE 1. LEAST‐COST POLICIES TO STABILIZE GLOBAL CLIMATE

2025

a

CCSP

MERGE MiniCAM

CO2 concentration, ppm
Reference
450 CO2 stabilization

2050

IGSM

MERGE MiniCAM

2100

IGSM

MERGE MiniCAM

IGSM

b

422
412

430
416

436
408

485
434

507
440

544
430

711
426

746
456

875
451

421

427

421

478

490

472

535

562

526

Global CO2 emissions, relative to 2000
Reference
1.27
450 CO2 stabilization
0.92

1.46
0.97

1.70
0.86

1.59
0.53

1.98
0.57

2.59
0.64

3.42
0.24

3.21
0.39

3.45
0.55

1.25

1.35

1.22

1.32

1.56

1.20

0.79

0.71

0.81

1.25
0.79

1.10
0.83

1.40
0.88

1.27
0.42

1.20
0.43

2.00
0.54

1.63
0.02

1.34
0.27

2.93
0.40

1.24

1.05

1.04

1.02

0.98

1.13

0.29

0.37

0.59

550 CO2 stabilization

550 CO2 stabilization
US CO2 emissions, relative to 2000
Reference
450 CO2 stabilization
550 CO2 stabilization
CO2 price, $/tonc
450 CO2 stabilization

41

36

88

157

127

230

166

173

1651

550 CO2 stabilization

3

6

26

10

19

67

127

115

475

% reduction in world GDPd
450 CO2 stabilization

0.8

0.5

2.6

1.8

1.6

5.4

1.4

1.4

16.1

550 CO2 stabilization

0.0

0.0

0.7

0.2

0.2

1.8

0.7

1.0

6.8

e

EMF‐21

lower end median upper end

lower end median upper end

lower end median upper end

Global CO2 emissions, relative to 2000
Reference
1.33
550 CO2 stabilization
1.17

1.48
1.25

1.64
1.41

1.64
1.13

1.88
1.25

2.23
1.41

2.11
0.66

2.93
0.90

3.52
1.25

US CO2 emissions, relative to 2000
Reference
550 CO2 stabilization

1.19
1.05

1.26
1.14

1.38
1.22

1.31
0.76

1.65
1.02

1.97
1.26

0.95
0.36

1.85
0.53

2.29
1.05

3

13

21

12

33

99

31

92

166

0.1

0.1

0.8

0.2

0.6

3.1

0.3

5.1

8.2

c

CO2 price, $/ton

550 CO2 stabilization
% reduction in world GDP
550 CO2 stabilization

d

Notes
Clarke et al. (2007).
b
The models stabilize concentrations of all GHGs, rather than CO2 alone (i.e., the CO2 equivalent concentration level is higher than
a

the CO2 concentration). Moreover, actual CO2 concentrations may exceed the approximate targets of 450 and 550 ppm.
c

In year 2000 dollars or thereabouts.
GDP losses are not broken out by region in the models. Losses include those from pricing CO2 and other GHGs on an equivalent basis.
The figures do not account for the benefits of reduced climate change.
e
de la Chesnaye and Weyant (2006). Results for EMF‐21 are from 16 models for CO2 prices and 12 models for GDP. Lower and upper ends
d

correspond to lower and upper two‐thirds of model results. Atmospheric CO2 concentrations are not reported.

48

Figure 1. Steady State Warming Above Preindustrial Temperatures from Stabilization at
Different GHG Concentrations

Equilibrium temperature increase OC

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
350

550

750

950

1150

GHG Concentration Stabilization Level (ppm CO2 equivalent)

Source: IPCC (2007), Table 10.8.
Note: The black curve indicates the central case projection and the grey curves indicate the 66 percent
confidence interval.

49

Figure 2. Selected Estimates of Contemporaneous World GDP Damages from Global Warming Occurring Around 2100

5
4.0°C

Percent of future world GDP, output weighted

4

3

3.9°C

2

2.5°C

2.5°C
2.5°C

2.5°C

2.5°C

1
4.6–7.1°C

2.5–5.2°C

1.0°C

0
Fankhauser 1995

Mendelsohn &
Williams 2004*

Mendelsohn & Nordhaus 1991** Nordhaus & Boyer Nordhaus 2008** Nordhaus 2008**
Williams 2007*
2000

Stern 2007**

‐1

‐2

‐3
Market

Catastrophic

Non‐market

* Only market damages were estimated in these studies. And the above figure is the midpoint of a range of damage estimates.
** Damage categories are not precisely de-lineated in these studies.

50

Tol 1995

Tol 2002**

