                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                FISCAL POLICY CAN REDUCE UNEMPLOYMENT:
        BUT THERE IS A LESS COSTLY AND MORE EFFECTIVE ALTERNATIVE

                                           Roger E. A. Farmer

                                         Working Paper 15021
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15021


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2009




This paper was prepared for the November 13-14, 2009 meeting of the Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy, "Fiscal Policy in an Era of Unprecedented Budget Deficits." The author gratefully
acknowledges the support of NSF grant 0720839. I wish to thank Katrin Assenmacher-Wesche, Amy
Brown, Larry Christiano, Anton Cheremukhin, Alain Delacroix, Martin Ellison, Peter Howitt, Masanori
Kashiwagi, James Nason, Roberto Perotti, Valery Ramey and Andrew Scott for their comments on
an early version of this paper and on a related paper that influenced the final draft. Thanks also to Leland
E. Farmer for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Roger E. A. Farmer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Fiscal Policy Can Reduce Unemployment: But There is a Less Costly and More Effective
Alternative
Roger E. A. Farmer
NBER Working Paper No. 15021
May 2009, Revised October 2009
JEL No. E2,E24

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper uses a model with a continuum of equilibrium steady state unemployment rates to explore
the effectiveness of fiscal policy. The existence of multiple steady state equilibria is explained by the
presence of search and recruiting costs. I use the model to explain the current financial crisis as a shift
to a high unemployment equilibrium, induced by the self-fulfilling beliefs of market participants about
asset prices. I ask two questions. 1) Can fiscal policy help us out of the crisis? 2) Is there an alternative
to fiscal policy that is less costly and more effective? The answer to both questions is yes.


Roger E. A. Farmer
UC, Los Angeles
Department of Economics
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
rfarmer@econ.ucla.edu
1       Introduction
Following the 2008 …nancial crisis, governments throughout the world in-
creased the size of …scal de…cits in a coordinated attempt to revitalize their
economies. The fact that policy makers resorted to discretionary …scal policy
has spurred renewed interest in theoretical models of its e¤ect, following two
decades in which the academic spotlight has been on new-Keynesian models
of monetary policy.
    For the past twenty …ve years, economists used the Real Business Cycle
Model to understand business cycles.1 They used the new-Keynesian model
to understand monetary policy.2 It has been understood for some time (see
Baxter and King (1993) and Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Fisher (2004)) that
the theoretical e¤ects of …scal policy in the Real Business Cycle model depend
on the way it is …nanced. Research on the e¤ects of …scal policy in new-
Keynesian monetary models is relatively new.
    Davig and Leeper (2009) and Christiano et al (2009) are two recent pa-
pers that have studied …scal policy in the new-Keynesian model. A clear
message from Davig and Leeper’s research is that the potency of …scal policy
in this framework depends on the interaction between …scal and monetary
policy regimes. The same message follows from Christiano et al who use
an insight from Eggersston and Woodford (2002) to show that …scal policy
can be highly e¤ective if monetary policy has reached a zero interest rate
lower bound. These results draw on an important property of new-Keynesian
models: Output can deviate from potential output only if prices are slow to
adjust.
    This paper takes a di¤erent approach. I study the e¤ects of …scal policy
in a model that I call old-Keynesian to di¤erentiate it from new-Keynesian
economics.3 The new-Keynesian model maintains the natural rate hypothe-
    1
      Kydland and Prescott (1982), Long and Plosser (1983).
    2
      Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (1999).
    3
      The old-Keynesian model is developed more fully in Farmer (2006,2008, 2009, 2010).



                                           1
sis. Deviations of output from potential output are temporary and have small
welfare e¤ects. In Farmer (2009) I develop an old-Keynesian model with very
di¤erent properties. This model displays a continuum of steady-state unem-
ployment rates. The natural rate hypothesis does not hold, and deviations
of the unemployment rate from its optimal value may be permanent. These
deviations are associated with large welfare losses that can easily exceed 20%
of steady state consumption. In the old-Keynesian model, sticky prices have
nothing to do with high unemployment and in a monetary version of the
model (Farmer 2010) any in‡ation rate is consistent with any unemployment
rate in the steady state.


2    Explaining the Crisis
An important feature of the …nancial crisis of 2008 was it’s sudden onset.
The value of worldwide assets fell by as much as 40% between September
of 2008 and February of 2009, and although the market has since begun to
recover, the loss of household wealth was substantial. Macroeconomic models
where the equilibrium is uniquely determined by fundamentals cannot easily
explain these events because there is no obvious candidate for the source
of the shock. In contrast, the old-Keynesian model explains the crisis as a
self-ful…lling drop in con…dence in a model with a continuum of steady state
equilibria.
    I will argue in this paper that in 2008, a drop in con…dence caused the
economy to move from a low to a high unemployment equilibrium. I claim
further, that this new equilibrium is sustainable as a steady state. If gov-
ernment does not actively intervene to correct the situation, there will be a
permanent loss of output, proportional to the size of the drop in the stock
market, that could easily amount to 20% of gdp in perpetuity.
    I ask two related questions. First: Can …scal policy help us out of the
crisis? Second: Is there an alternative to …scal policy that is less costly and


                                      2
more e¤ective? My answer to both questions is: Yes.


3    Relationship with Existing Literature
The existence of multiple equilibria in labor search models has been known for
some time. It was suggested by Diamond (1982a, 1984) that this multiplicity
might provide the basis for understanding why government should intervene
to manage aggregate demand. This paper takes Diamond’s argument further.
I build on an observation by Howitt (1986), that search models with costly
search and recruiting contain a continuum of equilibria and I construct a
fully articulated dynamic general equilibrium model with this property that
can be compared with more standard models of a macroeconomy.
    Multiplicities exist in labor search models for two reasons. The …rst has to
do with externalities in the recruiting process of the kind studied by Diamond
(1982b), Mortensen (1984) and Pissarides (1984). The second has to do with
a bilateral monopoly problem. Howitt and McAfee (1987) pointed out that
this second problem leads, not just to a …nite multiplicity of equilibria, but
to the existence of a continuum of steady state unemployment rates.
    The response in the literature to the Howitt-McAfee indeterminacy has
been to argue that the model requires the addition of an additional fun-
damental equation based on preferences, technology and endowments. A
variety of candidates have been proposed. The most common is the Nash
bargaining solution that allocates rents between a …rm and a worker by as-
suming a …xed bargaining weight. This solution was widely perceived to be
problematic after Shimer (2005) showed that it leads to unreasonably large
‡uctuations in unemployment if the model is driven by productivity shocks.
    Following Shimer’s observation, a variety of alternatives have been pro-
posed to the standard Nash bargaining approach including low worker bar-
gaining weight by Hagerdorn and Manovskii (2008), and predetermined wages
by Hall (2005a, 2005b) and Farmer and Hollenhorst (2004). The predeter-


                                       3
mined wage approach was developed further by Hall and Milgrom (forth-
coming), Gertler and Trigari (forthcoming) and Gertler, Sala and Trigari
(forthcoming), who added more complicated dynamic bargaining structures
to explain the observed sluggish movement of wages in data.
    This paper builds on Farmer (2009) where I propose a new approach.
Instead of searching for a fundamental explanation to close an indeterminate
model of the labor market, I close the model with the assumption that …rms
produce as many goods as are demanded. Demand, in turn, depends on
beliefs of market participants about the future value of assets. By embed-
ding the indeterminate labor search market into an asset pricing model, I
show that the unemployment rate can be explained as a demand-constrained
equilibrium where the indeterminacy of steady state equilibria is resolved by
assuming that the beliefs of market participants are self-ful…lling.


4       What’s New in this Paper?
In Farmer (2009), I assumed the existence of a representative agent. As a
consequence, I showed that …scal policy is ine¤ective and cannot be used
to restore full employment. In contrast, population demographics in the
current paper are based on work by Olivier Blanchard (1985) who developed
a tractable model in which …scal policy is e¤ective.4 Blanchard refers to this
as the perpetual youth model since it makes the simplifying assumption that
the probability of death is independent of age.
    The perpetual youth model captures an important idea in a simple way.
Government debt is net wealth to the community because a government
transfer to the current population, …nanced by issuing debt, increases the
wealth of current generations at the expense of future generations who incur
higher taxes to pay the interest on the debt. This property is in contrast to
    4
   Blanchard’s work was extended by Philippe Weil (1989). Their analysis is based on a
paper by Menahem Yaari (1965).



                                          4
that of the popular representative agent model that has become the standard
vehicle for studying business cycles. In that model, government debt is not
net wealth because the single representative agent fully discounts the future
tax burden of current transfers. This property, dubbed Ricardian Equiva-
lence by Robert Barro (1974), has become the benchmark for most recent
macroeconomic models.
    In the model I develop in this paper, the fact that government debt is
net wealth has important consequences for the real interest rate and for
employment. If the government makes a transfer to the current population,
consumers spend more on goods and services because the transfer increases
the net present value of their labor income. In contrast to Walrasian models,
this increase in demand moves the economy to a new equilibrium with less
unemployment and a higher real interest rate.


5     The Environment
In this section I describe the economic environment that underlies my theory
of multiple labor market equilibria. Much of this is a repeat of the model
described in Farmer (2009). Since I take a non-standard approach to the
labor market, I have repeated the main arguments here in some detail. In
addition to developing a model of costly search and recruiting in the labor
market, this section lays out the assumptions I make about the demographic
structure. These assumptions are important and they lay the groundwork
for my calculations of the potency of …scal policy.


5.1    Demographics
I begin with a description of the population structure. I assume there are
many generations alive at the same time. Each generation has a di¤erent
consumption pattern which depends on its date of birth. But although there
is heterogeneity at the individual level, two assumptions make aggregation

                                     5
possible. First, each generation has logarithmic preferences and hence their
consumption is linear in wealth. Second, all agents have the same probability
of death and hence there is a single concept of human wealth.
    These two assumptions allow me to derive a set of equations in aggregate
variables that describes the properties of an equilibrium. These equations are
similar to those of the representative agent economy; but the representative
agent’s Euler equation is replaced by an aggregate consumption equation in
which income and wealth a¤ect steady-state consumption.
    Each household discounts the future with discount factor . It survives
into the subsequent period with probability . Every period a measure
(1    ) of households dies and a measure (1         ) of new households is cre-
ated. These assumptions imply that the population is …xed and, without loss
of generality, I will normalize its size to 1. There is no bequest motive, no
population growth, and no uncertainty, although these features can be added
at the cost of a little extra algebra.


5.2    Preferences
Each household derives utility from consumption. Household expected utility
is de…ned by the function,

                                X
                                1
                  max Jth   =         (    )s      t
                                                       log chs   ;   t   h:   (1)
                                s=t


The superscript h on a variable xht indexes date of birth and the subscripts
t and s are calendar time. Each household has a unit measure of members
each with one unit of time. Hence the time endowment of the household has
measure 1. Time can be spent in market activities Ht , or in leisure 1 Ht .

                                          Ht       1.                         (2)




                                               6
Since leisure yields no utility this constraint will be binding in the social plan-
ning problem described in Section 6 and in the market equilibrium studied
in Section 9.


5.3    Two Technologiest
There are two technologies, one for producing goods from labor and cap-
ital and one for moving workers from home to work. The manufacturing
technology is represented by the constant-returns Cobb-Douglas function

                                 zt = Kt Xt1        :                          (3)

A bar over a variable denotes an economy-wide aggregate. Here, zt is output
in physical units of the produced commodity, Kt is the number of units of
capital allocated to the production of commodities, and Xt is the number
of workers allocated to the task of producing goods. I use the symbols zt ;
ct and gt to represent aggregate production, consumption and government
purchases measured in physical units and I assume that all commodities are
consumed by households or by government,.

                                   zt = ct + gt :                              (4)

   I assume there is a unit measure of households and I use Ht to represent
the aggregate measure of workers who participate in the labor market. In
period t, a measure Lt of workers will be employed and a measure Ut will be
unemployed,
                               Ht = Lt + Ut :                           (5)

Of the workers who are employed, a measure Xt is assigned to producing
goods and Vt to the task of searching for new workers. Hence,

                                  Lt = Xt + Vt :                               (6)


                                         7
   The search technology is represented by the constant returns-to-scale
Cobb-Douglas function
                                   1=2 1=2
                            Lt = Ht Vt :                             (7)

Here, Ht is the measure of workers looking for a job in the economy as a
whole.
    The model is simpli…ed by making the assumption that the entire labor
force is …red and rehired every period.5 This strong assumption allows me
to ignore the dynamics of labor adjustment whilst retaining the important
idea that there is a labor market failure that leads to multiple labor market
equilibria.


6       The Social Planning Optimum
What would a social planner do in this economy? Since households don’t
care about leisure, and since there is no way to transfer resources though
time, the optimal plan will maximize output per period. Putting together
equations (3) through (7) and recognizing that Equation (2) will bind at
the optimum, the reduced form technology faced by a social planner can be
described by the expression,

                                                          1
                             zt = Kt L1t         1   Lt       :                       (8)

Since the economy contains one unit of non-reproducible capital and one unit
of labor, the social planner would choose

                                 Lt = 1=2;       t = 1; :::                           (9)
    5
    Since the …rm begins the period with no workers, and since workers are an essential
input to recruiting, it might be argued that the …rm can never successfully hire a worker.
Since I will be thinking of the time period of the model as a quarter or a year, this
assumption should be seen as a convenient way of representing the equilibrium of a dynamic
process.



                                             8
to maximize welfare.
    Although the solution that maximizes output per period is unique, the
consumption allocation across households is not. There will be many social
welfare functions each of which allocates consumption in di¤erent ways.
    Since unemployment is equal to 50% for every choice of Pareto weights in
the social welfare function, the unemployment rate that maximizes output
per period is a natural choice for a de…nition of the natural rate of unem-
ployment. It di¤ers from that of Friedman (1968) who de…nes the natural
rate to be the equilibrium unemployment rate in an economy with search
frictions. Since there are many such equilibrium unemployment rates, using
my de…nition of an equilibrium, Friedman’s concept is ambiguous.6


7       Markets
This section describes assumptions about markets. I assume that production
is decentralized and there are unit measures of two kinds of …rms. Produc-
tion …rms hire labor in a search market that I will describe further below.
Financial services …rms own capital and government debt and o¤er annuities
contracts to households.


7.1     Production Firms
Let pt , be the price of a commodity, wt be the money wage and let rrt
represent the rental rate. All prices are quoted in dollars, which serves as a
unit of account. Each production …rm solves the problem,

                           max            pt Kt Xt1   wt Lt   rrt Kt ;                (10)
                      fKt ;Lt ;Xt ;Vt g

    6
    See the discussion in Farmer (2009). The fact that the natural rate is so high follows
from the assumption that the entire labor force is rehired in every period. I have retained
this assumption since it simpli…es my exposition. Amy Brown (2010, expected), shows
that when the assumption is replaced with a dynamic model of the labor market, the
optimal employment rate drops to 3% for the same matching function used in this paper.

                                                  9
subject to,
                                     Lt = Xt + Vt ;                                         (11)

                                          Lt = qt Vt :                                      (12)

The typical …rm chooses how much capital to rent, Kt , how many workers
to hire, Lt , and how many of these workers to allocate to the production
department, Xt ; and the recruiting department, Vt . The absence of a bar over
a variable denotes that it is associated with an individual …rm. I consider
symmetric equilibria for which xt = xt for any variable xt by integrating over
the measure of …rms.
    The money price pt ; the money wage wt and the money rental rate rrt are
taken as given. In one-commodity general equilibrium models it is typical to
choose the consumption good as the numeraire and to set the money price
of goods at 1. Here, I choose instead to take labor to be the numeraire and
I set wt = 1.


7.2       Costly Recruiting and the Search Externality
The variable qt that appears in Equation (12) is taken parametrically by each
…rm. It represents the number of additional workers that can be hired by a
single worker allocated to the recruiting department and it is analogous to the
labor market tightness variable in a standard search model.7 Substituting
Equations (11) and (12) into (10) and de…ning

                                      t   = (1        1=qt ) ;                              (13)

one obtains a reduced form expression for pro…t,                    t   of a typical …rm,

                                 t   = Zt        Lt      rrt Kt ;                           (14)
  7
      Pissarides (1990, P. 7).




                                              10
where,
                                       1
                           Zt = p t    t     Kt Lt1       :             (15)

represents the dollar value of output.
   Equation (13) is essential to understanding what is di¤erent about this
model from a Walrasian model with a spot market for labor. It represents
an externality to the …rm but is determined, in equilibrium, by aggregate
labor market conditions. In Section 9 I show that in a demand constrained
equilibrium, t is determined by the equation

                                t   = 1        Lt ;                     (16)

where the bar denotes aggregate labor. The appearance of this term for ag-
gregate employment in the production function of an individual …rm explains
the existence of Pareto ine¢ cient equilibria. Individual …rms do not take
account of their in‡uence on the aggregate labor market when they make
their decision to allocate workers to the recruiting department. The presence
of this externality invalidates the …rst welfare theorem of competitive equi-
librium that provides the conditions under which competitive equilibria are
socially optimal.
    The pro…t maximizing …rms will choose,

                                    Zt = rrt Kt ;                       (17)

and
                                           1
                              Zt =                 Lt :                 (18)
                                      (1       )
Equations (17) and (18) are identical to the …rst order conditions that would
hold in a competitive model with an auction market for labor. Equation (18)
is the …rst order condition for labor. wt does not appear in this equation
because I have chosen wt = 1 as the numeraire.



                                        11
7.3     Financial Service Firms
The second type of …rm in this economy provides …nancial services. Finan-
cial services …rms hold two types of assets: capital and government debt.
They …nance their acquisition of these assets by issuing …nancial contracts
to households. These contracts provide a claim to the assets of the …rms
and, in addition, they insure the households against mortality risk. They are
described below.
    There is free entry into the …nancial services industry. A …nancial services
company may purchases assets and issue liabilities. Consider a company in
period t that purchases Kt+1 units of capital and Bt+1 pure discount bonds,
issued by the government. Let capital sell for price pk;t and let Qts be the
price at date s of a security that promises to pay one dollar at date t. A
special case is a pure discount bond that sells for price Qt+1
                                                             t .
    The …nancial services company sells a contract to the household for price
pH;t . It promises to pay the household one dollar at date t + 1 if and only
if the household survives. How are the prices pk;t , Qt+1t   and pH;t related to
each other?
    The assumption of no riskless arbitrage opportunities implies the follow-
ing two equations,

                             pk;t+1 + rrt+1           1
                                                 =          Rt ;                      (19)
                                   pk;t              Qt+1
                                                      t


                                     pH;t = Qt+1
                                             t :                                      (20)

   The term Rt is the gross real interest rate on government debt.8 Equation
(19) asserts that the return to capital must equal the return to government
debt in an economy with no aggregate risk. Equation (20) asserts that the
household will pay price Qt+1t  for a security that pays one dollar in period
t + 1 contingent on being alive. The factor re‡ects an annuity discount
   8
     Since the wage is chosen as the numeraire and is set equal to one in every period, the
real and the money rates of interest are the same.


                                            12
that is o¤ered by competitive …nancial service …rms as a consequence of the
no arbitrage assumption.


7.4    Government
The government choose how much to spend, Gt , where

                                   Gt = pt gt ;                               (21)

is the dollar value of government purchases, and it levies a proportional tax
  t ; on labor income. Since all labor is inelastically supplied, this tax is non-

distortionary. I abstract from capital taxes although this could easily be
added back into the model.
      Government faces the sequence of constraints,

                       Bt+1
                            = Bt + Gt        t Lt ;     t = s; :::            (22)
                        Rt

together with the no-Ponzi scheme condition

                                 lim QT BT        0:                          (23)
                                T !1


Since the …rst order conditions for labor imply that

                                Lt = (1      ) Zt ;                           (24)

Equation (22) can also be written as follows,

                Bt+1 = Rt (Bt + Gt      (1        )    t Zt ) ;   t = ; :::   (25)

Equations (25) and (23) can be combined to impose the following single




                                       13
in…nite-horizon constraint on government choices,

                   X
                   1                               X
                                                   1
                           Qt Gt + B                         Qt (1         )       t Zt :     (26)
                    t=                              t=


 A feasible government policy is a sequence fB ; t ; Gt g1
                                                         t= that satis…es (26).
I assume that the government picks a feasible policy and I will study how
that policy a¤ects employment and the interest rate in equilibrium.


7.5    Households
Household h solves the problem,

                                     X
                                     1
                   max Jth       =         (     )s     t
                                                            log chs    ;       t       h      (27)
                                     s=t


subject to

              Qs+1 h     h
               s As+1 = As + (1                    s ) Ls       ps chs ;       s = t; :::1;   (28)

                                               Aht = 0:                                       (29)

Since agents have logarithmic preferences, they will choose to consume a
fraction (1    ) of wealth in every period. That is

                         pt ct       Cth = (1                ) Aht + hht ;                    (30)

where human wealth hht is de…ned recursively by the expression,

                           hht = (1            t ) Lt   + Qt+1 h
                                                           t ht+1 :                           (31)

Cth ; Aht and hht are all measured in dollars.




                                                 14
8     The Model Summarized
I am now ready to put together the pieces of a complete general equilibrium
model of the economy. These pieces are represented by …ve equations that
describe the behavior of …ve endogenous variables: Consumption, gdp, the
interest rate, government debt and employment. This section summarizes
each of them.


8.1    Equation 1: Consumption
The aggregate consumption equation (derived in Appendix A) has two com-
pound parameters, ~ and ~ . They are functions of the discount factor and
the survival probability, ,

               ~=1         (1      )
                                       ;    ~=
                                                 (1    ) (1        )
                                                                     :       (32)
                                                  1   (1          )

Using: (1) the assumption that each household consumes a …xed fraction of
wealth and (2) the fact that human wealth is independent of age; one can
derive the following expression,

                    1
            Ct =        Ct+1 + ~ (Zt + pk;t + Bt      (1      )   t Zt ) ;   (33)
                   Rt ~

where Ct is the dollar value of aggregate consumption expenditure.
    In the special case when the population is …xed, ( = 1), the model
collapses to a representative agent economy and Equation (33) reduces to
the consumption Euler equation of the representative household. When
0 <     < 1, aggregate consumption depends not only on expected future
consumption but also on income and wealth with a coe¢ cient ~ .




                                           15
8.2    Equation 2: The Interest Rate
The second equation of the model follows from combining Equation (17) with
(19).
                                    pk;t + Zt
                          Rt 1 =                :                     (34)
                                      pk;t 1
   The left side of this expression is the gross real return to debt held between
periods t 1 and t. The right side is the gross return to buying a unit of
capital for price pk;t 1 at date t 1. Since capital does not depreciate in this
model it can be sold for price pk;t and it earns a rental return of Zt where
proportionality follows from the assumption of a Cobb-Douglas technology.


8.3    Equation 3: The Government Budget Constraint
The third equation is the government budget constraint;

                     Bt+1 = Rt (Bt + Gt       t   (1        ) Zt ) :        (35)

I assume that government chooses a sequence fGt ; Bt g1 and that taxes are
chosen to ensure that

                   X
                   1                    X
                                        1
                          t
                        Q Gt + B             Qt    t   (1       ) Zt :
                   t=                   t=


8.4    Equation 4: The Gdp Accounting Identity
Equation four is the gdp accounting identity,

                                 Zt = Ct + Gt :                             (36)

Zt ; Ct and Gt are all denominated in dollars.




                                       16
8.5     Equation 5: The Aggregate Supply Curve
The …nal equation is the …rst order condition for choice of labor,

                                               1
                                    Zt =           Lt :                              (37)
                                           1

Since the money wage is equal to 1, (labor is the numeraire), this equation
describes the employment Lt needed to meet any level of demand, Zt ; when
Zt is measured in dollars. I call this equation the aggregate supply curve
following Keynes (1936).9


9       A Characterization of Equilibrium
This section presents a de…nition of equilibrium. The de…nition is non-
standard since this is not a Walrasian model and not all markets are cleared
by prices. To distinguish my equilibrium concept from that of a Walrasian
economy, I refer to it as a demand constrained equilibrium: Before de…ning
this concept formally, I begin by de…ning two preliminary concepts; the state
of expectations and …scal policy.10
    The state of expectations is a self-ful…lling sequence of beliefs about future
asset prices. This sequence is expected by agents in the model to occur with
probability one. I will compare di¤erent perfect foresight equilibria in which
this belief is correct. I will also consider shifts from one perfect foresight
equilibrium to another and, when this occurs, I will assume that the shift
    9
      Farmer (2010), discusses the relationship of this model to the concepts of aggregate
demand and supply from The General Theory.
   10
      I have appropriated the term, demand constrained equilibrium, from work by Jean Pas-
cal Benassy (1975), Jacques Dreze (1975) and Edmond Malinvaud (1977) who contributed
to a literature on …xed-price economics that was developed in the 1970’s. Although …xed-
price models with rationing of the kind studied by these authors are sometimes called
demand constrained equilibria; that is not what I mean here. Instead I will use the term
to refer to the equilibrium of a particular kind of competitive search model. The common
heritage of both usages of demand constrained equilibrium is the idea of e¤ective demand
from Keynes’General Theory.


                                           17
was unanticipated, At points like this, the perfect foresight assumption will
be violated.

De…nition 1 (State of Expectations) A state of expectations is a non-
negative sequence fpk;t g1
                         t= with a bound b such that

                                    pk;t < b;

for all t.

   In Farmer (2009) I derive an explicit value for the upper bound b as a
function of the parameters of the model and I show that an equilibrium, of
the kind I de…ne below, exists for all bounded asset price sequences. That
paper did not introduce government policy which I de…ne below.

De…nition 2 (Fiscal Policy) A …scal policy is a non-negative sequence fGt ;
 Bt ; t g1
         t= and an initial debt level B : If there exists a …scal policy such that
the inequality
                    X1                 X 1
                           t
                        Q Gt + B            Qt t (1      ) Zt                 (38)
                     t=                 t=
                                                                             1
is satis…ed, the …scal policy is said to be feasible for price sequence fQt gt= .

    The right side of (38) is the net present value of future taxes which puts an
upper bound on the net present value of the government sector and bounds
feasible expenditure plans. Given these de…nitions, a demand constrained
equilibrium is a set of feasible values of the endogenous variables that is
consistent with the behavioral assumptions of the model and with market
clearing in every period.

De…nition 3 (Demand Constrained Equilibrium) A demand constrained
equilibrium is a state of expectations, fpk;t g1
                                               t= , a feasible …scal policy fB ;
fGt ; Bt+1 ; t gt= g and a sequence of prices and quantities fCt ; Zt ; Rt ; Lt g1
                1
                                                                                 t=
such that Equations (33), (34), (35), (36) and (37) are satis…ed.

                                       18
   With the exception of aggregate supply, Equation (37), these equations
could equally well describe a Walrasian economy. The other four equations
determine sequences of consumption, government expenditure, government
debt and taxes. If one were to assume a Walrasian labor market with inelastic
labor supply, the model would be closed with two equations:

                                         1
                              Zt =            wt Lt :                     (39)
                                     1

                                     Lt = 1:                              (40)

These equations would determine employment and the money wage. The
assumption of an exogenous sequence of asset prices, fpk;t g1t= de…nes the
numeraire in each period.
   In the model of this paper, Equations (39) and (40) are replaced by (41)
and (42),
                                      1
                               Zt =      Lt ;                          (41)
                                    1
                                   wt = 1:                                (42)

Now the numeraire is …xed by the assumption that the money wage equals
1 and the beliefs fpk;t g1
                         t= are beliefs about the value of capital in wage
units. Variations in the value of aggregate demand pick out di¤erent values
of employment and di¤erent demand constrained equilibria.


10     Steady State Equilibria
In this section, I focus on steady state equilibria by assuming that households
form constant sequences of beliefs about the values of asset prices. Gov-
ernment follows a policy in which its budget is balanced and debt remains
constant over time. The assumption that debt remains constant allows me
to describe equilibria in which the economy jumps from one steady state
equilibrium to another in response to a change in the state of expectations.

                                         19
    Imposing the assumption that all variables are time independent, leads
to the following …ve equations that must hold in a steady state equilibrium.

                        1
              C 1             = ~ (pk + B + (1                   (1        )) Z) ;              (43)
                       R~
                                       pk
                                  Z=        (R       1) ;                                       (44)

                                  1          R       1
                         =                               B+G ;                                  (45)
                             (1       )Z         R
                                   Z = C + G;                                                   (46)
                                             1
                                  Z=        L:                              (47)
                                       1
   The state of expectations is captured by the self-ful…lling belief that the
stock market price will equal pk : Taking fpk ; B; Gg as exogenous, this system
describes …ve equations in the …ve unknowns R, Z, C, L and .
   To facilitate the description and analysis of the model, de…ne the decreas-
ing function H, (1 1~ ) ~ ; 1 ! 1; 1 ~ ~ ,

                                                 ~R~
                            H (R) =                              :                              (48)
                                       (1        ~) R~       1

Using this de…nition, one can rearrange Equations (43) – (46) to give the
following three reduced form steady state equations

                                                                              B
    Market Clearing (ME Equation):               Z = H (R) pk +                          + G;   (49)
                                                                              R

                                                                     pk (R     1)
              No Arbitrage (NA Equation):                   Z=                       ;          (50)

                                             1              (R        1)
             Tax Equation:        =                                        B+G :                (51)
                                       (1        )Z              R


                                            20
Equations (49) and (50) can be solved for fR ; Z g, the steady state values
of the real interest rate and GDP as functions of expectations pk and govern-
ment purchases G. Equation (51) de…nes the tax rate on labor income that
sustains this as an equilibrium.

                                 1.048



                                            Social
                                 1.046      Optimum
                                                                    NA Curve (pk*)
      Gross Real Interest Rate




                                 1.044




                                 1.042




                                                      A
                                  1.04


                                                                                     ME Curve
                                                                                     (pk*,B=0,G=0)
                                 1.038




                                 1.036




                                 1.034
                                      0.4     0.6         0.8   1         1.2        1.4     1.6     1.8   2

                                                                         GDP


   Figure 1: The Optimal Solution for Z and R (Baseline Calibration)


    Figure 1 plots Equations (49) and (50) on a diagram. I refer to the
curves on this diagram as the ME (market equilibrium) and NA (no arbitrage)
equations. The Market Equilibrium curve is a downward sloping relationship
between the real interest factor and the steady state dollar value of gdp. It’s
position depends on the relative price of capital, pk , and on government
policy, G and B. The No Arbitrage curve is an upward sloping relationship
between gdp and the real interest factor. The NA curve slopes up because

                                                                    21
the return to government debt must equal the return to capital. When GDP
is higher, the rental rate on capital increases and the return on government
bonds must also increase if households are to be indi¤erent between the two
assets.
    Figure 1 plots the ME and NA curves for a parameterization that I refer
to as the baseline. In this calibration, the discount factor, , is 0:97, the
survival probability, , is 0:98 and labor’s share of gdp to equal 0:66. When
   = 0:98, the expected lifespan of a household is …fty years. Because I assume
that workers are …red every period, the social planner would choose L = 0:5:
This implies Z = 0:76 and a riskless interest rate of 4:0%: I have drawn the
…gure for zero government spending, zero debt and a state of expectations,
pk = 6:4; that supports the social optimum.


11     Analysis of the Crisis
In this section, I use the calibrated model to analyze the e¤ectiveness of
balanced budget …scal policy. I assume that households spontaneously lose
con…dence in the stock market. They collectively come to believe that the
value of capital in all future periods will be lower and will never recover.
Given this permanent self-ful…lling shift in expectations, I ask …rst, What
happens to the interest rate, output, and employment? Second, Can a bal-
anced budget …scal expansion restore full employment?
    I study a balanced budget …scal policy for two reasons. First, it is the
easiest policy to study. Government debt is the only state variable in the
model and, if debt is held …xed, the equilibrium response to a change in
government purchases is an immediate shift from one steady state equilibrium
to another. Second, a balanced budget policy does not involve a transfer of
resources from one generation to another. Debt …nancing would yield higher
welfare to existing generations and less crowding out of current consumption.
Future generations would bear the cost in the form of higher taxes and lower


                                      22
consumption to pay for the pro‡igacy of their ancestors.

                                 1.075




                                  1.07
                                                                           M E (0.8*pk *, G= 0.47   NA (0.8 x pk *)

                                 1.065
                                                         M E (pk *,G= 0)
                                                                                                               NA (pk *)
      Gross Real Interest Rate




                                  1.06




                                 1.055




                                  1.05                                             C


                                 1.045




                                  1.04       M E (0.8 x pk *, G= 0)        B       A



                                 1.035




                                  1.03
                                         0         0.2        0.4          0.6         0.8     1      1.2       1.4        1.6

                                                                                   GDP



Figure 2: The E¤ects of a Crash in Expectations and a Subsequent Fiscal
Expansion


    Figure 2 illustrates the results of a market crash and a subsequent bal-
anced budget intervention. All of the curves on the …gure are drawn for
government debt of zero. Government purchases are …nanced by a propor-
tional tax on labor income. Point A is at the intersection of ME and NA
curves, plotted for beliefs pk = 6:4 that support the social optimum in the
baseline parameterization.11 This is the initial optimal state with zero debt
and zero government purchases.
 11
    I have posted the matlab code used to generate these graphs on my website at
http://farmer.sscnet.ucla.edu.

                                                                                 23
     Point B illustrates the e¤ect on the interest rate and GDP of a drop in
beliefs about the value of capital from pk to 80% of its optimal value. In
2008, the market fell by much more than this. I have kept the analysis here
to a drop of 20% because, for the baseline calibration, it is largest drop for
which …scal policy can be used to permanently restore full employment.
     The e¤ect of a 20% drop in the value of assets is to shift both the ME and
NA curves to the left by 20%. For the baseline calibration in which the initial
level of government debt is zero, GDP falls by 20% and the real interest rate
is left unchanged. A natural question is, Can …scal policy move the economy
back towards the social optimum?
     Point C on Figure 2 represents the e¤ect of a permanent increase in gov-
ernment purchases, …nanced by raising taxes on labor income. To restore full
employment in the baseline calibration, government must increase expendi-
ture from zero to 0:47 wage units (recall that the wage is the numeraire).
This is is equivalent to an increase of 61% of full employment GDP and it
must be paid for by increasing the tax rate on labor income from 0% (the
baseline assumption) to 93%. Since I assume no capital taxes and no out-
standing debt, 93% of labor’s share is equal to 61% of full employment GDP
and is su¢ cient to just keep the government budget balanced. This is a
huge …scal expansion, far larger than anything currently contemplated. It
is also an expansion that the agents in this model would oppose since it is
unambiguously welfare decreasing.
     Consider the e¤ect of the stimulus on consumption which, in the absence
of government debt, is an unambiguous measure of welfare. The initial drop
in the value of the stock market of 20% causes a 20% fall in consumption,
which in the baseline scenario, is initially equal to GDP. In the textbook Key-
nesian model of Samuelson (1955), an increase in government expenditure
raises consumption through a multiplier e¤ect that works through income.
The multiplier is larger than 1. In a model with a single Ricardian house-
hold, a one dollar increase in government expenditure lowers consumption


                                      24
by one dollar. In the Ricardian model the multiplier is zero. The perpetual
youth model lies between these two cases and for the baseline experiment the
balanced budget multiplier is 1=3.
    How would the average household compare its life before and after the
…scal stimulus? Before the stimulus the household receives no bene…t from
government purchases and pays zero income taxes. Because of the stock mar-
ket crash, the household consumes only 80% of the ‡ow of goods it enjoyed
previously and the number of unemployed household members increases by
20%. After the …scal stimulus, the unemployment rate is back to its e¢ cient
rate, and household income has gone up by 20%. The stimulus also raises
the risk free interest rate from 4:0% to 5:0%.
    Is the household happy with the stimulus plan? It is certainly true that
full employment has been restored but, in this model, that is not a good in-
dicator of welfare. I have assumed that government purchases yield no direct
utility to the household. Under this assumption, the household is not happy
because it is earning only 7 cents on every dollar of wage income earned. The
rest goes to the government in the form of additional taxes. Before the …scal
stimulus the household was consuming 80% of full employment GDP. After
the stimulus, it consumes only 39%. The additional 61% of full employment
GDP is spent by government and paid for with a 93% tax on labor income.


12     Robustness to Alternative Calibrations
Table 1 studies the robustness of these results to changes in the baseline
calibration. The model has three parameters, , , and . Table 1 keeps
…xed at 0:34 which implies that labor’s share will equal 2=3, a number that is
standard in the literature and consistent with a century of U.S. data. In the
baseline calibration, I set to 0:98. This implies that every living household
has an expected lifespan of 50 years. This number was chosen to line up
with the average lifespan of an American in 2008 by breaking the population


                                     25
into age deciles and averaging the life expectancy of each decile, weighted by
the number in each group. A rough calculation using this method yields an
average life expectancy of 48 years.
     In representative agent models, the discount factor is chosen to match
an average annual real interest rate of 3%. In the perpetual youth model
there is no longer a one-to-one mapping between           and the interest rate
since uncertain lifetimes cause agents to discount the future at a higher rate.
Table 1 reports results for two di¤erent discount factors, = 1 and = 0:97.
For each of these discount factors I report the value of the …scal multiplier for
four di¤erent assumptions about the value of that correspond to average
life expectancies of 67 years, 50 years, 20 years and 12:5 years.

     Discount       Life   Stim-    Tax  Cons. Mult Opt. New
      Factor      exptcy.  -ulus   Incr. Drop iplier Int.  Int
                            (%   (% wage (% of       Rate Rate
                 (Years) of GDP)   Inc.) GDP)        (%) (%)
       = 0:97       67         67           100     -47     0.30     3.7    4.7
        =1                     36           54      -16     0.56     0.9    1.1
       = 0:97       50         61           93      -41     0.33    4.0     5.0
        =1                     36           54      -16     0.56    1.2     1.5
       = 0:97       20         47           72      -27     0.43     5.8    7.2
        =1                     36           54      -16     0.56     3.0    3.8
       = 0:97      12.5        43           65      -23     0.47     7.7    9.6
        =1                     35           53      -15     0.57     5.0    6.2
      Table 1        E¤ects of a Fiscal Stimulus (Baseline Case in Bold)

     The two rows in bold correspond to the most plausible case of a life-
expectancy of 50 years for two di¤erent values of the discount factor. For a
discount factor of 0:97, the interest rate is 4% and for a discount factor of 1,
it is equal to 1:2%. Notice, from this table, that the multiplier is never larger
than 1 and that for the parameters in the table it varies in a relatively small

                                       26
range between 0:3 and 0:57:
    If one were to choose the discount factor to hit a target interest rate of
3%, the discount factor would lie in the interval [0:97; 1]. It follows that the
most plausible value for the multiplier in this model is somewhere between
0:33, when = 0:97 and 0:56, when = 1. The …rst case would lead to a
steady state interest rate of 4% and the latter would lead to a steady state
interest rate of 1:2%.


13      Are Borrowers Constrained?
If the model I have laid out in this paper is a good characterization of the
real world, then a …scal stimulus is unambiguously welfare decreasing. This
conclusion rests on two assumptions that critics may challenge. First, I have
assumed that credit markets work well and that households can borrow or
lend freely. Second, I have assumed that government purchases yield zero
utility. Both assumptions are open to debate.
     To many readers, the assumption of perfect credit markets will not seem
like a good characterization of the 2008 …nancial crisis. Critics will point to
the fact that in 2009 there was in excess of $900 billion in excess reserves
in the US banking system. But the fact that banks chose not to lend to
borrowers does not mean that they were constrained from doing so. Indeed,
there is considerable evidence that households and …rms chose not to borrow.
     There is another plausible explanation for the 2008 credit crunch. Lenders
and borrowers were equally concerned that the value of physical assets would
fall further. If house prices were to fall further, mortgage defaults would rise.
If the value of the capital stock were to fall further, capital rental rates would
drop and corporate revenue streams would be insu¢ cient to meet …xed loan
obligations. The problem in this scenario is not one of liquidity constraints;
it is one of potential insolvency.
     This is consistent with the view I have advanced in this paper in which


                                       27
credit markets function smoothly, but sometimes a lack of con…dence results
in the self-ful…lling belief that the economy will move to a high unemployment
equilibrium. In order for a borrower and a lender to agree to a lending
contract, both sides of the contract must agree that there is future income to
borrow against. In an insolvency crisis, future income streams dry up and it
is this self-ful…lling belief about the value of assets that is the problem, not
a barrier to lending.


14     What Does Data Say About the Size of
       the Multiplier?
If credit markets function well, consumption should depend on wealth, not on
income. It follows that increased government purchases will crowd out con-
sumption and the multiplier will be less than one. If credit markets function
poorly, then perhaps a …scal expansion can relax credit market constraints
and, in this case, one might construct models in which the multiplier is larger
than one. To resolve this issue, it is natural to look to data for evidence of
the size of the …scal multiplier.
    Unfortunately, there is no consensus on the facts since the empirical evi-
dence is mixed. Using identi…ed vector autoregressions, Blanchard and Per-
otti (2002) and Monacelli and Perotti (2008) …nd that consumption increases
in response to a government expenditure shock. Ramey and Shapiro (1998)
use a narrative approach to identify government expenditure shocks and …nd
that consumption falls. Who should we believe?
    The most recent contribution to this debate is a paper by Valerie Ramey
(2008) which uses historical evidence from articles in Business Week to show
that war-time expenditure shocks are predictable. By taking account of
this narrative data Ramey is able to explain the VAR evidence that the
consumption multiplier is larger than one as an artifact of the timing. If
Ramey is correct, and she makes a persuasive case, the nays have it. An

                                      28
increase in government purchases crowds out private consumption.


15      Is Government Expenditure Wasteful?
I have argued that a stimulus will reduce welfare because it lowers consump-
tion. But suppose that government purchases yield utility. Could it be that
the loss in consumption is dominated by the gain in welfare from increased
government programs? Although that may be true for some parameter val-
ues, it does not seem to be plausible under reasonable assumptions.
    Consider an economy with one unit to allocate and suppose that welfare
is given by the Cobb-Douglas function

                              U =c     (1 + g) ;                         (52)

where
                               c + g = y = 1:                            (53)

    Think of g as deviations from the optimal size of government. This utility
function is ordinally equivalent to an additively separable logarithmic func-
tion with equal weights on consumption and government purchases. For this
utility function, the household would choose g = 0 if had only one unit of
income to allocate and its utility would equal

                              UA = 1      1 = 1:                         (54)

This ordinal representation of utility is useful because we can directly com-
pare utility units with consumption units in the baseline case when g = 0.
    For example, suppose that as a result of a self-ful…lling drop in expecta-
tions, y falls to 0:8 and excess government expenditure remains at 0. In this
case, household utility will drop from U A to U B where

                            U B = 0:8 < U A = 1                          (55)

                                     29
The household in state B has lost 20% of consumption and we can state
directly that it would need to be compensated with 0:2 units of consumption
to return to the same utility that it had in state A.
    Now suppose the household is o¤ered the bargain suggested by the …scal
expansion in the baseline calibration studied in this paper. Starting from
state B with 0:8 units of consumption and 0 units of the government good,
the household can choose to receive an additional 0:61 units of government
goods if it is willing to give up 0:41 units of private consumption goods.
Would it be willing to accept this deal? Call this third situation state C.
Utility in this state is given by

              U C = 0:39    1:61 = 0:63 < U B = 0:8 < U A = 1:           (56)

In other words, restoring full employment with a balanced budget …scal ex-
pansion would cost the household an additional 17% (0:8 0:63) in units of
consumption. This is a policy that the household would vote against if given
the option.


16     Are There Better Alternatives?
The need for …scal policy depends on how e¢ ciently markets allocate re-
sources. The current policy debate is split between economists who advocate
a large …scal stimulus and those who are opposed. Those who favor a …scal
stimulus are, on the whole, believers in the proposition that the free mar-
ket can sometimes deliver grossly ine¢ cient outcomes. Opponents of a …scal
stimulus plan are believers in laissez-faire.
    My position is nonstandard. My model is one in which sometimes the
free market may break down. But it is also one that does not support a
large …scal stimulus as the best solution. My analysis suggests that replacing
private expenditure by government expenditure, without restoring con…dence
in the stock market, can restore full employment. But the cost of this policy

                                     30
is likely to be substantial. Is there a way of restoring full employment without
reducing welfare?
     A …scal stimulus is ine¤ective in my model because it can shift one of
the equilibrium relationships, but not the other. In terms of Figure 2, a
…scal expansion shifts the ME curve to the right but leaves the NA curve
in its depressed state. As a consequence, the interest rate rises and crowds
out private consumption expenditure. I see two possible resolutions to this
problem.
     First, an investment tax credit that changes the trade-o¤ between holding
private capital and government debt would act to shift the NA curve to the
right. In combination with a …scal expansion, this seems to be a promising
avenue to explore.
     Second, an extension of the quantitative easing that has been engaged
in by national central banks throughout the world holds some promise to
directly in‡uence asset markets. An extension of this policy would involve
the direct intervention of central banks in national stock markets by o¤ering
to exchange government debt for private equity at a …xed price.
     Many observers believe that the stock market and housing prices, in the
last decade, were overvalued. But even though the market fell considerably in
2008, in the fall of 2009 households and …rms were still holding substantial
liquid assets. I believe this was because market participants were afraid
that asset prices would fall even further. One way to restore con…dence
to the markets would be to place a ‡oor and a ceiling on the value of the
stock market by making a credible announcement that the central bank will
intervene to keep an index value for stocks within preannounced bounds.
     In the model, a market support policy would be sustained by an an-
nouncement that the price of capital will be supported at pk . The predicted
e¤ect in the model is to increase the value of private wealth. In terms of
Figure 2, it would shift the ME and NA curves to the right. Since debt
and capital are perfect substitutes, a credible announcement would move the


                                      31
price to the announced price as a result of arbitrage by private traders. In
theory, this policy should be credible even if the central bank never buys or
sells an asset. In practice it may require active open market intervention by
the central bank.
    One concern is that interventions of this kind would interfere with the
traditional central bank role of maintaining price stability. But there is no
reason for an intervention of the kind I am suggesting to in‡uence the money
supply. By issuing its own interest bearing securities, the Fed could in prin-
ciple, sterilize the e¤ects of stock market interventions from in‡uencing the
size of the monetary base. By varying the size of the monetary base, the
Fed would in‡uence overnight interest rates to target in‡ation. By varying
the composition of its balance sheet it would in‡uence the value of the stock
market to target unemployment.


17     Conclusion
We are at a time in history when established assumptions about macroeco-
nomics are being questioned. There are many voices in the debate. Most
arguments are informed either by a classical model in which free markets
are assumed to be optimal or by the new-Keynesian model in which market
failure occurs as a consequence of the assumption that prices are sticky. This
paper has presented an alternative.
    In my work, a stock market crash is caused by a self-ful…lling crisis of
con…dence that moves the economy from a low unemployment equilibrium to
a high unemployment equilibrium. Multiple equilibria are possible because of
a well de…ned market failure that follows from costly search and recruiting.
Although this is a model in which the market is not self-correcting, …scal
policy is not an e¤ective way of alleviating the problem. It is my hope that
this paper will prompt more careful quantitative model-based analysis using
the old-Keynesian framework. The model I propose can be estimated or cali-


                                     32
brated to provide quantitative assessments of the likely success of alternative
strategies and it allows one to assess the costs and bene…ts of a …scal stimulus
against the alternatives.




                                      33
A     Appendix: Aggregate Consumption
This appendix derives Equation (33). Let At be the set of agents alive at
date t and At+1 be all agents alive at date t + 1: De…ne aggregate human
wealth as
                                    X
                               ht =     hht ;                        (57)
                                        h2At

Sine all agents have the same human wealth and there is a unit measure of
agents it follows that aggregate human wealth follows the same recursion as
individual human wealth,

                        ht = (1      t ) Lt   + Qt+1
                                                 t ht+1 :                  (58)

Next, consider the budget constraint, Equation (28), which may be aggre-
gated over all agents alive at date t to give the expression,

                              1
                    At+1 =        [At + (1           t ) Lt    Ct ] :      (59)
                             Qt+1
                              t


The term is missing from this expression because the assets of the fraction
(1    ) of agents who die in period t are distributed to the agents who survive.
That is,
                              X
                                    Aht+1 = At+1 :                         (60)
                              h2At

Aggregating the policy function, Equation (30), across agents gives,

                           Ct = (1            ) [ht + At ] :               (61)




                                        34
Rearranging Equation (61), substituting it into (58), and making use of (59)
gives the following expression,

                  Ct
                               At = (1          t ) Lt
             (1            )
                                         Ct+1            1
                           + Qt+1
                              t                              (At + (1          t ) Lt      Ct ) ;   (62)
                                     1                  Qt+1
                                                         t


which can be rearranged to give

         1            (1       )                                                     Qt+1
                                                                                       t Ct+1
    Ct                              = ((1           t ) Lt + At ) (1      )+                  :     (63)
                  1                                                                 (1     )

De…ne the following constants:

                       ~=1          (1          )
                                                    ;    ~=
                                                              (1        ) (1         )
                                                                                       ;            (64)
                                                               1       (1           )
and notice that
                                     At = Bt + (pk;t + rrt ) :

Using the fact that Lt +rrt = Zt from the national income accounting identity,
we have the following intermediate expression,

                                    Lt + At = pk;t + Bt + Zt :                                      (65)

Substituting this into Equation (63) and making use of de…nition (64) and
of the interest factor
                                       1
                                Rt         ;                          (66)
                                      Qt+1
                                       t

yields the result,

                                   Ct+1
                           Ct =         + ~ (Zt + pk;t + Bt              t Lt ) :                   (67)
                                   Rt ~

which is the equation we seek.


                                                        35
References
Barro, R. J. (1974): “Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?,” Journal of
 Political Economy, 82(6), 1095–1117.

Baxter, M., and R. G. King (1993): “Fiscal Policy in General Equilib-
 rium,”American Economic Review, 83(3), 315–334.

Benassy, J. P. (1975): “Neo-Keynesian disequilibrium theory in a mone-
 tary economy,”The Review of Economic Studies, 42, 503–523.

Blanchard, O. J. (1985): “Debts, De…cits, and Finite Horizons,”Journal
 of Political Economy, 93(April), 223–247.

Blanchard, O. J., and R. Perotti (2002): “An Empirical Character-
 ization of the Dynamic E¤ects of Changes in Government Spending and
 Taxes on Output,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 1329–1368.

Brown, A. (2010, expected): “Three Essays in Macroeconomics (Working
 title),”Ph.D. thesis, UCLA.

Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, and J. Fisher (2004): “Fiscal Shocks
 and their Consequences,”Journal of Economic Theory, 115, 89–117.

Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2009): “When is the
 Government Spending Multiplier Large,”NBER Working Papers 15394.

Clarida, R., J. Galí, and M. Gertler (1999): “The Science of Monetary
 Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature,
 37(December), 1661–1707.

Davig, T., and E. Leeper (2009): “Monetary-…scal intertactions and …scal
 stimulus,”NBER Working Paper 15133.

Diamond, P. A. (1982a): “Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equi-
  librium,”Journal of Political Economy, 90, 881–94.

                                  36
        (1982b): “Wage determination and e¢ ciency in search equilibrium,”
  Review of Economic Studies, 49, 217–227.

           (1984): “Money in Search Equilibrium,”Econometrica, 52, 1–20.

Dreze, J. H. (1975): “Existence of an exchange economy with price rigidi-
 ties,”Interntaional Economic Review, 16, 310–320.

Eggersston, G. B., and M. Woodford (2002): “The zero bound on in-
 terest rates and optimal monetary policy,”Brookings Papers on Economic
 Activity, 2, 139–211.

Farmer, R. E. A. (2006): “Old Keynesian Economics,”UCLA mimeo.

       (2008): “Aggregate Demand and Supply,”International Journal of
  Economic Theory, 4(1), 77–94.

           (2009): “Con…dence, Crashes and Animal Spirits,” NBER WP no.
  14846.

          (2010): Expectations, Employment and Prices. Oxford University
  Press, forthcoming, New York.

Farmer, R. E. A., and A. Hollenhorst (2004): “Shooting the Auction-
  eer,”UCLA mimeo.

Friedman, M. (1968): “The Role of Monetary Policy,”American Economic
 Review, 58(March), 1–17.

Gertler, M., L. Sala, and A. Trigari (forthcoming): “An Estimated
 DSGE Model with Unemployment and Staggered Wage Bargaining,”Jour-
 nal of Money Credit and Banking.

Gertler, M., and A. Trigari (forthcoming): “Unemployent Fluctuations
 with Staggered Nash Wage Bargaining,”Journal of Political Economy.


                                     37
Hagedorn, M., and I. Manovskii (2008): “The Cyclical Behavior of
 Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies Revisited,” American Eco-
 nomic Review, 98(4), 1692–1706.

Hall, R. E. (2005a): “Employment E¢ ciency and Sticky Wages: Evidence
 from Flows in the Labor Market,”The Review of Economics and Statistics,
 87(3), 397–407.

Hall, R. E. (2005b): “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage
 Stickiness,”American Economic Review, 95(1), 50–65.

Hall, R. E., and P. Milgrom (forthcoming): “The Limited In‡uence of
 Unemployment on the Wage Bargain,”American Economic Review.

Howitt, P. (1986): “The Keynesain Recovery,” The Canadian Journal of
 Economics, 19(4), 626–641.

Howitt, P., and R. P. McAfee (1987): “Costly Search and Recruiting,”
 International Economic Review, 28(1), 89–107.

Keynes, J. M. (1936): The General Theory of Employment, Interest and
 Money. MacMillan and Co.

Kydland, F. E., and E. C. Prescott (1982): “Time to Build and Ag-
 gregate Fluctuations,”Econometrica, 50, 1345–1370.

Long, J. B., and C. I. Plosser (1983): “Real Business Cycles,” Journal
 of Political Economy, 91(1), 39–69.

Malinvaud, E. (1977): The theory of unemployment reconsidered. Basil
 Blackwell, Oxford.

Monacelli, T., and R. Perotti (2008): “Fiscal Policy, Wealth E¤ects
 and Markups,”NBER Working Paper 14584.



                                  38
Mortensen, D. T. (1984): “The Matching Process as a Non-Cooperative
 Bargaining Games,” in The Economics of Information and Uncertainty,
 ed. by J. J. McCall, pp. 233–254, Chicago. University of Chicago Press for
 N.B.E.R.

Pissarides, C. (1984): “Search Intensity, Job Advertising and E¢ ciency,”
  Jouurnal of Labor Economics, 2, 128–143.

          (1990): Equilibrium Unemployment Theory. Basil Blackwell, Ox-
  ford.

Ramey, V. A. (2008): “Identifying government spending shocks; it’s all in
 the timing,”Mimeo, University of California San Diego.

Ramey, V. A., and M. Shapiro (1998): “Costly Capital Reallocation and
 the E¤ects of Government Spending,” Carnegie Rochester Conference on
 Public Policy, 48, 145–194.

Samuelson, P. A. (1955): Economics: An Introductory Analysis (3rd Ed.).
  McGraw Hill.

Shimer, R. (2005): “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment
  and Vacancies,”American Economic Review, 95(1), 25–49.

Weil, P. (1989): “Overlapping Generations of In…nitely Lived Agents,”
 Journal of Public Economics, 38, 183–198.

Yaari, M. E. (1965): “Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory
 of the Consumer,”Review of Economic Studies, 32, 137–150.




                                    39
