NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RECENT WORK ON BUSINESS CYCLES IN
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE:
REVIEW OF THEORIES AND EVIDENCE

Victor

Zarnowitz

Working Paper No. 1503

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 19814

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper # 1503
November 19814

Recent Work on Business Cycles in Historical Perspective:
Review of Theories and Evidence

ABSTRACT

This survey outlines the evolution of thought leading to the recent
developments in the study of business cycles. The subject is almost
coextensive with short-term inacrodynamics and has a large interface with
economics of growth, money, inflation, and expectations. The coverage is
+-)y.Pry' kg4h
ii4 c,1 ,i4 4 tT

v4r 4

The paper first summarizes the "stylized facts" that ought to be
explained by the theory. This part discusses the varying dimensions of
business cycles; their timing, amplitude, and diffusion features; some
international aspects; and recent changes.
The next part is a review of the literature on "self-sustaining"
It notes some of the older theories and proceeds to more recent
models driven by changes in investment, credit, and price-cost-profit
relations. These models are mainly endogenous and deterministic.
cycles.

Exogenous factors and stochastic elements gain importance in the part on
the modern theories of cyclical response to monetary and real disturbances.
The early monetarist interpretations of the cycle are followed by the newer
equilibrium models with price misperceptions and intertemporal substitution of
labor.
Monetary shocks continue to be used but the emphasis shifts from
nominal demand changes and lagged price adjustments to informational lags and
supply reactions.
Various problems arise, revealed by intensive testing and
criticisms.
This prompts new attempts to explain the persistence of' cyclical
movements and the roles of uncertainty and financial instability, real shocks,
and gradual price adjustments.
One conclusion is that business cycle research will profit most from (a)
the updating of findings from the historical and statistical studies, and (b)
using the results to eliminate inconsistencies with the evidence and to move
toward a realistic synthesis of the surviving elements of the extant theories.

Victor Zarnowitz
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637

I.

II.

III.

IV.

Introduction

.1

Stylized Facts
1. The Overall Aspects and Varying Dimensions of Business Cycles
2. Main Features of Cyclical Behavior
Some International Aspects and Recent Developments
3.

.3

Theories of Self-Sustaining Cycles
1.
Disparities and Common Elements in Some Early Theories
2.
Uncertain Expectations, Unstable Investment, and Long Depression
Cycles
Wage
and Price Dynamics in Business Cycles
3.
14
Disequilibrium Models with Capital Accumulation
On Causes and Consequences of Fluctuations in Inventory
5.
Investment
6. The Role of Changes in Prices, Costs, and Profits

17

8
12

Theories
1.

2.
3.

L.
5
6.
7.

V.

3

of Cyclical Response to Monetary and Real Disturbances
Exogenous Factors, Stochastic Elements, and Types of Theory
The Monetarist Interpretation of Business Fluctuations
Price Misperceptions and Intertemporal Substitution of Labor
Cyclical Persistence and Extensions of the Equilibrium Models.
Rationality, Knowledge, and Uncertainty
Models of Financial Instability
Demand and Supply Shocks and Responses:
A Search for New
Concepts

Conclusion:

The Needed Synthesis

17

21

2
28
33
35

38
38
1t3

49
.

. .

56
61

68
73

82

Recent Work on Business Cycles in Historical Perspective:
Review of Theories and Evidence

Victor Zarnowitz
University of Chicago and National Bureau of Economic Research

I.

Introduction

Interest in business cycles is itself subject to a wave—like movement,
waxing during and after periods of turbulence and depression, waning in
periods of substantial stability and continuing growth.1

At times, confidence

in government institutions and actions persuaded many that cyclical instability had ceased to be a serious problem.

Thus in 1922—29, the early heyday

of the Federal Reserve System, monetary policies were expected to help maintain prosperity.

In the 1960s, the late heyday of Keynesian economics, fiscal

fine tuning evoked similar hopes.

The present is another time of disillusionment--now extending to both
types of stabilization policy.

The sequence of serious worldwide recessions

in the last decade soon refuted the perennially attractive idea that business
cycles had become obsolete.

Beyond that, the credibility of both Keynesian

and monetarist explanations has diminished.

Once again, the apparent failure

of old solutions prompts the profession to pay more attention to the continued
existence Of business cycles.

The rediscovery of an important subject is always welcome, even if long

1This is well illustrated in the early literature, which focused on the
episodes of commercial crises, but it is also reflected in the timing of
later, classical studies of the nature and causes of business cycles at
large.
There is little doubt about the impetus provided in this context by
the major depressions of the late 1830s, 1870s, 1890s, 1907-08, 1920-21, and
most strikingly the 193Os.

-2-

overdue.

However, much of the recent work has neglected the long history of

both the phenomena of major economic fluctuations and their interpretations,

con-

centrating instead on contemporary theoretical and policy controversies, mainly in
the United States.

An overview of selected literature will attempt to demonstrate

that this myopia is costly and needs to be corrected.

The study of business cycles is almost coextensive with short—term macrody—
namics and it has a large interface with economics of growth, money, inflation,

and expectations. The literature is huge, its level of difficulty is in general
high.

This survey attempts to provide a historical background and outline the

evolution of thought leading to the recent developments in the theory and related
evidence.

The coverage is extensive, yet of necessity much is left out.

This

includes theories that are largely concerned with unemployment and inflation, much
less with business cycles directly.2
In particular, no attempt can be made here to discuss in any detail the statistical. and historical work on the observed regularities and idiosyncrasies of

business cycles and their possible long-term changes.
is rich and important:

it deserves a separate review.

This empirical literature
After all, it is the "sty-

lized facts" which it provides that ought to be explained by the theory.
such facts are summarized in the next part (II), but with a minimum of'

The main

references

and commentary.

Part III discusses the main elements of older theories, before and after the

Great Depression, and proceeds to more recent models driven by changes in
investment, credit, and price-cost—profit relations.
models are primarily endogenous and deterministic.

Most of these theories and
Exogenous factors and

2Two sets of writings should be mentioned in this context, namely the theories of the new radical economists and those embodied in some of the recent "dis—
equilibrium" models. For summaries or surveys, see Sherman, 1976, Malinvaud,
1977, and Drazen, 1980.
Also, the early mathematical models and the more recent theories of the "political business cycle", receive little attention in the present paper; monographs
surveying this literature are Rau,
197)4; Gapinski, 1982; and Muilineux, 198)4.

-3—

stochastic

elements are introduced early in Part IV.

The sections that follow deal first with the monetarist interpretation of
business cyc'ies, then with the newer equilibrium models with price

misperceptions and intertemporal substitution.
"adaptive" to "rational" expectations.

The route leads generally from

The approach is generally monetarist

in the sense of relying on monetary shocks, but the emphasis shifts from
nominal demand changes and lagged price adjustments to informational lags and
supply reactions.

Various problems and complications arise, revealed in large

part by intensive testing and criticism.

This leads to new attempts to

explain the persistence of cyclicaLmovemerits, the role of uncertainty and
financial instability, real shocks, gradual price adjustments, etc.
Conclusions are drawn in the last section (V), which stresses the need for a
realistic synthesis.

II.

1.

Stylized Facts

The Overall Aspects and Varying Dimensions of Business Cycles
The term "business cycle" is a misnomer insofar as no unique period—

icities are involved, but its wide acceptance reflects the recognition of
important regularities of long standing.

The observed fluctuations vary

greatly in amplitude and scope as well as duration, yet they also have much in
common.

First, they are national, indeed often international in scope, show-

ing up in a multitude of processes, not just in total output, employment and
unemployment.

Second, they are persistent--lasting as a rule several years,

i.e., long enough to permit the development of cumulative movements in the
downward as well as upward direction.

This is well established by the his-

torical chronologies of business cycles in the United States, Great Britain,
France and Germany, a product of a long series of studies by the National

_14_

Bureau of Economic Research (Burns and Mitchell, 19146; Moore, 1961, 1983;
Moore and Zarnowitz, 19814).

For all their differences, business expansions

and contract-ions consist of patterns of recurrent, serially correlated and

cross—correlated movements in many economic (and even other) activities.

Seasonal movements, which are periodic but often variable in size and
pattern, may obscure the cyclical developments to an observer of current
changes in individual time series.

The same applies to short erratic

movements which are similarly ubiquitous.

But looking back across monthly or

quarterly data representing many different variables, business cycles can be
clearly distinguished from the other fluctuations in that they are as a rule
larger, longer, and more widely diffused.

They dominate changes in the econ-

omy over spans of several years, in contrast to the seasonal and other variations which spend themselves over spans of a

year or less.

They reflect, and

interact with, long growth trends which dominate developments across decades.

Peacetime expansions in the United States averaged about three years in
the last half-century, two years in the earlier periods containing ten cycles
each (Table 1).

Each of the wartime expansions was much longer.

Contractions

averaged close to one year since 1933, about twice as long in the earlier
periods.

Thus a definite shift toward longer and more variable expansions and

shorter and more uniform contractions is evident since the "great contraction"
of the early 1930s.

Before 1933, recessions were on the average only a few

months shorter than expansions; since then, expansions lasted more than three
times as long as recessions.

The mean duration of full peacetime cycles re-

mained approximately stable at four years.

The individual phase and cycle durations show considerable variability
over time, as shown by the standard deviations in Table 1.

However, when the

relatively rare outliers are discounted, fairly clear central tendencies
emerge.

Thus the ranges of

1

to 3

years,

1

to 2 years, and 2

to 5 years

-5—

account for three fourths or more of the peacetime expansions, contractions,
and full cycles in the United States, respectively.

Table 1
Average Duration of Business Cycles in the United States,

Number of
Business
Cycles

Period
(Years,

(T to T)

Covered

18514—1897

1897—1933
1933—1982
1933-1982, excl. wars

18514-1982
l85141982, excl. wars

18514_

1982

Average Measures of Phase and Cycles Durations
Contraction Full Cycle (T to T)
Expansion
Mean

S.D.

Mean

S.D.

Mean

S.D.

(3)

(14)

(5)

(6)

(7)
214

(1)

(2)

10
10
10

27
23

9
10

214

17
10

51

20

149

11

3

60

10
26

7

37

27
15

11

14

148

114

30
25

33
27

20

18

12

51

22

11

19

13

146

16

143

All means and standard deviations (S.D.) are rounded to full months.
Expansions are measured from troughs (T) to peaks (P), contractions from P to T, the
full cycles from T to T. Figures in line 14 exclude the expansions during World War
II, the Korean War, and the Vietnam War and the immediately following contractions.
Figures in line 6 exclude also the expansions during the Civil War and World War I
For references and the underlying
and the immediately following contractions.
detail, see Moore and Zarnowitz, 19814.
Note:

The amplitudes of cyclical expansions vary as much as their durations,
with which they tend to be well correlated.

The rates of change (velocities) and

diffusion show less variability across the cycles.

Table 2 provides some evidence

in support of these generalizations.

In the 20 years between the two world wars three major depressions occurred,
including the uniquely deep one of 1929-33.

Since then no general declines of corn—

parable magnitude happened, notwithstanding the gravity of recent conditions of
rising and high unemployment in some countries such as the United Kingdom.
whole recessions became not only much shorter but also shallower and
fused.

Table 3,

On the

less dif-

using a sampling of measures for the U.S. business contractions of

1920-82, illustrates the contrasting dimensions of major depressions vs. other
declines and the much smaller but consistent differences between
"mild" recessions.

the "severe" and

—6-

Table

2

Selected Characteristics of Seven Expansions,
United States, 1949—1982

Line

Real
1

Largest
Value

Statistic

Smallest
Value

(1)

(2)

106

12

Mean
(3)

Standard
Deviation

(4)

GNP:

Duration (months)

49.2

2

Total increases (%)

3

Rate of increase (% per year)

'46

30

21.1

14.7

6.4

3.5

-5.3

-0.6

—2.7

1.5

73

89

9

1.0

Unemployment rate:
4

Total decline (%

points)

Nonfarm employment:
5

Note:

Percent of industries expanding

100

The entries in column
refer to the expansion of 2/1961-12/1969 (lines 1-3)
and 10/191497/1953 (lines 14 and 5). The entries in column 2 refer to the expansion of
7/1980—7/1981. The entries in columns 3 and 14 cover all seven expansions.
Line 5
shows the maximum percentage of nonagricultural industries with rising employment,
based on changes over six month spans. For sources and detail, see Moore and
Zarnowitz, 1984, Table 6.
1

—7—

Table 3

Average Duration, Depth, and Diffusion of Thirteen Contractions,
United States 1920—1982
Great
Depression

Statistic

Line

(1)

1

Average duration (months)

43

Two Major
Depression

Six Severe
Recessions

Four Mild
Recessions

(2)

(3)

(14)

16

12

10

Percentage decline:
2

Real GNP

3

Industrial

production

Nonfarm employment

-32.6

-13.4

-3.3

—1.7

—53.14

_32.14

-13.1

-7.8

-31.6

-10.6

-

3.8

-1.7

21.7

9.6

Unemployment rate:
5

Total increase (%

points)

3.8

2.3

Non farm employment:
6

Percent of industries contracting

100

97

88

77

The contractions of 8/1929—3/1933 is referred to as the Great Depression; the
contractions of 1/1920-7/1921 and 5/1937-6/1938 as the major depressions. The dates of the six
severe recessions are 5/19237/19214, 11/19)48—10/1949, 7/1953—5/1954, 8/1957—4/1958, 11/1973—
3/1975, and 7/1981—11/1982. The dates of the four mild recessions are 10/1926—11/1927, 4/19602/1961, 12/1969—11/1970, and 1/1980—7/1980. For sources and detail see Moore and Zarnowitz,
Note:

19814, Table 7.

-8-

2.

Main Features of Cyclical Behavior3

Most industries and sectors of the economy participate in the general
business cycles with substantial regularity, that is, exhibit high conformity

or coherence, but some do not (e.g., agriculture, which depends heavily on the
weather, and production of naturally scarce resources).

Durable producer and

consumer goods tend to have high conformity and large amplitudes of cyclical
movements in production, employment, and inventories.

The amplitudes are much

smaller for nondurable goods, and still smaller for most of the (nonstorable)
services.

Manufacturers' sales move with greater amplitudes than wholesalers'

sales, and the latter with greater amplitudes than retailers' sales.

In many

industries, particularly manufacturing of durables, production is in large

measure guided by advance orders which show large fluctuations followed with
variable lags by much smaller fluctuations in outputs and shipments.

The re-

sulting changes in backlogs of, unfilled orders and average delivery lags are
themselves procyclical.

Private investment expenditures, while much smaller in the aggregate than
consumer spending, have much larger cycles in percentage terms.

Aggregate

production typically fluctuates more widely than aggregate sales, which
implies a procyclical behavior of inventory investment.

Business profits show

very high conformity and much greater amplitude of cyclical movements than
wages and salaries, dividends, net interest and rental income.

3mis section is based primarily on studies of U.S. economic history, but
many of the qualitative features of cyclical behavior summarized here are
found as well in the data for other major industralized countries with private
enterprise and free markets.
See Mitchell, 1913, 1927; Schumpeter, 1939;
Frickey, 19Lt2; Burns and Mitchell, 19146; Abramovitz, 1950; Mitchell, 1951;
Gayer, Rostow, and Schwartz, 1953; Lundberg, 1955; Matthews, 1959, Moore,
1961; R. A. Gordon, 1961; Friedman and Schwartz, 1963b; Hultgren, 1965; Burns,
1969; Bronfenbrenner, 1969; Zarnowitz, 1972, 1973; Moore, 1983; Moore and
Klein, forthcoming.

—9—

The level of industrial prices tends to have wider fluctuations than the
levels of retail prices and wages.

Virtually all U.S. business contractions

before World War II were associated with declines in wholesale prices.14

However, the last recession to be accompanied by a significant deflation was
that of 19148—49.

Since then the price level never fell cyclically, but each

of the seven U.S. recessions of 1953-82 resulted in a temporary reduction of
the rate at which prices rose, that is, in some disinflation.

But, in con-

trast to the general price indexes for consumer and producer goods, prices of

industrial commodities and new materials traded in organized auction markets
continued to show high sensitivity to business cycles, often turning down
early in slowdowns as well as contractions.

Narrowly and broadly defined monetary aggregates usually experience only
reduced growth rates, not absolute declines, in connection with ordinary recessions.

Only in cycles with severe contractions do substantial downward

movements interrupt the pronounced upward trends in these series.

The income

velocity of money, i.e., ratio of income to the stock of currency and commercial bank deposits held by the public, tends to move procyclically (up in
expansions and down in contractions), allowing for its long trends (downward
before World War II, then upward for some time).

Short—term interest rates display high positive conformity and generally
large amplitudes of' movements relative to their average level in each cycle.

However, when measured in basis points, cyclical changes in these series are
typically small when the interest-rate levels are low.

Long—term rates

usually lag behind the short-term rates, have much lower conformity and much

4This is true for both the periods of long-term inflationary trends
1896-1920) and for those of long-term deflationary trends (18614-96,

(18143-614,

1920-32).

-10-

smaller

amplitudes.

The relative movements in both short-term market rates

and bond yiei1s increased very significantly in the recent past as compared
with their historical averages.

Near cyclical peaks, short rates tend to come

close to or exceed the long rates; near cyclical troughs, they tend to be much
lower.

Along with these conformity and amplitude characteristics, the recurring
features of business cycles include an array of timing sequences.

Months be-

fore total employment, output, and real income turn down, activities marking
the early stages of investment processes begin to decline.

These include the

formation of new business enterprises; corporate appropriations for capital
expenditure; contracts for commercial and industrial construction; new orders
for machinery and equipment; new bond and equity issues.
realizations —-

construction

Investment

put in place, deliveries and installations of

euipment —- keep increasing long after the decline in these investment commitments as work continues on the backlog of orders accumulated during the busiest
stages of expansion.

Indeed, business expenditures for new plant and equipment

often peak when the overall economic contraction is already well underway.

At

business cycle troughs, with lower levels of capacity utilization, the delivery
lags are generally shorter, but investment commitments still tend to lead and
expenditures coincide or lag.

Long before the downturn in total sales, profits per unit of sales
decline.

Total profits (a product of margins times sales) also lead but by

shorter intervals.

Stock prices move early as well, reflecting expected changes

in corporate earnings.

Bond prices tend to turn earlier yet (bond yields are

generally lagging).

Labor productivity (output per hour) fluctuates procyclically around a
secularly rising trend, generally with leads.

Money wages often rise less than

prices in recoveries and more than prices in late expansion stages.

This

—11—

combines with the marked and persistent productivity changes to induce a
procyclical and lagging movement in labor costs per unit of output.

Met changes in consumer installment credit and in mortgage credit
outstanding have similar procyclical, leading behavior patterns.

So has the net

change in bank loans to business, but here the leads tend to be shorter and less
consistent.

Compared with the overall credit flows, the rates of growth in

monetary aggregates show in general lower cyclical conformities and amplitudes
and more random variations.
L.. L4...Ll..
LJy

L1i.11iy VL1dJ1 L)UL, thu

They have historically led at business cycle turns
1........

.,Jy

J.UII

III

FVd.L.

.LIIUtU L.LLt

1..J.
IdU

dl

Ui L[1 U

long as to produce strong elements of inverted behavior in the monetary growth
rates, that is, extended declines during expansions and rises during short
recessions.

Consumers' "sentiment," i.e., anticipations concerning their economic and
financial fortunes, also has a predominantly leading pattern.

Recent recessions

in the United States have been more often than not preceded by downturns, and
recoveries by upturns, in consumer buying plans and actual expenditures on
automobiles, housing and related durable goods.

Residential construction

commitments such as new building permits and housing starts have particularly
long leads at peaks and often also at troughs of the business cycle.

Here the

gestation periods are fairly short so that the expenditures themselves show
sizable leads.

Change in business inventories not only conforms positively to cycles in
general economic activity but is highly sensitive and volatile, often leading,
albeit by variable and on the average short intervals.

Total manufacturing and

trade inventories, on the other hand, are dominated by long trends and tend to
lag.

Inventory investment plays a very important role in short and mild cycles,

whereas fluctuations in fixed investment acquire a greater weight in the longer
and larger cycles.

-12Table 14

provides a conspectus of the timing relationships found

to be

typical of business cycles.
3.

Some Internationai Aspects and Recent Developments

Business cycles have tended to be shorter

in the United States than in

Europe (e.g., the 1851t-1938 period witnessed 21 U.S. cycles averaging
four years

and only 16 British cycles averagine 5 1/3 years).

However, before World War

II, more than 60 percent of the cyclical turning points can be matched for all
four countries covered by the NBER chronologies, and only 10 percent
cannot be
matched at all (Moore and Zarnowitz, 198L).

After World War II, an era of great

reconstruction in Western Europe and Japan set in, which witnessed first
a restoration of sound currencies and free markets, then rapid growth.

For some time

cyclical setbacks in these countries assumed the form of retardations of
growth
rather than absolute declines.

However, these slowdowns and the intervening

speedup phases continued to show a high degree of international diffusion.

Then

growth slackened and the "classical" business cycles (with absolute
declines in
total output and employment) reappeared everywhere in the 1970s.

The tendency

for these cycles to be roughly synchronized across the major trading
countries
became visible again, even without allowances for discrepancies in
the longer
growth trends.4a
In a large economy dominated by production for domestic
markets, business
cycles are likely to be induced primarily by internal mechanisms (e.g.,

fluctua-

tions in spending on durable goods endogenously and elastically
financed) but
they are then transmitted abroad through the movements in imports
that are a
positive function of production and income.

For small and, particularly, less

developed countries, fluctuations in exports usually call the
tune.

'Of course,

foreign influences can at times be critical for even the largest
and relatively
least open economy.

This is well illustrated by the adverse effects on the

events rekindled interest in business cycles of larger dimensions
and essentially endogenous nature; see Voicker, 1978.

Note:

-production, total

Velocity of money

V. Money, Credit, and Interest

IV. Prices, Costs, and Profits

Industrial

Nonagricultural employment
Unemployment rate
GNP; Personal income

III. nployment, Production, and Income

Manufacturing and trade sales

Production of consumer goods

II. Consumption, Trade, Orders, and Deliveries

Production of business equipment
Machinery and equipment sales*

It. Investment in Fixed Capital and Inventories

Rouqhly Coincident

-

loans outstanding

Commercial and industrial

Consumer credit outstanding*

Bond yields*

Short-term interest rates5

Unit labor costs
Labor share in national income

Average duration of unemployment
Long-term unemployment

appropriations, mfg.*
Business expenditures for new plant and equipment*
Manufacturing and trade inventories

Backlog of. capital

Lacici no

Series marked * are in nominal terms (some have the same average timing properties when deflated). All
other series are in real terms (constant dollars,
physical units) or related indexes and ratio numbers. The selection is based on U.S. indicators published in Business Conditions Digest
(BeD), a monthly
report by the Bureau of Economic nalysis, U.S. Department of Commerce. The timing relations among corresponding series for other countries
are in many
respects similar (see Moore, 1983, chap. 6.)
Abbreviations: mfg. = manufacturing; mtls. = materials.

Real money supply

Total private borrowing*

Change in consumer credit5

Change in liquid assets*

Monetary growth rates5

Bond prices5
Stock prices5
Sensitive materials prices*
Ratio, price to unit labor coat
Profit margins
Total corporate profits; Net cash flows

Average workweeki Overtime hours (mfg.)
hccession rate; Layoff rate (mfg>
New unemployment insurance claims
Productivity (output per hour)
Rate of capacity utilization (mfg., mtls.)

New orders for consumer goods
and materials
Change in unfilled orders, durable goods*
Vendor performance (speed of deliveries)
Index of consumer sentiment

permits; Housing starts
Residential fixed investment
Net business formation
New capital appropriations, mfg.*; Contracts
and orders for plant and equipment
Change in business inventories

New building

Leading

Typical Leads and Lags Among Major Economic Indicators

Table 4

—13—

—1 4—

United States of the OPEC oil price boosts

in 1973_7L and 1979—80 through

increased co5ts and prices (leftward shifts in the aggregate supply schedule)

and reduced real disposable income (hence presumably also some leftward shifts
in the aggregate demand schedule).

Such worldwide supply shocks, although

clearly of major importance in the context of contemporary problems of
productivity, growth and development, are new and rare phenomena whose role in
business cycles generally is modest but in danger of being overemphasized.5
The more persistent effects come from changes on the demand side.

Thus the

volume, prices, and value of U.S. exports show fluctuations that correspond

well to the cycles in the dollar value of imports by the outside World (Mintz,
1967).

The demand changes are powerfully reinforced when the links between

the major countries convert their independent cyclical tendencies into
fluctuations that are roughly synchronized.

These links result not only from international trade --

current-account

transactions in goods and services -- but also from international lending and
investment --

capital—account transactions in assets.

The latter factor

became particularly important in recent times when asset markets became highly
integrated worldwide.

Interest rates (adjusted for the anticipated exchange

rate movements) are now linked across the open economies and capital flows
are
extremely sensitive to the risk—adjusted differentials in expected rates of
return.

Partly because of the increased capital mobility, the shift from fixed to
flexible exchange rates in the early 1970s provided much less insulation
against foreign disturbances than was hoped for, and also much less autonomy

5Cf. Hamilton, 1983, on the role of changes in crude oil prices in
the
U.S. recessions after World War II.
It should be noted that many recessions
are preceded by upward cost pressures and supply restrictions associated with
the boom-and-slowdown sequence of mid- and late expansion stages. On the
developments in 1973—76, see Zarnowitz and Moore, 1977.

—15—

for effective national macroeconomic policies.

The price levels adjusted for

exchange rates (that is, the "real exchange rates") show large and persistent
movements over time:

the purchasing power parity does not hold over time spans

relevant for the study of business cycles.

The recent fluctuations in real

economic activity show a very considerable degree of international convergence,
which presumably reflects not only the exposure to common disturbances but also
the increased interdependence among (openness of) nations.6

In the 1960s, when it appeared that business contractions in Europe and
Japan are being replaced by mere retardations, there was a revival of interest
in cycles defined in terms of deviations from long trends rather than levels of
economic aggregates.

For lack of a better term, the alternations of above-

trend and below-trend growth phases caine to be called "growth cycles."

These

short fluctuations are defined by the consensus of detrended indicators just as
business cycles are defined by the consensus of the same time series with no
allowance for their long-term trends.
eliminated from each series separately.

The trends are estimated only to be
Growth cycles in this sense are thus

sharply different from, and should not be confused with, any fluctuations in
the long—term growth rates themselves.
They also need to be clearly distinguished from business cycles.

Most

persistent and pervasive economic slowdowns begin with much reduced but still
positive growth rates, then develop into actual declines --

recessions.

Thus

the high—growth phase typically coincides with the business cycle recovery and
mid-expansion, the low-growth phase with late expansion and contraction.

But

some slowdowns stay in the range of positive growth rates and issue in renewed
expansion, not recession.

Thus growth cycles are more numerous than business

cycles and more symmetrical, being measured from rising trends.

6See Whitman, 1976; P.A. Klein, 1976; Moore, 1983, ch.6.

—16—

One can imagine a lengthy period of low, positive growth that would be

associated with as much deterioration in business conditions and rise in
unemployment as a short and moderate recession - and more.

But it is also

possible for a slowdown mainly to reduce inflationary excess demand created in
the preceeding boom, without causing much surplus capacity and real
hardship.

The policy implications of such a deceleration in economic growth

are entirely different from those of a recession which always depresses real
incomes and spending, outputs and employment.

In actual experience, those decelerations in growth that have not led to
absolute declines in aggregate economic activity (in the recent U.S. history,
1951-52, 1962-64, and 1966-67) occupy an intermediate position between the two

hypothetical cases considered above.

Their adverse effects were felt

primarily in areas of particular sensitivity, notably as declines in housing
activity and stock prices.

Unemployment would cease falling rather than rise

substantially, and profits would weaken rather than tumble.

Thus the overall

impact of any of these slowdowns on economic activity was definitely less than
that of even the mildest of the recent recessions.

Some economists focus on the nature and sources of expansions and contractions, that is, on the business cycles.

Others, by abstracting from the

long-run trend, actually address growth cycle phenomena while aiming at an
analysis of business cycles; that is, they fail to differentiate between the
two categories.

The latter treatment, frequently implicit in the theoretical

literature of recent years, may not be a good practice.

General business

contractions need to be distinguished from periods of low but positive
growth.

However, mild recessions and severe depressions are also quite

different.

Also, many important regularities described in the previous

section are to a large extent observed in the context of growth cycles as

—17—

well.

Thus when the series that tend to lead at business cycle turns are

adjusted fortheir own long trends, the resulting detrended series are
generally found to be leading at growth cycles turns.

An analogous statement

can be made for the roughly coincident and lagging indicators,.

Systematic

differences among the series with respect to their conformity and amplitude
characteristics are likewise largely retained after the necessary
transformations.
III.
1.

Theories of Self-Sustaining Cycles

Disparities and Common Elements in Some Early Theories
The classics of business cycle literature made lasting contributions to

the description and analysis of the motion of industralized market
economies.

They addressed the cumulative processes of inflationary expansions

and deflationary contractions induced by bank credit fluctuations constrained
by the availability of reserves under the gold standard (Hawtrey,

1913).

The

role of discrepancies between the market and the "natural" interest rates in
this process was much explored following Wicksell, (1898) 1936.

At below—

equilibrium market rates, excessive bank credit creation produces over-

investment in capital goods industries and imposes "forced savings" on those
whose incomes lag behind inflation (Hayek, 1933).

But banks will have to

curtail the supply of credit and individuals will tend to restore their old
consumption standards.

As the demand and resources shift back to consumer

goods industries, undersaving or real capital shortage and losses to the
producers of capital goods result, causing a decline in these industries which
cannot be compensated elsewhere in the short run.
cannot be avoided.

A deflationary downturn

Here the monetary changes are linked to real "vertical

maladjustments", that is, imbalances between production of capital and
consumer goods or between aggregates of investment plans and savings decisions
(Tugan-Baranovskii (1894) 1913; Spiethoff (1925) 1953).

-18-

Other writers worked out the importance of long gestation and
life
periods of capital goods and developed some cyclical aspects
of the
acceleration principle (Aftalion,

1913; J. M. Clark, 1917, 1931).

Schumpeter

(1939) saw economic growth itself as a cyclical process reflecting
technological progress and spurts of innovations -- opening
up and temporary
exhaustion of opportunities for new profitable investment.

Related factors

include the failure of foresight, intersectoraj. shifts, and
changes in
relative prices.

Thus, under uncertainty,

interdependent expectations of

businessmen generate widespread errors of optimism in expansions
and pessimism
in contractions (Pigou, 1927).

Unpredictable shifts in demand or supply lead

to "horizontal maladjustments" -- say,
overinvestment in a particular sector,
which involves indivisible and durable fixed capital, •high
costs of

adjustments, and temporary but cumulative depressant effects (Robertson,
1915).

Unit costs of labor and production tend to rise relative
to output

prices before and after the downturn, and they tend to
fall before and after
the upturn, reflecting changes in capacity utilization
and productivity; as a
result, business profits show large fluctuations which help
explain the
cyclical movements in investment and output (Mitchell, 1913, 1927).
This capsule summary can merely illustrate the broad
range of views held

by these early students of business cycles.

It is clear that there are

important disagreements among their theories, particularly
with respect to the
relative importance of monetary and real factors, long
a major point of
contention.

But the dominant tone is one of awareness that what matters
most

is the interaction of changes in money and credit and
changes in economic

activity, particularly those connected with business investment.

Most of the

writers considered business cycles to be caused and conditioned
by a number of
factors and circumstances, and so their theories typically
overlap and vary

mainly in the emphasis accorded the different elements

(1-laberler,

19614).

—19—

theories that is
Not surprisingly, there is much in these individual

unsatisfactOPY, unduly restrictive, or out—of-date.

Here we must abstract

of consensus and
from the detail and note that it is the high degree
point of view.
achievement that is much more remarkable from the present

mainly
The first aspect of essential agreement is that the theories are
endogenous.

of the
That is, they purposely concentrate on internal dynamics

components).
system (interrelations and lagged reactions among its

The

as a result
authors generally held that contemporary industrial economies are,
with major regularities
of such dynamics, subject to recurrent fluctuations
that can be explained economically.

They believed that "the cyclical movement

outstanding extrahas a strong tendency to persist, even where there are no
held responsible."
neous influences at work which can plausibly be

Hence they

though acknowlviewed the role of the exogenous forces as secondary, even

disturbers of
edging that the latter continually act "as the originators or
endogenous processes, with power to accelerate, retard,

interrupt, or reverse

the endogenouS movement of the economic system."7
standard economic
Second, these economists all basically adhered to the
labeled the "classical
theory of their times, which is what Keynes later
them.
school;" indeed, the latter is well personified by some of

At the same

problem of economic
time, they generally appreciated the seriousness of the
instability.

The business cycles of their principal concern were major

contractions.
fluctuations measured in years of cumulative expansions and

The

7Both quotations above are from Haberler, op. cit., p. 10. This
in works by
characterization is strongly confirmed by numerous passages
Mitchell
(1927, esp. chs.
Robertson (1915, see in particular Part II, ch. IV);
For
chs.
VI-Vill,
XXI).
I and V); Hayek (1933, esp. ch. IV); and Pigou (1927,
is
of
much
Schumpeter, the basic mechanism of credit-financed innovations
"external factors,"
greater intrinsic interest than the multitude of diverse
particular
occasion (1935;
no matter how important the latter may be on any
1939, vol. I, chs. I—IV).

-20-

recurrent phases of widespread unemployment and underutilization of productive
capacities did (and still do) present a deep puzzle to the classical doctrine
according to which the economy is always in, or at least tending closely to,
the general equilibrium.

Thus, for a long time, business cycles were simply

ignored by most economic theorists or, at best, were viewed as merely temporary "frictional" interference with, and departure from, equilibrium.

But

students of the subject, including those who were themselves committed to the
equilibrium theory, have done much to counteract this evasive and untenable
position.

Third, in the historical periods addressed by these studies the level of
prices tended to move up during the general business expansions and down
during contractions.

The positive correlation between cyclical movements in

broad price indexes and real activity measures implied that fluctuations in
total nominal expenditures parallel the fluctuations in the aggregates of real
income, employment, and output.

This was generally accepted as a central

characteristic of business cycles by the early theories in which the
fluctuations in aggregate money flows of income and spending play a large,
proximately "causal" role.

Of course, for these fluctuations to produce

cyclical movements in real variables, it is necessary that wages and prices
adjust with some sufficient lags rather than being highly flexible.

This

condition was sometimes explicitly assumed but not much discussed and often
only implied.8

In terms of the present-day conven8Cf.Haberler, 19614, pp. 1459-)461.
tional macroeconomic model, let us add, the positive correlation of fluctuations in prices and real variables would indicate that shifts in aggregate
demand dominate the shifts in aggregate supply over the business cycle. If
this sounds rather alien to the early theories, it is because the latter are
typically more disaggregate.

—21—
2.

Uncertain Expectations, Unstable Investment, and Long Depression Cycles

Keynes (1936, ch. 22, esp. pp. 31L315) attributed to the trade cycle a
sudden, sharp downturn, a protracted decline, and a gradual, sluggish
upturn.

These are all characteristics of the 1929 peaks and the depressions

and recoveries of the 1930s in Great Britain and the United States; also, in
part, of the British experience in the depressed early 1920s.

They are not

typical of most cycles in these countries and elsewhere.

The sharp downturn or "crisis" is explained mainly by "a sudden collapse
in the marginal efficiency of capital."

During a boom the supply of new

capital goods and the cost of their production and financing rise, with
growing adverse effects on the current returns on investment.

The inducement

to invest is further weakened if the current costs come to be viewed as higher
than the probable future costs.

Optimism about the always uncertain future

returns lingers for some time, but sooner or later doubts arise about the
reliability of the hopeful expectations engendered by the boom.
Investment expectations are highly volatile because even those forecasts

of long—term profitability of specific business projects which are viewed as
most probable inspire little confidence.

Observable frequencies of past

outcomes are not generally a source of reliable knowledge in these matters.

Keynes' world is thus one of pervasive uncertainty which is sharply distinguished from calculable and insurable risk (as in Knight, 1921).
It is easier and more rewarding to predict the short—term movements in

the stock market, which are strongly affected by "mass psychology," than to
divine the long—term prospects for individual business concerns.

The market

reacts promptly to news on fluctuating business profits with revaluations
which inevitably exert a decisive influence on the rate of current
investment.

new business will not attract investors if a similar existing

one can be acquired on the exchange at lower costs (Keynes, 1936, p.

151).

-22-

This last insight gave rise to an influential theory of Tobin (1969),
which makes investment in new plant and equipment an increasing function of q,
the ratio of'the value placed by the security markets on the existing firm to
the replacement cost of'

its

capital.

This approach has several advantages:

it is relatively simple, uses observable variables, and provides an analytically attractive linkage between investment and the expectations of the
financial asset markets.

Implicitly, it also relates the expected profit rate

to the required rate of return on capital in the stock market and hence to the
interest rate.

However, the hypothesis has not fared well in empirical tests

(von Furstenberg, 1977; P. K. Clark, 1979; Blanchard and Wyplosz, 1981; Abel
and Blanchard, 1983; Gordon and Veitch, 198Z).

This is perhaps partly because

of the use of average q instead of the theoretically more appropriate marginal
q9 but more likely because of various simplifying restrictions used in this
work:

homogeneous capital and perfect financial markets with no liquidity

constraints on firms.

These idealizations are poorly suited for an analysis

of cyclical movements in investment and they certainly clash with the
Keynesian views on the instability of financial markets (see section IV-6

below))0

9This is the ratio of' the increase in the value of the firm from
acquiring an additional unit of capital to the marginal cost of that unit
(which, in contrast to the measured average q, is an ex ante and not directly
observable quantity).
10The same observations apply a fortiori to the "neoclassical" investment
theory dating from Jorgenson, 1963, which concentrates on the average long—
term behavior as determined by the requirement that the expected returns over
the life of a project exceed its costs. The short-run deterrent effect on
investment of the rising flow supply price of capital goods (stressed in
Keynes, 1936, ch. 11) is not well captured in this approach, and the
expectational lags are not distinguishable from the gestation periods or
delivery lags (cf. Abel, 1980). For recent tests of this and other investment
theories, see also Bischoff, 1971, and Kopcke, 1977.

-23-

Once aroused, the doubts about profitability of planned and current
investment projects spread rapidly, bringing down in "disillusion" the stock
market which is revealed to have been overoptimistic and overbrought.

As the

pendulum swings to overpessimism, the demand for broadly defined money will
increase, raising the rate of interest and hence seriously aggravating the
The revival of investment will require a "return of confidence

crisis.

an aspect of the slump which bankers and businessmen have been right in
.

emphasizing

.

•" (Keynes,

shaken, takes time to mend.

Butconfidence, once severely

1936, p. 317).

Also, the propensity to consume is adversely

affected by the fall in the value of equities.

Only as the downswing develops will it bring the level of interest rates
down.

This decline will not be as prompt and large as would be necessary to

counter the "collapse" of investment.

For the demand for money is interest.-

elastic, highly so at low levels of the rates, because of bearish speculation
in the face of basic uncertainty as to the future changes in the rate of
interest.

The conclusion here is that a recovery from a severe slump is

possible only after the capital stock of business has been reduced
sufficiently to restore its profitability.

This may take several years,

through use, wear and tear, and obsolescence (op. cit., p.

151).

It might appear that overbuilding is the cause of the downturn and long
slump but Keynes insists that it is not.

Rather, the effective private demand

fails to sustain full employment because investment is too unstable and the
propensity to consume is stable but too low.

It is only relative to the

deficient demand that "overinvestment" can occur; there is no saturation of
profitable investment opportunities at full employment.

Keynes' concern was with long and severe depressions characterized by

very large declines to low levels of both real investment and stock market
values.

Such major depressions have occured at intervals of a few decades

through the t930s but most business contractions were always much milder and
shorter.

Even in long contractions the stock of capital usually continues to

increase, although at much reduced rates; also, an abrupt collapse of
investment is rare.11

Consumer spending is much less stable in the short run

than Keynes assumed (but also much more stable and supportive of growth in the
long run).

As

for

the demand for money, there is a mass of evidence that its

interest elasticity tends to be relatively low (Laidler, 1969).

These

observations raise serious questions about some elements of: Keynes' theory.
3.

Wage and Price Dynamics in Business Cycles

Despite the great rise and persistence of unemployment, real wages increased throughout the 1930s thereby failing to provide one classical cure for
the apparent disequilibrium in the labor market.12

Keynes (1936, chs.

19 and

21) did not argue that money wages are entirely rigid downward but rather that

they adjust but sluggishly to excess supplies of labor.

Such slow wage declines

are apt to reduce incomes, consumption, and prices before they begin to improve
profitability and stimulate investment.

When the resulting gradual deflation

becomes widely anticipated, people would repeatedly postpone purchases, mainly

of durable goods, while waiting for prices to fall further.

The demand for

money increases at the expense of the demand for goods and equities.

These points were made early by Burns (see his collected essays, 1954,
pp.
3-25, 207-235).
On the dispersion of peaks in various categories of investment
commitments and expenditures, see Zarnowitz, 1973, ch. 4.
121n the United States, average hourly earnings in manufacturing divided
either by the consumer price index or by the wholesale price index rose
approximately 20 percent between 1929 and 1934, for example.
Money wage rates
declined less than prices. Hours of work fell along with the number of the
employed workers.
Cf. Temin, 1976, pp. 138-141.

-25--

Moreover, unexpected deflation increases the burden of accumulated debt
which falls most heavily on businesses and individuals with high propensities
to borrow, invest, and spend.

The activities of these units are severely

curtailed as their bank credit lines are cut.
bankruptcies rise in numbers and size.

Business failures and personal

Irving Fisher (1932, 1933) ascribed

the depth of the depression to the confluence and mutual reinforcement of
deflation and "overindebtedness" inherited from the boom.
overinvestment as the cause of the downturn.)

(This suggests

His policy prescription was

monetary reflation, a reversal of the price decline.

A one—time large drop in the general wage level is a theoretical but
hardly a practical alternative in a large decentralized economy with numerous,

strongly differentiated labor markets and a complicated structure of relative
wages.

A spreading depression in an open system threatens a competition among

the economies in reducing their export prices, with deeply damaging overall
consequences.

The actual and expected changes in the rates of change in wages and
prices can certainly be of great importance in business—cycle dynamics.

The

effects on aggregate demand of changes in the levels of wages and prices, on
the other hand, are believed to have their main roles in comparative statics
and the long run.13

The static and dynamic elements were never clearly

13The reference here is, first, to the "Keynes effect" (at lower prices,
a given quantity of money represents a larger real (quantity) and the "Pigou
effect" (at lower prices, a given quantity of net nominal private wealth
represents a larger real quantity). The former would raise investment through
lower interest rates, the latter would raise consumption. To stimulate the
economy in the short run both require downward flexibility of prices
The Keynes effect depends inversely on the interest-elasticity of
generally.
the demand for money. The Pigou effect depends positively on the magnitude of
Deflationary
net private wealth, which is probably small in relative terms.
expectations and distributional shifts may also weaken greatly this process
(Pigou,

19)47; Patinkin, 19)48).

—26—

distinguished by Keynes and his immediate critics; the debate proceeded for a
long time in the framework of comparative statics, which obscured the
essentially dynamic disequilibrium nature of Keynes' theory (Leijonhufvud,
1968).

After World War II, inflation became for the first time a chronic
condition in peacetime, drawing attention away from the concurrent, relatively
mild recessions and at the same time making their understanding apparently
much more difficult.

The old problem of'

depression-cum-deflation

by the new problem of unemployment-cum-inflation.

was replaced

The famous "Phillips curve"

emerged first as a nonlinear and inverse dependence of the rate of change in
nominal wages (w) on the rate of unemployment (U) and was rationalized by
relating U to the excess supply of labor (Phillips, 1958; Lipsey, 1960).

Soon

the rate of inflation (p) was similarly related to U, on the ground that p and w
normally differ by a steady rate of growth in labor productivity (Sarnuelson and
Solow,

196O).1

The classical view of an aggregated labor market posits the existence at
any time of a unique equilibrium or "natural" unemployment rate (UN) as a
function of real wages (Friedman, 1968).

An inflation that has lasted for some

significant time will be expected to persist at some positive average rate

(e)

Changes in the price level that are generally and correctly anticipated

are matched by wage changes and hence cannot cause deviations of U from UN).
Only unanticipated inflation, i.e., forecast errors
deviations.

Equilibrium requires that

e

=

(e

-

p),

can cause such

p, hence a stable long-run tradeoff

between p and U cannot exist (the "natural rate hypothesis" -- NRH -- see

should be noted that from the cyclical perspective it is far from
As will be shown in
innocuous so to substitute price for wage inflation.
section 111-6 below, labor productivity and the related price and cost
variables undergo partly systematic changes over the cycle.

-27-

Friedman, 1966, 1968; Phelps, 1967).

A short-run Phillips curve, associated

with unanticipated or disequilibrium inflation, stays in place only as long as

e

remains unchanged.15

The initial reaction of most economists to the Friedman-Phelps critique was
to embrace the NRH without questioning the existence of an inverse relationship
between inflation and unemployment in the short run.

This was because they

assumed expectations to be "adaptive," that is, backward-looking and involving
only partial and lagging corrections of past errors.16

Indeed, it was frequently assumed that the errors of inflation forecasts are
fully eliminated only on the average over the business cycle.

On this

permissive interpretation of a "long run", the NRH is entirely consistent with
continuing parallel fluctuations in inflation and real economic activity around
their (uncorrelated) long trend movements.

The expectations-augmented but only slowly shifting Phillips curve appears
in Tobin's 1975 analysis of Keynesian models of cyclical contractions, with the
qualification that this does not imply a full acceptance of the NRH.

In this

dynamic model, output (Q) moves in reaction to changes in aggregate real demand
CE).

In the short run the two variables can differ, say, E K Q when Q

because of lags in consumption and unintended inventory changes.
positively on Q and the expected price change
level P.
in Q

Actual inflation p (

relative

e•

rising

E depends

and negatively on the price

of change in P) adjusts to changes in

to QN (the full-employment output).

divergencies of p from

e•

rate

e

is

e

Finally

e

and

reacts to the

The equilibrium conditions are E = Q, Q = QN, and p =

The main inference from the model is that "a strong negative price-level

' (Ut); for
f (Ut) + p.

15The general form for the original Phillips equation is W =
the "expectations—augmented" equation satisfying the lIRH it is Wt =

16A simple model of this type is p

-

p1

k

-

P_1),

where 0 K k <

1.

The early locus classicus for adaptive expectations is Cagan, 1956, Also, see
Muth, 1960; Nerlove and Wage, 196Lt; and Mincer, 1969.

-28-

effect on aggregate demand, a weak price-expectations effect, and a slow response
of price expectations to experience are conducive to stablility" (Tobin, 1975,
pp. 199-200).

Large adverse shocks to E can push the economy into a depression,

and market price adjustments will provide no reasonably prompt and effective
remedy under conditions where the price-change effects on E are stronger than the
price—level effects.

4•

17

Disequilibrium Models with Capital Accumulation
Keynes' analysis is only implicitly and partially dynamic.

Since net

investment varies, so does total capital, which influences output, investment,
and savings.

But these effects are ignored and the stocks of production factors

and technology are treated as constant.

The older acceleration principle has no

role in the General Theory, and indeed is not even mentioned.

But the 1930s and

l9LIOs saw a proliferation of formal models of essentially endogenous cycles in

aggregate output, which use various versions of the investment accelerator and
the consumption multiplier and let the two interact (Harrod, 1936; Kalecki, 1937;

Samuelson, 1939; Metzler, 191; Hicks, 1950).
In most of these formulations, net investment is a function of changes in

output, which implies that fluctuations in consumption are transmitted with
increasing amplitudes to the higher stages of production -- the derived demand
for intermediate and producer goods.

This contrast in amplitudes is broadly

consistent with the evidence (see section 11—2 above), which has long made the
acceleration principle attractive to business cycle theorists.

Yet it is clear

from the data that investment series have much higher persistence or serial
correlations than the series of first differences in output or sales.

17For a more recent reassessment, with similar conclusions concerning the
cyclical effects of deflation, see Tobin, 1980, ch. I.

—29—

The simultaneous relationship between these variables over short unit periods
is weak, not surprisingly, since investment depends on expectational and

financial factors as well as on changes in technology, cost of labor, etc.18
With consumption lagging behind income and induced investment behind
change in output, the multiplier-accelerator interaction can produce a model
of fluctuating output in form of a second-order difference equation.
values of'

Small

the coefficient of acceleration result in damped cycles, large

values in explosive cycles.

When a trend is added reflecting continuous

technological change embodied in "autonomous" investment, the cycles are
slanted upward around a line whose slope represents the equilibrium rate of'

the economy's real growth.

In the potentially explosive case, fluctuations in

actual output are constrained between a "ceiling" along which the (growing)

resources are fully utilized and a "floor" set by the nonnegativeness of gross
investment (Hicks, 1950).

This model uses distributed lags in consumption and

investment functions and suspends the accelerator during a steep downswing,
with the result that the slump is both cushioned and prolonged as the excess

stocks of capital depreciate but slowly down to the levels required by the low
production at the floor.

A closely related but more general class of models is based on the
capital stock adjustment (or "flexible accelerator") principle:

current

investment equals some fraction of the gap between the desired and the actual
capital.

The desired stock varies directly with output (taken, questionably,

18The theory of production function of the firm includes the acceleration
effect but also, in the general case of variable factor proportions and prices,
a substitution effect (see, e.g., Gapinski, 1982, chs. 2 and Li). Net investment
cannot decline in any period by more than the capital stock can be worn out,
which suggests asymmetrical behavior between upswings and downswings.
In
principle, it is in the long run, along the rising trend of capacity output,
that the simple accelerator making net investment proportional to the change in
output should work best, not in the short-run of cyclical analysis.

-30-

as a proxy for the expected demand for output that the capital is to help
produce).

Net investment therefore depends positively on output and inversely

on the initially available stock of capital.

This formulation (used early in

Kalecki, 1935; Kaldor, 1940; Goodwin, 1951) is capable of being
some significant advantages.

improved with

Since profitability should depend positively on

the output-capital ratio, the role of profits in the investment function
(stressed by many authors, particularly after Tinbergen, 1939) is given at
least an indirect consideration.

The fraction of the capital gap closed in

the short unit period (the speed of adjustment) may be made a function of the
interest rate and, more generally, the costs of capital.

The costlier the

speed,the more gradual will be the optimal adjustment; this opens the way to a
potentially useful dynamic analysis.

On the other hand, the cyclical changes

in capital stock, being relatively small (and rarely negative), have probably
rather weak short-term effects on investment and output.

The dynamics in the models under review comes from lags, nonlinearities,
or both.

Monlinearities are likely to be very common in economic

relationships, in part because the numerical values of certain important
parameters should vary with the phases of business cycles which cover a wide
variety of macroeconomic conditions.

Yet few theoretical models of the cycle

make important use of nonhinearities.
sigmoid function of output (Q)

with

In Kaldor (1940), investment (I) is a

much lower positive slopes at both

extremes than in the broad middle range of the Q

scale.

I

is deterred by both

surplus capacity in slumps and rising construction and financial costs in
booms.

Saving (S) has a converse shape, with higher positive slopes at both

extremes than in the middle range of Q:

people stabilize consumption over

time by temporarily reducing (raising) the average rate of savings when their

—31—

incomes are unusually low (high).19

Given Q, I depends inversely and S

depends positively on the capital stock K.
two of which are stable.

There are three possible equilibria,

The result is a self-sustained cycle in the real

aggregates, from stable to unstable to another stable equilibrium.20
The substantive uses of nonlinearities in the theory of business cycles
are yet to be systematically explored.

There are, to be sure, various non—

linearities in mathematical and econometric models but they are on the whole
scattered and treated mainly as technical detail.

The early models by Kaldor,

Hicks, and Goodwin remain influential in this literature.21
Very recently, some methods of the "singularity" and "catastrophe"
theories, new branches of applied mathematics, began to be applied to the
analysis of large economic fluctuations involving crises, depressions, and
rapid recoveries.

The theory is concerned with the interaction of "fast" and

"slow" variables in dynamic systems described by differential equations, where
the short run equilibrium may jump from one region of the state space to
another.

For example, the rate of change in output may depend on the level of

output, a "fast" variable, and physical capital and financial assets, "slow"
variables (expectations or other parameters can also be treated as slow
variables).

Varian, 1979.

An illustration using a modified Kaldor model is offered by
This is an interesting approach, though still in its infancy.

19The argument seems to anticipate the more recent theories of
consumption if one adds the assumption that people perceive larger proportions
of their incomes as being transitory in booms and slumps than in the more
Transitory income is taken to be largely
"normal" times closer to the trend.
saved, permanent income consumed.
cz[I(Q,k) - S(Q,K)1, with a > 0 denoting
20The path of output is dQ/dt
they are
S(•);
The
equilibria
are defined by I(•)
the speed of adjustment.
which
occurs
at
both
low
and
high
levels
of
Q,
stable when óS/'SQ > tSI/ÔQ,
OI/OQ,
which
occurs
in
an
intermediate
position.
and unstable when oS/SQ <
movements along the I or S curves, are speedier than
The responses of Q,
the shifts of these curves caused by the changes in K.

i.e.,

list of some references must suffice: (Ichimura, 19514; Rose, 1967;
Bober, 1968; Chang and Smyth, 1971; Kosobud and O'Neil, 1972; Torre, 1977;
Scarfe, 1977, Ch 14; Gapiriski, Chs. 4—6).

-32-

While innovative in their dynamics, the models discussed here are severely
limited in their contents.

They slight or ignore the monetary, financial,

and

expectational factors which, theory and evidence suggest, are particularly
important in major cycles, crises, and depressions.

Most of these models, too,

neglect the role of new technology as a determinant of investment (Goodwin,
1951, is a notable exception).

These criticisms have been made early in the

heyday of the endogenous investment theories of the cycle (Burns, 1952;
Haberler, 1956; Lundberg, 1958).

Hansen (1951) 19614 viewed the accelerator as

relatively weak and stressed the driving force of autonomous investment related
to innovations which require more capital per worker.
However, it is also clear that the models in question contain important
elements and are capable of being expanded and improved, in particular by incorporating monetary factors.

Indeed, Hicks (1950) added to his main real

model a monetary subsystem which could aggravate some downturns.22

Tobin's

1955 model has similar cycles but also explicit roles for the supply of monetary assets and the inflexibility of money wages.

More recently, Laidler

(1973a) makes the desired capital stock depend on the lagged real interest
rate as well as the lagged output, thereby modifying Hicks' equation for induced investment so that it includes monetary effects.

Inflation expectations,

formed adaptively, appear in a Phillips-type relationship which complies with
the NRH but permits gradual price adjustments.

This model retains an

accelerator-multiplier mechanism and can generate fluctuations in output and
prices.

However, unlike in Hicks, the cycles are here damped, and exogenous

22See Hicks, 1950, ohs. XI and XII.
The "monetary complication" takes
the form of a cobweb cycle in the IS-LM space, with rather complex lags and
nonlinearities.
A quarter-century later, Hicks (197)4) revised his views,
stressing the need for greater reliance on monetary factors and autonomous
investment.

—33—

interest rate or autonomous expenditures may be
changes in either the nominal
the ceiling.23
required to move the economy off either the floor or
5.

Inventory Investmefl!
On Causes and Consequences of Fluctuations in

than fixed capital and
Inventories have a much shorter expected life span
the desired levels. Nevertheless, the
can be adjusted much more quickly to
is by no means assured as it depends
success of attempts at such adjustment

how promptly production
partly on accurate sales forecasts and partly on
reacts to unanticipated sales changes.

Some of the observed inventory

investment is planned, and some is unintended.
protecting output from the
It is difficult to use stocks as a buffer
demand are small and short,
variation in sales, except when the changes in
In the more persistent business—
calling for no alteration fl production.
to be, on the contrary,
cycle movements, inventory investment tends
aggregate output flucdestabilizing, as shown by the already noted fact that

tuates more widely than final sales.
cycles was developed in
An early and influential theory of inventory
Metzler's multiplier_accelerator models (19141,

19147).

Here the desired level

anticipated sales to consumers which
of stocks of consumer goods varies with
Output lags behind consumption,
reflect sales observed in the recent past.
An initial rise in the level
which is proportional to contemporaneous income.
autonomous,, depletes
of noninventOry investment, which is treated as
But inventory
inventories, hence businessmen attempt to increase them.

and consumptiOn, which
investment has the feedback effect of raising income
reduces the stocks still more.

This causes further rounds of increase in

and the
23Laidler considers alternatively the nominal rate of interest
related
not
to
inflation
money stock as exogenous. Output is systematically
in either.
or deflation but to the rate of change

—3k—

inventory

investment, output, and sales.

However, at some point during the

expansion the rates of increase in sales, and hence also in inventory
investment, will start falling.

Declines in income and consumption will

ultimately result, reducing the desired stock levels.

Again, the very efforts

to get rid of the unwanted stocks depress income and consumption further and
are thus temporarily self-defeating, but eventually the rate of decline in
sales and the disinvestment in stocks will begin to diminish, and an upturn in
income and consumption will initiate a new cycle.

Several papers report generally favorable tests of Met2ler's model based
on annual and quarterly data, mainly for the U.S. in the first two decades
after World War II (Coppock, 1959, 1962, 1965; Hillinger, 1966, 1979).
periodicities are heavily concentrated in the 3—k

The

years range and are not

seriously disturbed by inclusion of random error terms, but there is substantial damping.

Anticipated values are derived from distributed lags (adaptive

expectations).

The techniques include cyclical (NBER) measures, regression,

and spectral analyses.

The hypothesis that fluctuations in non-farm business

inventory investment and nonresidential fixed investment are essentially

periodic, with cycles of about 3-5 and 7—10 years, respectively, has been
recently revived by Hillinger (1982, 1983).

However, the unconventional

methods used in this work are subject to serious doubts and the results are
yet to be fully described and evaluated.24

Metzler's hypothesis, like other cyclical investment models of the
multiplier—accelerator type runs entirely in real terms and pays no attention
to price adjustments and monetary and financial factors.

Also, it fits best

2kCycles are estimated by cosine functions applied to residuals from
polynomial trends. The latter lack a theoretical rationale and are limited to
the period of estimation. The paucity of annual observations presents another
grave problem of statistical nature.

_35..

the finished goods inventories subject to changes reflecting errors in Sales
forecasts. But studies which disaggregate inventories by stage of fabrication
and type of production (Abramovitz, 1950; Stanback,

1962; Lovell, 196L; Mack,

1967; Zarnowitz, 1973; Popkin, 1981) show that for good reasons the behavior
of stocks varies systematically between these categories.

Thus finished

goods inventories are important primarily in production to stock; in
production to order, which plays a very large role in durable-goods and

particularly capital—goods industries, inventories consist mainly of goods in
process which depend positively on the rate of output, and materials, which
are strongly influenced by cyclical changes in supply conditions (delivery
periods, availability).
the ordering stage.

The stocks of materials can be promptly adjusted in

Of course, it is difficult to allow for such details in

aggregative models but an important lesson here is that desired inventories
depend importantly on other variables in addition to sales.
6.

The Role of Changes in Prices, Costs, and Profits

In his 1913 volume, Mitchell linked the major changes in business activity to the outlook for profits or (in time of crisis) the quest for solvency.

Prospective profits depend on sales experience and expectations and on

the price—cost relation which is itself changing with the rate of employment
and capacity utilization.

Business costs tend to rise faster than product

prices in the late stages of expansion, which depresses profit margins and expectations.

Accordingly, new investment commitments are curtailed well before

sales flatten.

Income receipts and consumption expenditures weaken, inven-

tories pile up, and production cuts multiply, particularly in durable goods
industries.

Pessismistic expectations spread and are confirmed and worsened

when output and employment turn down.

In the contraction that follows,

similarly, price—cost margins and profits first deteriorate and then

improve,

—36—

excess stocks and other imbalances are gradually liquidated, and new investment
orders, sales, and output eventually revive.

When Mitchell first developed a theoretical account of these developments,
he had little empirical knowledge of them from the very inadequate data then in
existence.

By now, however, there is much evidence that the relations he

stressed are generally consistent with the "stylized facts" discussed in part II
above (on their validity see Fabricant, 1959; Hultgren, 1950, 1965; Kuh, 1960;
Moore, 1962, 1975; Zarnowitz, 1973; Moore and Cullity 1983; Boehm, 1982).

What

is particularly well established and important is the typically procyclical but
lagging pattern in labor costs per unit of output, which reflects primarily the
positive conformity and leadtimes of labor productivity (output per hour of
work).

Real wages, on the other hand, normally do not show large deviations

from trend that are consistently associated with business cycles.25

In a 1967 model of Rose, employment and labor supply fluctuate relative to
the stock of capital which grows with net investment.

The rates of change in

wages (w) and prices (p) are equal in the long-run equilibrium but differ in the
short run reflecting these fluctuations.

During a recession, the ratio of labor

supply to capital increases, the rate of employment falls, and prices start
rising faster than wages.
the rate of employment.

The improvement in profitability leads to an upturn in
During the recovery, the condition p >

w

persists, but

25Countercyclical movements in real wages are implied by the classical
marginal productivity theory of the demand for labor, which was accepted by
Keynes, and they are also suggested by the view that prices generally are more
However, the evidence is mixed and
flexible and procyclical than money wages.
it varies with the choice of the deflator, the characternot conclusive:
istics of the period covered, methods and dates (e.g., the intracycle changes
A few studies favor
may not show up well in regressions with annual series).
the countercyclical hypothesis (Neftci, 1978; Sargent, 1978), but there is
more support for either procyclical behavior (Dunlop, 1938; Tarshis, 1939;
Modigliani, 1977; Stockman, 1983) or no significant relationship between real
wages and employment (Kuh, 1966; Bodkin, 1969; Geary and Kennan, 1982).

-37—

gradually

investment revives and growth of capital accelerates.

and then capital start growing faster than the labor supply.
eventually causes wages to overtake prices.

First employment

The upswing

In the new phase where p < w, the

profit rate and the employment-capital ratio turn down.

Investment is reduced,

the rate of employment declines, and a new recession begins.

The model has debatable implications for the real wage movements and its
era.26
shortcomings are apparent given the lessons of the recent inflationary

But

all formal models are heavily restricted and the aspect covered here, namely the
cyclical role of changes in the relative input/output prices, is important enough
to make the attempt interesting.

Earlier theories of this type, although not

worked out mathematically, are in some respects broader and more satisfactory.2'1'

The price-cost-profit nexus can and should be combined with monetary elements, since, as stressed by Mitchell, business cycles arise only in a "money
economy" in its late stage of development and are incompatible with pure barter.
(For one interesting attempt in this direction, see Rose,

1969).

In moderate

cycles, the effective limit on the volume of transactions is set by demand,
whereasin "intense booms" a higher limit of monetary natureis reached.28

26under perfect competition, Rose's hypothesis has real wages increasing
in the boom and early contraction, decreasing in late contraction and reUnder imperfect competition, however, real wages could be either
covery.
invariant or procyclical, depending on the elasticities of demand and marginal
A single nonlinear Phillips wage-employment curve is involved; shifts
costs.
in it would have to be introduced, lest the model be applicable at best to a
short period before any endogenous expectations of inflation changes develop
and take effect.

27Krelle, 1981, shows the similarity of Rose's theory to that of Preiser,
The main difference is that Preiser had a two-sector (consumer-goods,
1933.
producer-goods) model, whereas Rose has a simpler one-sector model.
28For example, an expansion can be halted by the constraint on a further
rise in bank credit imposed by the gold standard, as in Hawtrey (Mitchell, 1927,
On Mitchell's efforts to synthesize real, monetary, and expectational
oh. 2).
factors in viewing both the causes and effects of business cycles, see Friedman,
1952, and Zarnowitz, 1968 and 1972.

-38-

IV.
1.

Theories

of Cyclical Response to Monetary and Real Disturbances

Exogenous Factors, Stochastic Elements, and Types of Theory
Part III discussed mainly the work of economists who attribute business

cycles to the modus operandi of industrialized private-enterprise economies.
Here the cycle itself is the principal source of the stresses and imbalances
that keep it going.

A nonlinear model that requires only a single initial

disturbance to produce self—sustaining cycles has maximum endogeneity.29
In reality, of course, the economy is always influenced by outside factors
(e.g., weather) so that a comprehensive explanation of its motion cannot be
purely endogenous.

But no outside influences can by themselves produce the

recurrent sequences of expansions and contractions; this presumably requires in
the first place the particular dynamics of an interdependent economic system.
really satisfactory theory, therefore, should explain how business cycles are
generated by the internal mechanism of an economy exposed to the impact of a
great many potentially relevant external events.

What matters, then, is the

relative role of the inside and outside factors, not the extreme cases.
Nevertheless, a mainly endogenous model of business cycles differs in principle
sharply from a mainly exogenous one.

The specific events and variables that are usually treated as exogenous
include wars, changes in population, technology, weather, government spending,
tax laws, etc.

They clearly can and often do have major exonomic consequences

that affect cyclical behavior.

In addition to these factors which usually show

29Fluctuations that are neither damped nor explosive but self-sustaining
are simply not credible in linear models.
It would be extremely unlikely,
e.g., for the accelerator always to assume that precise middle value which is
needed to keep the system in a constant cycle. With random shocks imposed
upon such a model, the cycles would increase over time (Saznuelson, 19147, pp.
268—269).
This does not apply to nonlinear models which can produce recurrent
cycles with bounded variances, as shown for a Kaldor-type model by Klein and
Preston (1969).

A

—39—

considerable

persistence over time (are serially correlated), there are also the

random shocks --

uncorrelated

disturbances of various kinds which impinge upon

the structure of economic relationships.

Both the white noise and the

and
identifiable exogenous factors play important roles in the early, linear

dynamically stable model by Frisch (1933).

Here a low value for the accelerator

impulses which
is assumed but also a sufficiently close succession of erratic
keep the system fluctuating.

That is, the response of the economy to random but

continual disturbances is such that what would be otherwise damped (fading)

oscillations are converted into the recurrent business cycles.

This hypothesis

recognition in
(which was suggested earlier by Wicksell and Slutsky) gained much
recent theoretical writings and particularly influenced the work of
macroeconometriC model builders.

Several econometric models of the U.S. economy in the post-World War II
period have been found generally noncyclical in the absence of outside

disturbances, as shown by simulation studies (Adelman, 1959; Hickman, 1972).
But random shocks applied to the more recent quarterly models proved to be
to
insufficient to generate movements with the observable cyclical properties;

induce fluctuations in these models,

it was necessary to use serially correlated

disturbances (Zarnowitz, Boschan, and Moore, 1972; Howrey, 1972).

Moreover,

much weaker that
even the best simulations show only residual cyclical elements,
models.
those found in the historical series used in the estimation of the

This

estimates of
could be due to errors in either the structure of the models or the
the disturbances or both.3°

It should be noted that the large macroeconometric models used primarily

30me models estimate as constant parameters that may well vary with
and
changes in policy regimes (Lucas, 1976), the structure of the economy,
Models estimated with data
major departures from average cyclical patterns.
cycles
such
as
those
of the 1950s and 1960s
from periods with mild business
such as
are known to be unable to reproduce much more violent fluctuations
those of the 1930s (Zeliner and Peck, 1973).

-140-

for short-term forecasting are frequently and extensively revised, and the more
recent versions of them may well be substantially more cyclical.

Simulation of

one commercially successful model suggest that random noise from equation errors
accounts for only 7% of an overall measure of "cyclicality" and that some two
thirds of the latter would remain even with stable monetary policy, no financial
disintermediation "crunches", and no oil price shocks (Eckstein and Sinai,
19814).

The validity of the evidence from macroeconometric models which appear to
refute the endogenous cycle and favor the random shock theory is for these and
other reasons open to doubts.

Thus Blatt (1978) constructed artificial time

series on income, consumption, and investment based on Hicks' model with a high
accelerator implying unstable behavior.

An econometric analysis of these data

shows that they are seemingly well explained by a linear model with random
shocks, which has a low accelerator yielding stable conditions.

The problem is

attributed to the limitations of linear models (Hicks' theory is essentially
nonlinear) 31

Business cycles interact with long-term trends in varied and subtle ways so
the separation of the two is difficult conceptually and empirically (Zarnowitz,
1981).

Decompositions using purely deterministic (say, log-linear) trends

ignore such interactions, e.g., the imprint that major cycles leave on the
growth rates for some considerable time.

Cyclical analyses based on deviations

from such trends are suspect on statistical grounds (Nelson and Plosser,
1982).

The proposed alternative is to use stochastic trends approximated by

3'Further, Blatt (1980) argues that the random shock theory is
inconsistent with the evidence that deviations of many economic time series
from smooth long-term trends show a pronounced asymmetry:
the rises tend to
be longer than the declines and also smaller per unit period.
The measures
are based on long monthly time series examined in trend—adjusted form by Burns
and Mitchell (19146,

ch.

7).

—)41—

practice that most of the contractions as well
random walks, but this means in
constructs, whereas the residual
as expansions are included in such trend
noise (Beveridge and Nelson,
components labeled the "cycle" are largely pure
of looking at the
There is no good economic theory to justify this way

1981).

world.

cannot be reconciled
The regularities reviewed in part II of this paper
1925 and revived by McCulloch
with the suggestion made by Irving Fisher in
(1975, p. 303) that business

cycles resemble "the cycles superstitious gamblers

like the ne at Monte
believe they can discern in their luck at casinos
Carlo."

contraction has exceeded
As shown by MoCulloch, once an expansion or

of its being reversed in a
its minimum historical duration, the probability
given month is independent of its age.

But that is merely a proof of

"business
nonperiodicitY, not of randomness, of the fluctuations called
cycles."

and upturns,
Endogenous processes can still bring about the downturns

serially correlated outside
but they interact with all types of random and
unpredictable (cf. Matthews,
events, which makes the timing of the reversals
1959, pp.

199_205).32

in general
Certainly, the processes and relations economists study are

macroeconomic movements
stochastic, and purely deterministic explanations of
cannot be sufficient.

theoretical
But purely stochastic explanations have no

economic theory
content, and it is the factors which can be integrated in an

economist who attempts to
that are naturally of primary interest to any
understand the nature and causes of business cycles.

particular historical and in32Sueh processes include those arising from
practice of banks and
stitutional developments, e.g., the "misintermediation"
1981)
asserts are a cause of
thrift institutions which McCulloch elsewhere (1977,
business
fluctuations.
financial instability and recurrent, if non-periodic,
debt-deflation hypothesis of the 1930s treats the
Similarly, Irving Fischer's
in the 1920s.
business cycle problem much more seriously than his writings

In the generally prosperous times after World War II, however, business
cycles slipped way down in the public and professional interest.

The weight of

the public sector increased greatly throughout the industralized world, and
government actions and policies attracted growing attention as a likely source
of large macroeconomic effects, notably the rising inflation.

The idea that

business contractions are also policy-induced and episodic rather than a part of
self-sustaining cycles seemed increasingly plausible.

Even while the style of macroeconomic analysis and policy remained
predominantly "Keynesian," the theory soon veered sharply away from the unstable
accelerator-multiplier models to concepts that imputed much more stability to
the private sector.

This evolution shows up strongly in Duesenberry (1958).

The notion of strong cyclical effects from high values of the accelerator and
multiplier was further deflated by new theoretical developments:

the permanent

income and life cycle hypotheses of consumption and the "neoclassical" models of
investment.

Used along with adaptive expectations reacting but gradually to

past events, these formulations suggested relatively stable trends in private
demands.

The rise of monetarism (see next section) worked in the same

direction.

Historically, the main substantive differences among, the theories centered
on the relative importance of real vs. monetary factors.

This can be linked to

the the distinction between the impulses and the propagation mechanism,
introduced formally by Frisch in 1933.

There can be models with monetary shocks

and real propagation, models with real shocks and monetary propagation, and
various mixtures of'

the

two.

Even in the largely endogenous theories it is

331n this relatively disaggregate and complex theory, growth is explained
by the interaction of a capital-adjustment process with autonomous investment,
downturns by the operation of' various exogenous factors, and upturns by the
corrective forces inherent in the basically stable system.

_143_

sometimes possible to differentiate in a somewhat similar manner between the
mainly origthating factors and the mainly conditioning or responsive factors.314
In sum, the several dichotomies encountered in modern business-cycle

dynamics intersect in various ways, and the extant theories actually represent
many of the possible resulting combinations.

They generally resist being neatly

characterized by these categories, but even attempts at approximations can be
instructive.

A few illustrations for some theories lightly treated above are

given in Table 5 (see the first four cases; the others refer to materials to be
discussed later).

2.

The Monetarist Interpretation of Business Fluctuations
In the 1960s, the rise of monetarism mounted a frontal challenge to

Keynesian economics, starting from the simple quantity-theoretic proposition:
Changes in the stock of money are the main determinant of changes in nominal
income.

The demand for money is a relatively stable function linking real

balances to wealth or permanent income and to expected rates of return on money
and alternative assets.

Given significant lags in wage and price adjustments,

sequences of alternating phases of'

high and low growth rates in the quantity of

money lead to corresponding fluctuations in aggregate demand and real economic
activity relative to the secular trends.

Sufficiently long periods of low but

predominantly positive monetary growth rates are likely to produce business
slowdowns or recessions; sufficiently long periods of negative monetary growth
rates lead to depressions (Friedman and Schwartz, 1963a and b).35

314me idea is found in Pigou, 1927, p. 8. Hansen (196'4, chs. 17 and 18)
applies it to the work by Wicksell, Aftalion, Pigou, and J. H. Clark.

350f course, monetarism (like Keynesianism) has come to denote a broad
assortment of theoretical concepts and empirical propositions attributed to
Here there is
economists who agree in some respects and disagree in others.
need only for a selective treatment of these characteristics inasmuch as they
(For comprehensive
bear on the evolution of the work on business cycles.
surveys, see R.J. Gordon, ed., 19714; J. Stein, ed., 1976; Mayer et al., 1978.)

Unstable supply
of bank credit

Monetary

Undefined erratic
shocks and diecontinous Schumpeterian
innovations

Sequential shocks:
high monetary growth
rates followed by
low rates, etc.

Random monetary
shocks causing
price level
variations

Unstable expected
profits drive business investment
which generate fluctuations in realized

Impulse
and propagation in a
real model

The original
monetarist
theory

Market clearing with RE
and incomplete information.

A disequilibrium theory
of investment
and financial
instability
(largely en—
dogenous)

prof its

Bursts of innova—
(new products, markets...) contested
by imitators

Cyclical
real growth

men t

overinves t-

Unstable flow of
money (bank
credit)

(2)
I.

Business capital.
investment—booms
and readjusteents
in contractions

Capital investment,
lengthening and
shortening of production processes

ones

Investment in
traders invest—

Yes

No or
weakly

No

(5)

Growt:h?

Are Cycles
Linked to

Money created by bank
lending to business;
short—term financing
of long—term investment

for relative price changes.
Intertemporal substitution of laborleisure

Relative prices of
capital assets set
in financial markets
under uncertainty
about future returns,
costs of capital,
and cash flows

strong
reactions to perceived
changes in relative
prices or real rates
of return on the
supply side

Prompt and

General price changes
misperceived

Both consumption
and investment react
to monetary changes

damped-dynamically
stable

tern as a whole is

Capital-goods production, but the sys-

Relative prices and
asset yields, then
spending flows

Investment accelerator, lags in output
of capital goods,
money demand and
imperfectly elastic
supply

Yes

Yes

No

No

(through
innovations)

(6)

Special
Features

Simultaneous
interacting long,
intermediate
and short cycles

result from monetary disequilibria

maladj usteents

Real vertical

Cycles tend to
be periodic
under the gold
standard

innovations

Long expansions
produce overconf id—
ence, unsound f i—
nancing practices, a
growing debt burden,
and illiquidity...
sources of contractions and crises

Flexible prices
and wages clear
markets continuously.
Money and
price surprises
cause fluctuations
in output and investment

Monetary policies
destabilize the
private sector

bunched in expanslons needed to
maintain asciiations

or

Random shocks

Some Theories with Major Exoqenous and Stochastic Elements

Credit financing;
excesses of speculation and misjudgment

Discrepancy between
the natural and money
interest rates

II.

(4)

Most Sensitive
Processes

Some Largely Endogenous Theories

Interest rate changes; cycles of inflation and deflation

(3)

Main Factors
Originating
Responsive

Monetary
disequilibrium

(1)

Type of
Theory

A

—44--.

Table 5
Synopsis of Selected Business Cycles Theories

Schwartz,

1982

Minsky,

Lucas,
1977

1963

&

Friedman

Friach,
1933

Schu.peter,
1912—39

Hayek,
1931—39

Hawtrey,
1913—37

(7)

Author
and Dates

—l 5—

The lags of output behind the monetary changes are seen as variable but on
the average iengthy.

This is so because, say, an accelerated increase in the

quantity of money must first alter the relative prices or yields on a broad
range of assets.

The resulting discrepancies between the actual and the desired

portfolios prompt the banks and the public to take corrective actions.

The

stimulus would eventually spread to product markets, causing rises in payments
for services of, and the investments in, nonfinancial assets.

As spending,

income, and prices rise, interest rates will snap back from their earlier
decline.

If price expectations are adaptive, i.e., subject to lagged error

corrections, people will tend to underestimate the rising prices and hence
overestimate their real money balances for some time.

This will induce more

transitory spending to liquidate the extra amounts of "redundant" money, and in
the process the rates of rise in prices and nominal income will overshoot the
new equilibrium paths for these variables.6

Thus, even in the case of a single

shock, some cyclical (presumably damped) reaction may well occur.
The rate of growth of output or real income corresponding to full

employment (or the "natural unemployment rate") is exogenous in this model,
being determined by real factors.

The monetarist theory of macroeconomic

fluctuations deals with deviations of output from this trend, that is, with
"growth cycles.

6These paths would run parallel but higher than the new equilibrium path
for the money stock, because at a higher rate of price rise less money in real
terms would be demanded relative to wealth and income. See Friedman and
Schwartz, 1963a, and Friedman, 1970.
37me equilibrium or trend level of output in this sense is associated
with less than full utilization of resources; hence it can be either higher or
lower than the actual level of output at any time. This is unlike the concept
of a "ceiling" imposed on output by full employment (as in Hicks, 1950).

The early and still influential versions of this theory, due largely to
Friedman, treat monetary changes —- growth rates or deviations from trend of
the quantity of money -- as if they were predominantly autonomous, i.e.,

having strong one-way effects on movements in total spending, income, and
output.

The reverse effects, from business activity to money, are recognized

to exist but only as secondary "feedbacks."

The main source of critical

monetary disturbances is thus located outside the private economy, in policy
actions and institutional changes.

Private expenditures, including business

investment, are viewed as essentially stable, except when affected by the
money shocks:

when undisturbed, they tend in real terms to be consistent with

the natural rates of employment and output.
This is a new emphasis.

Earlier monetary theories generally gave most

attention to private sector instabilities, particularly credit fluctuations.
The differences are highlighted in Table 5 above (see also section 111—i
passim).

This brings us to the subject of the determinants of money supply.

Under

the present fiduciary standard, money consists of currency and, mainly, deposits in private banks.

Monetary authorities can affect the quantity of money

only indirectly and over time, by trying to control the monetary base (bank
reserves plus currency).

Subject to legal or regulatory constraints, banks

vary their reserve-to-deposits ratios and the public their currency-to—
deposits ratios in response to actual and expected changes in interest rates,
real income, and probably some other indicators, e.g., those of business and
consumer confidence.

In principle, then, a supply function for money in

nominal units can be derived, involving the policy-related base and a few
endogerious determinants of'

the base).

the money multiplier (ratio of the money stock to

The stability of this function is an empirical question on which

_L7_

there is significant disagreement.8

However, there is a substantial

consensus, not only among monetarists, that any effects that interest rates,
wealth, or -income may have on the nominal money supply are much weaker and

less consistent than the effects of these variables on the demand for real
balances.

Moreover, monetarist studies argue that central banks have the

power and tools to exercise the dominant influence upon the money stock,
except in the very short run.

The potential for an autonomous monetary policy is generally overestimated by analysts who concentrate on United States, the only large market
economy in which balance-of-payments considerations could long be treated as
secondary even under fixed exchange rates.

For any small economy under this

regime, the nominal money supply depends on changes in the available foreign
exchange reserves, must tend to be consistent with prices and incomes that
will balance the country's international payments, and hence cannot be determined independently by domestic authorities.

Under the gold standard, a

business expansion would come to a halt when the drain of cash and shortage of
gold reserves forced the banking system to curtail credit on a sufficiently
large scale.

This was the ultimate source of the relatively large and regular

British cycles in the 19th century to Marshall, Hawtrey, and Lavington.

An early expectation that the monetarist approach may ultimately produce
a theory of "a partly self-generating cyclical mechanism

.

.

.

including

a

38Cagan, 1965, shows that high-powered money fluctuated more erratically
than, and often opposite to, the currency and reserve ratios.
One source of
the interrelation is indirect—-common response to business cycles—-another
direct-—central bank operations designed to stabilize the economy.
He finds
that "the dependence of the money stock on prices and business activity, as
well as on other variables, is strong but is neither rigid, uniform, nor
Friedman stresses that "neither interest rates nor real
immediate" (p. 16).
income have a consistent and sizable influence on the nominal quantity of
money supplied" (1982, p. 35). On the other hand, Brunner and Meltzer argue
that an empirically stable money-supply function exists (1968, 1972).

-8feedback in the rate of change in money itself"
1963a, p.64) has remained unfulfilled.

(Friedman and Schwartz,

The feedback or "reflex influence"

running from business activity to monetary growth has not been analytically
developed and integrated into a theory of how money, prIces, and real factors
interact in the short run.

The approach produced instead an essentially

exogenous and monetary model of the business cycle.

Yet the same studies that

show an important independent role of money, particularly in major inflationary booms and severe deflationary slumps, also find much evidence that
fluctuations in the monetary variables reflect those in real

aggregates,

particularly in mild cycles (for a summary, see Cagan, 1965,

p. 29L).

The

primacy of the monetary effects cannot be established by the less than compelling
argument that, since money plays a key role in the major cycles, it should also be
important in the minor cycles which are just "less virulent members of the same
species" (Friedman and Schwartz, 1963a, p. 55).

The idea that cyclical instability is mainly policy—induced is not an integral
part of, or a necessary inference from, the monetarist theory.

judgment held by some monetarists as well as other economists.39

It is an empirical

The popularity of

this view rose in the late 1960s and 1970s, when both inflation and unemployment
drifted upward, the Phillips curve moved north-to—northeast through a series of
clockwise cycle-related loops, and failures of attempted stabilization policies were
evident.

Rather paradoxically, the 1970s also witnessed the culmination of the

belief in the power of macroeconomic policies in form of the concept of a "political

39Consider the following statement by authors who contributed much to the
development of the money supply function:
"Our version of monetarism does not
deny that if exogenous shocks take the form of government policies, including
fiscal policies, the system may oscillate or even explode into inflation or
cumulative deflation.
Our proposition asserts that cyclical instability is
mainly the product of government policies that are imposed on a stabilizing
private sector" (Brunner and Meltzer, in J. Stein, ed., 1976, p. 180).

_L9_

business cycle," which is not of monetarist origin.40
Monetarist models can acquire some cyclical dynamics by combining an

expectationsaUgmented Phillips curve with the quantity-theoretic demand for money
function.

Laidler (1973b) presents an intentionally very simple model of this type,

with exogenous monetary growth and the full-employment output rate, and adaptive
expectations of inflation.

The causation runs from lagged and current money growth

rates and current inflation to the change in output, then back to inflation, and so
on, recursively.

The model generates a cyclical movement in output and inflation

(relative to their natural and expected values, respectively) in response to a
single shift in the rate of monetary expansion.

Laidler notes that its simulations

leave much to be desired, probably in large part because of the missing variables,
particularly the interest rate.4
3.

Price Misperceptions and Intertemporal Substitution of Labor
Adaptive expectations often imply long lags of adjustment and persistence

of apparently systematic errors.

Critics regard models that yield such

results as ad hoc and inconsistent with optimizing behavior.

They accept

instead the view that "expectations are essentially the same as the predictions of the relevant economic theory" (Muth, 1961, p. 316).

Application of

this "rational expectations" hypothesis (REH) to macroeconomics was part of a

40The political models of business cycles maintain several strong and
questionable assumptions. (1) Policymakers know the structure of the economy, the
(2) The inflation-unemployment short-run tradeoff can be exploited
public does not.
(3) Voters are myopic and concerned with the
effectively by the party in power.
current electoral period only. Thus the government is capable of fine-tuning the
It is not surprising that these models, though ingenious,
economy periodically.
find little support in facts: the related evidence is mixed and generally
inconclusive. See Nordhaus, 1975; Lindbeck, 1976; MacRae, 1977; also, Fels, 1977;
A very useful, balanced overview is given in Alt and
Moore, 1977a; and Tufte, 1978.
Chrystal, 1983; see especially, ch. 5.

For

a corresponding theoretical analysis of a model for a small open economy
under fixed exchange rates, see Laidler, 1975, ch. 9.

-50-

new ambitious program of work undertaken in the 1970s by several economists
following the initiative of Lucas, 1972.

The objective was to develop a

general business—cycle theory in strict adherence to the basic principles of
the analysis of economic equilibrium:

consistent pursuit of self-interest by

individuals and continuous clearing of all markets by relative prices.42
Under RE}-{, the route of the older monetarist theory which used adaptive

expectations to help explain the duration of cyclical movements is foreclosed.

Expectations are now taken to be free of any bias and subject to

random errors only.

All persistent monetary changes, inasmuch as they are

predictable, will be correctly anticipated and met directly by proportional
changes in prices and related nominal variables.

Only random monetary

impulses can lead to price surprises and miscalculations which, in this view,
are necesssary to explain any cyclical movements in real variables.

The short-run aggregate supply function for labor (Lucas and Rapping,
1969) is upward-sloping relative to the deviations of the current level of
real wages from their expected (discounted future) level.

It is seen as

typically elastic, reflecting strong competitive incentives to take advantage
of temporarily higher rates of real return.

Since the substitutability of

leisure over time is high, a small change in the return on the current work
effort can induce a large change, in the same direction, in the amount of work
done.

This intertemporal substitution hypothesis (ISH) plays a central role

in the recent attempts to explain employment fluctuations as an aggregate
result of individual choices on the supply side of the labor market.

42Lucas,

1973, 1975, 1977; Sargent and Wallace, 1975, 1976; Sargent, 1976a;
Barro, 1976, 1980b; Lucas and Sargent, 1978.
Lucas, 1977, p. 7, cites Hayetc,
1933, as an "intellectual ancestor" who posed the problem of explaining the
business cycle as part, not a contradiction, of the equilibrium, theory.
This
was indeed Hayek's intent, but it is also correct to characterize his solution
as a theory of monetary disequilibrium and an unstable cumulative process, with
excessive credit creation causing distortions of relative prices and the
structure of production (as Hayek, 1932, 1933, are commonly interpreted).

-51-

their output
By an analogous argument, firms are expected to vary

prices, provided
positively in response to transitory changes in their selling
equated with
that these are seen as relative or real price changes and not
general inflation.

But they would likewise vary their output inversely in

their inputs,
response to transitory changes in the relative prices of

The basic equilibrium model of business cycles

including in particular labor.

firms into a
disregards this complication by simply combining workers and
single group.

supplies
The representative worker_entrepreneur then generally

with an unanticipated rise
more (less) of both labor and output when faced
(fall) in his selling price.

earlier business—
This approach, by eliminating other prime suspects of

dispersed and
cycle theories (including real disturbances, which are viewed as
localized) places a heavy explanatory burden on a single causal chain:

random

production demonetary shocks induce price misperceptions which induce wrong
cisions.

known
By assumption, prices other than those in one's own market are

to anyone only with a lag of one unit period of unspecified length.

Agents

and lagging
have complete and timely local information but only incomplete
economy-wide
information about other "island" markets (Phelps, 1970) and about

aggregates such as the money stock and the overall price level.

Suppose now

raising prices
that an unanticipated acceleration in monetary growth occurs,
first observes a
in general; then the representative worker_entrepreneur

part a temporary
higher selling price than he expected, takes it to be in some
his output
increase in his relative price or real rate of return, and raises
in accordance with the ISH.

These reactions prevail whenever the observed

had expected on the
prices turn out to be higher than the level most producers
basis of previous information.

In the opposite situation of prices having

proved lower than expected, output is on the average reduced.

The random

—52—

forecasting errors are unavoidable and can be recognized only in time, after
the outside price data becomes available.

However, by then many erroneous

decisions will already have been taken, and the necessary revisions and
corrections, too, will involve time and costs.
The model of the "representative producer," with its fusion of worker and
employer, assumes that labor and business recognize that their interests
generally coincide, or at least act as if they did.

This is not consistent

with the strong evidence of significant patterns of cyclical behavior in cost—
price-profit relationships (see part II and section 111—5 above).

These

observations can best be interpreted on the common—sense assumption that firms

and workers pursue their own interests in reacting rationally to changing

business and labor market conditions.3
The issue of the relative timing of output prices vs. input costs can be
reduced to an informational problem in a number of ways.

It might be assumed that

firms have prompter knowledge of price changes than workers or, more generally,
that the representative producer unit (firm

or worker) knows the prices of things

it sells better than the prices of things it buys (cf. Friedman, 1968).

If so,

then inflation will be stimulative because it is largely unanticipated by workers

or buyers (or, which is much the same, because it is recognized sooner in output
prices than in input costs).

Some critics view any of these assumed informational

asymmetries as arbitrary specifications (B. Friedman, 1978, p. 76;

Tobin,

1980, p.

42).

The equilibrium approach to business cycles can be explained well in general
terms (Lucas, 1977) and restated simply

(see the text above and the capsule

3To be sure, the interests of workers and employers may coincide in some
respects and are reconciled in negotiated or implicit contracts (see section IV7(3) below).

—53—

description in Table 5).

The individual models based on the REH and the ISH,

however, are much too diverse, experimental, and complex to lend themselves to
such verbal summarization.

Some of them use changes in current prices relative to

the next period's expected price level to induce intertemporal substitution on the
supply side (Lucas 1972, 1973; Sargent and Wallace, 1975).

Others allow for the

existence of assets that earn a nominal interest rate and add that rate to the
above price surprise term to obtain a measure of anticipated one-period real rate
of return.

This relative price variable then appears with a positive sign as a

determinant of supply and with a negative sign as a determinant of demand
(Barro, 1980a and

The general criticism of the price—misperception hypothesis is that it
requires long informational lags which are even less likely under rational than
under adaptive expectations.

Ample, frequent, and low-cost monetary and price

statistics are now available, so informational confusion of the type here
hypothesized can at most be short-lived and associated with random changes, not
persistent cyclical fluctuations, in output and employment (Hall, 1975, 1980a;
Tobin, 1977; Modigliani, 1977).

True, this argument is partly countered by the

observation that there are indeed serious deficiencies in these and other impor-

tant data on the economy, which in many cases are reduced only througha timeconsuming sequence of revisions.

This can distort initial expectations and

delay successful signal detection for several months (Zarnowitz, 1982).

Still,

informational lags are surely much shorter than the average cyclical movements,

so they cannot alone account for the duration of the observed fluctuations
(Okun, 1980) or, one may add, for the large size procyclical fluctuations in
corporate profits and stock prices.

Beginning with an economy at full

The net effect of a rise in this composite variable, then, will be to
stimulate output if, on the aggregate across the markets, the induced increase in
This formulation takes into
supply is larger than the induced decrease in demand.
account the debate about the direction of informational asymmetries noted in the
preceding paragraph of the text.

_51_

empioyment,

most errors caused by temporary misperceptions of monetary and

price changes would be detected and corrected before they could give rise to
large cumulative income movements in either direction.

Finally, the knowledge

of the nominal interest rates, a set of timely and global variables, may convey
information about the unobserved part of money growth (King, 1983;

Barro,

1980b).6
The criticism of the ISH centers on observations said to be inconsistent
with continuous equilibrium in the labor market (see, e.g., Okun, 1980).
,"

•

.4 ..iJL
JJI4 ....,.-....
L4LI

separations

..._a
£' iLIiL. .LyUi
1 _...
.L11Ui
I
&..

.

d.IIU

account for most of the rise in unemployment.

..

Thus

IL1VU.LUIILL y
..... 4..

More people are

looking for work at current (or even lower) wages over longer average time
periods.

Fewer people quit their jobs as vacancies drop.

General critiques, however, have limited power of persuasion, particularly
against strong priors of the economic equilibrium theory.

It is therefore

particularly important that the hypotheses under consideration have been
subjected to various tests, in large part by their proponents.
In one set of tests, the reaction function of' monetary authorities was

estimated by regressing the rate of growth in money on its own past values and
selected lagged variables, and identifying the residuals from this regression
with the "unanticipated" component of monetary change (Barro, 1977a, 1978; Barro
and Rush, 1980).

These tests could not reject the joint hypotheses of

rationality and neutrality of money, but many doubts were raised about the
specification and identifiability of'

Barro's

reaction function as well as its

5it is against the spirit of the new equilibrium theory (and some older
scholars such as Hayek and other Austrians) to start an attempted explanation
of business cycles from postulating an initial state of recession.
146This prompts Barro (1981, p. 51) to observe that the "stress on
confusions between temporary and permanent monetary shocks has been overdone.
The real effects of temporary, but perceived, money shocks would be
eliminated by the appropriate adjustment in the nominal rate of return."

-55—

consistency with private and public rational behavior.7

The neutrality hypothesis that anticipated money growth has no real effects
is strongly rejected by tests reported in Mishkin (1982).

Here anticipated as

well unanticipated money growth influence output and unemployment with lags of
up to 20 quarters.8

Data on monetary aggregates are available promptly and often (now weekly)
but they are also repeatedly revised.

The revisions are frequently large

relative to the average rates of money growth but they appear to be on the whole
random.

Economic agents should not be assumed to be ignorant of the current

monetary values for which they do have usable approximations.

And, contrary to

the RE-IS models in which prices are fully flexible, output is in fact
positively associated with these measured and knowable values of the money stock
(King, 1981; Boschen and Grossman, 1982; McCallum, 1982).

The early tests by Lucas and Rapping (1969) favor the ISH but they are
based on adaptive expectations.

When re-estimated by Altonji (1982) under

rational expectations and a variety of alternative assumptions about agents'
information sets, the results generally fail to support the ISH.49

Weak

negative effects of a price surprise term on the unemployment rate are reported

the comments by Blinder, H. J. Gordon, R. Weintraub, and Fischer in
S. Fischer, ed., 1980, pp. 49-72 and 219-221.
On the related basic problems
of "observational equivalence" and testability, see also Sargent, 1976b, and
Sims, 198Oa.

is these longer lags that are primarily responsible for Mishkin's
conclusion being the opposite of that reached in the Barro papers, where lags
of two years or ten quarters are used.
No attempts to rationalize the
persistence of such long distributed lags under the REH are made in any of
these reports. See also Nelson, 1981, on the dependence of unemployment on
lagged values of nominal GNP.

9"For most specifications, the current real wage, the expected future
real wage, and the expected real rate of interest are either insignificantly
related to unemployment and labour supply or have the wrong sign" (Altonji,
op. cit., p. 78L).
See also Altonji and Asherifelter, 1980.

-56—

in Sargent (1976a) but disputed in Fair (1979); there are simultaneity problems
with these estimates, as shown in Barro (1980a).

These and other tests (Hall,

1979) are admitted to be rudimentary and on the whole inconclusive; all
participants in this work stress that it presents great difficulties.

Still

other recent tests addressed to certain manageable aspects of the problem have
produced for the most part negative results (Clark and Summers, 1982; Mankiw,
Rottemberg, and Summers, 1982).
To sum up, the evidence can be fairly described as being on balance unfavorable to the theories here considered.
on the part of their authors.

This has led to some reassessments

Thus Barro (1981, p. 74) expresses "doubts

about the explanatory value for business cycles of currently available
equilibrium theories."50

MeCalluin, 1982, p. 4.,

argues that the evidence

requires the abandonment of "flexible-price equilibrium models" but not of the
"equilibrium approach to macroeconomic analysis," which can rationalize sticky
or slowly-adjusting wages and prices.

4.

Cyclical Persistence and Extensions of the Equilibrium Models
Can random monetary shocks produce persistent fluctuations of'

real

gates in an economy with market clearing and incomplete information?

aggre-

Those

who deny it attack mainly the ISH as leading to misguided attempts to
represent business cycles as a "moving equilibrium" (Modigliani, 1977; Tobin,
1977, 1980; Solow, 1980).

Some expect that the postulate of continuous

marketing clearing will have to be abandoned in the RE models (Okun, 1980;
Gordon, 1981).

50He hastens to add that these doubts "do not constitute support for
Keynesian disequilibrium analysis," which is incomplete and even more
questionable.
His argument implies that there are only two sides to the
debate, the "new classical macroeconomics' and "Keynesian macroeconomics."
This is a widespread but mistaken and, in my opinion, much too restrictive
point of view.

—57-

The equilibrium theorists recognize that the basic ingredients of their

models are not sufficient to produce the persistent movements in output and
employment -which occur during the business cycle.

However, they point out

that random shocks to aggregate demand can be converted into persistent
Further,

movements by suitable propagation mechanisms, as in Frisch, 1933.

Lucas and Sargent (1978, pp. 65-67) argue that some devices of this type have

already been incorporated in the equilibrium models and others are likely to
be developed.

The first of these propagation mechanisms relates to the familiar
observation that rapid adjustments of the rates of employment and production
are costly.

Accordingly, firms respond with lags to the relative price

signals they perceive.51

In practice, modeling the cost-of-adjustment effects

takes the form of making the demands for factors àf production depend partly
on their own lagged values. it is important to note that this mechanism is
entirely different from and extraneous to that of the random price-misperception effects.

The latter should not be spread over time by the old device of

distributed lags.

The unit period here is defined by the lag of data on the

nominal aggregates which was already shown to be relatively short.

The logic

of this approach seems to leave no good reasons for extending the lag to more
than one period and so opening up the possibility of autocorrelated forecast
errors.

Cost-of-adjustment models may provide a rationale for more

and longer lags.

complex

However, in a world without uncertainty about the

probability distributions governing the future (see next section), where
markets clear continuously leaving no unexploited opportunities for gain,

51It should be noted that such lags could also rationalize a dynamic
model of fluctuations in employment and output that is purely "real", i.e.,
independent of' the behavior of money and prices (see Sargent, 1979, pp. 370379).

-58-

there

should be little ground for any sizable distributed
lags in economic

decision making (cf. Poole,

1976).

Another propagation device incorporates
a form of an investment accelerator (Lucas, 1975).

Positive price surprises induce not only increases
in

current employment and output but also acquisition of
additional capital.
Capacity is supposed to increase promptly during
the period when the nature of
the shock is not yet recognized. This increment to the
stock of capacity
raises labor productivity and temporarily increases
the demand for labor and
the supply of commodities; it also retards the
general price increase, thereby

delaying the recognition of, or adjustment to,
the initial shock.

Thus a

persistence effect is created.
This formulation also poses some major problems.
projects involve indivisibilities,

Many capital investment

high costs and risks, and gestation periods

measured in years and quarters, not months.

They are unlikely to be decided

upon isolated signals that could well prove false
after a short information
lag (cf. Gordon, 1981, p. 510).

Not surprisingly, random monetary

disturbances and price misperceptions have not
attracted much attention in the
literature as potentially important determinants
of investment; instead,
expectations based on systematic changes in demand,
profits, credit, and cost
of capital have.

Neglect of these factors deprives the treatment of
business

capital investment in this class of models of
much interest.

Furthermore, because of the relatively long ordering
and construction lags,
investment will tend to add to demand before
it adds to capacity.

The effects
of increased capacity on supply, prices, and the
anticipated real rate of return
on capital are delayed.

it must be recalled, too, that capacity itself
normally

continues to increase during recessions; it is investment
and the rate of capacity utilization that are highly sensitive cyclically.

In models that concen-

-59—

of capital which is presumably
trate on monetary and price effects on the stock
labor), the role of the
optimally utilized throughout (as is the stock of
reformulated "accelerator" would seem to be quite limited.
purely random
In models with lagging information, the effects of
monetary-price shocks do not cumulate:

the responses peak in the first period

202).- This feature is not
and decline gradually thereafter (Lucas, 1975, p.
capital is installed
changed by the introduction of investment as long as new
with a lag of one period only.
unrealistic.

But these timing specifications are very

in plant
There is strong evidence that on the average investment

complete, with few projects
and equipment requires about seven quarters to
505—519; Hall,
taking less than one year (Mayer, 1960; Zarnowitz, 1973, pp.
1977).

Kydland and Prescott (1980,

1982) use the "time to build" new capital

number of periods needed
stocks as a feature of technology which dictates the
to produce durable producer and consumer goods.

These lags are treated as

pOlicy-invariant and constant for a given type of capital.

(This is unlike

procyclically with backthe observed delivery lags on these goods which vary
Carlton, 1979.)
logs of orders; see Popkin, 1965; Zarnowitz, 1973, part III;

movements over the
Time to build contributes to the persistence of output
goods (unfinished
multiple periods required to produce the finished capital
goods are not part of the productive stocks).

The models used in this work

basically by
rely on an intertemporal labor supply function and are driven

of the representative
real shocks that affect technology and the productivity
worker 52

52The real shocks have permanent (autocorrelated) and transitory
movements or
components; the former also contribute to the cumulative
and Prescott
The
1980
paper
by
Kydland
"momentum" in employment and output.
monetary disturincludes random shocks to nominal wages as well, but these
real
shocks
only.
The 1982 model contains
bances are secondary.

-60-

Investment realizations are a distributed—lag function of investment
plans.

But the series of new capital appropriations and contracts and orders

for plant and equipment that proxy for investment plans are also serially

correlated like the expenditures that follow them, only less so (see, e.g.,
Zarnowitz, op. cit.).
equilibrium

Hence they lack the random-shock property which the

theorists look for in "an essential propagator of business cycle

fluctuations" (Taylor in Fischer,

ed., 1980, p. 192).

an important link in the cyclical process.

Nevertheless they are

The lag of investment expenditures

behind investment decisions is an essential element in several otherwise
quite
different theories of business cycles (Mitchell, 1913; Kalecki, 1935;
Hicks,
1950).

Inventory investment provides still another potential channel for

persistence effects in equilibrium models.

In Blinder and Fischer (1981), an

unanticipated rise in money and prices leads firms to sell out of inventories
at the same time as they increase output.

In subsequent periods, production

is gradually raised to restock the depleted inventories.

More specifically,

inventory investment depends positively on the excess of the
desired stock of
inventories over the available stock
surprise term

-

positively with Q
now also with

(N

p1)

-

Nt)

and inversely on the price—

The aggregate supply function has

vary

and the same price surprise (as in Lucas, 1972, 1973) but
-

Nt)

activity, but a rise in
N

(N

.

Nt

The desired inventory
relative to

N

N

will stimulate

will discourage it.

Even with

a constant, this model can account for some serial correlation of

output.

With interest-sensitive

Nt

,

larger

fluctuations would result since

even fully anticipated changes in money wouldhave some real effects (Blinder
and Fischer, 1981, sec. 5).

—61—

aggregate sales-inventorY—
This approach draws on some old ideas about the
above)afld combines them with
income nexus in business cycles (see section 111-5
It needs to
rather uneasy match.
elements of the new equilibrium models for a
adjustments is large during mild
be recalled, too, that the role of inventory
War II period but
recessions and slowdowns such as prevailed in the post-World
Blinder and Holtz-Eakin,
otherwise supporting rather than central (cf.

198k).

durability and long
Summing up, the cost-motivated adjustments lags,
inventory effects have all been
gestation periods of capital goods, and desired
business cycles.
long recognized as important in studies of

These elements,

The
of the equilibrium model.
however, do not exactly mesh with the basic core
reduced and less intelligible
random monetary shocks and price surprises have

"propagation" processes move to the
parts to play, while the real factors in the
"may undermine the quantitative
center of the stage. These extensions, indeed,

mechanism as the basis for
role of underlying intertemporal substitution
I9).
fluctuations in output and employment" (Barro, 1981, p.

5.

Rationality, Knowledge, and Uncertainty

must be consistent with
To be "rational" in a technical sense, expectations
the whole 5elf_fulfilling,
the structure of the given model. Unless they are on
is vitiated.
the model of behavior assumed to be ruled by them

Given the

RE model for its
relevant information set, it may be possible to solve a
equilibrium path over all future.
forecast-solution is updated.

As new information becomes available, the

Used as a principle of modeling dynamic

produced important new
stochastic equilibria, RE gained wide popularity and
insights

.3

aspects of macroeconOmetric models,
53mese include the criticism of some
markets with imperfect information, and work on

the analysis of competitive
of economic
the consequences of endogenous expectations for the effectiveness
outside
the scope
These matters lie
policies (see Lucas, 1976; Poole, 1976).
Kantor,
abound
(Shiller,
1978;
of this paper. Assessments of the RE models
For
surveys
of
the
1980).
1979; S. Fischer, ed., 1980; McCalluifl et al.,
1983;
and
Frydman
and
literature and references, see Begg, 1982; Sheffrin,
Phelps, eds., 1983.

-62-

However, even in relatively simple linear models, the computational
problems posed by this radically logical approach are often formidable.

Using

RE as a model of actual behavior cannot mean imputing to economic agents
generally the ability to solve such problems.

Rather it is the markets that

are supposed to work as if they somehow approximated this capacity.

This

could be interpreted along the lines of what may be called a weak version of
the REH:

market incentives and penalties favor the dominance of optimal or

cost-efficient predictions..

Firms and individuals whose forecasts are

consistently poor will not be able to survive economically.
of those who do survive will tend to come true.

The anticipations

This implies that predic—

tively valuable information, on which such anticipations are based, is
scarce

so that collecting it is a profitable activity (Grossman and Stiglitz, 1980).
Such propositions, when applied to well-functioning individual markets,
seem simply good, standard economics.

In the aggregate, they need not imply

more than a long-run tendency toward equilibrium, promoted by learning from
experience but inhibited by limited opportunities for controlled experiments.

Thus no firm link is established between the type of model and the

expectational hypothesis used.

In particular, RE models have been built

without the property of continuous market clearing.

In principle, various

types of disequilibria could be expected by people and modeled with the
aid of
RE methodology; or, if expectationa]. confusions prevail, no unique solutions

should be found.

The REH of the macroeconomic literature in the 1970s, however, is a
strong version which adds to the reasonable premise of rational use of costly
information another assumption, namely that the available data and models
provide sufficient knowledge about the future so that the prevailing expectations are free of any systematic errors and consistent with continuous

—63—

aggregate

equilibriUfli.

Economic behavior is guided by subjective probabil-

the events in
ities which on the average agree with the true frequencies of
question.

uncertainty
lJnlike in Knight (1921) and Keynes (1936) there is no

are.Sk
as to what these objective probabilities

generally
Now there seem to be no good a priori reasons why this should
for most of the objections
be so; indeed, the belief that it is not accounts
to the REH.

It is evident that there is no agreement on what is the

at any
"objective" probability distribution of future outcomes for the economy
time, since different theories and models coexist.

Another reason why

and skills to
forecasts differ across people, firms, etc., is that information
use it are not evenly distributed.
that depends
Attempts to form rational predictions of any macro-variable
in the economy involve
on anticipatory actions of many or all agents
individual
adjustments through a learning process in which not only the
evaluated.
forecaster's own beliefs but also those of others are continually

what others are
Each agent, then, tries to predict the average forecast, or
likely to predict that average will be, and so on.

This is the difficult

example of
"infinite regress" problem well known from the "beauty contest"
Keynes (1936, p. 156).

Although increasingly and ingeniously attacked, this

problem is still far from being fully tractable or understood.

However, an

unique,
important result that is strongly suggested by this work is that a

all markets,
stable RE equilibrium, path along which prices continually clear

entails the collective consistency of individual plans.

But individual

rationality (the cornerstone of modern microeconomic analysis) does not

of uncertainty,
Indeed, Lucas, 1977, p. 15, argues that "In cases

For the REH to apply, business
economic reasoning will be of no value."
similar events.
cycles must represent "repeated instances of essentially

.

."

necessarily imply such a consistency.55
In a stochastically stationary environment that has persisted long enough
to be familiar, agents are assumed to have learned all they can about the

probability distributions they face.6

In the economy as it is, however,

change is to a large extent unanticipated and learning is perpetual.

In

models with learning and disparate expectations, convergence to the RE equilibrium requires that agents know no less than the laws governing the change in
the key parameters of the economy and the effects of exogenous shocks.
Learning itself can act as a cyclical propagator mechanism by inducing serial
and cross correlations in forecasts (Townsend, 1978, 1983a and b).
The strong assumptions of prior knowledge, are implausible but there

seems to be no alternative to them that would be satisfactory from the RE
point of view.57

Some simple but flexible rules of adaptive expectations (AE)

may be consistent with optimal learning (Taylor, 1975; B. Friedman, 1979)and
some models with a common simple rule converge to an equilibrium solution
an example, see Bray, 1983).

(for

But the collective adherence to a rule which, if

individually followed, would yield biased forecasts is in conflict with the
idea of the optimizing representative agent in a decentralized market economy.
It is important to distinguish between the critique of the RE and the
critique of the particular market-clearing models with RE (see, e.g.,
Fair,1978).

Many critics agree that the pre-.RE treatments of expectations are

555ee several essays and the introductory chapter by the editors in
Frydman and Phelps, eds., 1983.
56Most of the early basic RE models, constructed on this premise, simply.
contain no learning processes.
.57Without some such assumptions, convergence may not occur even in
single—market contexts (Cyert and DeGroot, 197U; B. Friedman, 1979; DeCanio,
1979).

—65-

generally

1980, pp. 28—
arbitrary and, at least in principle, inferior (Tobin

29; Meltzer, 1982, p. 3).

Further

advances in the intensely used and studied

in Lucas and Sargent,
RE methodology are to be expected (as argued, a.o.,
1978; Lucas, 1981; S. Grossman, 1981).

Still, the claim to general validity

market-clearing macromodels is now
of the strong form of the REH as applied to
1980, 1981;
rejected by a wide range of economists (Arrow, 1978; Tobin,

Laidler, 1981, pp. 11—15; Friedman, 1982, p. 630).

the stationarity
In the present context, the critical questions concern
and predictability of the processes observed during business cycles.

Their

established,bUt so is their
recurrent and sequential nature is indeed well
in durations and
lack of periodicity and the. large inter-cycle differences
amplitudes (see part II above).

The separability of business cycles from the

These are arguments against

long trends an by no means be taken for granted.
the applicability of the RE methods.

In a nonstationary world with a mixture

uncertainty in the sense of
of random and serially correlated disturbances,
dubious) premises
Knight and Keynes is pervasive, even under the (empirically
of no structural change and stable policy regimes.
contain uncer—
The monetarist models with AE may be interpreted to

tainty.8

Meltzer (1982) distinguishes between uncertainty, which is

from "permanent"
associated with variations in nonstatioflary means resulting

associated with transchanges in levels or growth rates, and risk, which is
itory, random deviations around stable trends.

He argues that the current RE

explanation of the
models err in ignoring uncertainty which is essential to an
persistence of cyclical contractions.

Models of business cycles should allow

8See Friedman, 1972, pp. 923-924, on uncertainty; also Muth, 1960;
1980; and Friedman,
Frenkel, 1975; Mussa, 1975; Brunner, Cukierman, and Meltzer,
empirical
usefulness
of AE.
1982, pp 415 and 14147, on the rationality and

—66—

permanent changes to occur but not to be identified immediately.

Stochastic

shocks, whether monetary or real, have permanent and transitory components
which cannot be reliably separated (new information reduces but does not
eliminate the confusion).

The rational response to the shocks is adaptive,

taking the form of gradual adjustments of beliefs about the permanent values
of the endogenous variables.59
What is the evidence of how people actually form their expectations?
Recent work using survey data has been preoccupied with tests for the
rationality of inflation forecasts.

Typically, actual values are regressed on

predicted values, and the forecasts fail the tests when (1) the sample
intercept and slope estimates are significantly different from zero and one,
respectively, and/or (2) the residual errors are significantly autocor—
related.

Data from the semiannual surveys of economic forecasters conducted

since 19J47 by Joseph A. Livingston, a syndicated financial columnist, reject

the REH according to most of these and related tests (Pesando, 1975; Carlson,
1977; Wachtel, 1977; Moore, 1977b; Pearce,

results are reported by Mullineaux, 1978).

1979; Gramlich, 1983; more favorable

Tests of individual forecasts

confirm those of the group average forecasts, and the results from the
quarterly NBER—ASA economic outlook surveys are consistent with those obtained
for the Livingston surveys (Figlewski and Wachtel, 1981; Zarnowitz, 1983) 60

59Note that this is a general approach, compatible with Keynesian, monetarist, and other theories. It is used in the 1980 model of Brunner et al.,
in which monetary shocks affect only the price level and the rate of interest,
while unemployment is caused by errors due to the inability of workers to
distinguish between permanent and transitory real productivity shocks.
This
model is subject to all doubts concerning the hypotheses of complete neutrality of money and intertemporal substitution in labor supply.
60The relevant literature on the properties of expectationa]. data is very
voluminous and can be only briefly summarized here. For a more comprehensive
review of the evidence, see Zarnowitz, 198)4.

-67-

Studies of consumer survey data from the Survey Research Center of the
University of Michigan show mixed but in large measure negative results
(Juster, 1979; Huizinga, 1980; Curtin,

1982; Grarnlich, 1983).

The same

applies to the surveys of business executives (deLeeuw and McKelvey,

1981) and

European and Japanese surveys (Aiginger, 1981; Papadia, 1982; Visco,

198)4).61

Few authors have tested data on anticipations for variables other than
inflation.

U.S. manufacturers' sales expectations have been on the whole

negatively assessed in a comprehensive study by Hirsch and Lovell (1969), more
positively by Pashigian (1964) and Irvine (1981).

For professional economic

forecasters, including econometric service bureaus, there is strong evidence
that predictions of inflation in the 1970s have been generally biased, while
those of other important aggregates (growth in nominal and real GNP, the
unemployment rate) pass the rationality tests much more frequently and better
(MeNees, 1978; Zarnowitz,

1983).62

The REH finds the strongest support in the "efficient markets" literature
(Fama, 1970; Poole, 1976).

This is readily understandable since financial

assets and commodities are traded in well organized and informed competitive
auction markets.

However, some tests of forecasts by active participants in

these markets reject the REH, as shown in the survey of Wall Street predictions of interest rates by B. Friedman (1980).

This could merely mean that

this survey was not adequately representative of the most successful traders

61A11 these surveys collect largely qualitative responses (on the
direction and in some cases range rather than the precise size of the expected
The conversion of these data to the quantitative form
price movements).
required for the tests presents some difficult problems.
62For many early forecasts of U.S. aggregate series, there is evidence of
significant bias (Mincer and Zarnowitz, 1969). The most common pattern is
underestimation of growth, and, less frequently, of cyclical changes (Theil,
There are indications of adaptive learning behavior
1958; Zarnowitz, 1967).
(Mincer, 1969).

-68-

and hence of the market.6
Expectations which fail the rationality criteria in ex post tests may
well prove entirely consistent with optimizing ex ante behavior once the
consequences of uncertainty, unique events, defective models, and fragmentary
or costly information are taken into account (Zarnowitz, 1982).
need not be adaptive or otherwise backward-looking only.

Also, they

In fact, it appears

that time—series models rarely explain statistically much more than half of
the variance of expectational data (see several papers in Mincer, ed., 1969;
Aiginger, 1979).

The evidence suggests that economic expectations are neither

mere projections of the past nor flashes of intuition about the future but
combinations of both extrapolative and autonomous components.

Predictions of

real growth and inflation are usually diversified and uncertain, seldom
demonstrably self-fulfilling.

Anticipatory action is often inhibited by prior

commitments incurred in part to reduce uncertainty.
bygones and expectations are not all-important.

Thus not all past is

Yet they matter a great deal

and are a proper subject for empirical as well as theoretical studies,6
6.

Models of Financial Instability
Speculative excesses or "manias" have attracted the attention of contem-

poraries and economic historians since at least the Dutch Tulip Bubble of

6Indeed, Mishkin (1981a) constructs forecasts from the bond market data
which fail to reject the rationality tests for interest-rate expectations.
But the concurrent bond-market predictions of inflation fail the tests.
The
argument that this reflects the unusual character of the 1960s, a period of
rising inflation, is not really persuasive. The inflation forecasts in the
perhaps even more "unusual" 1970s seem generally worse yet.
Long periods of
tranquility are hard to find.
61The evidence from surveys has certain important limitations and must be
assessed with caution, but the consensus of careful independent tests based on
such data should be taken seriously; indeed, the materials now available are
rich and in need of much further exploration (cf. Tobln, 1980, p. 29).
Lessons from such work can usefully counter and correct the freely speculative
analysis that treats expectations as being inevitably "unobservable."

—69-

1625—37.

Financed by credit expansion and characterized by "overtrading" in

real or financial assets,e.g., gold, land, or securities, they have been

associated with more than two dozen major booms in business activity, often
involving many countries (Kindleberger, 1978).

Historically, they tended to

be followed by "panics," that is, distress selling of the same assets to

reacquire money and repay debt, and crashes in the prices of the now illiquid
objects of the speculation.

The resulting financial crises accompanied or

aggravated the downturns in the business cycle.
'In asset markets, the current price depends as a rule positively on its
own expected rate of change.

Expectations are influenced by outside events as

well as the "market fundamentals"--economic determinants of the rates of
return.

The markets may react to the events by adopting such price antici-

pations as would drive the actual prices away from the path consistent with
the fundamentals.

In this view, accepted much more readily by practitioners

than theorists, anticipations of a strong market trend are occasionally
capable of causing speculative "bubbles"--cuznulative, even explosive,

fluctuations in prices of selected assets.
Very recently, these ideas, long mistrusted by most contemporary

economists, began to receive support from writers using rigorous techniques of
equilibrium analysis.

Shiller (1981a and b) concludes that stock price

movements are too large to be explained by an efficient-markets model which
incorporates future dividends, capital gains and inflation.

Blanchard and

Watson (1982) argue that bubbles can occur in efficient markets with new entry
and no unexploited arbitrage opportunities; also, that they have potentially

-70-

strong real effects, on relative asset prices, wealth, and aggregate demand.6

Much of the recent work in this area uses the overlapping-generations
approach due to Samuelson (1958) (see Kareken and Wallace, eds., 1980).
Models of this type, with markets continously cleared by price movements,

typically have a multiplicity of RE solutions, a large proportion of which may
involve fluctuations prompted by arbitrary but self-fulfilling shifts in
anticipations (Azariadis, 1981).

Thus, if the belief that sunspots predict

future prices were widely held, many individuals would act on it so as to bear
out their expectations.

Cass and Shell (1983) argue that RE equilibria

generally can be influenced by extrinsic uncertainty, i.e., random phenomena
such as "animal spirits" or "market psychology," which do not affect the basic
parameters of the economy (endowments, preferences, technologies).

The

conditions under which this would not be the case are so unrealistic as to be
devoid of any empirical interest.66

These abstract treatments rationalize the role in financial crises of
"sunspots," but they do not tell us how much these interacting and selffulfilling expectations matter.

The crises are seldom isolated phenomena;

rather they form a part of some business cycles and are thus related to the

6The problems of indeterminacy and instability of RE equilibria are now
Conditions under which bubbles may be
well recognized and much studied.
excluded from the RE paths of the price level have been specified for some
monetary models (see, e.g., Brock, 1975). Tests for the German hyperinflation
of the early 1920s reported by Flood and Garber (1980) give no support to the
But it
hypothesis that a price-level bubble occurred in that extreme episode.
is easy to see that expectations alone cannot account for a long or rapid
inflation in the absence of persistent or very high rates of money creation.
Clearly, bubbles are much more likely in speculative markets for financial
assets.
66They include (1) strong RE -— unanimity of beliefs; (2) complete
markets -- there are markets for all types of contingent claims; and (3)
unrestricted access to these markets for all agents at all times -- across the
"generations." (1) and (2) are merely improbable; (3) is altogether
impossible.

-71—

monetary, institutional, and real factors involved in these cycles.

Market

psychology plays a large role insome crises, mainly the major ones.
Mild financial crises of recent U.S. history, called "credit crunches",

are associated by some observers primarily with reduced availability of
credit, not high interest rates (Wojnilower, 1980).

Credit rationing by banks

is linked to imperfect information about the borrowers' default risk (Stiglitz
and Weiss, 1981; Blinder and Stiglitz, 1983).

When banks refuse to renew

their loans, the high-risk borrowers and many small firms will be unable to

secure credit elsewhere and forced to curtail investment and perhaps current
operations.

The retrenchment may or may not be caused by restrictive open-

market policies of the central bank.

Under fractional banking, loans and

deposits are highly collinear, so it is difficult to use the data to distinguish between this "Oredit" hypothesis and a "money supply" hypothesis of a
downturn.

Since the early 1950s, broad credit aggregates such as the total

debt of U.S. nonfinancial sectors have been closely and stably related to
GNP -

better

or not worse than the money stock and monetary base series (B.

Friedman, 1983).

In several collected papers, Minsky (1982) argues that long periods of
prosperity interrupted only by mild recessions or slowdowns breed overconfidence, excessive short-term financing by banks of long-term business
projects, investment booms interacting with stodk market booms, growing
indebtedness and illiquidity.

Innovative practices and new instruments are

used to increase the availability of'

investment

broadly defined and is endogenously determined.

finance:

money should be

Its supply, however, becomes

at some point inelastic as uncertainty grows and banks increasingly deem it
prudent to retrench (or monetary authorities act to constrain inflation).
demand for credit to finance planned and progressing investment projects

The

-72-

nevertheless continues to rise.

It takes sharp increases in interest rates

and declines in the present value of expected net returns on capital assets to
check and reverse the expansion in new investment.

Business cash flows and

profits decline and eventually so do total sales, output, and employment.

The

resulting losses force many industrial concerns and financial intermediaries
into refinancing of debt and liquidation of assets to raise cash; many

retrench, some fail. When a sufficiently large number of these units experience inadequate cash flows from current operations and declining ability to
sustain debt, a financial crisis must occur, unless the central bank intervenes, injecting sufficient money into the system and preventing large bank
defaults and business failures,

If a crisis is averted and stimulative

monetary and fiscal policies continue, a mild recession may ensue but another
inflationary and eventually destabilizing investment boom will soon follow.
This is a disequilibrium theory with strong endogenous elements.

The

originating factors are real, but monetary and credit changes have much to do
with the propagation of the cycle and are primarily responsible for its worst
manifestations (see also the summary in Table 5).

This is the opposite of

some recent theories (such as that of Lucas) which have monetary shocks and real
propagation mechanisms.

financial

Minsky's hypothesis predicts the recurrence of'

crises and business depressions, which invites controversy.

It

deserves to be carefully evaluated, but it is difficult to test (in part
inevitably so since financial crises and depressions are rare and complex
events).

In general terms, however, the account provided by Minsky tends to be

consistent with the history of speculative investment booms, financial crises,

and deep depressions in the United States (see Burns and Mitchell, 1946, ch.
sec. VI; Kindleberger, 1978; Hoyt, 1933).

11,

It also has interesting connections

-73—

with several diverse business cycle theories.6
7.

Demand and Supply Shocks and Responses:

A Search for New Concepts

Dissatisfaction with the results obtained by using random money supply
shocks and price misperceptions prompted some economists to experiment with
different models (while retaining in most cases the basic RE methodology).
Abstracting from numerous detail, one can distinguish the following approaches.
(1) Focus on interest rates and related factors.

These received much

attention in the literature from Wicksell and the Austrians to Keynes.
Monetary intervention or excesses of credit creation were seen as causing

interest rates to deviate from their equilibrium levels so that they fail to
coordinate saving and investment decisions.

Inconsistencies arise in the

aggregate between the expectations of those who make these decisions and the
expectations of the financial intermediaries.

Monetarists opposed these ideas

on the ground that investment and savings depend on the real interest rates
which cannot be affected by the banking system, except very transitorily.

In

the early RE models, too, interest rates had no important roles to play.

However, fluctuations in credit and interest, which have been so pronounced in
recent years, are receiving renewed attention in the literature since the late
1970s (Leijonhufvud, 1981, ch. 7, and in Frydman and Phelps, eds,, 1983, ch.
10).

This includes some new departure along the incomplete-information line of
approach.

McCulloch (1977, 1981) argues that business fluctuations are asso-

ciated with unanticipated changes in interest rates that misdirect real investment decisions toward a wrong mix of capital goods and so distort the in—

credits primarily Keynes, whom he interprets as having a dynamic
analysis that does not rely on price rigidities; but his emphasis on the
instability of credit flows and business debt relative to income recalls the
Austrians and draws on Fisher.

- 7L -

tertemporal

production process (as in the real part of the theories of Hayek

and Mises).68

In an equilibrium model by Grossman and Weiss (1982), random

real shocks affect productivity and the real interest rate, causing investment
and output to fluctuate.

Random monetary shocks affect inflation and the nom-

inal interest rate, with the effect of amplifying the cycle.

Agents make er-

rors in trying to infer the ex ante values of the real rate and inflation from
the nominal rate (which includes the two) because the latter's movements contain much random noise.

The critical gap in information concerns the relative

rates of real return (on own compared with other investments).

The model in-

volves only supply decisions, with the role of demand being purely passive.6
Recent empirical work suggests that output (real GNP or industrial
production) interacts with price—level indexes, comprehensive credit
aggregates, interest rates, and narrow money aggregates.

None of these

variables is definitely exogenous relative to all the others; in particular,

money adds to the incremental prediction of the real variables along with
credit and interest rates, but it is not predetermined or predominant (Sims,

68The novel element is the stress on "misintermediation" rather than on
the money-creating function of the banks (the two are closely connected).
Banks and other intermediaries, by borrowing short and lending long, are said
to mismatch asset and liability maturities and to add to the uncertainty about
interest rates by creating imbalances in their term structure. This
hypothesis and the related estimates deal only with nominal, not with real
rates, besides posing other problems that cannot be discussed in the available
space; but it does address an important and -long recognized institutional
aspect of financial instability (to which the previous section also briefly
referred).

6investment here is equated to the process of transforming labor input
into next period's output. No durable goods are produced. The nominal shocks
take the form of disturbances to money demand. These simplifications are made
to allow some difficult problems in the dynamic equilibrium theory to be rigorously analyzed, but they also deprive the model of some highly relevant
characteristics of the modern capitalist economies which experience business
cycles.
This is, to be sure, not uncommon in the recent theoretical
literature.

-75—

1980b; B. Friedman,

1983).70

These results are interesting and may prove robust, but they should be
interpreted with much caution.

Nominal interest rates may matter because

their changes are read as signals of changes in the stock of money and
inflation.

But they may also be important in their own right as the major

part of the true costs of credit.

Historically, their adjustments to

inflation, (and deflation) were sufficiently sluggish and incomplete to suggest

that people treated the nominal rates as if they were adequate proxies for the
real ones.

Evidence going back to the 1860s shows that this. condition

continued to prevail at least well into the 1950s; only thereafter did the

relationship between interest and inflation strengthen to become rather close
in the 1960s and 1970s.

More recently, it weakened again considerably.71

The ex post real interest rates, pre and post-tax, have small cyclical
variations, which makes it difficult to detect how they are correlated with
movements in real variables, but this is rightly seen as a problem in
measurement rather than evidence of no significant relationships (Mishkin,
1981b).

Real rates rose sharply to unusually high levels in the early years

of the Great Depression and again in 1980-82, a period of severe recession and

70mese exogeneity tests ask whether, say, the lagged values of money
help explain or predict output in a regression equation containing the lagged
values of output itself and of the other variables. This question is answered
for each variable in the system in terms of all variables included. This
method of variance decomposition or accounting for the interactions among the
"innovations" (serially uncorrelated residuals) of the series in question
avoids some major shortcomings of simple distributed-lag regressions but
encounters some difficult problems of its own (see the references in text
above).

71These findings refer to the United States; for •the United Kingdom the
corresponding relation was much weaker throughout. See Friedman and Schwartz,
According to Summers, 1983, the impact of inflation on interest
1982, ch. 10.
rates has been much smaller throughout the post-World War II period than a
general equilibrium model would predict on classical assumptions, particularly
when properly allowing for the effective tax rates (see also Feldstein, 1976).

-76—

strong

disinflation.

It is only reasonable to view these changes as mainly

unanticipated and their probable net effects as seriously adverse.72
measured real rates are inversely correlated with lagged inflation.

The

Increased

money growth, then, by raising inflation, lowers the real rate; but the
evidence for a short—term effect of monetary policy, independent of inflation,
is mixed and weak (Shiller, 1980; Mishkin, 1981b).
(2) Focus on real factors.

Consider two polar models:

fluctuations in real investment cause the business cycle.

(A) Exogenous

Banks meet the

borrowers' demand for money and the depositors' demand for money as the monetary
authority provides them with the necessary reserves at any given level of
interest rates.
cycle.

(B) Exogenous fluctuations in money supply cause the business

The demand for money continuously adjusts to the supply through

changes in permanent income associated with much larger changes in measured
real income or output.

Tobin (1970) sets the two models up so that (A) implies a consistent
pattern of early cyclical timing for monetary growth rates or deviations from
trend, while (B) does not.
his views.

Friedman denies that these examples cast doubt on

The two debaters agree that the evidence on leads and lags alone

cannot prove any hypothesis about causation (though it can disaprove some);
also, that both of the above models are far from adequate.

Indeed, (A) is an
The

oversimplification and partial distortion of Keynes, (B) of Friedman.

widely used general IS/LM-AD/AS framework can accomodate some of the ideas of
some of the Keynesians and monetarists with respect to the effects and
interactions of both autonomous expenditure and monetary changes.73

But this

T2But note that the real rates stayed relatively high in 1983_8L without
Presumably, once the economy
visibly obstructing a vigorous recovery.
adjusted to the large changes, the smaller ones have but weak effects.

-77-

long—ruling paradigm was designed for comparative statics of exogenous
interventions with a stationary environment; its adaptation to dynamic and
expectatiorial processes confronts a host of difficult and unresolved problems.

Earlier sections contain several diverse illustrations of recent work
oriented toward nonmonetary (real, psychological, institutional) explanations
of macroeconomic instability.

Other such efforts relate to the old idea

(preceding Keynes, though often associated with him) that both money and real
activity respond to the common factor of fluctuations in aggregate demand and
the corresponding changes in interest rates and the value of existing
assets.

Sims (1980b), referring to Tobiri (1970), urges the development of a

stochastic version of this theory.

Some new historical studies also emphasize

the importance of factors other than the independent influence on business

conditions of changes in the stock of money.
It remains to take note of the most radical reactions against monetarist

and monetary-shock theories by some strong believers in general-equilibrium

73is and LM relate output and interest rates, AD and AS
(aggregate
demand and supply functions) relate output and the price level.
it is assumed
that the IS and AD curves slope downward, the LM and AS curves upward. The
Keynesian view is often associated with relatively steep IS and flat LM, the
monetarist view with relatively flat IS and steep LM curves.
But this
interpretation is by no means universally acceptable; even if accepted, it
leaves open other important. issues inthe controversy. The IS/LM-AD/AS mmodel
evolved from Hicks, 1935, 1937, through a long series of writings including
notably Patinkin, 1956.

74mus Temin, 1976, attributes the 1929 downturn to a decline in
"autonomous" spending (interestingly, mainly in consumption and exports rather
than investment). For monetarist counterarguinents, see the essays by Schwartz
and Brunner in Brunner, ed., 1981; for a view that both money and investment
(and other spending) mattered, see Gordon and Wilcox in the same volume.
King and Plosser, 1982, examine the possibility that the positive
correlation between the rates of' growth in output and monetary aggregates
reflects in large part the causal chain running from business activity to
"inside money", i.e., bank deposits.
Bernanke, 1983, produces evidence linking the sharp drop in output during
the early 1930s to the reduced quality and higher real costs of credit
intermediation services, a result of the institutional weakness and crises of
banking.

-78-

modeling and the neutrality of money.

Here the main idea is that unantici-

pated changes in tastes and tethnology cause intersectoral shifts of human and
physical capital associated with much friction and temporary idleness.
ployment generated by a

large

Unem-

number of partly independent shocks to different

sectors will persist for considerable time because rapid transfers of
resources are costly, the more so the greater the specialization of the

production factors (Black, 1982).

But changes in tastes and technology will

tend to penalize some sectors and benefit others, causing numerous shifts in
relative prices and outputs; they may occasionally have significant net
favorable or adverse effects on growth but can hardly be responsible for
recurrent sequences of expansions and contractions in aggregate economic
activity.

The most restrictive formal model of purely real "business cycles" (Long
and Plosser, 1983) abstracts not only from money and government but also from
technological change, durable goods, and adjustment costs; it assumes RE,
complete information, and stable preferences.

There are random shocks to

outputs of the many commodities, each of which can be either consumed or used
as input in the production of any other commodity during each unit period.

The optimal allocation rule is such that when the i-th output is unexpectedly
high (low), the simultaneous inputs of
increased (reduced).

i

in all its productive uses are

It is shown that this works to propagate the effects of

the output shocks both forward in time and across the sectors of the
economy.

The model is intended to serve as a benchmark for evaluating the

importance in actual business cycles of the many factors it omits, but it

75mis recalls the "horizontal maladjustments," which were treated as a
potentially important aggravating factor, but not a prime cause, in classical
writings.
See p. 18 above.

-79-

admittedly presents serious problems and the approach itself is
questionable. 76

(3)Focus on the causes and effects of contractual wage and price
setting.

Recent literature is much concerned with the specification of

economic reasons for the existence of explicit or implicit multiperiod
contracts that limit the flexibility of wages and prices in response to
unanticipated shifts in demand and supply.77

The "contract—theoretic" models

based on this work drop the assumption of market clearing and the reliance on
price errors and intertemporal substitution effects.

They restore the changes

in aggregate demand to their old role as a direct determinant of fluctuations
in the real aggregates by delaying the adjustments in the contractually
predetermined wages and the wage-related prices.-

The main models of this type are monetarist in the original sense of
relating short-run fluctuations in output to monetary policy operating via
changes in demand.

This is so even where the policy is based on a fixed

feedback rule known to the public, because the money stock can be changed more
frequently than the wage is renegotiated (Phelps and Taylor, 1977; Fischer,

76

particular, the model has constant employment of labor while the
commodity outputs fluctuate. Simulations based on a 1967 input-output table
for six major industry divisions result in output series that show considerable comovements and two complete quasi-cycles in runs of 100 unit periods of
undefined length.
It is not clear whether the fluctuations due to the output
shocks are separable from those due to other factors.
770ne hypothesis is that fixed-wage, variable employment contracts sell
risk-averse workers partial insurance against the variability of their incomes
(Baily, 1974; D.F. Gordon, 1974; Azariadis, 1975).
Another is that labor
contracts or understandings treat incomes as normal returns on the loyalty and
efficiency of long—term employees and protect large investments in firmspecific human capital (Hall, 1980b; Okun, 1981, chs. 2 and 3). Steady
pricing policies are used to reduce the costs of shopping and attract steady
customers (Okun, op. cit., ch. U).
In sum, contracts are attempts to deal
economically with a variety of "transaction" (information, negotiation,
adjustment) costs in the face of price instability and general uncertainty.
For surveys, see. R.J. Gordon, 1976; Barro, 1981.

-80-

The authors work with staggered contracts in which

1977a; Taylor, 1980a).

wages are linked to expectations that are weakly "rational" (i.e., modelconsistent).

Fischer relates wages to price level forecasts; his contracts

are (frustrated) attempts to keep real wages from falling in the face of
inflationary policy.

Taylor relates wages to other past and anticipated wage

settlements; the degree of inertia in these interrelations helps explain the
persistence of unemployment.

These models have attracted much attention and

criticism. 78

According to the "credibility" hypothesis (Feilner, 1976,

1980), a

consistent policy of adhering to preannounced moderate money growth targets
can deter inflationary wage and price setting and reduce instability in the
long run.

A correlate is that unions will push for higher wages in labor

contract negotiations and business will respond by raising prices if both
parties expect the monetary authorities to "ratify" their decisions through
accommodative policies.

This view differs in some important respects from

monetarism and the newer RE and contract theories, but it also incorporates
some of their elements.

It recognizes that, in practice, systematic policy

components are often weak and only belatedly detectable (see also Sims,
1982).

It is related to the idea of "coordination failures" (Leijonhufvud,

1981) in a game-theoretic form:

it is possible for expectational impasses to

develop, e.g., a recession-cum—inflation may continue while the central bank
waits for wage demands to moderate and business and labor wait for a resurnption of monetary expansion (Phelps, 1981).

All this certainly raises issues

8The issues include the consistency of the assumed contract features
with rational behavior (Barro, 1977b; Fischer, 1977b) and the reasons why
wages are not fully indexed under anticipated inflation (Brunner and Meltzer,
eds., 1977). For a detailed critique of Fischer and Taylor, and a proposed
For some evidence and further discussion,
improved model, see McCallum, 1982.
see Taylor, 1980b and 1983.

-81-

that are very important in dealing with inflation; how much bearing it has
here depends on how strongly policy-induced changes in monetary growth and
inflation influence business cycles.

The notion that such changes are the

principal cause of the cycles (which many now accept as if it were selfevident) is not supported by the long record of cyclical instability coexisting with alternating extended periods of inflations and deflations.

It

is also countered by the argument that business contractions, whatever their
causes, have deflationary or disinflationary effects.79
Most recent RE models, including those of' the contract-theoretic type,

consider only one determinant of aggregate demand, the real money balances,
and concentrate on the effects of monetary policy.

But shifts in aggregate

demand may be due to real and expectational as well as monetary factors.

They

may reflect the instability of any of the major expenditure components of'

real

GNP.

Neither theory nor evidence support the. focus on nominal demand shocks

and real supply shocks alone.

In recent times, at least, consumer capital

outlays have been no less cyclical than business investment (of. Gordon and
Veitch, 198L).

Indeed, new models of consumption which embrace RE have

consumers respond promptly and strongly to any new information that revises
their forecasts of future income.

This in itself would tend to increase the

sensitivity of consumption, and hence of income, to unanticipated changes in
aggregate demand or "autonomous expenditures" (compared with the earlier
models which used adaptive rather than rational expectations in the
calculation of permanent income).

The increased instability on the demand

side is offset only when the REH is combined with speedy clearing of' the

79None of this, of course, is to deny that the inflationary bias of
government actions and the reactions to it have economic consequences of great
importance; what is questioned is the view (going far beyond the credibility
hypothesis) that these consequences include the business cycle.

-82-

markets and a highly stable and inelastic aggregate supply curve, i.e., in the
new "classical" equilibrium models (Bilson, 1980, pp. 279—283, and comment by
Hall, ibid., p. 301).80
V.

Conclusion:

The Needed Synthesis

Business cycles belong to the history of modern economies with interdependent markets, free enterprise, and private ownership of financial assets
and capital goods.
banking and credit.

They developed in the era of great growth of industry,

They are varied and changing, even while retaining their

general characteristics of perstistence and pervasiveness as well as specific
regularities of amplitude and timing.

All this was long recognized by serious

scholars and careful observers with abiding interest in the subject.

For a long time, too, there was a substantial consensus among these
economists that business cycles have mainly endogenous explanations involving
recurrent fluctuations in interrelated monetary and real variables, prices and
quantities, expectations and realizations.

The theories tended to agree on

the cast and setting, disagreeing principally on which factors should play
star and which supporting roles.

Chance and outside disturbances were left

behind the stage, interfering with and modifying the action but not
determining its main course.

The cycle had plural causes and effects; it

produced and resolved its own stresses and resources, nationally and
internationally.

Few attributed it to any single factor or defect, and few

believed that it can be eliminated by any single, low-cost type of policy
intervention or institutional reform.

The 1930s convinced many that the economy is not merely cyclical but

80Many interesting theoretical and empirical studies of the consumption
function appeared in recent years, but the implications of this work for
business cycles remain to be worked out. See Hall, 1978; Davidson and Hendry,
1981; Blanchard and Wyplosz, 1981; Flavin, 1981; and Bernanke, 1982.

-83-

depression-prone.

The instability of profits, investment, and credit (old

concerns) attracted renewed attention.

In the 19140s and 1950s, however, there

was a rise of interest in the dynamics of multiplier-accelerator interaction
which yielded highly aggregative and purely endogenous models of potentially
unstable output fluctuations.

The monetary, financial, and expectational

aspects of the cycle were largely neglected.
against this one-sided conception.
ally stable mathematical models.

Soon, strong reactions developed

One took the form of stochastic, dynamicThis greatly influenced macroeconometric

models which emphasized the destabilizing role of random shocks and exogenous
factors.

The other reaction against theories of endogenous instability was monetarism.

Its targets included not only the Keynesian models of aggregate

demand, with fluctuating but often weak investment and a major role for fiscal
policies to combat unemployment, but also the older models with unstable
credit-investment interactions.

Fluctuations in monetary growth attributed to

erratic or misguided policies were made primarily responsible for disturbing
the basically stable private economy and creating "business cycles".

The

real, financial, and expectational factors received little attention.
The natural-rate and rational-expectations hypothesis, plus the

discouraging record of the 1970s, led to new hopes for a program of study with
a grand design:

to reconcile business cycles with the postulates of the com-

petitive general equilibrium theory in its modern dynamic form.

The initial

approach relied upon random monetary shocks, price misperceptions, and inter—
temporal substitution of labor.

However, critical analyses and tests soon

cast serious doubts on this construction and thereby on the underlying
premises, mainly that of flexible prices continuously clearing all markets.

No convincing remedy could be provided by adaptation of familiar elements of

_814 -

older

"disequilibrium" theories such as the accelerator arid lags due to costs

of adjustments in the stocks of'

production

factors.

Some equilibrium theorists questioned the importance of the disturbances
to money supply and tried to explain business cycles in real terms only.
Their RE models are more restrictive yet.

They consist of supply reactions of

a "representative" producer-consumer to productivity or input-output shocks.
The environment is purely competitive or even of a Robinson Crusoe-type.
There is little or no evidence to support these models.

Contract theories, designed to explain why most wages and prices are
temporarily "sticky," formed the basis of very different models in which
aggregate demand fluctuations are restored to their usual prominence.

Other

work, also using the currently favored RE methodology,, turned to factors with
a long history of service in business cycle models:

uncertainty arid shifts in

"market psychology"; interest-rate misperceptions or maladjustments; long
investment gestation periods.

There is not much empirical validation that random shocks of all kinds
play as large a role in business cycle as has been attributed to them in
recent literature.

The weight of exogenous policy factors, too, seems more

often than not overstated.

The theoretical interest in self-sustaining

cycles, or elements thereof, declined in times when economic events and
thought favored a revival of the faith in the private sector's capacity for
stable growth.

New work in this area, therefore, has been limited, but it

still produced some interesting and significant results.

The most disturbing aspect of what must be viewed as the new mainstream
literature (the RE models) is its increasing fragmentation in the face of
various theoretical problems and recalcitrant facts.

The ruling research

strategy in these studies is to demonstrate for each particular model that one

-85-

or more of the selected factors can contribute to fluctuations in total output
or employment, while recognizing that others can do so as well.

The authors

are mainly concerned with theoretical possibilities rather than with explanations of what actually happens.

There is in general little regard for how the

pieces fit each other or the "real world."

The variety of the iodels is only

loosely limited by the ingenuity of the theorists, but many of the offered
hypotheses are not tested and some are not testable.

Small linear models are

favored because of their mathematical tractability in the equilibrium RE
framework, but this certainly does not mean that larger and/•or nonlinear
systems are somehow inferior.

The criterion of conformity to stylized facts

would, in fact, suggest the. opposite.

As a matter of simple logic, if each of a number of models is indeed

valid, then it should inprinciple be possible to integrate them and improve
the theory.

Of course, this is easier said than done, but when each model is

treated in isolation, there is little chance for the Job to be ever seriously
attacked.

The conclusion reached here, then, is that a movement toward a

synthesis of the tested and nonfalsified hypotheses is urgently needed if real
progress is to be made in our understanding of business cycles.
In this view, research in this area will profit most from the confronta-

tion of testable hypotheses with a broad range of evidence on stylized facts
and from efforts to combine those hypotheses that survive the tests.

This

assigns high priorities to the work on (1) the consolidation and updating of
findings from the historical and statistical business cycle studies, and (2)

using the results to eliminate those elements of the extant theories that are
definitely inconsistent with the evidence and to improve the modeling of the
other elements.

This strategy could lead us away from the proliferation of

models which lopsidedly stress either the monetary or the real factors, either

-86-

the supply or the demand behavior, either random shocks or purely endogenous
movements; instead, we would be working toward a better comprehension of how
these forces interact.

As was recognized early by the "classics," the sharp

dichotomies and monocausal theories tend to be invalidated by experience.

Also, the hypothesis that business cycles are all alike would itself be
tested in the course of this research.

It is important to know not only what

the common core of the cyclical process has been for the U.S. economy in
recent times, but also how it may have changed historically and how it differs
from similar processes elsewhere.

The knowledge is necessary for an assess-

ment of the temporal and spatial reference points of business cycle theory.
(For the most recent work on these problems, see R. J. Gordon, ed.,
forthcoming.)

We have witnessed a period of great intellectual ferment, activity, and
controversy in the theory of macroeconomic fluctuations and policies, but the
debate seems to be growing less heated lately and some signs of a future
rapprochement can be discerned.
needed synthesis.

The present may be a good time to ponder the

_______.
______

Recent Work on Business Cycles in Historical Perspective
Bibliography
1.

Abel, Andrew B. "Empirical Investment Equations:

An Integrative

Framework," in Karl Brunner and Allan H. Meltzer, eds., On
the state of macroeconomics, Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy, 1980,(12), Amsterdam:

North

Holland, pp. 39-92.
2.

.

and Blanchard, Olivier J., "The Present Value of Profits and

Cyclical Movements of Investment," NBER Working Paper No.
1122, May 1983.
3.

Abramovitz,

Inventories and business cycles, New York:

Moses.

NBER

1950.
4.

Adeirnan, Irma, and Adelman, Frank L. "The Dynamic Properties of the

Klein-Goldberger Model," Econometrica, October 1959, 27(4),
pp. 596—625.
5.

Paris:
6.

Les crises priodigues de surproduction, 2 vols.,

Aftalion, Albert.

Riviere

,

1913.

Aiginger, Karl. "Empirische Informationen zur Bildung von
Erwartungen," Ifo-Studien, 1979,25, 1/2, pp. 83-135.

7.

Empirical

Surveyed Expectational Data and Decision Theory,"

paper presented at the 15th CIRET Conference, Sept. 1981,
Athens,

Summary in H. Lauiner and M. Ziegler, eds.,

International research in business cycle surveys,
Aldenshot:

Gower, 1982.

_______
_______.
______
______.
______
_______

-82—

8.

Alt, James E., and Chrystal, K. Alec. Political economics, Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1983.

9.

Altonji, Joseph G. "The Intertemporal Substitution Model of Labor
Market Fluctuations:

An Empirical Analysis," Rev. Econ. Stud.,

1982, 149, pp. 783-8214.

., and

10.

Ashenfelter, Orley. "Wage Movements and the Labor Market

Equilibrium Hypothesis," Economica, 1980, 147,

11.

217—145.

Arrow, Kenneth J. "The Future and the Present in Economic Life," Econ.
Inquiry, 1978,

12.

pp.

16, pp. 157-69.

Azariadis, Costas. "Implicit Contracts and Underemployment Equilibria,"
J. Pout. Econ.,, December 1975, 83(6), pp.. 1183—1202.

13.

"Self-Fulfilling

.

Prophecies,"

Journal of Economic Theory,

Dec. 1981, 25(3), pp. 380—96.
114.

Baily, Martin N. "Wages and Employment under Uncertain Demand," Rev.
Econ. Stud., January 19714, 141(1), pp.37-50.

15.

Barro, Robert, J. "Rational Expectations and the Role of Monetary
Policy, J. Monet. Econ., January 1976, 2(1), pp. 1-32.

16.

"Unanticipated

.

Money Growth and Unemployment in the United

States," Amer. Econ. Rev., March 1977a, 67(2), pp.

"Long Term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary Policy,"

17.

J. Monet. Econ., July 1977b, 3(3),
18.

101-15.

.

"Unanticipated

pp.

305—16.

Money, Output, and the Price Level in the

United States," J. Pout. Econ., August 1978, 86(4) pp. 5149—80.
19.

"Intertemporal

Substitution and the Business Cycle," NBER

Working Paper, no. 490, June 1980a.

_______
______.

-B3-

20.

"A Capital Market in an Equilibrium Business Cycle Model,"
Econometrica, September 1980b, 148(6), pp.

1393-11417.

"The Equilibrium Approach to Business Cycles," in Robert J.

21.

Barro, ed., Money, expectations and business cycles. New
York:

Academic Press, 1981, Chapter 2, pp. 141-78.

and Rush, Mark,

22.

"Unanticipated Money and Economic

Activity," in S. Fischer, ed.,1980,pp. 23—148 (48—73).

23.

Begg, David K. H. The rational expectations revolution in
macroeconomics: theories and evidence, Baltimore:

The Johns

Hopkins University Press, 1982.
24.

Bernanke, Ben S.

"Adjustment Costs, Durables, and Aggregate

Consumption," NBER Working Paper no. 1038, December 1982.
25.

.

"Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the

Propagation of the Great Depression," Amer. Econ. Rev. June
1983, 73(3),
26.

pp. 257-76.

Beveridge, Stephen, and Nelson, Charles R. "A New Approach to
Decomposition of Economic Times Series into Permanent and
Transitory Components with Particular Attention to
Measurement of the 'Business Cycle', "J. Monet. Econ., March
1981, 7(2), pp.

27.

151_1714.

Bilson, John F. 0. "The Rational Expectations Approach to the Consumption Function:

A Multi-Country Study," European Econ.

Rev., May 1980, 13(3), pp. 273-99.
Hall, ibid., pp. 301-303).

(Comment by Robert E.

_______.
_______
_______

— BL -

28.

Bischoff, Charles W. "Business Investment in the 1970s:
of Models," Brookings Pap. Econ. Act., 1971,

1,

A Comparison

pp. 13-58

(59—63).
29.

Black, Fischer. "General Equilibrium and Business Cycle," NBER
Working Paper, no. 950, August 1982.

30.

Blanchard, Olivier J., and Watson, Mark W. "Bubbles, Rational
Expectations and Financial Markets," in Paul Wachtel ed.,

Crises in the economic and financial structure, Lexington,
Mass.:

Lexington Books, 1982, pp. 295-315.

and Wyplosz, Charles, "An Empirical Structural Model of

31.

Aggregate Demand," J.
32.

Blatt, John M.

Monet. Econ., 1981, 7(1) pp. 1-28.

"On the Econometric Approach to Business—Cycle

Analysis," Oxford Econ. Papers (n.s.), July 1978, 30, pp.
292-300.
33.

"On the Frisch Model of Business Cycles," Oxford Econ.

.

Papers, (n.s.) November 1980, 32(3), pp. 67-79.

3.

Blinder,

Alan S. and Fischer, Stanley. "Inventories, Rational

Expectations, and the Business Cycle," J. Monet. Econ.
November 1981, 8(3), pp. 277_3OLL.
35.

and Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Money, Credit Constraints, and Economic Activity," Amer. Econ. Rev., May 1983,

and Holtz-Eakin, Douglas.

36.

United States Since 1929,"
1981L.

"Inventory

73(2),

pp. 297—302.

Fluctuations

in the

NBER Working Paper No. 1371, June

_______
_______.

-B5-

37.

Bober, Stanley.

The economics of cycles and growth, New York:

John

Wiley & Sons, 1968.
38.

Bodkin, Ronald A. "Real Wages and Cyclical Variations in Employment:
A Reexamination of the Evidence," Canadian J. Econ., August
1969, 2(3), pp. 353714.

39.

Boehin, Ernst A. "Understanding Business Cycles:

A Critical Review of

Theory and Fact," 11th Conference of Economists, Flinders
University, Adelaide, August 1982.
40.

Bosohen, John F., and Grossman, Herschel I. "Tests of Equilibrium
Macroeconomics Using Contemporaneous Monetary Data," J.
Monet. Econ., Nov. 1982, 10(3), pp. 309-33.

141.

Bray, Margaret.
Ch. 6

142.

in

"Convergence to Rational Expectations Equilibrium,"

Frydman and Phelps, eds., 1983, pp. 123-37.

Brock, William A. "A Simple Perfect Foresight Monetary Model,"

J.

Monet Econ., April 1975, 1(2), pp. 133-50.
143.

Bronfenbrenner, Martin (ed).
York:

1414.

Is the business cycle obsolete?, New

John Wiley & Sons, 1969.

Brunner, Karl, ed., The Great Depression revisited, Boston:

Martinus

Nijhoff Publishing, 1981.

Cukierman, Alex; and Meltzer, Allan H. "Stagflation,

45.

Persistent Unemployment and the Permanence of Economic
Shocks," J. Monet. Econ., October 1980, 6(4), pp. 146792.
146.

.

and Meltzer, Allan H.

"Liquidity Traps for Money, Bank

Credit and Interest Rates," J. Pout. Econ., January/February
1968, 76(1), pp. 1—37.

_______
______.
______
______.
______,
- B6 —

"Friedman's Monetary Theory," J. Pout. Econ.,

k7.

September/October 1972, 80(5), pp. 837-51.

eds.,

148.

Stabilization of the domestic and international

economy, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy, vol. 5, Amsterdam:
149.

Burns, Arthur F.

"Hicks and the Real Cycle," J. Polit. Econ.,

February 1952,, pp.
50.

North-Holland, 1977.

1-214.

The frontiers of economic knowledge, Princeton:

.

University Press for NBER,

Princeton

19514.

The business cycle in a changing world, New York:

51.

NBER,

1969.

and Mitchell, Wesley C., Measuring business cycles, New

52.

York:
53.

NBER, 19146.

Cagan, Phillip. "The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinflation," in Milton
Friedman, ed., Studies in the quantity theory of money,.
Chicago:

514.

.

University of Chicago Press, 1956, pp. 25-117.

Determinants and effects of changes in the stock of money,

1875-1960, New York:
55.

Columbia University Presss for NBER, 1965.

Carlson, John A. "A Study of Price Forecasts,"

Annals of Economic

and Social Measurement, Winter 1977 6(1), pp. 27-56.
56.

Canton, Dennis W. "Contracts, Price Rigidity, and Market
Equilibrium," J. Polit. Econ., October 1979, part 1, 87(5),
pp. 1031462.

57.

Cass, David, and Shell, Karl. "Do Sunspots Matter?" J. Pout. Econ.,
April 1983, 91(2), pp. 173—227.

_______
______
_____.

58.

Chang, W. W., and Smyth, D. J. "The Existence and Persistence of Cycles
Kaldor's l9Lto Model Re—examined," Rev.

in a Non—Linear Model:

Econ. Stud, January 1970, 38(1) no. 113, pp. 37-.

59.

Clark,

John M.

"Business Acceleration and the Law of Demand:

A

Technical Factor in Economic Cycles," J. Polit. Econ., March
1917, 25(3), PP. 217—35.
60.

Strategic

.

factors in business cycles, New York:

NBER,

1 93•

61.

Clark, Kim B., and Summers, Lawrence H. "Labor Force Participation:
Timing and Persistence," Rev. Econ. Stud., sp. issue, 1982,

9(5), pp. 825—.
62.

Clark, Peter K.

"Investment in the 1970's:

Theory, Performance, and

Prediction," Brookings Papers on Econ. Activity 1,

1979, 13—60,

(61—72).
63.

Coppock, Dennis J. "The Periodicity and Stability of Inventory Cycles
in the U. S. A.," parts I and II, Manchester Sch. Econ. Soc.
Stud., 27, May 1959, pp.

64.

.

"Business Cycles:

140—'47 and September 1959, pp. 261-99.

Endogenous or Stochastic?

A Comment" Econ.

J., June 1962, pp. 458-68.

65.

"The Post-War Short Cycle in the U. S. A.," Manchester Sch.
Econ. Soc. Stud., January 1965, 33(1), pp. 17—44.

-B8-

66.

Curtin, Richard T. "Determinants of Prce

Expectations:

Evidence from

a Panel Study," in H. Laumer and M. Ziegler, eds.,
International research on business cycle surveys, Aldershot:
Gower, 1982.
67.

Cyert, Richard M, and deGroot, Morris H. "Rational Expectations and

Bayesian Analysis," J. Pout. Econ., May/June 1974, 82(3), pp.
521-36.
68.

Davidson, James E. H., and Hendry, David F. "Interpreting Econometric
Evidence: The Behaviour of Consumers' Expenditure in the UK,"
European Econ. Rev., May 1981, 16(1), pp. 177-92.

69.

DeCanio, Stephen. "Rational Expectations and Learning Experience,"
Quart. J. Econ., February 1979, 93(1), pp. l47...57

70.

deLeeuw, Frank and McKelvey, Michael J. "Price Expectations of Business
Firms," Brookings Pap. Econ. Act., 1981,

71.

Duesenberry, James S. Business cycles and economic growth, New
York:

72.

McGraw—Hill, 1958.

Dunlop, John T. "The Movement of Real and Money Wage Rates," Econ.
J.,

73.

1, pp. 299_3114.

September 1938, 48(191), pp 413—34.

Drazen, Allan. "Recent Developments in Macroeconomic Disequilibrium
Theory," Econometrica, March 1980, 48(2), pp. 283—306.

74.

Eckstein, Otto, and Sinai, Allen.
Cycle in the Postwar Era,"

"The Mechanism of the Business

mimeo., May 1984 (to be published

in R. J. Gordon, ed. forthcoming).
75.

Fabricant, Solomon.
NBER, 1959.

Basic facts on productivity change, New York:

______.
______

-B9—

76.

Fair,

"A Criticism of One Class of Macroeconomics Models with

Ray C.

Rational Expectations," J. Money, Credit, Banking, November
1978,

10(14), pp. 1411—17.

"An Analysis of the Accuracy of Four Macroeconometric

77.

Models," J. Pout. Econ., August 1979, 87, pp. 701-18.
78.

Fama, Eugene F. "Efficient Capital Markets:

A Review of Theory and

Empirical Work," J. Finance, May 1970, 25, pp. 383_1417.
79.

Feldstein, Martin S. "Inflation, Income Taxes, and the Rate of
Interest:

A Theoretical Analysis,"

Amer. Econ. Rev.

December 1976, 66(5), pp. 809-20.
80.

Feilner, William. Towards a reconstruction of macroeconomics:
problems of theory and policy, Washington DC: American
Enterprise Institute, 1976.

"The Valid Core of the Rationality Hypothesis in the Theory

81.

of Expectations," J. Money, Credit, Banking, November 1980
part 2,

82.

Fels, Rendigs. "What Causes Business Cycles?". Soc. Sd. Quart., June
1977,

83.

12(14), pp. 763—87.

58

(1),

pp. 88—95.

Figlewski, Stephen, and Wachtel, Paul. "The Formation of Inflationary
Expectations," Rev. Econ. Stat., February 1981, 63(1), pp. 1-10.

814.

Fischer,

Stanley. "Long-Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the

Optimal Money Supply Rule," J. Polit. Econ., February 1977a,
85(1) pp. 191—205.
85.

"Long—term Contracts, Sticky Prices, and Monetary Policy:' A
Comment," J. Monet. Econ., July 1977b, 3(3), pp. 317-23.

_______.
_______.
______
_______.,

-B 10-

ed. Rational expectations and economic policy, A Conference

86.

Report, Chicago:
87.

Fisher, Irving.

University of Chicago Press for NBER, 1980.

"Our Unstable Dollar and the So-called Business Cycle,"

J. Polit. Econ., June, 1925, 20(150), pp. 179—202.
Booms and depressions:

88.

some first principles, New York:

Adeiphi Co., 1932.
89.

.

"The Debt-.Deflation Theory of Great Depressions,"

1, pp.35(—5(.

conomecrica, 1933,
90.

Flavin, Marjorie A. "The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing

Expectations about Future Income," J. Pout. Econ., October
1981, 89(5), pp. 974-1009.
91.

Flood, Robert P., and Garber, Peter M. "Market Fundamentals versus
Price-Level Bubbles:

The First Tests," J. Polit. Econ.,

August 1980, 88 (4), pp. 745-70.
92.

Frenkel, Jacob A. "Inflation and the Formation of Expectations," J.
Monet. Econ., October 1975, 1(4), pp. 403—21.

93.

Frickey,

Edwin.

Economic fluctuations in the United States,

Cambridge, Mass,:
94.

Harvard University Press, 1942.

Friedman, Benjamin H. "Optimal Expectations and the Extreme Information Assumptions of 'Rational Expectations' Macromodels," J.
Monet. Econ., June 1979, 5(1), pp. 23—41.

95.

"Survey Evidence on the 'Rationality' of Interest Rate Expec—
tations," J. Monet. Econ., October 1980, 6(14), pp. 453-65.

96.

"The Roles of Money and Credit in Macroeconomic Analysis,"
in Tobin, ed., 1983, pp. 161—199.

______.
______.
______
_______
_______.

-Bi 1-

97.

Friedman,

Milton. "The Economic Theorist," in A.F. Burns, ed., Wesley

Clair Mitchell, the economic scientist, New York:

NBER,

1952, pp. 252-57.

"Interest

98.

Rates and the Demand for Money," J. Law Econ.,

October 1966, 9,
99.

.

pp.

71-85.

"The Role of Monetary Policy," Amer. Econ. Rev., March 1968,

58(1), pp 1—17.
"A Theoretical Framework for Monetary Analysis," J. Polit.

100.

Econ., March/April 1970, 78(2), pp. 193—238.
"Comment on Tobin", Quart. J. Econ., May 1970,

101.

81t(2), pp.

318—327.
102.

.

"A Monetary Theory of Nominal Income," J. Pout. Econ.,

March/April 1971, 79(2), pp. 323-37.
103.

.

"Comments on the Critics,"

J. Polit. Econ.,

September/October 1972, 80(5), pp. 906-50.
1014.

.

and Schwartz, Anna J. "Money and Business Cycles," Rev.

Econ. Stat., February 1963a, 45(1), part 2, pp. 32—64.
105.

.

A

monetary history of the United States: 1867—1960,

Princeton:
106.

Princeton University Press for NBER, 1963b.

Monetary trends in the United States and the United
Kingdom: their relation to income, prices, and interest
rates, 1867-1975, Chicago:
MBER, 1982.

University of Chicago Press for

______

-B 12—

107.

Frisch, Ragnar. "Propagation Problems and Impulse Problems in Dynamic
Economics", Economic essays in honor of Gustav Cassel,
London: George Allen and Unwin, 1933.

108.

Frydman, Roman, and Phelps, Edmund S., eds., Individual forecasting
and aggregate outcomes, Cambridge:

Cambridge University

Press, 1983.
109.

Gapinski, James H. Macroeconomic theory:
policy, New York:

110.

statics, dynamics, and

McGraw-Hill, 1982.

Gayer, Arthur D.; Rostow, W. W.; and Schwartz, Anna Jacobson, The
growth and fluctuations of the British economy, 1790-1850,
Oxford:

111.

At the Clarendon Press, 1953.

Geary, P. T., and Kennan,.J. "The Employment-Real Wage Relationship:
An International Study," J. Pout. Econ., August 1982, 90(14),
pp. 85'4-71.

112.

Goodwin, Richard M.

"The Non-Linear Accelerator and the Persistence of

Business Cycles," Econometrica, January 1951, 19(1),
113.

1—17.

Gordon, Donald F. "A Neo-Classical Theory of Keynesian Unemployment,"
Econ. Inquiry, December 1974,

1114.

PP.

12(14),

pp. 1431-59.

Gordon, Robert Aaron, Business fluctuations, 2nd ed., New York:

Harper

Brothers, 1961.
115.

Gordon, Robert J. ed., Milton Friedman's monetary framework:
with his critics, Chicago:

116.

.

University of Chicago Press,

"Recent Developments in the Theory of'

Inflation

a debate
19714.

and

Unemployment,"J. Monet. Econ. April 1976, 2(2), pp. 185—219.

______.
______
______,
_______,
_______

-B 13-

"Output Fluctuations and Gradual Price Adjustment," J. Econ.

117.

Lit., June 1981, 19(2) pp. 1493530.
118.

.

The American business cycle today:

continuity and change,

University of Chicago Press for NBER, forthcoming.

and Wilcox, James A. "Monetarist Interpretations.of the Great

119.

Depression:

An Evaluation and Critique" in Brunner, ed., 1981,

pp. 49-1O7.

and Veitch, John M. "Fixed Investment in the American Business

120.

Cycle, 1919-83," NBER Working Paper No. P11426, August 1981.
121.

Gramlich, Edward M. "Models of Inflation Expectation Formation:

A

Comparison of Household and Economist Forecasts," J. Money,
Credit, Banking, May 1983, 15(2), pp. 155—73.
122.

Grossman, Sanford J. "An Introduction to the Theory of Rational
Expectations Under Asymmetric Information," Rev. Econ. Stud.,

October 1981, 8(1), pp. 541—59.
123.

.

and Stiglitz, Joseph E. "On the Impossibility of

Informationally Efficient Markets," Amer. Econ. Rev., June 1980,
70(3), pp. 393—408.
124.

.

and Weiss, Laurence. "Heterogeneous Information and the Theory

of the Business Ecori." J. Pout. Econ, August 1982, 90(4), pp.
699—727.

125.

Haberler, Gottfried.

Prosperity and Depression, Cambridge, Mass.:

Harvard University Press, 1964 (new edition; first published by
the League of Nations in 1937).

______
______.
_______
_______.
______
-B114—

126.

"Monetary and Real Factors Affecting Economic Stability:

.

A

Critique of Certain Tendencies in Modern Economic Theory," Banca
Nationale del Lavoro Quarterly Rev., September 1956, 9, pp. 8599.

127.

Hall, Robert E. "The Rigidity of Wages and the Persistence of

Unemployment," Brookings Pap. Econ. Act., 1975, 2, pp. 301-35

(336319).

"Investment, Interest Rates, and the Effects of Stabilization

128.

Policies," Brookings Pap. Econ. Act.

1,

1977, pp. 61—101 (10)4—

21).
129.

.

"Stochastic

Hypothesis:

Implications of the Life Cycle—Permanent Income.

Theory and Evidence," J. Pout. Econ., December

1978, 86(6), pp. 971—87.
130.

.

"A Theory of the Natural Unemployment Rate and the Duration of

Employment," J. Monet. Econ., April 1979, 5(2), pp. 153—69.
131.

.

"Labor Supply and Aggregate Fluctuations," in Karl Brunner and

Allan H. Meltzer, eds., 1980, pp. 7-33.

132.

"Employment Fluctuations and Wage Rigidity," Brookings Pap.
Econ. Act.

133.

1,

1980b, pp. 91—123.

Hamilton, James D. "Oil and the Macroeconomy," J. Pout. Econ., April
1983, 91(2), pp. 228i48.

13)4.

Hansen, Alvin H. Business cycles and national income, expanded ed., New
York:

135.

Norton (1951),

Harrod, Roy F.

196)4.

The trade cycle, Oxford:

Clarendon Press, 1936.

_______.
______.
_______.

—B 15—

136.

Hawtrey, Ralph G. Good and bad trade:

trade
137.

fluctuations, London:

Constable & Co., 1913.

1-layek, Friedrich A. von. Monetary theory and the trade cycle, New

Harcourt, Brace & Co., 1933.

York:
138.

an inquiry into the causes of'

Profits,

interest and investment, London:

George Routledge

and Sons, 1939.
139.

Hickman, Bert G., ed. Econometric models of cyclical behavior,
Studies of Income and Wealth 36, 2 vols.,

New York: Columbia

University Press for NBER, 1972.
1140.

Hicks, John R. "A Suggestion for Simplifying the Theory of Money,:
Economica (n.s.), Februrary 1935,

1141.

2(5), pp.

"Mr. Keynes and the 'Classics':

1-19.

A Suggested

Interpretation," Econometrica, April 1937, 5(2), pp.
1142.

A

1147—59.

contribution to the theory of the trade cycle. Oxford:

Clarendon Press, 1950.
1143.

"Real and Monetary Factors in Economic Fluctuations,"
Scottish J. Pout. Econ., November 1974, 21(3), pp.205-2114.

1414.

Hilliriger, Claude.

"An Econometric Model of Mild Business Cycles,"

The Manchester Sch. Econ. Soc. Stud., September 1966, 314(3),
pp. 269_814.
1145.

"An Empirical Test of Metzler's Hypothesis Regarding the
Nature of Short-Run Cyclical Fluctuations," Proceedings of
the third Reisenburg symposium, ed. by Oldrich Kgn and Wolfram
Schrettl.

Gottingen:

Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 1979.

______.
_______
______

-B 16-

1L6.

pp.

9,
1117.

"Business Cycles Are Alive and Well," Econ. Letters,

.

133—37.

"U. S. Business Cycles in the Postwar Era,"

.

1982,

Seminar for

Mathematical Economics, University of Munich, July 1983.
1118.

Hirsch, Albert A., and Lovell, Michael C. Sales anticipations and
inventory behavior, New York:

149.

Wiley, 1969.

Howrey, E. Philip. "Dynamic Properties of a Condensed Version of the

Wharton Model," in B.G. Hican, ed., 1972, pp. 601-668(668671.)
150.

Hoyt, Homer.

One hundred years of land values in Chicago, Chicago:

The University of Chicago Press, 1933.

(repr. New York:

Arno Press, 1970).
151.

Huizinga, John.

"Real Wages, Employment, and Expectations, Ph.D.

Thesis, M.I.T., 1980.
152.

Hultgren, Thor.

Cyclical diversities in the fortunes of industrial

corporations, Occasional Paper 32, New York:
153.

NBER, 1950.

ass. by Pech, M.R., Cost, prices, and profits:

their

cyclical relations, New York: Columbia University for NBER,
1965.
1514.

Ichimura, S.

"Toward a General Non-Linear Macro-Dynamic Theory of'

Economic Fluctuations," in K. Kurihara, ed., Post-Keynesian
economics, New Brunswick:
155.

Irvine, R. Owen, Jr.

Rutgers University Press, 1954.

"Tests of the Rationality and Accuracy of

Manufacturers' Sales Expectations," Working Paper Series,
Board of Governors, Federal Reserve System, 1981.

______.

-B 17-

156.

"Capital Theory and Investment Behavior," Amer.

Jorgenson, Dale W.

Econ. Rev., May 1963, 53(2), pp. 267—259.
157.

Statement presented in Hearings before the Task

Juster, F. Thomas.

Force on Inflation of' the Committee on the Budget, House of

Representatives, 96th Congress, First Session (June),
U. S. Government Printing Office, 1979,

Washington: D.C.:
pp. 21'4—226.
158.

"A Model of the Trade Cycle," Econ. J., March

Kaldor, Nicholas.

19140, 50(197), pp. 78-92.
159.

Kalecki, Michael. "A Macroeconomic Theory of Business Cycles,"
Econometrica, 1935, 3, pp.

160.

"A Theory of the Business Cycle," Rev. Econ. Stud.,
February 1937,

161.

14,

pp. 77-97.

"Rational Expectations and Economic Thought," J.

Kantor, Brian.

Econ. Lit., December 1979,
162.

327_31414.

17(14), pp.

11422_1I4L1.

Kareken, John M., and Wallace, Neil, eds. Models of monetary
economics, Proceedings and Contributions from Participants of
a December 1978 Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis, January 1980.

163.

Keynes, John M.
money.

1614.

Kindleberger,

The general theory of employment, interest, and

London:

Macmillan & Co., 1936.

Charles P.

Manias, panics, and crashes:

financial crises, New York:
165.

King, Robert G.

a history of

Basic Books, 1978.

"Monetary Information and Monetary Neutrality", J.

Monet. Econ., March 1981, 7(2), pp. 195—206.

_______
______,

-B 18-

166.

.

"Interest

Rates, Aggregate Information, and Monetary

Policy," J. Monet. Econ., August 1983, 12(2), pp. 199—234.
167.

and Piosser, Charles I.

"The Behavior of Money, Credit, and

Prices in a Real Business Cycle," NBER Working Paper, no.
853, February 1982.
168.

Klein, Lawrence R. and Preston, R. S.

"Stochastic Nonlinear Models,"

Econometrica, January 1969, 37(1), pp. 95-106.
169.

Klein, Philip A. Business cycles in the postwar world.:

reflections on recent research, Washington, D. C.:

some

American

Enterprise Institute, 1976.
170.

Knight, Frank H.

Risk, uncertainty, and profit, Boston:

Houghton-

Mifflin, 1921.
171.

Kopcke, Richard W.

"The Behavior of Investment Spending during the

Recession and Recovery, 1973-1976," N. E. Econ. Rev., Nov.Dec. 1977, pp. 5—41.
172.

Kosobud, R. F., and O'Neil, W. D.

"Stochastic Implications of

Orbital Asymptotic Stability of a Nonlinear Trade Cycle
Model," Econometrica, January 1972, 40(1), pp. 69-86.

173.

Krelle, Wilhelm. "Erich Preisers Wachstums-und Konjunkturtheorie als
einheitliche dynamische Theorie,"

W. J. MUcki and A. E. Ott,

eds, Wirtschaftstheorie und Wirtschaftspolitik, Gedenkschrift
für Erich Preiser, Passau:
pp. 235-253.

Passavia Universitatsverlag, 1981,

_______
______.
______

-B 19—

17k.

Kuh, Edwin.

"Profit, Profit Markups, and Productivity," in

Employment, growth, and price levels, Study Paper 15, Joint
Economic Committee, 86th Congress, first session, 1960.
175.

Kydland, Finn, and Prescott, Edwin C.

.

"A Competitive Theory of

Fluctuations and the Feasibility and Desirability of
Stabilization Policy," in S. Fischer, ed., 1980, pp. 169187(187—198).,
176.

.

"Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations," Econometrica,

November 1982, 50(6), pp. 135-137O.
177.

Scranton, Pa.:
178.

The demand for money:

Laidler, David E. W.

.

theories and evidence,

International Textbook company, 1969.

"Simultaneous Fluctuations in Prices and Output:

A

Business Cycle Approach," Econometrica, n.s., XL, February
1973a.
179.

.

Reprinted as Ch. 6 in Laidler, ed., 1975.

"The Influence of Money on Real Income and Inflation:

A

Simple Model with Some Empirical Tests for the United States,
1953-72," Manchester School, XLI, December 1973b.

Reprinted

as Ch. 7 in Laidler, ed., 1975.
180.

.

Essays on money and inflation, Chicago:

The University of

Chicago Press, 1975.
181.

"Monetarism:

An Interpretation and an Assessment," Econ.

J., March 1981, 91(361), pp. 1—28.
182.

Leijonhufvud,Axel.
Keynes:

On Keynesian economics and the economics of

A study in monetary theory, Oxford:

University Press, 1981.

Oxford

______
_______
_______
______
_______
-B20-

183.

Information

.

theory, New York:
18k.

and coordination:

essays in macroeconomic

Oxford University Press, 1981.

"Keynesianism, Monetarism, and Rational Expectations:

.

Reflections and Conjectures," Ch.

Some

10 in Frydman and Phelps,

eds., 1983, PP. 203-223.
185.

Lipsey, Richard G.

"The Relation Between Unemployment and the Rate

of Change of Money Wage Rates in the United Kingdom, 18621957:

A Further Analysis," Economica, February 1960, 27,
pp.

1—31.
186.

Lindbeck, Assar.

"Stabilization Policy in Open Economies with

Endogenous Politicians," Amer. Econ.
pp.
187.

1-19.

Long, John B., and Plosser, Charles

I.

Polit. Econ., February 1983, 91(1),
188.

Rev. May 1976, 66(2),

Lovell, Michael C.

"Real Business Cycles,"

J.

pp. 39-69.

"Determinants of Inventory Investment," Models of

income determination, Studies in income and wealth, Vol. XXVIII
Princeton University Press for NBER, 196k, pp. 177-231.
189.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr.

"Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," J.

Econ. Theory, April 1972, k(2), pp. 1031214.
190.

.

"Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation

Tradeoffs," Amer. Econ. Rev., June 1973, 63(3), pp. 326-33k.
191.

.

"An Equilibrium Model of the Business Cycle," J. Polit.

Econ., December 1975, 83(6), pp. 1113—llkk.
192.

.

"Econometric Policy Evaluation:

A Critique," in K. Brunner

and A.M. Meltzer, eds., 1976, pp. 19LI6.

_______.
_______
______.
_______

-B2 1-

193.

.

"Understanding Business Cycles" in Karl Brunner and Allan

H. Meltzer, eds., 1977, PP. 7-30

"Tobin and Monetarism:

19L.

A Review Article," J. Econ. Lit.,

June 1981, 19(2), pp. 558—567.

195.

.

and Rapping, Leonard A.

"Real Wages, Employment and

Inflation," J. Pout. Econ., 1969, September/October 1969, 77
(5), pp. 721—754.
196.

.

and Sargent, Thomas J.

After the Phillips curve:

"After Keynesian Macroeconomics,"

Persistence of high inflation and

high unemployment, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 1978. pp.
L9...78 (discussion by B. Friedman and response, pp. 78—81).
197.

Lundberg, Erik, ed., The business cycle in the postwar world,
London:

198.

1955.

"The Stability of Economic Growth:

A Critique of

Statistical and Theoretical Investigation," mt. Econ. Pap.,
vol. 8,
199.

1958 (trans. from Swedish:

Mack, Ruth P.
New York:

200.

Ekonomisk Tidskrift, 1950).

Information, expectations, and inventory fluctuations,
NBER, 1967.

MacRae, C. Duncan.

"A Political Model of the Business Cycle," J.

Polit. Econ., April 1977, 85(2), pp. 239—263.
201.

Malinvaud, Edmond.

The theory of unemployment reconsidered, Oxford:

Basil Blackwell, 1977.
202.

Mankiw, Gregory N.; Rotemberg, Julio J.; and Summers, Lawrence H.
"Intertemporal Substitution in Macro-Economics," NBER
Working

Paper, no.898, June 1982.

______.
_______.
______

-B22-

203.

The trade cycle, Cambridge,

Matthews, R. C. 0.

At the University

Press, 1959.
204.

Mayer, Thomas.

"Plant and Equipment Lead Times," J. Bus., April

1960, 33(2), pp. 127—132.
205.

.

et

al.

The structure of monetarism, New York:

W. W.

Norton, 1978.
206.

McCalluxn, Bennett T. "Rational Expectations and Macroeconomic

An Overview," J. Money, Credit, Banking,

Stabilization:

November 1980, part 2, 12(4), pp. 716-746.
207.

"Macroeconomics After a Decade of Rational Expectations:
Some Critical Issues," Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
Economic Review, December 1982, 68(6), pp. 3—12.

208.

McCulloch, J. Huston.
Economic Inquiry,

209.

"The Monte Carlo Cycle in Business Activity,"
September 1975, 13(3), pp. 303—321.

"The Cumulative Unanticipated Change in Interest Rates:
Evidence on the Misintermediation Hypothesis," NBER Working
Paper no. 222, December 1977.

210.

"Misintermediation

and Macroeconomic Fluctuations," J.

Monet Econ. 8 (1), July 1981, pp. 103-115.
211.

"The Rationality of Economic Forecasts," Amer.

McNees, Stephen K.

Econ. Rev., May 1978, 68(2), pp. 301—305.
212.

Meltzer, Allan H.

"Rational Expectations, Risk, Uncertainty, and

Market Responses," in Paul Wachtel, ed., Crises in economic
and financial structure, Lexington, Mass.:
1982, pp. 3—22.

Lexington Books,

______.
______.
_______.

- B2 3—

213.

"The Nature and Stability of Inventory Cycles,"

Metzler, Lloyd A.

Rev. Econ. Stat., August 19141, 23(3), pp. 113—129.
2114.

"Factors

Governming the Length of Inventory Cycles," Rev.

Econ. Stat. February 19147, 29(1), pp. 1-15.
215.

Mincer, Joseph, ed.

analyses

Economic forecasts and expectations:

of forecasting behavior and performances, New York:

Columbia

University Press for NBER, 1969.
216.

"Models of Adaptive Forecasting," in J. Mincer, ed.,1969,
pp. 83—111.

217.

and Zarnowitz, Victor.

"The Evaluation of Economic

Forecasts," in J. Mincer,ed., 1969, pp. 3—146.
218.

Minsky, Hyman P.

Can "it" happen again?

finance, New York:
219.

Mintz, Use.

M.E. Sharpe, Inc., 1982.

Cyclical Fluctuations in the Exports of the United

States Since 1879, New York:
220.

essays on instability and

Mishkin, Frederic S.

NBER, 1967.

"Are Market Forecasts Rational?" Amer. Econ.

Rev., June 1981a, 71(3), pp. 295—306.
221.

"The Real Interest Rate:

An Empirical Investigation," in

Karl Brunner and Allan H. Meltzer, eds., The costs and
consequences of inflation, Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy, vol. 15, Autumn 1981b, pp. 151—200.
222.

"Does Anticipated Monetary Policy Matter?
Investigation,"
22—51.

An Econometric

J. Pout, Econ., February 1982, 90(1), pp.

______
_______
______
_______
-B214-

223.

Mitchell, Wesley C.

Business cycles, Berkeley:

University of

California Press, 1913.
2214.

Business cycles:

.

The problem and its setting, New York:

National Bureau of Economic Research, 1927.
What happens during business cycles, New York, NBER, 1951.

225.
226.

Modigliani, Franco.

"The Monetarist Controversy or, Should We

Forsake Stabilization Policies?" Amer. Econ. Rev., March

1911, b1(), pp. 1—19.
227.

Moore, Geoffrey H.

Business cycles indicators, 2 Vols., Princeton

University Press for NBER, 1961.

.,

228.

Tested knowledge of business cycles, Forty-second Annual

report of the NBER, June 1962.
229.

"Productivity,

.

Hypothesis".

Costs, and Prices:

New Light from an Old

Explorations in Economic Research, 2(1), Winter

1975.

230.

.

"Business

Cycles:

Partly Exogeneous, Mostly Endogenous,"

Soc. Sci. Quart., June 1977a, 58
231.

.

"Five

(1),

pp. 96-103.

Little-Known Facts about Inflation,"

The Morgan

Guaranty Survey, August 1977b.
232.

.

Business cycles, inflation, and forecasting, 2nd ed.,

Cambridge, Mass.: Bellinger Pubi. Co. for NBER, 1983.

233.

,

Cullity,

John P.,

Costs, and Prices:
Moore, 1983.

"Trends and Cycles in Productivity, Unit

An rnternational Perspective," Ch.

16 in

_______.
_______
______

—B25-

and Zarnowitz, Victor.

2314.

"The Development and Role of the

National Bureau's Business Cycle Chronologies," NBER Working
Paper no.
235.

.

13914, July 19814.

and Klein, Philip A.

Monitoring Business Cycles at Home and

Abroad1 NBER, forthcoming.
236.

Mullineaux, Donald J.

"On Testing for Rationality:

Another Look at

the Livingston Price Expectations Data," J. Pout. Econ.,
April 1978, 86(2), pp. 329—336.
237.

The business cycle after Keynes:

Mullineux, A. W.

a contemporary

analysis, Barnes and Noble Books, N.J., 1984.
238.

"Adaptive and Regressive Expectations in a Rational

Mussa, Michael.

Model of the Inflationary Process,"

J. Monet. Econ., October

1975, 1(4), pp. 423-442.
239.

Muth, John F.

"Optimal Properties of Exponentially Weighted

Forecasts," J. Amer. Stat. Ass., June 1960, 55(290), pp. 299—
306.
240.

.

"Rational

Expectations and the Theory of Price Movements,"

Econometrica, July 1961, 29(3), pp. 315—335.
2141.

Neftci, Salih N.

"A Time—Series Analysis of the Real Wages-

Employment Relationship," J. Pout. Econ., part I, April
1978, 86(2), pp. 281-291.
2142.

Nelson, Charles R.

"Adjustment Lags versus Information Lags:

A Test

of Alternative Explanations of the Phillips Curve
Phenomenon," J. Money, Credit, Banking, February 1981, 13(1),
pp. 1-11.

______.
______
_______.
-B26—

and Plosser, Charles I.

2143.

Macroeconomic Time Series:

"Trends and Random Walks in
Some Evidence and Implications,"

J. Monet. Econ., September 1982, 10(2), pp. 139—162.
2414.

Nerlove, Marc, and Wage, S.

"On the Optimality of Adaptive

Forecasting," Management Science, January 1964, 10(2), pp.
207-224.
245.

Nordhaus, William D., "The Political Business Cycle," Rev. Econ.
Stud., April 1975, 142(2), pp. 169—190.

2146.

Okun, Arthur M.

"Rational—Expectations-with-Misperceptions as a

Theory of Business Cycle," J.Money, Credit, Banking, November
1980, part 2,
247.

.

Prices

12(4) pp. 818-825.

and quantities:

Washington, D.C.:
248.

Papadia, Francesco.

a macroeconomic analysis.

Brookings Institution, 1981.

"Rationality of Inflationary Expectations in the

European Communities' Countries," EEC Working Paper,
Brussels, March 1982.
249.

Pashigian, B. Peter

"The Accuracy of the Commerce-SEC Sales

Anticipations," Rev. Econ. Stat., November 1964, 46(4), pp.
3981405.
250.

Patinkin, Don. "Price Flexibility and Full Employment," Amer. Econ.
Rev., September 19148, 38(4), pp. 5143_564..

251.

Money, interest, and prices:
and value theory, New York:
edition 1965).

an integration of monetary

Harper & Row, 1954 (second

_______
_______.
______.

- B27 -

252.

Pearce, Douglas K.

"Comparing Survey and Rational Measures of

Expected Inflation," J. Money, Credit, Banking, November
1979, 11(4), pp. 8U9-858.

253.

"A Note on the Rationality of the Livingston

Pesando, James E.

Price Expectations," J. Pout. Econ., August 1975, 83(14), pp.
8149-858.

254.

"Phillips Curves, Expectations of Inflation,

Phelps, Edmund S.

and Optimal Unemployment Over Time," Economica, n.s., August
1967,

255.

.

314

(135),

pp. 2514—281.

"Introduction:

The New Microeconornics in Employment

and Inflation Theory," in Microeconomic foundations of
employment and inflation theory, ed. by E. S. Phelps, et
New York:

al.

Norton, 1970, pp. 309—337.

"Okun's Micro-Macro System:

256.

A Review Article," J.

Econ. Lit., September 1981, 19(3), pp. 1065-1073.

and Taylor, John B., "Stabilizing Powers of Monetary

257.

Policy under Rational Expectations,t' J. Pout. Econ.,
February 1977, 85(1), pp. 163—190.
258.

Phillips, A. W.

"The Relation Between Unemployment and the Rate

of Change of Money Wage Rates in the United Kingdom, 18621957," Economica (n.s.), November 1958, 25(100), pp. 283—299
259.

260.

Pigou, A. C.
.

Industrial fluctuations, London:

Macmillan, 1927.

"Economic Progress in a Stable Environment,"

Economica, n.s., August 19147, 114(55), pp. 180—188.

_______
________.
______

-828-

261.

Poole, William.

"Rational Expectations in the Macro Model,"

Brookings Pap. Econ. Act., 1976, 2, pp. 14635O5.

262.

Popkin, Joel.

"The Relationship Between New Orders and

Shipments:

An Analysis of the Machinery and Equipment

Industries," Survey of Current Business,, March 1965, pp. 214_
32.

263.

.

"The Business Cycle at Various Stages of Process," J.

Bus. Econ. Stat., July 19814, 2(3), pp. 215—223
264.

Preiser, Erich.

Grundz uge der Konjunkturtheorie, Tubingen:

J.C.B.Mohr (Paul Siebeck), 1933.
265.

Rau, Nicholas, Trade cycles:
Macmillan,

266.

theory and evidence, London:

19714.

Robertson, D. H.

A study of industrial fluctuations, London:

Aldwych (1915), reprinted 1948.
267.

Rose, Hugh.

"On the Non-linear Theory of the Employment Cycle,"

Rev. Econ. Stud., April 1967, 34(2) no. 98, pp. 153—173.
268.

.

"Real and Monetary Factors in the Business Cycle," J.

Money, Credit, Banking, May 1969, 1(2), pp. 138—152.
269.

Sainuelson, Paul A.

"Interactions Between the Multiplier

Analysis and the Principle of Acceleration, Rev. Econ. Stat.,
May 1939, 21(2), pp. 75—78.
270.

Foundations of economic analysis, Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press,

19i47.

_______.
______
_______
_______

-B29—

271.

An Exact Consumption—Loan Model of Interest With or

.

J. Polit. Econ.,

Without the Social Contrivance of Money,"
December 1958, 66(6), pp. 1467_1482.
272.

.

and Solow, Robert M.

"Analytical Aspects of Anti—

Inflation Policy," Amer. Econ. Rev., May 1960, 50(2), pp.
177— 1914.

273.

"A Classical Macroeconometric Model for the

sargent, Thomas J.

United States," J. Pout. Econ., April 1976a, 814(2), pp. 207237.

"The Observational Equivalence of Natural and

2714.

Unnatural Rate Theories of Macroeconomics," J. Polit. Econ.
June 1976b, 814(3), pp. 631—6140.
275.

.

"Estimation

of Dynamic Labor Demand Schedules under

Rational Expectations," J. Polit. Econ., December 1978,
86(6), pp.
276.

.

loO9_101414.

Macroeconomic Theory.

New York:

Academic Press,

1979.

277.

.

and Wallace, Neil.

"Rational' Expectations, the

Optimal Monetary Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply
Rule," J. Pout. Econ., April 1975, 83(2), pp. 2141—2514.
278.

"Rational

Expectations and the Theory of Economic

Policy," J. Monet. Econ., April 1976, 2(2), pp. 169—183.
279.

Scarfe, Brian L.

Cycles, growth, and inflation:

contemporary macrodynamics, New York:

a survey of

McGraw—Hill, 1977.

_______.
_______
______

-B30-

280.

Schumpeter, Joseph A.

"The Analysis of Economic Changes," Rev.

Econ. Stat., May 1935, 17(k), pp. 2-10.
281.

.

Business cycles:

a theoretical, historical, and

statistical analysis of the capitalist process, 2 vols., New
York:
282.

McGraw-Hill, 1939.

Schwartz, Anna J.

"Understanding 1929-1933" in Brunner, ed.,

1981.

283.

Sheffrin, Steven M.

Rational expectations, Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press, 1983.
284.

Sherman,

Howard J.

Stagflation:

a rational theory of

unemployment and inflation, New York:
285.

Shiller, Robert J.

Harper & Row, 1976.

"Rational Expectations and the Dynamic

Structure of Macroeconomic Models:

A Critical Review,"

J.Monet. Econ., January 1978, k(1), pp. 1-4)4.
286.

.

"Can the Fed control real interest rates?", in S.

Fischer, ed., 1980, pp. 117—156(156—167).
287.

.

"Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justified by

Subsequent Changes in Dividends?", Amer. Econ. Rev., June
1981a, 71(3), pp. Lt21_k36.

"The Use of Volatility Measures in Assessing Market

288.

Efficiency," J. Finance, May 1981b, 36(2), pp. 291—30)4 (30)4311).
289.

Sims, Christopher, A.

"Macroeconomics and Reality,"

Econometria, Jan. 1980a, 148(1), pp.

1—148.

_______.
______

-B31-

"Comparison of Interwar and Postwar Business Cycles:

290.

Monetarism Reconsidered," Amer.

Econ. Rev., May 1980b, 70(2),

pp. 250-257.
291.

"Policy

.

Analysis with Econometric Models,"

Brookings

Pap. Econ. Act., 1982, no. 1, PP. 107-152.
292.

Solow, Robert H.

"On Theories of Unemployment," Am. Econ. Rev.,

March 1980, 70(1), pp. 1—11.
293.

"Business Cycles," International Economic

Spiethoff, Arthur.

Papers, 3:75—171 (first published as "Krisen" in Volume 6
the

Handworterbuch der Staatswissenschaften)

,

of

pp. 8-91,

(1925)1953.
294.

Postwar Cycles in Manufacturers'

Stanback, Thomas M., Jr.
Inventories, New York:

295.

Stein, Jerome L., ed.,

NBER, 1962.

Monetarism, Amsterdam:

North—Holland,

1976.

296.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. and Weiss, Andrew.

"Credit Rationing in

Markets with Imperfect Information," Amer. Econ. Rev., June
1981, 71(3), pp. 393—410.
297.

Stockmari, Alan C.

"Aggregation Bias and the Cyclical Behavior

of Real Wages," Paper presented at the NBER Macro Conference,
July 1983.
298.

Summers, Lawrence H.
Rates:

"The Monadjustment of Nominal Interest

A Study of the Fisher Effect," in Tobin, ed., 1983,

pp. 201-241.

______
_______.
______
_______

—B32-

299.

"Changes in Real and Money Wages," Econ. J.,

Tarshis, Lone.

March 1939, 49(193), pp. 150—154.
300.

"Monetary Policy during a Transition, to

Taylor, John B.

Rational Expectations," J. Pout. Econ., October 1975, 83(5),

pp. 1009-1021.
301.

.

"Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts," J.

Polit. Econ., February 1980a, 88(1), pp. 1-23.

3U.

.

"Output an k'rice tabi1ity:

An international

Comparison," J. Econ. Dynamics Control 1980b, 2, pp. 109-132.
303.

"Rational

.

Expectations and the Invisible Handshake," in

Tobin, ed., 1983, pp. 63-82.
304.

Did monetary forces cause the great depression?,

Temin, Peter.

New York: Morton, 1976.
305.

Theil, Henri.

,

Economic forecasts and policy, Amsterdam:

North-

Holland, 1958.
306.

Tinbergen, Jan.

Statistical testing of business cycle theories,

2 Vols., Geneva:
307.

Tobin, James.

League of Nations, 1939.

"A Dynamic Aggregative Model," J. Pout. Econ.,

April 1955, 63(2), pp. 103—115.
308.

.

"A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory,"

J. Money, Credit, Banking, Feb. 1969, 1(1), pp. 15-29.
309.

.

"Money and Income:

Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc?,"

Quart. J. Econ., May 1970, 84(2), pp. 301-317.
310.

"How Dead is Keynes?" Econ. Inquiry, October 1977,

15(4), pp. 459—468.

_______
______
_______.
______

-B33-

311.

Asset accumulation and economic activity:

.

on contemporary macroeconomic theory, Chicago:

reflections
The

University of Chicago Press, 1980.

"The Monetarist Counter-Revolution Today--An

312.

Appraisal," Econ. J,, March 1981, 91(361), pp. 29-42.

.,ed.,

313.

Macroeconomics, Prices, and Quantities:

Memory of' Arthur Okun, Oxford:
314.

Torre, V.

Essays in

Basil Blackwell, 1983.

"Existence of Limit Cycles and Control in Complete

Keynesian System by Theory of Bifurcations," Econometrica,
September 1977, 45(6), pp.
315.

Townsend, Robert M.

1457—1466.

"Market Anticipations, Rational

Expectations and Bayesian Analysis," Internat. Econ. Rev.,
June 1978, 19(2 ), pp. 481_L91L
316.

.

"Equilibrium

Expectations:

Theory with Learning and Disparate

Some Issues and Methods," Ch. 9

in

Frydman and

Phelps, eds., 1983a, pp. 169—198.
317.

.

"Forecasting the Forecasts of Others," J. Pout.

Econ., August 1983b, 91(4), pp. 5146_588.

318.

Tufte, Edward R.
NJ:

319.

Political control of the economy, Princeton,

Princeton University Press, 1978.

Tugan—Baranowskii, Mikhail I.
Angleterre, 2nd ed., Paris:

320.

Varian, Hal R.

Les crises industrielles en
Giard & Briere,

[1894] 1913.

"Catastrophe Theory and the Business Cycle,"

Econ. Inquiry, January 1979, 17(1), pp.

114_28.

-B34-

321.

Amsterdam:
322.

North—Holland, 1984.

The rediscovery of the business cycle, New

Voleker, Paul A.
York:

323.

Price expectations in rising inflation,

Visco, Ignazio.

The Free Press, 1978.

von Furstenberg, George M.

"Corporate Investment:

Does Market

Valuation Matter in the Aggregate?" Brookings Pap. Econ. Act.
2,

324.

1977, pp. 3)47_397 (398—408).

Wachtel, Paul

"Survey Measures of Expected Inflation and Their

Potential Usefulness," in Joel Popkin, ed., Analysis of
Inflation:

1965—197)4, Cambridge, Mass.:

Ballinger Publ. Co.

for NBER, 1977, pp. 361-395.
325.

Whitman, Marina V.N.

"International Interdependence and the

U.S. Economy," in William Feilner, ed., AEI Studies on
contemporary economic problems, Washington, D.C.:

American

Enterprise Institute, 1976, pp. 183—223.
326.

Wicksell, Knut.

Interest and prices:

a study of the causes

regulating the value of money, London:

Macmillan [1898]

1936.

327.

Wojnilower, Albert M.

"The Central Role of Credit Crunches as

Recent Financial History," Brookings Pap. Econ. Act. 2:
1980, pp. 277-339.
328.

Zarnowitz, Victor.

An appraisal of short-term economic

forecasts, New York: NBER, 1967.

______.
______
_______.
_______
_______.
______
______

-B35-

329.

"Wesley C. Mitchell," International encyclopedia of' the

.

social sciences, New York:

Macmillan and Free Press, 1968,

vol. 10, PP. 373—378.
330.

.

ed.,

331.

.

Orders, production, and investments—-cyclical and

The business cycle today, New York:

structural analysis, New York:
332.

.

NBER, 1973.

"Business Cycles and Growth:

Measures," in W. J.

NBER, 1972.

Some Reflections and

Mucki and A. E. Ott, eds.,

Wirtschaftstheorie und Wirtschaftspolitik:
Erich Preiser, Passau:

Gedenkschrift fur

Passavia Universitatsverlag, 1981,

pp. U75—508.
"On Functions, Quality, and Timeliness of Economic

333.

Information," J. Bus., January 1982, 55(1), pp. 87-119.
33'L.

.

Rational

Expectations and Macroeconomic Forecasts,"

NBER Working Paper No. 1070, January 1983.

"Business Cycles Analysis and Expectational Survey

335.

Data," NBER Working Paper no. 1378, June 19814.
336.

.

Boschan, Charlotte and Moore, Geoffrey, H.

"Business

Cycle Analysis of Econometric Model Simulations," in B.G.
Hickman, ed., 1972, Pp. 311-533 (5314_5141).
337.

and Moore, Geoffrey H., "The Recession and Recovery of'

1973—76,"

Explorations in Economic Research, Fall 1977,

(14), pp. 472—557.

14

—B36—

S

338.

Zeliner, Arnold and Peck, Stephen C.

"Simulation Experiments

with a Quarterly Macroeconomic Model of the U. S. Economy,"
in A. A. Powell and R. A., Williams, eds., Econometric
studies of macro and monetary relations, Amsterdam:
Holland, 1973, pp. 1'9-168.

North-

