                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      WHY DO SKILLED IMMIGRANTS STRUGGLE IN THE LABOR MARKET? A
             FIELD EXPERIMENT WITH SIX THOUSAND RESUMES

                                         Philip Oreopoulos

                                        Working Paper 15036
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15036


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2009




This research was carried out with support from Metropolis British Columbia. It could not have been
completed without the awesome research assistance from Amit Dhand, Wei Gong, Adam Kowalczewski,
Chris-Ann Monteiro, Monica Pu, and Ayaz Warraich. I also thank Joana Lahey for providing her
program to randomize resume characteristics, and Rishi Aurora for computing service support. I am
grateful to Marianne Bertrand Tarek Hussain, Dan-olof Rooth, Katherine Laird, and Joanna Lahey
for detailed suggestions, and to seminar participants at the ‘Comings and Goings’ conference at the
Ottawa Research Data Center, the 2008 Symposium on Findings from Small Scale Experiments in
Ottawa, Simon Fraser University, and the University of British Columbia. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Philip Oreopoulos. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Why Do Skilled Immigrants Struggle in the Labor Market? A Field Experiment with Six
Thousand Resumes
Philip Oreopoulos
NBER Working Paper No. 15036
June 2009
JEL No. J15,J31,J7,K31

                                              ABSTRACT

Thousands of resumes were sent in response to online job postings across multiple occupations in
Toronto to investigate why Canadian immigrants, allowed in based on skill, struggle in the labor market.
Resumes were constructed to plausibly represent recent immigrants under the point system from the
three largest countries of origin (China, India, and Pakistan) and Britain, as well as non-immigrants
with and without ethnic-sounding names. In addition to names, I randomized where applicants received
their undergraduate degree, whether their job experience was gained in Toronto or Mumbai (or another
foreign city), whether they listed being fluent in multiple languages (including French). The study
produced four main findings: 1) Interview request rates for English-named applicants with Canadian
education and experience were more than three times higher compared to resumes with Chinese, Indian,
or Pakistani names with foreign education and experience (5 percent versus 16 percent), but were no
different compared to foreign applicants from Britain. 2) Employers valued experience acquired in
Canada much more than if acquired in a foreign country. Changing foreign resumes to include only
experience from Canada raised callback rates to 11 percent. 3) Among resumes listing 4 to 6 years
of Canadian experience, whether an applicant’s degree was from Canada or not, or whether the applicant
obtained additional Canadian education or not had no impact on the chances for an interview request.
 4) Canadian applicants that differed only by name had substantially different callback rates: Those
with English-sounding names received interview requests 40 percent more often than applicants with
Chinese, Indian, or Pakistani names (16 percent versus 11 percent). Overall, the results suggest considerable
employer discrimination against applicants with ethnic names or with experience from foreign firms.


Philip Oreopoulos
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T, 1Z1
CANADA
and NBER
philip.oreopoulos@ubc.ca
I. Introduction



        Recent immigrants to Canada struggle in the labor market. Their unemployment

rates compared to similarly-aged non-immigrants are twice as high (Table 1 shows this

for immigrants arriving between 1996 and 2000 using the 2001 Canadian Census).1

Median wages of recent immigrant workers are also about 35 percent lower compared to

native-born workers. Previous research finds little evidence for expecting that this wage

gap will significantly narrow with host-country experience. While the immigrant-native

wage gap used to disappear (and sometimes even reverse sign) after 10 to 15 years for

immigrants arriving prior to the 1970s, wages of immigrants arriving in the 1990s are still

about 25 percent lower than wages of non-immigrants even after 2005 (Frenette and

Morissette, 2005).

        Recent immigrants to other countries such as the United States also experience

similar labor market disadvantages (e.g. Lubotsky, 2007), but what is particularly

noteworthy in the Canadian case is the fact that their immigration policy focuses on

attracting immigrants with superior levels of education, experience, and industry demand

to offset an anticipated skilled labor force shortage and encourage economic growth.

More than half of today’s immigrants enter Canada under a point system, which rates

applicants based on their highest degree, language ability, age, whether they have work

experience at occupations deemed ‘in demand’, whether they already have a job offer,

have worked or studied in Canada previously, and have cash at hand.2 Virtually every


1 Picot and Sweetman (2005), Worswick (2004), and Frenette and Morisette (2005) report similar
statistics.
2 See Beach, Green, and Worswick (2006), Antecol, Cobb‐Clark, and Trejo (2003) or Borjas (1993) for

more details about the Canadian Point System (more formally called Federal Skilled Status Category).


                                                 2
immigrant who enters Canada under the point system now has at least an undergraduate

degree. The overall percentage of recent immigrants with an undergraduate degree is

about 60 percent, compared to 20 percent for Canadian-born of similar age (Statistics

Canada, 2008). Conditioning on highest degree completed, therefore, causes the relative

wage gap between recent immigrants and non-immigrants to increase, from 35 percent

lower wages for immigrants to 45 percent (Table 1).

        Canada has the largest per-capita immigration rate in the world (Dolan and

Young, 2004). Policy makers are concerned about the lack of immigrant assimilation

because it suggests that recent immigrants are not integrating into the high-skilled labor

market, despite effort to attract immigrants who will. This raises questions about the role

immigration plays in providing Canada with a source of highly skilled individuals to

boost economic growth. It also has important implications for the use of government

transfer programs, such as social assistance and child tax benefits, as well as for income

tax revenues. A number of other countries such as the United Kingdom, Spain, and

Germany are also considering or in the process of bringing in a point system as part of a

plan to shift their immigration policies more towards a skill-based focus. The

international competition to attract skilled immigrants is evidently increasing and more

attention is being devoted to a point-system approach to evaluate the desirable

characteristics of prospective immigrants. While the United States has traditionally

emphasized more the role of family reunification in its immigration policy, some debate

has initiated over possible adoption of a point system. So it is also worthwhile to


Language ability is evaluated based on an applicants “International English Language Test System
(IELTS) score, or by submitting a written explanation detailing training in and usage of English
Language. If an immigration officer believes the written explanation is inadequate, he or she can
require the applicant take the IELTS instead.


                                               3
investigate, from the perspective of other countries, why Canada's point system does not

appear to be having its desired effect.

       The usual suspects to explain the gap include the possibility that employers do not

value foreign education as much as they value Canadian education. The point system

treats any degree from any institution the same. Foreign experience may also be treated

as inferior to Canadian experience, since less is known about the employer and tasks

involved. Other possibilities are that cultural and language differences have grown as the

proportion of applications from Europe has decreased and the proportion from Asia and

the Pacific Coast has increased. The point system places no role on an applicant’s

understanding of social etiquette and concerns about language proficiency may remain.

       Previous studies have attempted to explain the immigrant-native wage gap using a

Blinder-Oaxaca-type decomposition methodology (Aydemir and Skuterud, 2004,

Frenette and Morissette, 2053, Green and Worswick, 2004, Schaafsma and Sweetman,

2001, Lalonde and Topel, 1992, and Ferrer and Riddell, 2008). The typical approach is

to first predict immigrant wages based on having similar characteristics as non-

immigrants, such as total years of experience, schooling, city of residence, and local

economic conditions. Then, the difference between an immigrant’s actual and predicted

wage is regressed on his foreign background to determine which of these characteristics

have the greatest explanatory power. My reading of this literature is that there is general

consensus around the conclusion that the immigrant-native wage gap in Canada exists

mostly because of lower returns to foreign experience, especially among immigrants from

Asia and the Pacific.




                                            4
       The Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition approach, however, does not offer details

about what underlies these relationships. Lack of data about language ability, quality of

education, quality of experience, and other hard-to-measure skills prevent us from telling

why employers value foreign experience less. It also cannot assess the extent to which

differences in wages are driven simply by taste-based discrimination, since it’s

impossible to rule out unobserved characteristics explain these results.

       This study adopts a completely different methodology to investigate why

Canadian immigrants arriving under the point system struggle in the labor market.

Thousands of resumes were sent online in response to job postings across multiple

occupations in the Greater Toronto Area after randomly varying characteristics on the

resume to uncover what affects employer’s decisions on whether to contact an applicant.

The resumes were constructed to plausibly represent recent immigrants under the point

system from the three largest countries of origin (China, India, and Pakistan) and Britain,

as well as non-immigrants with and without ethnic-sounding names. In addition to

names, I randomized where applicants received their undergraduate degree, whether their

job experience was gained in Toronto or Mumbai (or another foreign city), whether they

listed being fluent in multiple languages (including French), whether they had additional

education credentials, and whether they listed active extra curricular activities. The

approach provides a way to estimate what resume elements affect callback rates and

compare different theories behind the immigrant-native gap.                I also recorded

characteristics of the job and employer to determine whether the effects vary across type

of firm or evaluator.




                                             5
       My approach extends the work of Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004) who found

that resumes sent to blue-collar jobs in Boston in Chicago with white-sounding names

generated callbacks about 50 percent more often than the same resumes sent with black-

sounding names. The first studies to apply this type of methodology used pairs of trained

‘auditors’ instead of resumes to test for discrimination (Riach and Rich, 2002, provide a

review of this literature). Traditional audit studies try to match individuals in all respects

except the variable of interest, usually race, ethnicity, or gender, to rent an apartment, buy

a house, or apply for a job (e.g., Fix and Struyk 1993).           Resume audits have the

advantage that they provide more control over the information employers use to make a

decision. Although these types of studies only measure the interviewing stage of the

hiring process, they allow far larger samples to be collected, and thus more degrees of

freedom to examine interactions and sup-groups.

       The only existing Canadian audit study that I am aware of examined response

differences after calling 237 employers to ask whether job openings are still available

using auditors with “Canadian”, Slavic, West-Indian, or Indo-Pakistani accents. Those

with typical Canadian accents were told jobs were available 85 percent of the time. Those

with Slavic accents were told jobs were available 52 percent of the time, and those with

Indo-Pakistanni accents were told jobs were available 47 percent of the time (Henry and

Ginzberg, 1985). Another related paper looked at callback differences between Middle

Eastern and Swedish-sounding names (in Sweden). Carlsson and Rooth (2007) found

callback rates were 50 percent higher for equivalent resumes with Swedish names, and

that the effects were higher when the employer was a small firm and the recruiter was




                                              6
male. My study is the first to consider many randomized characteristics on the resume at

once, to help explain why immigrants fare poorly in the labr market.

       As discussed more below, I find almost as much name-discrimination in my study

as Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004) find between Black and White-sounding names.

Applicants with English-sounding names with Canadian education and experience

received callbacks 40 percent more often than did applicants with Chinese, Indian, or

Pakistani names. Conditional on listing 4 to 6 years Canadian experience, being foreign

educated (whether at a highly ranked school or not) did not affect callback rates

substantially. But changing only the location of the applicant’s job experience, from

Canadian to foreign, lowered the callback rate further from about 10 percent to 5 percent.

Adding more language credentials, additional Canadian education, or extracurricular

activities had little impact on these overall results. The effects were almost the same

whether jobs applied to required more or less social or language skills.         Callback

differences mostly went away when comparing native applications to British immigrants.

Overall, the results suggest considerable employer discrimination against ethnic

Canadians and immigrants. I discuss more the implication of these results below and

what behavior might underlie these results.



II. Research Design



       Thousands of randomly created resumes were sent by email in response to job

postings across multiple occupations in the Greater Toronto Area between April and




                                              7
November 2008 (data and examples are provided in the electronic appendix).3 The

resumes were designed to plausibly represent typical immigrants that arrived recently

under the Canadian Point System from China, Pakistan, and India (the current top three

source countries) and Britain, as well as non-immigrants with and without ethnically

sounding names.        They were constructed after consulting actual resumes of recent

immigrants and online submissions.4 The sample of jobs I applied to represent all jobs

posted during this period that accepted applications via direct email and generally

required three to seven years of experience and an undergraduate degree. Positions that

specifically required at least a graduate degree, North American experience or education,

or French as a second language were ignored.

        With few exceptions, four resumes were sent to each employer over a 2 to 3 day

period in random order. The first represented an applicant with an English-sounding

name, Canadian undergraduate education, and Canadian experience (Type 0).                         The

second resume had instead a foreign-sounding name (Chinese, Indian, or Pakistani), but

still listed Canadian undergraduate education and Canadian experience (Type 1). The

third resume included a foreign-sounding name, foreign undergraduate degree, and

Canadian experience (Type 2). The fourth included a foreign-sounding name, foreign

education, and some (Type 3) or all (Type 4) foreign experience.5 I also randomized

each applicant’s alma mater, whether the applicant listed being fluent in multiple




3 Two examples are shown at the end of this paper. Files of all resumes sent are available by request.
4 A human resource director at a job placement organization in Bangladesh provided very helpful
advice and a comprehensive set of annonymized resumes of individuals who qualified under the
Point System to immigrate to Canada. I also consulted resumes posted on www.workopolis.com and
www.jobbank.ca.
5 Resume sets with more than one applicant with foreign experience or education from the same

country were excluded.


                                                  8
languages (including French), whether they had additional Canadian education

credentials, and whether they listed active extra curricular activities.

        The English-sounding names on Type 0 resumes were picked randomly from a

list of the most popular Anglophone surnames in Canada (Smith, Martin, Brown, Wilson,

and Johnson), and matched randomly with one of four possible male names (Greg, John,

Matthew, or Michael) or four possible female names (Alison, Carrie, Emily, and Jill)

used previously by Bertrand and Mullainathan (2003).6 Resumes with foreign education

or experience from Britain had the same names. The other resumes of Type 1 to 4 had

names picked randomly among a list of 24 popular male and female names from China,

India, and Pakistan.7 Table 2 shows the number of resumes sent by name and type.

Email addresses were set up for all 32 names using both gmail.com and yahoo.ca

accounts.

        Work experiences were constructed from actual resumes accessible online. The

descriptions were sufficiently altered to create distinct sets that would not be associated

with actual people, but I also tried to maintain original overall content and form. Each

resume listed the job title, job description, company name, and city location for an

applicant’s three most recent jobs covering 4 to 6 years, with the first job beginning in the

same year as the applicant’s undergraduate degree completion. The city listed was



6 The common Canadian surname list comes from an article dated July 26, 2007 by the Canadian
Broadcasting Corporation, accessible on March 12, 2008 at www.cbc.ca/news/background/name‐
change/common‐surnames.html. The article mentions the list comes from infoUSA, “which claims to
have put together a directory of every telephone listing in Canada”.
7 Chinese names were picked from a most common names list on the website
http://zhidao.baidu.com/question/41504421.html. The web page cited the National Citizen Identity
Information Center of China as the source. Indian names were gathered from the web page
http://hinduism.about.com/library/babynames/bl‐babynames‐index.htm, and with consultation
with one of my research assistants with Indian heritage. I saved these web pages, which are available
on request.


                                                 9
always the same (except for Type 3 resumes).8 Experience sets were constructed for 20

different occupation categories, almost all the same ones used by the online job site

workopolis.com.9 Within each category, I created four different experience sets, whose

job titles and corresponding job descriptions were randomly assigned to one of the four

resumes sent to a single employer.10 It is worth emphasizing that this randomization not

only made years of experience the same across immigrant and non-immigrant resumes

(on average), but it also made the description of this experience the same. In addition,

company names were also independent of resume type for about half the sample.

International companies were chosen wherever possible to keep the experience sets

identical across immigrant and non-immigrant resumes except for location (for example

ABC Inc., Toronto versus ABC Inc., Mumbai). In cases where no obvious international

company was available, I picked closely related companies in size and industry.

Interestingly, the overall results using identical company names were the same as those

using different names (I discuss this more below).

        Since virtually all immigrants that arrived recently under the point system had at

least a bachelor’s degree, all resumes generated in this study did so as well. A job

posting’s occupation category determined the set of degrees to randomly pick. For

example, resumes generated for a position as a Financial Analyst had either a Bachelor of

Arts in Economics or one in Commerce while those for a Software Developer position

had a Bachelor’s degree in Computer Science or one in Computer Engineering. Alma



8 The city was either Mississauga, Toronto, Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhu, New Delhi, Mumbai, Punjab,
or London.
9 The categories were administrative, insurance, arts and media, biotech‐pharmaceutical, marketing,

ecommerce, production, education, retail, maintenance, programmer, civil engineering, electrical
engineering, executive, finance, technology, human resources, computer, healthcare, and hospitality.
10 The main sites I used for this were workopolis.com and jobbank.ca




                                                10
mater was picked randomly from a list of about four universities in the same country as

the applicant’s corresponding name and in the same proximity to the applicant’s location

of experience.     About half of the universities were listed in the 2008 QS World

University Rankings’ top 200.11            The other universities were less prestigious.

Manipulation of this characteristic helps examine whether employers prefer applicants

with degrees from Canada even in cases where, all else constant, other applicants have

foreign degrees from more selective or better quality schools. It is interesting to note that

under the point-system an applicant receives the same number of points for a Bachelor

degree, regardless of where he or she received it.

        To assess whether additional Canadian educational credentials may offset lower

callback rates from having foreign experience or foreign schooling, 20 percent of

resumes, except those of Type 4, were randomly assigned Canadian Master’s degrees

from universities nearby Toronto.12         Masters degrees were occupation specific and

completed during the same three-year period as the applicants’ most recent (Canadian)

experience, so that it looked like the applicant was enrolled part-time while working full-

time. Some job postings also indicated that specific certificates or credentials (other than

a Bachelor’s degree) were required, or at least strongly preferred (two common instances

were Certified General Accountant (CGA) and software experience such as Flash). For

job postings that required a particular certificate (13 percent of my sample), I listed this

requirement on each of the four resumes sent.             For job postings that mentioned a

preference for a particular certificate (4 percent of my sample), I randomly assigned it to

one or two of the four resumes sent. These procedures provide another method for

11See www.topuniversities.com.
12I note in the results section below that callback differences between Type 4 and other type
resumes are about the same whether Masters degrees are listed on the other type resumes or not.


                                               11
exploring the potential effects of certification on reducing callback gaps between

applicants with and without foreign backgrounds.

        Language skills and extra-curricular activities were also manipulated to help

explore whether language or cultural concerns underlie callback differences. I randomly

selected 20 percent of resumes to list fluency in multiple languages. Resumes with

English soundings names listed fluency in English and French. The other resumes listed

fluency in English, French, and the applicant’s mother tongue (Mandarin, Cantonese,

Hindi, or Punjabi), depending on the applicant’s ethnic origin of name. In addition, 60

percent of resumes listed active extra curricular activities. One of three possible sets was

chosen listing characteristics such as volunteer initiative (e.g. Big Brother/Sister, Habitat

for Humanity), social interests (e.g. competitive squash player, classical pianist) and

proactive work skills (e.g. excellent common sense, judgment, and decision-making

abilities).   Table 3 shows average frequencies of these and other characteristics on the

resumes sent, for each type.

        Clearly resumes had to look different when sending to the same employer, so I

also randomized each applicant’s cover letter (a short, general message sent as a part of

the email text), and the email subject line and the resume file name (resumes were saved

as pdf files unless word documents were specifically requested). I randomized each

resume’s layout, residential address and telephone number (all possibilities were within

the Greater Toronto Area, with one apartment address and four home addresses in

Mississauga, Brampton, and Toronto). Each applicant listed three previous jobs, with

earlier years of experience being over 2, 3, or 4 years for each particular job, and with the

most recent job always being listed as starting from 2006 to present. I randomized each




                                             12
applicant’s email address (s.shreya6@gmail.com or shreya.sharma48@yahoo.ca for

example) and resume profile, which was listed near the top of the resume. Profiles

mentioned general and specific skills, such as “highly motivated” and “fast learner”.

Some bullet points were occupational specific (“six years experience in customer service

and sales environment”, for example). Within each occupation, profiles were selected

randomly from 5 sets.

       A program by Lahey and Beasley (2007) was used to randomly select the

characteristic codes of each resume. Microsoft Office was then used to transform these

choices into text and mail-merge them onto actual resume templates. Some resume sets

were dropped to avoid repeating names sent to the same employer. Research Assistants

developed a program to make the data collection process more menu-driven. When a job

posting was identified for the study (from a newspaper ad or internet site), a research

assistant would open a dialog window prompting for the job’s corresponding occupation.

Phone numbers or email addresses on the post were used to check that someone had not

applied to this employer previously. A second window allowed the user to enter the job

title, the job posting’s source, the company name, contact information, and whether

additional certificates needed adding. The program then updated the data collection

spreadsheet and created four resumes that could be edited for cosmetic quality (e.g. to

ensure they fit cleanly on one or two pages). The output also included instructions for

what cover letter, subject line, and file name to use. The resumes were saved as pdf files

and emailed from the addresses of the corresponding names to the employer over a 2 to 3

day period in random order. Any applications whose corresponding email bounced,

indicating it was never received, were dropped from the sample.




                                           13
        Five telephone numbers and two email accounts for each name were set up to

collect employer responses. Employers that telephoned an applicant received the same

automatically generated message mentioning the number dialed and a request to leave a

message. Messages and emails were recorded and redirected to a single email address.

Responses were classified as callbacks if the employer requested an applicant to contact

them (not just for clarification). Responses were classified as requests for interviews if

one was specifically mentioned. Research assistants also guessed the contact’s gender

and ethnicity based on accent or name. If the person calling back was likely the person

who assessed the resumes, this information allows me to analyze interaction effects

between resume type and some of the assessor’s characteristics.              Employers that

contacted an applicant twice were contacted themselves during off-hours by email or

phone-message and told that the applicant had accepted another position and was no

longer looking for employment.

        I also recorded measures of language and social skills associated with each job

using the Occupational Information Network (O*NET). The purpose was to examine

whether callback differences across resume types differ by the extent to which jobs

require use of language or social skills. For each job title, I recorded the O*NET’s

corresponding skill measure for speaking, writing, social perceptiveness, and social

orientation.13 Each variable ranges from possible values of 0 to 100. I also measured

whether a job was classified as “In-demand” or not, so see whether greater competition

for employees reduces callback differences.




13Occupations were matched to these skill measures using O*NET’s web site,
http://online.onetcenter.org/


                                               14
            With random assignment, simple comparisons of callback rates can identify

    relative effects of the different resume characteristics. I also consider a more detailed

    analysis using the following linear probability model:



    (1)   y ij = δ0 + δ1 Re sume _ Typeij + δ2 X ij + δ3 [Re sume _ Typeij * X ij ] + e j + eij



€   Where        is an indicator variable for whether resume           sent to job posing         generated a

    call back,                      is an indicator variable for resume type, with the indicator for

    Type 0 being omitted.               is a vector of other resume characteristics. Equation (1)

    allows for interactions between resume type and other characteristics. This allows me to

    estimate, for example, whether callback differences between resumes with English and

    Chinese-sounding names become smaller when additional language skills or educational

    credentials are listed.       The      ’s are job fixed effects that lead to analyzing average

    callback differences for resumes sent to the same employer (estimates of δ1 remain

    unbiased whether these effects are accounted for or not).                            is the error term.
                                                                          €
    Standard errors are corrected for possible heteroskedasticity and clustering by job.




    III. Results




                                                       15
        Table 4 shows the main results.14 The baseline callback rate for Type 0 resumes,

with English-sounding names, Canadian experience, and Canadian education is 15.8

percent (Column 1). Changing only the name to one with Indian origin lowers the

callback rate by 3.7 percentage points, to 12.1 percent (s.e. = 1.9 percentage points), and

changing it to one with Chinese or Pakistani origin lowers it slightly more, to 10.8

percent and 11.0 percent respectively. Overall, resumes with English-sounding names

are 40 percent more likely to receive callbacks than resumes with Indian, Chinese, or

Pakistani names (Column 6). For comparison, Bertrand and Mullainathan (2003) find

that resumes with similar English sounding names are 50 percent more likely to receive

callbacks than resumes with African-American-sounding names sent to employers in

Boston and Chicago (4 percent versus 8 percent respectively).15

        There does not appear to be any difference in callback rates between Type 1 and

Type 2 resumes, which systematically differ only by whether they list a Bachelor’s

degree from a Canadian (Type 1) or foreign (Type 2) university. Both sets of resumes

include Canadian names and foreign experience. Thus, conditional on listing 4 to 6 years

of Canadian experience, employers do not seem to care whether an applicant’s education

is from a foreign institution or not, when deciding whether to contact them for an

interview.

14 Appendix Table 1 shows similar results using other outcome variables than the general callback
rate: whether a resume generated a specific interview request, a second callback, or a second
callback conditional on a first callback. Of particular note is the finding that receiving a second
callback after receiving a first callback (perhaps indicating exceptional interest) occurs less often for
resumes with foreign experience or education.
15 I also explored whether the results for resumes with Chinese‐sounding names change when using
only Chinese last names instead of both Chinese last and first names. Many second‐generation
Chinese adopt and use and English‐sounding name (such as Monica Liu instead of Min Liu).
Appendix Table 2 shows results comparing callback rates for different resume types with English‐
sounding names, all Chinese‐sounding names, and English‐Chinese names. The rates are slightly
higher for resumes with English‐Chinese names instead of Traditional‐Chinese names, but not by
much, and these differences are statistically insignificant.


                                                   16
        In contrast, switching from job experience acquired in Canada to job experience

acquired from a foreign country seems to matter a lot. Types 2, 3, and 4 resumes all list

foreign names and foreign degrees. The experience descriptions are also identical, but

Type 4 resumes list previous job experience with companies located in foreign cities (e.g.

ABC Inc, Shanghai instead of ABC Inc, Toronto) and Type 3 resumes list foreign cities

for 2 of the three previous jobs (the most recent job is listed being in Toronto). The

callback rate for resumes that list almost all job experience from India, China, or Pakistan

drops 2.6 percentage points compared to resumes with all Canadian experience (from

11.4 percent to 8.8) percent, shown in Column 6. Callback rates drop 6.2 percentage

points for resumes listing only foreign job experience.16 Interestingly, The resumes that

list only British experience do not generate any significant fall in callback rates compared

to Type 0 Canadian resumes (14.1 percent compared to 15.8 percent, as reported in

Column 5).17




16 Type 4 resumes also differ from other types in that they list no Canadian masters degrees (because
the resumes would look strange with masters degrees acquired in Canada during a period while
working outside Canada). But dropping the 20% of Type 0 and Type 4 resumes with masters
degrees makes no difference to these results. The callback rates, corresponding to Column 6, for the
sub sample without masters degrees are 15.9 percent, 11.4 percent, 12.4 percent, 8.4 percent, and
5.2 percent for Types 0 through 4 respectively. These results line up with the finding that masters
degrees have little effect on the callback rate (shown in Table 5). Type 4 resumes with all foreign
experience also may raise concern by an employer whether the applicant has the proper working
visa status to work in Canada. However, if this explained the drop in callback rates for resumes from
India, China, and Pakistan, one would also expect to observe a similar drop for resumes from Britain.
17 Type 3 and Type 4 resumes list foreign experience, but in about half the sample company names and job
descriptions are identical with those in Type 2 resumes (with Canadian experience). For example, some
resumes list experience with ABC Inc, Toronto, while others list experience with ABC Inc, Shanghai.
Results using resumes with the same company names are similar to those using samples whose company
names are different (but whose job descriptions are identical). More specifically, the callback rates for
Type 3 and 4 resumes listing experience with international companies (that could instead be used for
resumes with Canadian experience) are .071 and .068 respectively. The callback rates for Type 3 and 4
resumes listing local foreign company names are 0.099 and 0.040 respectively.


                                                  17
       For the remaining results, Type 2, 3, and 4 resumes exclude applicants with

British experience and education, in order to focus on comparisons with the three largest

immigrant groups from India, China, and Pakistan.

       Table 5 shows callback differences after conditioning on other resume

characteristics. Column 1 shows the baseline results, repeated from Column 6 in Table 4.

Column 2 shows coefficient estimates from regressing callback rates on indicators for

resume type and fixed effects for job position. The fixed effects make the callback

comparison the average tendency for an employer to contact one resume type over

another. Column 3 shows estimated callback differences after conditioning on gender,

whether the resume included a degree from a high ranking university, whether multiple

languages were listed, and whether a Canadian masters degree was listed. Column 4 adds

job position fixed effects to the empirical specification. These additional conditioning

variables make no substantial difference to the callback comparisons. This is expected,

since these variables are independent of resume type assignment. What is surprising is

that the coefficients on these other resume characteristics are all statistically insignificant,

except possibly for gender. Callback rates for resumes listing female are marginally

higher than those listing male, but rates between resumes with and without listing active

extracurricular activities, and between resumes listing fluency in multiple languages

(including French) and those that do not are about the same. Even resumes with Masters

degrees do not generate more callbacks than resumes without. I interpret these results as

suggesting that experience plays far more an important role when applying to jobs

requiring 3 to 7 years experience.        Or, perhaps employers do not look beyond an

applicant’s general experience and education in determining whether to callback.




                                              18
Unfortunately, the results also imply that an applicant’s name matters considerably more

than his additional education, multiple language skills, and extracurricular activities.

        While these other resume characteristics to not appear to help for the sample as a

whole, perhaps they matter to immigrants in particular. Table 6 shows results from

regressing callback status on resume characteristics separately by resume type. Females

with English-sounding names are 3.3 percentage points more likely to receive a callback

than males with English-sounding names (Column 2).                 For applicants with foreign

sounding names, gender did not make a difference. This may be because employers

could not distinguish gender from some of the foreign names listed on the resumes.

Column 3 shows that callback rates are higher among Type 1 applicants with degrees

from more prestigious Canadian universities, even though no such relationship holds for

Type 0 applicants with English-sounding names instead of foreign-sounding ones.

Notably, callback rates are no different between applicants with foreign degrees from

high-ranking universities and applicants with foreign degrees from less known schools.18

Listing extracurricular activities, fluency in French and other languages, or a Canadian

Masters degree does not appear to have any impact on callback rates, whether for

immigrant or non-immigrant resumes.

        Table 7 shows callback rates separated by the five largest occupation categories in

my sample. The overall results are not driven by one or two particular occupations. The

finding that callback rates fall from listing foreign-sounding names and foreign

experience occurs across all categories. The callback ratio of Type 0 resumes over Type

1 resumes, for example, is 2.1, 1.5, 1.4, 1.2, and 1.5 times greater for resumes in

18 Appendix Table 3 shows a more detailed breakdown of callback rates by resume type and
university degree. A Degree from China’s top ranked university (Peking University), for example,
generated no higher callback rates than did a degree from Lanzhou University.


                                                19
Administrative, Finance, Marketing, Programmer, and Retail job categories respectively.

All five categories show no substantial difference in callback rates between Type 1

resumes (with degrees from Canada) and 2 resumes (with degrees from foreign

institutions). There is some callback evidence that callback rates for programming jobs

are not very different. These jobs require strong cognitive abilities, but do not require as

much social interaction skills.

       Table 8 examines the role additional Canadian education credentials may play in

helping offset less employer interest in foreign applicants. As mentioned in Section II,

certificates (such as Certified General Accountant) were added to all four resumes when a

job posting said they were required (13 percent of my sample), and added randomly to

one or two of the four resumes sent to an employer when a job posting said they were

preferred (4 percent of my sample).         Callback rates for resumes listing required

certificates are certainly higher than rates for resumes sent to jobs with no specific

certificate requirement (e.g. 26.2 percent versus 14.2 percent for Type 0 resumes), but

this boost occurs more for non-immigrant resumes and applicants with English-sounding

names than for immigrant resumes and applicants with ethnic-sounding names. The

callback rate for Type 2 resumes with required certificates is 14.8 percent, only 3.9

percentage points greater than the rate for Type 2 resumes sent to jobs not requiring

additional certificates. The callback rate for Type 4 resumes with required certificates is

lower than the callback rate for jobs not listing these additional requirements.

       Columns 3 to 5 in Table 10 show the impact from randomly assigning certificates

to resumes for jobs that mention these certificates are preferred.        Column 3 shows

callback differences by resume type for this small sub-sample.            Column 4 shows




                                             20
coefficient estimates from regressing callback status on resume type, plus an indicator for

the resumes assigned the additional certificate. The certificate boosts the chances of a

callback by 6.8 percentage points, but the estimate is imprecise and insignificant.

Interacting the indicator for including the certificate with resume type generates similar

(but imprecise) conclusions as those drawn from the results using resumes with required

certificates; the likelihood of hearing back from an employer increases mostly for Type 0

resumes.    Overall, obtaining additional Canadian education credentials appears to do

little to offset lower callback rates from listing foreign education or experience.

       The next table looks at whether callback differences depend on whether the

evaluator’s gender or ethnicity. For the sets of four resumes sent to an employer that

generated at least one callback, I recorded the gender of the person who called back or

emailed. I also recorded whether the person spoke with an Asian, Indian, or other ethnic

accent, or had an ethnic-sounding name. If the person who contacted an applicant is the

same one who considered all four resumes, we can use this information to determine

whether callback differences depend on these evaluator characteristics. Table 11 reports

similar callback differences whether the evaluator is male or female. Among the set of

resumes receiving at least one callback, male evaluators are 82 percent more likely to

contact Type 0 resumes over resumes with foreign-sounding names (0.646/(1-0.646),

from Column 2).      Females are 86 percent more likely to contact Type 0 resumes.

Evaluators with Asian or Indian backgrounds are more likely to call back resumes Asian

or Indian names, but still favor resumes with English sounding names by a factor of 1.42.

Similarly, evaluators with no accent or ethnic name are about twice as likely to call back

a resume with an English-sounding name over a foreign one, while evaluators with an




                                             21
ethnic accent or name are still 67 percent more likely to call back a resume with an

English-sounding name. The confidence intervals around these estimates, however, are

generally too large to draw precise conclusions.

       The final table shows how callback rates differ after separating the sample by jobs

applied that require above or below median language and social skills. The idea is to

explore whether employers trying to hire in jobs that require more intensive language or

social skills are even less likely to interview immigrants out of concern they have fewer

of these skills than natives. I match each posting’s job description with measures of

speaking, writing, and social skill using the Occupational Network Database (O*NET).

For example the O*NET records computing programmers as having a score of score 56

(out of 100) under speaking requirements, which is below the median, while receptionists

score 79, which is above the median. The table shows differences in callback rates

between Type 0 and Type 1 resumes (that differ by name ethnicity) by skill quartile.

Column 1 in the first panel, for example, shows the callback differences for the sample of

resumes sent to jobs in the lowest quartile of the O*NET’s measure speaking skill

requirements. The three most frequent occupations in this category are Accountants,

Computer Programmers, and Web Developers. Column 4 in the first panel shows the

differences among resumes sent to jobs with speaking skill requirements in the top

quartile. These include Receptionists, Sales Representatives, and Financial Managers.

       The results hint that employers discriminate more for some jobs with higher

speaking and writing skill requirements, but the callback differences overall are quite

similar across these skill quartiles. Except for differences among resumes in the lowest

speaking skill quartile, the callback ratio between resumes with English-sounding names




                                           22
to those with Indian, Chinese, or Pakistani names ranges from 1.3 to 1.9, with no

particular relationship with the O*NET skill measures.          If resumes for accounting

positions are dropped from the lower quartile sample of speaking and writing skills

(because accounts may, in fact, use these skills when interacting with clients), the call

back differences change to 0.016 (s.e. = 0.032) and -0.037 (s.e. = 0.024) respectively.

Perhaps this implies that employers do not particularly discriminate by name ethnicity for

jobs such as computer programmers and web developers. Overall, however, the finding

of significantly lower callback rates for resumes with foreign names occurs over

occupations requiring very different language and social skill requirements.




IV. Discussion and Conclusion


       In this paper, I conduct an audit-study to explore why immigrants, allowed into

Canada based on skill, fair so poorly in the labor market. The study’s methodology

involves sending mock resumes in response to thousands of job postings across a wide set

of occupations and industries around the Greater Toronto Area.             Multiple resume

characteristics are randomized, including name (English, Chinese, Indian, and Pakistani),

education (local or foreign university, prestige, and additional credentials), experience,

fluency in French, and extra curricular activities. This design leads to knowing exactly

what information employers have available when making interview decisions, and allows

us to determine what specific characteristics cause callback rates to differ.




                                             23
       The study leads to three main conclusions. First, Canadian-born individuals with

English-sounding names are much more likely to receive a callback for an job interview

after sending their resumes compared to foreign-born individuals, even among those with

foreign degrees from highly ranked schools, or among those with the same listed job

experience but acquired outside of Canada. More specifically, the study finds that 16

percent of resumes sent with English-sounding names, Canadian education and

experience received a call back from an employer, compared to only 5 percent for

resumes with foreign-sounding names from China, India, or Pakistan, and foreign

experience and education.      The callback gap lines up with overall unemployment

differences– in 2006, for example, the national unemployment rate for immigrants was

11.5 percent, more than double the rate of 4.9 percent for the Canadian-born population

(Statistics Canada, 2007). Much of the unemployment difference may therefore be due to

immigrants not even making it to the interview stage in the job application process.

       The second conclusion is that employers value Canadian experience far more than

Canadian education when deciding to interview applicants with foreign backgrounds.

Among resumes with foreign names and foreign education, the callback rate climbs from

5 percent to 8 percent by listing just one previous job with a company located inside

Canada rather than outside. Listing all job experience with companies located inside

Canada leads to the callback rate increasing further to 11 percent. These substantial

increases are noteworthy especially in light of the fact that only job location differs while

keeping constant job descriptions and company names (e.g. ABC Inc., Toronto versus

ABC Inc., Beijing). Employers are much more interested in foreign-born applicants with

more Canadian experience. Letting in more of these immigrants, or helping recent




                                             24
arrivals find initial work that matches their previous background may help to boost

immigrants’ wage trajectories.

        While Canadian experience plays a crucial role in determining the likelihood of a

callback, having a degree from a more prestigious foreign institution, or acquiring

additional schooling in Canada does not appear impact the chances of a callback

significantly. Conditional on listing 4 to 6 years of Canadian experience on a resume,

callback rates do not differ significantly by whether a resume lists a Bachelor’s degree

from nearby Canadian university or lists one from a foreign university. I also find little

effect from indicating an applicant graduated from a top ranking school compared to a

low-ranking one, even among resumes with degrees from Canadian institutions. This

surprises me, since admission criteria varies widely by school. It may indicate employers

do not pay close attention to education qualifications for resumes with several years of

experience. The one exception is Canadian resumes with foreign names. While there is

no effect for similar applicants with English names, applicants with foreign names

receive about 40 percent more callbacks if they list a higher ranked Canadian university.

Including credentials listed as required or desired for a job naturally raises callback rates,

but more so for native resumes with English names than for immigrant resumes with

foreign names.19 I find no effect from listing an additional Canadian Master’s degree.

Recruiters I discussed these results with are not surprised; all said that education plays

only a minor role in deciding whether to call back for an interview once an applicant has

accumulated 4 to 6 years of experience.



19These results are similar to Ferrer and Riddell (2004), and do not support Dietz and Esses’s
(2007) conclusion that standardizing native and immigrant education credentials would equalize
employer interest.


                                               25
       The third conclusion is that employers discriminate substantially by the name.

More specifically, employer contact falls 40 percent when switching from a Canadian

resume with a common English name to one with a common Indian, Chinese, or

Pakistani name (16 percent to 11 percent respectively). This difference is substantial, and

almost as large as that found by Bertrand and Mullainathan (2003) using resumes in the

United States with Black or White sounding names.

       A potential explanation for these different callback rates is that employers

statistically discriminate by name and location of experience because they believe these

characteristics signal a greater chance of inadequate language and cultural skills for the

job. The finding that callback differences vanish when comparing Canadian resumes

with British resumes suggests that this may be the case, since British immigrants arrive

fluent in English and with similar cultural background to those from Canada. Other

evidence, however, suggests that this is not the full story. Foreign-named applicants with

Canadian experience and education are more likely second-generation immigrants than

first, especially when only the last name sounds foreign (e.g. Amy Wang). Employers

should not expect these applicants to face significant language or social difficulties, yet

callback differences between them and resumes with all English-sounding names remain.

       Another reason to believe statistical discrimination based on language and social

skill concerns cannot fully explain the results is that I find similar callback differences by

name whether comparing resumes sent to jobs requiring extensive communication skills

to resumes that don’t. We would expect that if discrimination occurs primarily because

employers believe ethnic applicants might lack adequate communication skills to see

larger differences in callback rates among ethnic and non-ethnic resumes sent in response




                                             26
to jobs that require more of these skills. As further evidence against the statistical

discrimination story, I also find no difference in callback rates between immigrant or

non-immigrant resumes listing fluency in French and other languages.            My initial

conjecture was that, if employers are concerned about candidates lacking communication

skills, explicitly indicating multiple language fluency on the resume should mitigate these

concerns.

       Another possibility behind the results is that employers prefer to hire individuals

of similar ethnic or language backgrounds (this behavior is sometimes referred to as

taste-based discrimination). I report evidence, however, to suggest that this type of

discrimination also cannot fully explain the findings. For example, recruiting agencies

are slightly less likely to respond to resumes with ethnic names compared with employers

that sort through resumes themselves.      Since agencies do not have to interact with

individuals that get the job, they should not care about ethnicity as much as employers

when deciding who to interview. I also find that evaluators with Asian or Indian accents

or names are less likely to callback resumes with Asian or Indian names (although these

results are somewhat imprecise).     This finding also goes counter to the taste-based

discrimination hypothesis.

       Regardless of what behavior underlies these results, deciding whether to interview

an applicant based solely on his or her name is illegal under the Ontario Human Rights

Act.20 This behavior leads to applicants not being given a chance to show employers that



20The Human Rights Act in Ontario states, “Every person has a right to equal
treatment with respect to employment without discrimination because of race,
ancestry, place of origin, colour, ethnic origin, citiznship, creed, sex, sexual
orientation, age, record of offences, marital status, family status or disability”. R.S.O.
1990, c.H.19,s.5(1); 1999,c.6, s. 28 (5); 2001, c. 32, s. 27 (1); 2005, c. 5, s. 32 (5). An

                                            27
underlying concerns about inadequate skills are unjustified. Previous research on why

immigrants do not assimilate in the labor market has largely ignored this potential

explanation, perhaps because of lack of data.         My study, in contrast, suggests

discrimination (regardless of what kind of discrimination) could be a leading explanatory

factor. Discrimination causes immigrants to miss out on hiring opportunities in situations

where they are most qualified for a job. Employers may miss out too, by hiring less

qualified workers. The costs to employers from not interviewing an immigrant, however,

are likely not as large as the costs to immigrants from not being selected. Screeners

typically must sort through hundreds of resumes to identify a handful of candidates to

interview. The process involves considerable ambiguity: in the search for a “good” job

applicant, there is no such thing as a simple formula to be followed to determine which

candidates are above the bar. The chance that a marginal candidate not picked would

have been hired and would have significantly outperformed the next best candidate is

probably small.

       A number of researchers suggest that the conditions by which employers sort

through resumes make it more likely that name discrimination is unintentional (Stanley

Phelps, and Banaji, 2008). Social psychologists differentiate between explicit attitudes,

which describe one’s expressed views, and implicit attitudes, which are unconscious

mental associations between a target (such as immigrants) and a given attribute (such as

“poor communication skills”). Implicit attitudes may operate subconsciously, and cause

people to make decisions in ways that oppose their own conscious and deliberative views



employee with the Ontario Human Rights Commission also confirmed the illegality
of name‐based discrimination, but said that she was not aware of any case that had
been brought to the Commission’s attention.

                                           28
(Ranganath, Smith, and Nosek, 2006). Chugh (2004) argues that time pressure, stress,

and ambiguity in whether to place resumes on the “yes” pile or the “no” pile all make it

more likely that employers use automatic implicit attitudes to decide.

         Implicit attitudes can be measured.      The Implicit Association Test (IAT)

(Greenwald et al., 1998) relies on test takers’ speed of response to represent the strength

of their unconscious mental associations.21 Rooth (2009) matches self-reported racial

attitudes and IAT scores of employers to callback outcomes from an audit study he

carried out that looks at discrimination between resumes with common Swedish names

and Arab-Muslim names. Those with more negative implicit association measures are

less likely to callback Arab-Muslims, while self-reported measures of explicit association

have little explanatory power. Bertrand, Chugh, and Mullainathan (2005) report similar

results from a study involving picking qualified candidates from a set of resumes with

White and African-American names.         They find a negative correlation between the

number of African-American resumes selected by a given subject and that subject’s IAT

score. The correlation is largest among those subjects that report feeling most rushed

during the task. They also find no correlation between the number of African-American

resumes picked and self-reported explicit attitudes towards African Americans. Those

surveyed, however, may find it easier to mask or not admit their explicit attitudes, which

may explain why these explicit measures do not correlate with implicit measures.

         If discrimination is unintentional, then employers gain from realizing they do it.

Correcting accidental tendencies of favoring native Caucasian candidates may lead to

better hires. Ethnic applicants, of course, also gain. We should therefore add this



21   Readers can take the test for themselves online: (http://implicit.harvard.edu).

                                            29
explanation to the list of candidates to explain the substantial wage and employment gap

between recent skilled immigrants and natives. Further research is needed to investigate

exactly why employers are much less interested in interviewing candidates with foreign-

sounding names.




                                          30
References


Antecol, H., Peter Kuhn, and S.J. Trejo. 2003. “Assimilation via prices or quantities?
Labor market institutions and immigrant earnings growth in Austrailia, Canada, and the
United States,” No. 802, Institute for the Study of Labour (IZA) Discussion Paper.
Aydemir, Abdurrahman and Mikal Skuterud. 2004. “Explaining the Deteriorating Entry
Earnings of Canada’s Immigrant Cohorts: 1966-2000.” Analytical Studies Research
Paper Series. Catalogue No. 11F0019MIE2004225. Ottawa: Statistics Canada.

Beach, Charles, Alang G. Green, and Christopher Worswick, “Impacts of the Point
System and Immigration Policy Levers on Skill Characteristics of Canadian
Immigrants,” Queens Economics Department WORKING paper No. 1115, 2006.

Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2004. "Are Emily and Greg More
Employable than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market
Discrimination," American Economic Review, American Economic Association, vol.
94(4), pages 991‐1013, September.

Bertrand, M., D. Chugh, and S. Mullainathan (2005). “New approaches to
Discrimination Implicit Discrimination,” American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings, 95(2), 94‐98.

Borjas, G.J. (1993) “Immigration Policy, National Origin and Immigrant Skills: A
Comparison of Canada and the United States,” in Small Differences That Matter:
Labor Markets and Income Maintenance in Canada and the United States, David
Card and Richard Freeman (eds), Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Pp. 21‐43

Carlsson, Magnus, and Dan‐Olof Rooth. (2007). “Evidence of Ethnic Discrimination
in the Swedish Labor Mart,” Labour Economics Vol. 14, pp. 716‐729

Dietz, Joerg, and Victoria Esses (2007). “The evaluation of immigrants’ credentials:
The roles of accreditation, immigrant race, and evaluator biases,” CLSRN Working
Paper Number 30.

Dolan, Benjamin, and Margaret Young (2004). “Canada’s Immigration Program,”
Parliamentary Information and Research Service Background Paper BP‐190E.

Ferrer, A. and Craig Riddell. (2008). “Education, Credentials, and Immigrant
Earnings,” Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 40, No. 1.

Fix, M. and R.J. Struyk (1993). “Clear and Convincing Evidence: Measurement of
Discrimination in America. Washington D.C., Urban Institute Press, distributed by
University Press of America Lanham Md.




                                          31
Frenette, Marc and René Morissette. 2005. “Will they ever converge? Earnings of
immigrant and Canadian‐born workers over the last two decades,” International
Migration Review, Vol. 39, No. 1 (Spring 2005), pp 228‐258.

Green, David A. and Christopher Worswick. 2002. “Earnings of Immigrant Men in
Canada: The Roles of Labour Market Entry Effects and Returns to Foreign
Experience.”. University of British Columbia, Department of Economics. Paper
prepared for Citizenship and Immigration Canada.

Henry, Frances, and Effie Ginzberg, “Who gets the work? A test of racial
discrimination in employment,” The Urban Alliance on Race Relations and the Social
Planning Council of Metropolitan Toronto, January 1985.

Lahey, Joanna,Age, Women, and Hiring: An Experimental Study. Journal of Human
Resources, Vol. 18, No. 1, 2008.

Lahey, Joanna and Beasley, Ryan A., "Computerizing Audit Studies" (July 1, 2007).
Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1001038

Lalonde, R. J. and R.H. Topel (1992) “The Assimilation of Immigrants in the U.S.
Labor Market,” in Immigration and the Work Force, G.J. Borjas and R.B. Freeman
(eds), Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. Pp. 67‐92

Li, Peter S. 2003. “Initial Earnings and Catch‐up Capacity of Immigrants.” Canadian
Public Policy. XXIX(3): 319‐327.

Lubotsky, Darren. “Chutes or Ladders? A Longitudinal Analysis of Immigrant
Earnings,” Journal of Political Economy, 2007, vol. 115, no. 5. Pp. 820‐867

Picot, Garnett, and Arthur Sweetman, “The Deteriorating Economic Welfare of
Immigrants and Possible Causes: Update 2005,” Statistics Canada Analytical Studies
Branch Research Paper #262, 2005.

Riach, P.A., and J. Rich, “Field experiments of discrimination in the market place,”
The Economic Journal, Vol. 112 (Noember), 2002, pp. F480‐F518.

Reitz, Jeffrey. 2001. “Immigrant success in the knowledge economy: institutional
changes and
the immigrant experience in Canada, 1970‐1995.” Journal of Social Issue. 57: 579‐
613.

Rooth, Dan‐Olof (2009). “Automaatic Associations and Discrimination in Hiring –
Real World Evidence,” Mimeo.

Schaafsma, J. and A. Sweetman. 2001. “Immigrant Earnings: age at immigration
matters.” Canadian Journal of Economics. 34(4): 1066‐1099.


                                        32
Statistics Canada. (2007). “The Canadian Immigrant Labour Market in 2006: First
Results from Canada’s Labour Force Survey,” Catalogue no. 71-606-XIE

Statistics Canada. (2008). “Earnings and Incomes of Canadians Over the Past Quarter
Century,” Catalogue no. 97-563-X

Worswick, Christopher (2004). “Immigrants’ Declining Earnings: Reasons and
Remedies,” C.D. Howe Institute Backgrounder, No. 81, April 2004.




                                        33
                                                    Table 1
           Unemployment and Earnings Differences Between Recent Immigrants and Natives Aged 25 to 39
                                             From the 2001 Census

                                            (1)                              (2)                             (3)
                                       Unemployment                   Mean Earnings                   Median Earnings
                                           Rate                     for Positive Earners            for Positive Earners
                                                                       in Labor Force                  in Labor Force

Non-Immigrants                              0.069                           33177                           30000

Recent Immigrants (0-4 years)               0.134                           25694                           20181

Ratio (Non-Immig / Immig)                    0.51                            1.29                            1.49

Estimated Ratio, conditional                 0.43                            1.52                            1.81
on age, schooling, and city

Sample Size                                128890                          109625                          109625

 Notes: The sample in Column 1 includes all individuals from the 2001 Public‐Use Canadian Census, aged 25 to 39, in the labor
 force, and either recorded as a non‐immigrant, or a recent immigrant (arrived within the last 5 years). The sample in Columns
 2 and 3 is restricted further to individuals with posiHve earnings. All amounts are in 2000 Canadian dollars. The esHmated
 raHo is computed by ﬁrst regressing unemployment status or log earnings on immigrant status, plus ﬁxed eﬀects for age,
 highest degree, and city of residence. The unemployment rate and mean earnings is imputed using the immigrant coeﬃcient
 from the regression, relaHve to the actual value for non‐immigrants, and the raHo of this is reported in the table. For column
 3, quanHle regregression around the median is used instead of ordinary least squares.
                                                                                     Table 2
                                                    Number of Resumes Sent and Callbacks Received by Resume Type and Ethnicity

                                                    Resumes Sent                                                                                         Callbacks Received
                                                       Resume Type                                                                                   Resume Type
                                   0            1            2            3            4                                         0           1            2            3                          4
                             English Name Foreign Name Foreign Name Foreign Name Foreign Name                               Anglo Name Foreign Name Foreign Name Foreign Name               Foreign Name
                              Cdn Educ      Cdn Educ   Foreign Educ Foreign Educ Foreign Educ                                Cdn Educ    Cdn Educ   Foreign Educ Foreign Educ               Foreign Educ
Name Ethnicity and Sex         Cdn Exp      Cdn Exp      Cdn Exp     Mixed Exp    Foreign Exp                                Cdn Exp     Cdn Exp      Cdn Exp     Mixed Exp                  Foreign Exp
English     Greg Johnson          221                              37              36               33                           27                              3               2                4
Males       John Martin           253                              47              34               35                           34                              5               3                4
            Matthew Wilson        216                              38              37               36                           30                              2               5                3
            Michael Smith         261                              56              33               30                           29                              3               4                1

English     Alison Johnson        256                              40              29               37                           35                              5               5                5
Females     Carrie Martin         265                              38              35               28                           46                              6               6                3
            Emily Brown           254                              48              41               58                           38                              8               6                6
            Jill Wilson           256                              42              24               42                           43                              2               3                7

Indian      Arjun Kumar                            55              36              38               47                                           6               7               1                3
Males       Panav Singh                            75              38              38               36                                           9               4               4                1
            Rahul Kaur                             59              43              39               35                                           6               3               3                2
            Samir Sharma                           57              32              43               35                                           9               3               5                1

Indian      Maya Kumar                             51              27              30               37                                           6               3               4                0
Females     Priyanka Kaur                          58              38              54               41                                           6               3               4                2
            Shreya Sharma                          59              36              40               59                                           6               7               3                4
            Tara Singh                             54              52              36               38                                           9               7               0                4

Chinese     Dong Liu                               62              40              36               37                                           6               1               6                1
Males       Lei Li                                 64              45              34               43                                           6               3               2                3
            Tao Wang                               58              36              45               34                                           7               5               4                3
            Yong Zhang                             54              36              43               39                                           6               5               4                2

Chinese     Fang Wang                              58              43              48               34                                          11               5               5                2
Females     Min Liu                                65              36              55               37                                          12               6               5                3
            Na Li                                  53              38              36               32                                          1                3               5                1
            Xiuying Zhang                          67              45              31               46                                          3                2               3                1

Pakistani   Ali Saeed                              55              23              13               29                                           3               6               0                1
Males       Asif Sheikh                            63              19              23               25                                           5               0               0                0
            Chaudhry Mohammad                      43              19              20               16                                           3               1               2                0
            Hassan Khan                            63              18              23               23                                           7               1               0                0

Pakistani   Fatima Sheikh                          54              17              15               25                                           4               1               2                2
Females     Hina Chaudhry                          73              17              30               21                                           6               3               1                1
            Rabab Saeed                            51              21              8                14                                           3               1               0                0
            Sana Khan                              64              22              16               34                                           6               4               2                0

Total                             1982            1415            1123            1063             1116                         282             146             118              99               70


  Notes: Cdn = Canadian, Educ = Country where bachelors degree obtained, and exp = country where job experience obtained. Mixed experience corresponds to ﬁrst two jobs listed on resume are from foreign
  country, and most recent (third) job listed is from Canada.




            .
                                                            Table 3
                                             Resume Characteristics, by Resume Type

                                           (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)                  (5)       (6)

Characteristics of Resume                                                       Resume Type Sent

                                                             0                1                 2                3              4
                                       Full Sample     English Name     Foreign Name      Foreign Name     Foreign Name   Foreign Name
                                                        Cdn Educ          Cdn Educ        Foreign Educ     Foreign Educ   Foreign Educ
                                                         Cdn Exp          Cdn Exp           Cdn Exp         Mixed Exp      Foreign Exp

Female                                     0.51             0.52             0.50              0.50             0.50          0.52
Top 200 World Ranking University           0.46             0.50             0.51              0.41             0.43          0.41
Extra Curricular Activities Listed         0.61             0.60             0.60              0.60             0.61          0.63
Fluent in French and other Languages       0.20             0.20             0.21              0.20             0.21          0.19
Canadian Masters Degree                    0.16             0.20             0.19              0.20             0.20          0.00

Name Ethnicity
   Engligh Name                            0.30             1.00             0.00              0.00             0.00          0.00
   Chinese Name                            0.21             0.00             0.34              0.28             0.31          0.27
   Indian Name                             0.21             0.00             0.33              0.27             0.30          0.29
   Pakistani Name                          0.14             0.00             0.33              0.14             0.14          0.17

Resume Sent In:
    May-08                                 0.05             0.04             0.05              0.04             0.05          0.05
    Jun-08                                 0.34             0.29             0.40              0.33             0.37          0.34
    Jul-08                                 0.15             0.13             0.18              0.15             0.16          0.15
    Aug-08                                 0.03             0.03             0.04              0.03             0.03          0.03
    Sep-08                                 0.15             0.21             0.10              0.16             0.14          0.14
    Oct-08                                 0.23             0.26             0.19              0.24             0.20          0.24
    Nov-08                                 0.05             0.06             0.04              0.05             0.05          0.05


 Notes: Top 200 World Ranking University according to the 2008 QS World Rankings (h?p://www.topuniversiDes.com/).
                                                                       Table 4
                                                   Callback Rates by Resume Type and Ethnic Origin

                                     (1)                     (2)                   (3)                      (4)                (5)                   (6)
                                                                                      Callback Rate
                                                                             (Difference Compared to Type 0)
                                                                               [Standard Error of Difference]
                                                                              {Callback Ratio: Type 0 / Type}

                                                                                         Ethnic Origin
                              English-Canada               India                 China                   Pakistan            Britain             India/China/
                                                                                                                                                   Pakistan
Type 0   English Name              0.158
          Cdn Educ
           Cdn Exp

Type 1   Foreign Name                                       0.121                 0.108                     0.11               NA                    0.113
           Cdn Educ                                       (-0.037)              (-0.050)                  (-0.048)                                 (-0.045)
           Cdn Exp                                        [0.019]*             [0.018]***                [0.016]***                               [0.011]***
                                                           {1.31}                {1.46}                    {1.44}                                   {1.40}

Type 2   Foreign Name                                       0.122                 0.094                     0.14               0.129                 0.114
         Foreign Educ                                     (-0.036)              (-0.064)                 (-0.018)            (-0.029)              (-0.044)
           Cdn Exp                                         [0.022]             [0.020]***                 [0.027]             [0.019]             [0.014]***
                                                            {1.30}               {1.68}                    {1.13}              {1.22}               {1.39}

Type 3   Foreign Name                                       0.075                 0.103                     0.078              0.157                 0.088
         Foreign Educ                                     (-0.083)              (-0.055)                  (-0.080)           (-0.001)              (-0.070)
          Mixed Exp                                      [0.019]***            [0.021]***                [0.020]***           [0.023]             [0.013]***
                                                           {2.11}                {1.53}                    {2.03}              {1.01}               {1.80}

Type 4   Foreign Name                                       0.051                 0.053                     0.052              0.141                 0.052
         Foreign Educ                                     (-0.107)              (-0.105)                  (-0.106)           (-0.017)              (-0.106)
          Foreign Exp                                    [0.017]***            [0.018]***                [0.015]***           [0.021]             [0.011]***
                                                           {3.10}                {2.98}                    {3.04}              {1.12}               {3.04}

Notes: Cdn = Canadian, Educ = Country where bachelors degree obtained, and exp = country where job experience obtained. Mixed experience
corresponds to ﬁrst two jobs listed on resume are from foreign country, and most recent (third) job listed is from Canada. *** , **, and * indicate callback
rate diﬀerences compared to Type 0 are staHsHcally signiﬁcant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respecHvely.
                                                    Table 5
                              Estimated Callback Rate Differences by Resume Type,
                     Conditional on Other Resume Characteristics and Employer Fixed Effects

                                                                  (1)             (2)          (3)            (4)

                                                                            Dependent Variable: Callback

Constant                                English Name             0.158           0.148        0.164          0.143
(Type 0 Callback Rate                     Cdn Educ             [0.009]***      [0.006]***   [0.022]***     [0.010]***
When Other Control Variables = 0)         Cdn Exp

Type 1                                  Foreign Name             -0.045          -0.047       -0.044         -0.047
(Callback rate difference btw. Type 0     Cdn Educ             [0.011]***      [0.009]***   [0.011]***     [0.009]***
Holding Control Variables Constant)       Cdn Exp


Type 2                                  Foreign Name             -0.044          -0.047       -0.042         -0.046
(Callback rate difference btw. Type 0   Foreign Educ           [0.014]***      [0.011]***   [0.014]***     [0.011]***
Holding Control Variables Constant)       Cdn Exp


Type 3                                  Foreign Name              -0.07          -0.06        -0.068         -0.06
(Callback rate difference btw. Type 0   Foreign Educ           [0.013]***      [0.011]***   [0.013]***     [0.011]***
Holding Control Variables Constant)      Mixed Exp


Type 4                                  Foreign Name             -0.106          -0.108       -0.105         -0.110
(Callback rate difference btw. Type 0   Foreign Educ           [0.011]***      [0.011]***   [0.011]***     [0.012]***
Holding Control Variables Constant)      Foreign Exp

Female                                                                                       0.015           0.010
                                                                                            [0.008]*        [0.008]

Top 200 World Ranking University                                                              0.012          0.000
                                                                                             [0.008]        [0.008]

Extra Curricular Activities Listed                                                           -0.006          0.000
                                                                                             [0.008]        [0.007]

Fluent in French and other Languages                                                         -0.004          0.000
                                                                                             [0.010]        [0.009]

Canadian Masters Degree                                                                      -0.007         -0.007
                                                                                             [0.011]        [0.011]

Job Fixed Effects?                                                No              Yes          No             Yes


Sample Size                                                      5785            5785         5785           5785


 Notes: The table reports coeﬃcient results from regressing callback status (0 or 1) on resume type, with Type 0
 omi?ed from the regression. Robust standard errors are reported. Job ﬁxed eﬀects are a set of dummy variables
 for each separate job posIng. Columns 3 and 4 include addiIonal controls for sex, an indicator that the applicant
 obtained her bachelors degree from a university ranked in the top 200 according to the QS University World
 Rankings, and indicator for whether the resume menIons ﬂuency in English, mother tongue (if applicable), and
 French, and a indicator for whether a Canadian Masters Degree was obtained. Cdn = Canadian, Educ = Country
 where bachelors degree obtained, and exp = country where job experience obtained. Mixed experience
 corresponds to ﬁrst two jobs listed on resume are from foreign country, and most recent (third) job listed is from
 Canada. *** , **, and * indicate callback rate diﬀerences compared to Type 0 are staIsIcally signiﬁcant at the 1%,
 5%, and 10% levels respecIvely.
                                                                             Table 6
                                            Estimated Callback Effects from Resume Characteristics, by Resume Type

                                                 (1)                  (2)                   (3)                   (4)                (5)                  (6)
                                                                   Type 0                Type 1                Type 2             Type 3               Type 4
                                           Full Sample          English Name          Foreign Name          Foreign Name       Foreign Name         Foreign Name
                                                                 Cdn Educ               Cdn Educ            Foreign Educ       Foreign Educ         Foreign Educ
                                                                  Cdn Exp               Cdn Exp               Cdn Exp           Mixed Exp            Foreign Exp

Resume Characteristic                                                                     Dependent Variable: Callback

Female                                          0.016                0.033                 0.000                 0.018              0.012                0.006
                                              [0.008]**            [0.016]**              [0.016]               [0.022]            [0.020]              [0.014]

Top 200 World Ranking University                0.02                 -0.011                0.044                  0.04             -0.005                0.008
                                              [0.008]**             [0.016]              [0.016]***             [0.025]            [0.023]              [0.018]

Extra Curricular Activities Listed             -0.008                -0.011                0.001                -0.029             -0.001                0.002
                                               [0.008]              [0.016]               [0.016]               [0.024]            [0.020]              [0.015]

Fluent in French and other Languages           -0.004               -0.016                -0.008                0.054              -0.033                0.015
                                               [0.010]              [0.019]               [0.020]              [0.031]*            [0.022]              [0.020]

Canadian Masters Degree                         0.005               -0.003                -0.005                -0.051              0.021                 NA
                                               [0.011]              [0.019]               [0.020]              [0.025]**           [0.026]


Sample Size                                     5785                 1982                  1415                  777                794                  817


 Notes: The table reports coeﬃcient results from regressing callback status (0 or 1) on sex, an indicator that the applicant obtained her bachelors degree from a
 university ranked in the top 200 according to the QS University World Rankings, and indicator for whether the resume menHons ﬂuency in English, mother tongue (if
 applicable), and French, and a indicator for whether a Canadian Masters Degree was obtained. Robust standard errors are reported. Cdn = Canadian, Educ = Country
 where bachelors degree obtained, and exp = country where job experience obtained. Mixed experience corresponds to ﬁrst two jobs listed on resume are from
 foreign country, and most recent (third) job listed is from Canada. *** , **, and * indicate callback rate diﬀerences compared to Type 0 are staHsHcally signiﬁcant at
 the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respecHvely.
                                                                                Table 7
                                                 Estimated Callback Rate Differences by Resume Type and Occupation

                                                               (1)             (2)           (3)             (4)             (5)                (6)                (7)
                                                                                                          Occupation Type

Resume Type                                                    All       Administrative    Finance       Marketing      Programmer            Retail             Other
                                                                                                         & Sales

Type 0                                 English Name           0.158           0.06          0.209          0.108            0.138             0.181              0.157
Callback Rate                           Cdn Educ
                                         Cdn Exp

Type 1                                 Foreign Name           -0.045         -0.032          -0.07        -0.018           -0.022             -0.059              -0.05
Callback rate difference btw. Type 0     Cdn Educ           [0.011]***       [0.022]      [0.026]***      [0.033]          [0.035]           [0.034]*           [0.021]**
                                         Cdn Exp

Type 2                                 Foreign Name           -0.044         -0.029         -0.084        -0.018           -0.026             -0.042            -0.039
Callback rate difference btw. Type 0   Foreign Educ         [0.014]***       [0.027]      [0.030]***      [0.042]          [0.041]            [0.043]           [0.026]
                                         Cdn Exp

Type 3                                 Foreign Name            -0.07         -0.012         -0.105         -0.064          -0.074             -0.077             -0.067
Callback rate difference btw. Type 0   Foreign Educ         [0.013]***       [0.029]      [0.029]***      [0.037]*        [0.036]**          [0.039]**         [0.023]***
                                        Mixed Exp

Type 4                                 Foreign Name           -0.106          -0.059        -0.152         -0.078          -0.044             -0.106              -0.12
Callback rate difference btw. Type 0   Foreign Educ         [0.011]***      [0.019]***    [0.025]***      [0.031]**        [0.039]          [0.035]***         [0.019]***
                                        Foreign Exp
Sample Size                                                   5785             705          1338            661             610                786               1685

 Notes: The table reports coeﬃcient results from regressing callback status (0 or 1) on resume type, with Type 0 omi?ed from the regression. Robust standard errors are
 reported. Cdn = Canadian, Educ = Country where bachelors degree obtained, and exp = country where job experience obtained. Mixed experience corresponds to ﬁrst two jobs
 listed on resume are from foreign country, and most recent (third) job listed is from Canada. *** , **, and * indicate callback rate diﬀerences compared to Type 0 are
 staLsLcally signiﬁcant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respecLvely. OccupaLon type indicates the type of experience listed on the resume, customized according to the job
 descripLon in the job posLng.
                                                     Table 8
  Estimated Callback Rate Differences by Resume Type and Certificate Requirements (In Addition to Bachelor Degree)

                                               (1)                  (2)                  (3)            (4)            (5)
                                         No Additional    Must Have Certificate                 Certificate Optional
                                          Certificate      (Certificate Added            (Certificatel Asigned Randomly)
Resume Type                              Requirement        To All Resumes)

Type 0                 English Name           0.142               0.262                 0.131          0.1           0.084
Callback Rate,          Cdn Educ
No Credential            Cdn Exp

Type 1                Foreign Name            -0.039               -0.09               -0.037        -0.031          -0.031
                        Cdn Educ            [0.012]***           [0.040]**             [0.063]       [0.063]         [0.068]
                        Cdn Exp

Type 2                Foreign Name           -0.033               -0.115               -0.067         -0.06          -0.037
                      Foreign Educ          [0.015]**           [0.044]***             [0.067]       [0.067]         [0.077]
                        Cdn Exp

Type 3                Foreign Name            -0.061              -0.152                0.001         0.012           0.011
                      Foreign Educ          [0.013]***          [0.043]***             [0.079]       [0.079]         [0.086]
                       Mixed Exp

Type 4                Foreign Name            -0.089              -0.226               -0.073        -0.064           0.003
                      Foreign Educ          [0.012]***          [0.034]***             [0.064]       [0.063]         [0.082]
                       Foreign Exp
Credential                                                                                            0.068
                                                                                                     [0.048]
Type 0 * Credential                                                                                                    0.1
                                                                                                                     [0.096]
Type 1 * Credential                                                                                                   0.011
                                                                                                                     [0.138]
Type 2 * Credential                                                                                                  -0.054
                                                                                                                     [0.148]

Type 3 * Credential                                                                                                   0.023
                                                                                                                     [0.185]
Type 4 * Credential                                                                                                  -0.191
                                                                                                                    [0.113]*

Sample Size                                   4849                 734                   202           202            202

 Notes: Job pos+ngs applied to in the sample in Column 1 did not men+on a cer+ﬁcate preference or requirement (other than
 possibly a Bachelors degree). Job pos+ngs applied to in the sample in Column 2 required a par+cular cer+ﬁcate. Each resume
 in this sample listed this requirement. Job pos+ngs applied to in the sample in Columns 3 to 5 men+oned a cer+ﬁcate
 preference. One or two cer+ﬁcates were randomly assigned to resumes corresponding to these jobs. The table reports
 coeﬃcients from regressing callback status (0‐1) on resume type. Column 5 includes results from interac+ng resume type with
 whether the resume listed the creden+al. See also notes from Table 9.
                                                                                   Table 9
                                                     Callback Rate Differences for Resume Sets Sent to Same Employer,
                                                     by Evaluator Characteristics, Conditional on At Least One Callback

                                                                  (1)             (2)            (3)               (5)             (6)                (7)              (8)
                                                                                                              Type of Evaluator

                                                                Full                                           Non Asian/  Asian/Indian          Non-Ethnic       Ethnic
                                                               Sample            Male         Female             Indian   Accent or Name       Accent or Name Accent or Name

Resume Type

Type 0                                   English Name           0.648           0.646           0.65              0.654           0.586             0.665            0.626
Callback Rate                             Cdn Educ
                                           Cdn Exp

Type 1                                   Foreign Name           -0.193          -0.202         -0.178             -0.184        -0.355               -0.21           -0.172
Callback rate difference btw. Type 0       Cdn Educ           [0.038]***      [0.050]***     [0.059]***         [0.039]***     [0.160]**          [0.048]***       [0.060]***
                                           Cdn Exp

Type 2                                   Foreign Name           -0.222           -0.33         -0.075             -0.236        -0.065              -0.298           -0.119
Callback rate difference btw. Type 0     Foreign Educ         [0.048]***      [0.064]***       [0.071]          [0.050]***      [0.189]           [0.065]***        [0.072]*
                                           Cdn Exp

Type 3                                   Foreign Name           -0.291           -0.31         -0.259             -0.315         0.007              -0.467           -0.019
Callback rate difference btw. Type 0     Foreign Educ         [0.049]***      [0.064]***     [0.076]***         [0.050]***      [0.209]           [0.057]***         [0.080]
                                          Mixed Exp

Type 4                                   Foreign Name            -0.49          -0.502         -0.471             -0.512        -0.244              -0.567            -0.38
Callback rate difference btw. Type 0     Foreign Educ         [0.046]***      [0.056]***     [0.079]***         [0.047]***      [0.197]           [0.055]***       [0.077]***
                                          Foreign Exp

Sample Size                                                      1208            721            487               1114             94                714              494


   Notes: The table reports coeﬃcient results from regressing callback status (0 or 1) on resume type, with Type 0 omi?ed from the regression, and ﬁxed eﬀects for job posEng.
   The sample includes only resumes sets where at least one resume generated a callback. Robust standard errors are reported. Cdn = Canadian, Educ = Country where
   bachelors degree obtained, and exp = country where job experience obtained. Mixed experience corresponds to ﬁrst two jobs listed on resume are from foreign country, and
   most recent (third) job listed is from Canada. *** , **, and * indicate callback rate diﬀerences compared to Type 0 are staEsEcally signiﬁcant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels
   respecEvely.
                                                          Table 10
                      Callback Rate Differences between Resume Types 0 and 1 (name differences),
                                                by O*NET Skill Characteristics


                                           (1)                  (2)                    (3)                  (4)

                                                      O*NET Defined Occupation Requirements:

                                                                   Speaking Skills
                                       0-25 pctile         25-50 pctile        50-75 pctile            75-100 pctile
Resume Type

Type 0           English Name            0.123                0.147                   0.196               0.158
Callback Rate     Cdn Educ
                   Cdn Exp

Type 1             Foreign Name         -0.023                -0.058                  -0.04               -0.058
Callback rate difference
                     Cdnbtw.
                         EducType 0     [0.025]             [0.022]***              [0.024]*            [0.021]***
(callback ratio)      Cdn Exp             1.2                   1.7                    1.3                  1.6

                                                                      Writing Skills
                                       0-25 pctile         25-50 pctile            50-75 pctile        75-100 pctile
Resume Type

Type 0           English Name            0.126                0.092                   0.178               0.214
Callback Rate     Cdn Educ
                   Cdn Exp

Type 1             Foreign Name          -0.041               -0.036                 -0.039               -0.055
Callback rate difference
                     Cdnbtw.
                         EducType 0     [0.024]*              [0.023]               [0.021]*             [0.024]**
(callback ratio)      Cdn Exp              1.5                  1.6                    1.3                  1.3

                                                                      Social Skills
                                       0-25 pctile         25-50 pctile           50-75 pctile         75-100 pctile
Resume Type

Type 0           English Name            0.141                0.122                   0.132               0.175
Callback Rate     Cdn Educ
                   Cdn Exp

Type 1             Foreign Name         -0.039                -0.044                 -0.063               -0.051
Callback rate difference
                     Cdnbtw.
                         EducType 0     [0.031]              [0.023]**              [0.027]**            [0.021]**
(callback ratio)      Cdn Exp             1.4                   1.6                    1.9                  1.4


   Notes: The table reports coeﬃcient results from regressing callback status (0 or 1) on resume type, with Type 0
   omi?ed from the regression. The sample is divided into quarDles, based on measures of skill requirements
   matched to jobs applied using the OccupaDonal Network Database (O*NET). Robust standard errors are
   reported. Cdn = Canadian, Educ = Country where bachelors degree obtained, and exp = country where job
   experience obtained. *** , **, and * indicate callback rate diﬀerences compared to Type 0 are staDsDcally
   signiﬁcant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respecDvely.
                                                        Appendix Table 1
                                                 Alternative Outcome Measures
                                                                 (1)              (2)               (3)                 (4)
                                                                                Specific                             Second
                                                                               Interview         Second              Callback
                                                              Callback         Request           Callback           Given First

Resume Type

Type 0                                   English Name           0.158            0.047            0.042               0.276
Callback Rate                             Cdn Educ
                                           Cdn Exp

Type 1                                  Foreign Name            -0.045          -0.016            -0.014              -0.032
Callback rate difference btw. Type 0      Cdn Educ            [0.011]***       [0.006]**         [0.006]**            [0.045]
                                          Cdn Exp

Type 2                                  Foreign Name            -0.044          -0.015            -0.023              -0.112
Callback rate difference btw. Type 0    Foreign Educ          [0.014]***       [0.008]*         [0.006]***           [0.048]**
                                          Cdn Exp

Type 3                                  Foreign Name             -0.07           -0.023           -0.026              -0.102
Callback rate difference btw. Type 0    Foreign Educ          [0.013]***       [0.007]***       [0.006]***           [0.056]*
                                         Mixed Exp

Type 4                                  Foreign Name            -0.106           -0.031           -0.035              -0.163
Callback rate difference btw. Type 0    Foreign Educ          [0.011]***       [0.006]***       [0.005]***          [0.062]***
                                         Foreign Exp

Sample Size                                                     5785             5785             5785                 614


 Notes: The table reports coeﬃcient results from regressing callback outcomes on resume type, with Type 0 omi<ed from the
 regression. Robust standard errors are reported. Cdn = Canadian, Educ = Country where bachelors degree obtained, and exp =
 country where job experience obtained. Mixed experience corresponds to ﬁrst two jobs listed on resume are from foreign
 country, and most recent (third) job listed is from Canada. *** , **, and * indicate callback rate diﬀerences compared to Type 0
 are staKsKcally signiﬁcant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respecKvely. The outcome variable in Column 1 indicates an employer
 emailed or telephoned to asking to speak with the applicant further. The outcome variable in Column 2 indicates whether the
 employer speciﬁcally menKoned a desire to interview the applicant for the posiKon. The outcome variable in Column 3 indicates
 whether the employer contacted the applicant more than once. The sample in Column 4 is condiKonal on the resume receiving
 an iniKal callback.
                                                            Appendix Table 2
                    Callback Rate Differences by Resume Type, using Traditional and Non-Traditional Chinese First Names

                                     (1)                 (2)               (3)                   (4)                  (5)                  (6)
                               Callback Rate          Callback Rate Difference                                  Names Used

                                                                                    Name Ethnicity
                                   English           Traditional        English-               English            Traditional            English-
                                                      Chinese           Chinese                                    Chinese               Chinese

 Type 0   English Name              0.158
           Cdn Educ
            Cdn Exp

 Type 1   Foreign Name                                  -0.050           -0.034             Alison Johnson      Dong Liu              James Liu
            Cdn Educ                                  [0.018]***        [0.017]*            Carrie Martin       Fang Wang             Allen Wang
            Cdn Exp                                                                         Emily Brown         Lei Li                Jack Li
                                                                                            Greg Johnson        Min Liu               Monica Liu
 Type 2   Foreign Name                                  -0.064           -0.068             Jill Wilson         Na Li                 Jennifer Li
          Foreign Educ                                [0.020]***       [0.020]***           John Martin         Tao Wang              Amy Wang
            Cdn Exp                                                                         Matthew Wilson      Xiuying Zhang         Vivian Zhang
                                                                                            Michael Smith       Yong Zhang            Bill Zhang
 Type 3   Foreign Name                                  -0.055           -0.052
          Foreign Educ                                [0.021]***        [0.023]**
           Mixed Exp

 Type 4   Foreign Name                                  -0.105           -0.078
          Foreign Educ                                [0.018]***       [0.019]***
           Foreign Exp

Total Sample                                            3412             2937


 Notes: The table reports coeﬃcient results from regressing callback status on resume type, with Type 0 omi<ed from the regression. Robust
 standard errors are reported. Cdn = Canadian, Educ = Country where bachelors degree obtained, and exp = country where job experience obtained.
 Mixed experience corresponds to ﬁrst two jobs listed on resume are from foreign country, and most recent (third) job listed is from Canada. *** ,
 **, and * indicate callback rate diﬀerences compared to Type 0 are staKsKcally signiﬁcant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels respecKvely.
                                                                Appendix Table 3
                                                           Callback Rates by University

                                                                 (1)                       (2)              (3)             (4)
Resume Type                                   University                              Callback Rate   Resumes Sent        F-Test
                                                                                                                         (p-value)

Type 0           English Name                 Brock University                            0.120            349             0.590
                 Cdn Educ                     Queen's University*                         0.133            323
                                              Ryerson University                          0.165            328
                                              University of Toronto*                      0.136            339
                                              U oF Toronto at Mississauga                 0.158            322
                                              University of Waterloo*                     0.143            321

Type 1           Foreign Name                 Brock University                            0.077            235             0.082
                 Cdn Educ                     Queen's University*                         0.128            235
                                              Ryerson University                          0.095            241
                                              University of Toronto*                      0.112            251
                                              Toronto at Mississauga                      0.068            219
                                              University of Waterloo*                     0.137            234

Types 2-4        Indian Name                  Dayalbagh Educational Institute             0.064            251             0.432
                 Foreign Educ                 Indian Institute of Management*             0.102            216
                                              Indian Institute of Technology*             0.092            239
                                              University Of Pune                          0.074            242

Types 2-4        Chinese Name                 Jinzhong University                         0.057            230             0.074
                 Foreign Educ                 Lanzhou University                          0.111            262
                                              Peking University*                          0.065            245
                                              Tsinghua University*                        0.104            212

Types 2-4        Pakistani Name               Hamdard University                          0.076            119             0.412
                 Foreign Educ                 Isra University                             0.067            135
                                              Quaid-i-Azam University                     0.033            123
                                              University of the Punjab                    0.053            114


 Notes: Resume types are the same as indicated in Table 6. The F‐Test corresponds to the test that all callback rates by university
 are the same, and is calculated a>er regressing callback status (0‐1) on dummy variables for each university where the applicant
 obtained her bachelors degree from, using robust standard errors. * indicates a university ranked in the top 200 according to the
 QS University World Rankings.
