NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT LIES BENEATH THE EURO'S EFFECT ON FINANCIAL INTEGRATION:
CURRENCY RISK, LEGAL HARMONIZATION, OR TRADE?
Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
Elias Papaioannou
José-Luis Peydró
Working Paper 15034
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15034

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2009

Essential parts of this paper were prepared while Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan was visiting the European
Central Bank as 2008 Duisenberg Fellow. She thanks the economists at the Bank for providing a stimulating
research environment. We thank Dimitrios Rakitzis for excellent research assistance. Fabio Fiorello
from the European Commission and Ana Monteiro from the Legal Department of the ECB helped
us gathering and understanding the data related to the implementation of European financial laws.
We also thank Simone Manganelli, Philipp Hartmann, Phil Lane, Marco Pagano, Mark Spiegel, Axel
Weber, Charles Engel, conference participants at the 5th ECB Central Banking Conference on the
Euro at Ten, and two anonymous referees for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed
in this paper are those of the authors and do not reflect the views of the European Central Bank, the
Eurosystem, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Elias Papaioannou, and José-Luis Peydró. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

What Lies Beneath the Euro's Effect on Financial Integration: Currency Risk, Legal Harmonization,
or Trade?
Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Elias Papaioannou, and José-Luis Peydró
NBER Working Paper No. 15034
June 2009, Revised March 2010
JEL No. F10,F15,F30
ABSTRACT
Although recent research shows that the euro has spurred cross-border financial integration, the exact
mechanisms remain unknown. We investigate the underlying channels of the euro's effect on financial
integration using data on bilateral banking linkages among twenty industrial countries in the past thirty
years. We also construct a dataset that records the timing of legislative-regulatory harmonization policies
in financial services across the European Union. We find that the euro's impact on financial integration
is primarily driven by eliminating the currency risk. Legislative-regulatory convergence has also contributed
to the spur of cross-border financial transactions. Trade in goods, while highly correlated with bilateral
financial activities, does not play a key role in explaining the euro's positive effect on financial integration.
Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
University of Houston
Department of Economics
Houston, TX 77204
and NBER
sebnem.kalemli-ozcan@mail.uh.edu
Elias Papaioannou
Dartmouth College
Department of Economics
Hanover, NH 03755
elias.papaioannou@Dartmouth.EDU

José-Luis Peydró
European Central Bank
29 Kaiserstrasse
Frankfurt am Main,
D60311, Germany
jose-luis.peydro-alcalde@ecb.int

1

Introduction

The introduction of the single European currency has been one of the most important developments
in the international markets over the past century. The sixteen European countries that have so far
abandoned their national monies and adopted the euro did so expecting that monetary union and
the accompanying integration policies would shield their economies from adverse shocks, smooth
consumption, and promote non-inflationary growth. On its tenth anniversary, the debate on the
costs and benefits of the euro is as intense as ever.
Given the difficulty of measuring the growth benefits of the euro with limited time-series data,
the literature has focused on quantifying the effects of the euro on goods trade (see Rose (2009),
and Baldwin (2006) for surveys). Examining the effect of the single currency not only on trade,
but also on financial integration is fundamental as the free movement of capital across borders is
a key prerequisite for the functioning of a currency area (Mundell (1961)). Thus, following the
construction of new datasets on cross-border investment for a large number of countries (CPIS
data from the IMF), recent studies examine the euro’s impact on international capital flows (see
Lane (2006b, 2009) and Papaioannou and Portes (2008, 2010) for reviews).1 These studies augment
an otherwise standard gravity equation of financial holdings/flows with an indicator variable that
takes on the value one when the two countries are members of the euro area (and zero otherwise).
This approach is certainly the natural first step in analyzing whether financial integration is higher
among the euro area countries compared to other economies. Yet, this approach does not identify
the sources of the euro’s effect on financial integration. As Baldwin (2006) forcefully emphasizes in
the similar context of the euro’s impact on goods trade, it is vital that we investigate the underlying
roots of this effect. For example, is the documented positive effect of the euro on financial integration
driven by elimination of the currency risk among member countries? Or is it an outcome of various
financial sector legislative-regulatory reforms that European countries undertook simultaneously
with the euro’s introduction? What if the positive effect of the euro on financial integration is
simply due to increased goods trade?
In this paper, we address these questions, which were overlooked by the aforementioned studies
1
Lane (2006a) and Coeurdacier and Martin (2009) estimate that the monetary union increased cross-border bond
holdings among the euro area countries by 230% and 150% respectively. Similarly Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2008),
Coeurdacier and Martin (2009), and De Santis and Gerard (2006), among others, document that the euro has increased
international equity investment among member states by as much as 150%. In the same vein, Spiegel (2009a,b) finds
that cross-border bank lending increased three-fold in Portugal and Greece after the euro’s introduction. Blank and
Buch (2007) find a positive and significant increase in intra-euro area financial linkages following the introduction of
the euro.

1

that investigate the effect of the euro on financial integration. Our main contribution is to identify
the sources of the euro’s impact on financial integration.2 We do so exploiting a unique (confidential) dataset from the Bank of International Settlements (BIS) that reports bilateral cross-border
bank assets and liabilities for twenty advanced economies over the past thirty years. Although our
focus is primarily in understanding the underlying mechanisms on euro’s impact on financial integration, the rich panel structure allows us to perform a comprehensive before-after analysis of the
impact of the single currency on cross-border integration accounting for time-invariant country-pair
characteristics and global trends. This is important since due to data limitations most previous
studies employed cross-sectional approaches.3 A natural concern with the cross-sectional estimates
in the literature is that they might reflect hard-to-account-for and unobserved country-pair factors
that are both correlated with the euro and financial integration. Accounting for such factors is
essential, as recent studies show that information asymmetries, distrust and cultural dissimilarities
are significant determinants of cross-border investment (e.g. Portes and Rey (2005), Portes et al.
(2001), Aviat and Coeurdacier (2007), Guiso et al. (2009), Ekinci et al. (2008); Buch (2003);
Gianneti and Yafeh (2008); Mian (2006); Buch, Driscoll, and Ostergaard (2009)).4
Thus before we analyze the sources of euro’s impact, we start our analysis quantifying the
total effect of the single currency on cross-border financial integration. We estimate differencein-difference specifications that compare the ”within” country-pair impact of the single currency
among the twelve initial euro area member countries (the treatment group) with the general evolution of banking activities across the control group of economies (that consists of other EU and
non-EU industrial countries). Our results suggest that following the adoption of the euro bilateral
bank holdings and transactions increased by roughly 40% among the euro area countries. We obtain similar, though somewhat smaller estimates in the range of 25% − 30%, when we compare the
increase in banking integration in the twelve countries that first adopted the euro with the three
EU15 nations that have not joined the currency union. Both estimates, although highly significant,
are much lower than the ones found in previous studies examining the impact of the single currency
2

In recent work Hale and Spiegel (2009) also investigate the sources of the euro effect using disaggregated firm-level
data on bond issuance before and after the euro. They find that after the introduction of the single currency an
increased number of mostly non-financial firms issued euro denominated securities.
3
A notable exception is the study by Blank and Buch (2007), who also also report “within” estimates controlling
for country-pair fixed-effects. However their study does not aim to identify the underlying channels of the euro’s
positive impact on cross-border investment, which is the main question we pursue in this paper.
4
The parallel literature that assesses the impact of currency unions on trade shows that accounting for countrypair unobservables is fundamental. For example while cross-sectional (“between”) studies document that the euro’s
impact on trade was as large as 200%, the average fixed-effect (“within”) estimates falls to 8% − 12%, see Rose (2009)
and Baldwin (2006).

2

on various types of capital flows/holdings. This illustrates that failing to account for country-pair
fixed-effects and global trends can lead to inflated estimates, due to omitted-variable bias.
After quantifying the total effect of the euro we turn to the main focus of our analysis and
investigate the roots of this impact. First, we explore the impact of reducing currency risk and
eliminating exchange rate fluctuations among the euro area countries. Among policy circles this was
always considered to be the main channel of the euro’s impact on financial integration and trade.
To isolate the effect of the nature of the currency regime from other policies and developments, we
use the recent update of the Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) exchange rate regime classification (from
Ilzetzki et al. (2008)) and construct time-varying measures of the flexibility of bilateral exchange
rates. This allows us to control for the fall in the exchange rate volatility among the EU currencies
in the 1990s before the euro’s adoption, when the EU countries joined the exchange rate mechanism
(ERMII). Our panel specifications show that international banking activities increase significantly
among pairs of countries that adopt hard pegs. Most importantly for our focus, once we control
for the nature of the exchange rate regime, the indicator variable that switches to one after 1999
for the euro area countries drops significantly compared to the unconditional specifications; in
addition, in most permutations it becomes statistically indistinguishable from zero. This illustrates
that the euro’s positive effect is mainly driven by elimination of the currency risk. This result is
also interesting in the light of the so-called ”fear of floating” literature, which argues that due to
commitment issues, developing countries are unwilling to let their currencies float (e.g. Calvo and
Reinhart (2002); Gelos and Wei (2005)). Our results contribute to this body of work by showing a
similar pattern among industrial economies.
Second, we examine the impact of legislative harmonization policies in financial services. Acknowledging that legal, regulatory, and supervisory differences in financial markets are significant
impediments to the full integration of capital markets, the EU countries implemented various reforms in banking, insurance, and equity markets over the past decade. Most of these measures
were under the umbrella of the Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP), an ambitious initiative
launched by the EU Commission and the EU Council in the late 1990s aiming to harmonize the
functioning of financial intermediaries. The most important policies of the FSAP were detailed into
a set of EU-level laws, the Directives and the Regulations. Among others, the FSAP included new
legislation on cross-border M&A activity of financial institutions, money laundering, transparency
in capital markets, investor protection, and supervision (see Table 1 and Supplementary Appendix
Table A).
To assess the impact of financial reforms on banking integration, we use information from the
3

EU Commission and each of the EU-15 countries and build a new dataset on the implementation of
the 27 Directives of the FSAP across member states (see Table 2). In contrast to Regulations that
become immediately enforceable across the EU, the Directives are legislative acts that require from
member states to achieve some well-specified results, but without clearly dictating the means. Most
importantly the EU countries have discretion in the timing of the transposition of the Directives
into the domestic legal order. Governments usually delay the transposition of the Directives to
national law for various reasons such as technical difficulties in transposing the directives into
national law and protecting domestic interests. Hence, the transposition of the Directives takes
in practice several years and differs considerably across the EU. As a result, we have significant
variation in the adoption time of the 27 legislative acts incorporated in the FSAP.
After constructing this new dataset, we estimate the effects of legislative convergence in the
regulation of banking, insurance, company law, and capital markets supervision on financial integration. Our estimates indicate that cross-border banking activities increased significantly among
European countries that quickly adopted the financial services Directives of the FSAP. This result
contributes to the law and finance literature (La Porta et al. (1997), (1998)), which emphasizes the
importance of contracting institutions in shaping financial patterns. To our knowledge, this finding
is the first result linking bilateral legislative harmonization to cross-border financial integration.
However, although financial services legislative harmonization is a significant driver of banking integration, it cannot explain the total effect of the euro on its own. One explanation might be that
the FSAP Directives have not been fully enforced across Europe (see Enriques and Gatti (2007)).
Finally, we investigate whether the spur in cross-border banking integration is driven by an
increased volume of transactions in international trade. As goods and asset trade move in tandem
(e.g. Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000); Rose and Spiegel (2004); Rose (2005); Aviat and Coeurdacier
(2007)) and currency unions raise bilateral trade (e.g. Rose (2000, 2009)), the positive impact
of the single currency on financial integration may partly at least be coming from goods trade.
Although there is a strong ”within” correlation between banking activities and international trade,
trade can not explain any part of the effect of the euro on financial integration.
Besides our contribution to the literature on the impact of the single European currency on
financial integration and how this impact works, our work relates to the broader literature that
examines the determinants of international capital flows. Empirical studies by Wei (2000), Alfaro et
al. (2008), Papaioannou (2009) and others show that institutions — broadly defined — are important determinants of all types of international capital flows. Our findings that legal and regulatory
harmonization in financial services is strongly associated to international movements illustrates
4

that differences in institutions (broadly defined) and the transparency in governance of financial
intermediaries are important factors explaining capital flows and the lack of international diversification. Our results further show that, besides institutional frictions, a crucial factor explaining the
lack of international diversification is currency risk (see also Gelos and Wei (2005)).
The paper is structured as follows. In the next section we discuss the empirical specification
and explain in detail our data. Section 3 gives our estimates on the total effect of the euro, and
presents our analysis on the impact of the three aforementioned channels for the impact of the euro
on financial integration. Section 4 concludes.

2

Empirical Specification and Data

2.1

Specification

Our baseline specification takes the following form:
0
BIi,j,t = αi,j + αt + ψ1 EU 1i,j,t + ψ2 EU 2i,j,t + ψ3 EZ1i,j,t + ψ4 EZ2i,j,t + Xi,j,t
γ + vi,j,t

The dependent variable (BI) is the average of the log of real bilateral assets and liabilities holdings
(or gross flows) of countries i and j in year t, standardized by the sum of the two countries’ population. We construct BI using data on cross-border banking activities from the confidential version
of BIS’s International Locational Banking Statistics Database that reports bilateral positions. We
extract from this dataset bilateral stocks and flows covering twenty industrialized countries over the
period 1977 − 2007.5 Our data covers all the twelve initial euro area countries (Austria, Belgium,
Germany, Greece, Luxemburg, France, Finland, Netherlands, Spain, Portugal, Ireland, and Italy),
plus the three EU15 non-euro area countries (Denmark, Sweden and the United Kingdom), and
Australia, Canada, Japan, Switzerland, and the United States.6
Our focus is on the coefficient of the EZ2i,j,t variable that takes on the value one if both countries
are members of the eurozone in year t and zero otherwise. To isolate the effect of the single currency
5

The Locational Banking Statistics nowadays covers data from roughly forty countries; yet half of these countries
started reporting only recently (mostly after 2000) or are “off-shore” centers. Therefore, we only analyze the twenty
industrialized countries that appear in the BIS dataset since 1970s.
6
Thus the maximum number of observations are 5, 700 (20 ∗ 19 ∗ 30/2). Usually bilateral asset and goods trade
data contain many zeros that make the logarithmic transformation questionable. Our focus on industrial countries
makes our analysis immune to this problem, because we miss just a few observations and only in the beginning of
the sample. Our baseline models are estimated in a sample of 5, 566 observations. Most gaps involve Greece and
Portugal. We thus re-estimated all models dropping these two countries. The results are similar.

5

from an EU-wide effect, we include in the specification a dummy variable that equals one if the
two countries are members of the EU in year t and zero otherwise (EU 2i,j,t ). In all specifications
we also control for the unilateral effects of the EU and the euro on banking integration, adding
indicator variables that take on the value one when only one of the two countries is a member of
the EU or the euro zone in a given year (EU 1i,j,t and EZ1i,j,t respectively).
The three dimensional panel structure allows us to control for year fixed-effects (αt ) and (more
importantly) country-pair fixed-effects (αi,j ). Year fixed-effects account for global trends on banking integration (see Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2008)), that might be reflected by the euro variable
if not controlled. Country-pair fixed-effects control for all time-invariant bilateral characteristics, such as trust, culture, information asymmetries that affect financial patterns. Our empirical
model constitutes a difference-in-difference specification, where the euro area member countries are
the ”treatment” group, while the three EU and the five non-EU countries serve as the ”control”
group(s). Since we include both time and country-pair fixed-effects the coefficients on the indicator variables measure the effect of the EU and the euro membership on banking integration of
the participating countries compared to evolution of international banking integration in the other
industrial economies.
0
Vector Xi,j,t
includes other independent and control variables, such as trade, the flexibility of

the exchange rate regime and legal-regulatory harmonization, which are explained in detail below.

2.2

Data

Dependent variable
The BIS Locational Banking Statistics database covers all of banks’ on-balance sheet exposure, as
well as some ”off-balance sheet” items. The dataset reports asset and liability holdings of banks
located in the main industrial countries (”the reporting area”) against more than 100 economies
(the ”vis-a-vis area”) since the end of 1977. The data includes mainly cross-border bank-to-bank
lending activities, such as foreign loans, deposits and long-term debt placed with non-resident
banks, including bank’s own related offices abroad and subsidiaries.7 The data also covers traderelated credit, and holdings of debt securities issued mainly by other banks, and participations of
equity and FDI. Yet, BIS documentations suggests that equity portfolio was, until recently, a small
7

This is the main difference with the similar BIS Consolidated Banking Statistics Database, used for example by
Spiegel (2009a,b). However, Spiegel measures the impact of the euro only for Greece and Portugal.

6

fraction of international banking activities (see BIS (2003a,b) and Wooldridge (2002)).8
Quite importantly domestic monetary authorities report to the BIS the currency exposure
of local banking institutions. Using this information the BIS experts can estimate cross-border
flows accounting for valuation effects that occur due to exchange rate swings. As the BIS (2003a)
documents ”flows are estimated by the BIS staff as the exchange rate adjusted changes in holdings.”
Although from an international diversification standpoint studying stocks is more appropriate, flows
account for valuation effects are also important and thus we opt for using both measures.9
The data is originally expressed in current U.S. dollars. After deflating the series with the U.S.
price index, we construct two measures of banking integration, one based on stocks and one based
on gross flows. BI1i,j,t is the average of the log of real bilateral assets and liabilities holdings of
countries i and j in each year, standardized by the sum of the two countries’ population. BI2i,j,t
is the average of the log of real bilateral assets and liabilities gross flows, standardized by the sum
of the two countries’ population in year t.10

Exchange rate regime
To investigate the impact of currency risk we augment our main specification with a bilateral timevarying measure that reflects the flexibility of the exchange rate regime (ERi,j,t ). We do so using
the latest update of the Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) exchange rate regime classification (by Ilzetzki,
Reinhart and Rogoff (2008)). Using data on official and dual (parallel and black) foreign exchange
markets, Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) produce two (de facto) classifications of the exchange rate
regime at a monthly frequency from 1946 till the end of 2007.11 The ”coarse” index distinguishes
between four regimes, fixed (score of 1), crawling pegs (score of 2), managed floating (score of 3),
8

Unfortunately the database does not distinguish between FDI, portfolio and fixed-income investments, and standard bank-to-bank loans and credit lines.
9
de Santis and Gerard (2006) and Buch, Driscoll, and Ostergaard (2009) take a more “structural” approach than
we do and compare the actual investment holdings of foreign investors and banks respectively to what an international
mean-variance model predicts. While this approach has the obvious benefit of imposing some structure in the empirical
analysis it is far from clear than international banks follow simple mean-variance global strategies. For example the
corporate finance literature shows that due to monitoring costs and asymmetric information banks tend to lend to
proximate borrowers. Moreover since our data includes investment in both debt and equity instruments it is not clear
how one could estimate expected international returns.
10
We also experiment with other measures of banking integration. First, following Rose and Spiegel (2004) we
didn’t standardize the variables with population (and controlled for the product of log population). Second, following
early works on trade we used the log of the average (and alternatively the sum) of bilateral holdings and gross flows
(see Baldwin (2006) for a critique of this measure). The results are similar and hence not reported for brevity.
11
It should be stressed that in our sample of developed economies there are no major black or parallel currency
markets. Thus in our group of economies the index is to great extent de jure as it reflects the choice of monetary
authorities to peg their currencies.

7

and free floating (score of 4).12 The ”fine” grid ranges from 1, indicating a fixed-exchange rate
regime (such as the euro), till 13, suggesting a freely floating exchange rate.13 For our benchmark
estimates we prefer the ”fine” classification, as it exhibits larger variation and is less correlated
with the binary euro area measure (EZ2) that we also include in many specifications. We also
show results with the ”coarse” classification for robustness. For both classifications, we construct
a bilateral measure of exchange rate flexibility by taking the sum of the log of the scores for each
f,c
f,c
f,c
country in the beginning (as of January) of each year (ERi,j,t
≡ ln(ERi,t
) + ln(ERj,t
) where

superscript f and c indicate the fine and the coarse classification).

Legislative harmonization
The introduction of the euro was accompanied by legislative reforms in financial services. To
isolate the impact of these policies we use information from the European Commission and the
EU-15 Member States on the implementation of the Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP) and
construct a new dataset that measures the degree of legislative harmonization in financial services
across European countries.14
The FSAP was a major 5-year program launched by the European Union in the end of 1998
with the aim to establish: (1) a single EU wholesale market for financial services, (2) open and
secure retail markets, and (3) state-of-the-art prudential and supervisory regulations. The project
included 42 measures that aimed to create a harmonized EU market for banking, securities and
insurance. The most important part of the project consisted of (27) EU-level legislative acts (the
Directives) and (2) Regulations. The other measures were Communications and Recommendations
12
There is also a fifth category, free falling, that includes hyperinflation currencies. Yet none of the 20 industrialized
countries we consider is ever placed in this category.
13
For example, for most years the U.S. dollar, the Japanese yen, and the Australian dollar get a score around
11 − 13. The Swiss franc ranges from 8 to 12, while the Canadian dollar fluctuates around 8. The variation in
European countries is substantial. In general, European currencies appear in intermediate status for most of the
1980s (in the range of 4 to 8); in the early 1990s the majority of countries move to a fixed-regime range (score of 4),
and to a fully-fixed regime (score of 1) for the ones that join the euro in 1999. The Deutsche mark is classified as a
free floating currency (score of 13) till 1998.
14
Besides legal harmonization in financial services the introduction of the single currency was accompanied by a series of technical/infrastructure reforms. For example with the introduction of TARGET (Trans-European Automated
Real-time Gross settlement Express Transfer system) payments between credit institutions within the euro-area take
place in real-time and at a harmonized transaction fee. At the same time the number of payment systems was
reduced from seventeen to six in 1999. Other important infrastructure innovations included the introduction of the
SEPA (Single Euro Payments Area) and the STEP (Short-Term European Paper) platforms that aimed to integrate
payments in retail banking and bond markets (see Kalemli-Ozcan, Manganelli, Papaioannou, and Peydro (2010) for a
more-in-depth discussion). Since these electronic payment and settlement systems were introduced at the same time
in all EU countries, one cannot isolate their impact from that of the elimination of the exchange rate variability.

8

of the Commission with the member states on technical issues.
Until its official completion at the end of 2003, the EU legislative bodies (the EU Council and
the European Parliament with the assistance of the EU Commission) passed most of the initially
planned measures. In particular, the EU bodies passed 21 Directives and 2 Regulations. The remaining 6 Directives were initiated with some delay, but their circulation and adaptation for most
member-states took place before the end of our sample period (end of 2007). Unlike Regulations
that become enforceable immediately after their passage across all EU member states, Directives
have to be transposed within a certain period in the legal order of the member states. Usually the
transposition time takes a couple of years, as it entails various technical modifications and adaptations. European governments prefer Directives to Regulations, as they can delay the transposition
either for technical reasons (some countries need to change internal laws or/and create new institutions to incorporate the directive into national law), or for domestic policy considerations, such
as protecting local firms, shielding national industry interests, etc.15 Therefore, there is significant
heterogeneity on the adaptation timing across countries, which is quite useful for our purposes.
Table 1 gives the title, the date of circulation by the EU Commission, and the deadline for
the respective transposition for each of the 27 Directives of the FSAP. Supplementary Appendix
Table A provides a brief description of the context of each directive.16 While in our analysis we
do not distinguish between these legislative acts, it seems that the most important provisions for
investors were incorporated in the Prospectus Directive, the Market Abuse Directive, the Takeover
Bids Directive and the Transparency Directive (see Enriques and Gatti (2007)). Table 2 reports
the date of the transposition for each Directive across all EU15 member states. There is sizable
heterogeneity on the timing of the transposition across member states. Take for example the first
Directive of the FSAP on Settlements that was circulated by the Commission in late 1998. Only
half of the EU-15 countries transposed the Directive in the following year. France, Luxemburg, and
Italy took three years to incorporate this Directive into national law. The transposition pace of the
Directive on the Supervision of Credit Institutions, Insurance Undertakings and Investment Firms
in a Financial Conglomerate was notoriously slow. Although the transposition mandate expired in
late 2004 (following an adoption time framework of two years), it was incorporated in time only by
15

Numerous assessments conclude that this system of transposition was too slow, rigid, and failing to distinguish
between essential framework principles and implementing rules (see the so-called Lamfalussy report). The Takeovers
Directive, for example, had been discussed and negotiated at the EU level for 12 years. Likewise it took more than
30 years for EU governments to agree, vote, transpose and implement the European Company Statute Directive.
16
All Supplementary Appendix Tables are available at: http://www.dartmouth.edu/˜elias/research.html and
http://www.uh.edu/˜skalemli/papers.html

9

four countries (namely Denmark, France, Finland and the UK). Most countries took five years to
transpose this important financial legislation into national law.
To create the bilateral harmonization variable (HARM ONi,j,t ) we first define twenty-seven
indicator variables that equal one starting at the year of the transposition of each directive into
national law in each country, and zero otherwise. Second, we construct a country-level timevarying legal transposition measure ranging from zero to twenty-seven by summing up the values
of the indicator variables for each Directive (LEXi,t ). Third, we construct the bilateral harmonization index by taking the sum of the logs of one plus the legislation measure for each country
(i.e. HARM ONi,j,t ≡ ln(1 + LEXi,t ) + ln(1 + LEXj,t )).17 For robustness we also construct the
HARM ON indicator using only the initial twenty-one Directives that were passed by the Commission before the official completion of the FSAP.

3
3.1

Results
Total Effect

Table 3 reports our results on the total (aggregate) effect of the euro on banking integration.18
Columns (1)-(2) of Panel A report unconditional estimates in the maximum sample of twenty
countries and thirty years with the stock and the flow based measures of banking integration. The
coefficient on EZ2 is positive and statistically significant at the 1% level in both permutations.
This indicates that bilateral banking activities among the euro area countries increased significantly
after the adoption of the single currency. In contrast, the EU 2 indicator enters with an insignificant
estimate. This suggests that it was the adoption of the single currency rather than being a member
of the EU that has contributed to the increase in financial integration. The coefficient on EU 1
that equals one when one of the two counterparts is a member of the EU is negative and in most
models significant at standard confidence levels. This is due to the fact that cross-border banking
activities among the control group of countries (USA, Japan, Switzerland, Australia, and Canada)
17
For robustness we also used the product of the logs of the countries’ scores in transposition. We also simply
took the sum rather than the sum of the logs of the country measures of legislative harmonization, again finding
almost identical results. We prefer the logarithmic transformation because the harmonization variable is skewed. In
addition, since the dependent variable is also specified in logs this transformation makes the interpretation of the
coefficients easier. We also estimated specifications using a harmonization index that increases when both countries
in each country pair have transposed exactly the same Directive (see Supplementary Appendix Table I).
18
To account for serial correlation and potentially for country-pair specific heteroskedasticity, standard errors are
clustered at the country-pair level (Bertrand et al. (2004)).

10

is quite high, as many of these countries are important financial centers. The coefficient on EZ1
that equals one when one of the two counterparts has adopted the euro is insignificant, suggesting
that the unilateral impact was much smaller than the bilateral effect.19
While in the specifications reported in columns (1)-(2) we do not condition for other covariates, the inclusion of country-pair fixed-effects accounts for most of the usual control variables of
standard gravity equations of financial flows, such as distance, colonial ties, and land areas, all of
which have been shown to affect integration. In addition, the country-pair fixed-effects account for
other hard-to-measure time-invariant bilateral factors that affect financial linkages, such as trust,
cultural similarities, and information asymmetries. Gravity equations typically include the product
of bilateral GDPs in the set of explanatory variables. The main idea is that larger-richer economies
are able to attract more foreign investment, by providing a larger set of diversification opportunities (e.g. Martin and Rey (2004)) and offering collateral (e.g. Gertler and Rogoff (1990)). In
columns (3) and (4) we repeat estimation controlling for the log of the product of real per capita
GDP of the two countries in each year (using data from World Bank’s World Development Indicators database). GDP is a significant correlate of cross-border financial holdings and transactions,
even after conditioning on country-pair unobservables and time trends. Yet the coefficient on the
indicator that equals one when both counterparts are members of the euro area (EZ2) remains
significant at the 1% level.
In columns (5)-(8) we repeat the estimation, dropping observations from the late 1970s and
the 1980s. As cross-border banking activities increased drastically since the early 1990s, when the
initial stages of the EMU were designed and implemented, it is important to explore the sensitivity
of our estimates in this dimension. In addition, focusing in the 1990s and the 2000s allows us to
examine the effects of the single currency with the same number of pre and post-1999 observations,
something always useful in before-after event studies. The estimate on the indicator that switches
to one when both countries join the euro area (EZ2) is stable and remains highly significant.
The most conservative estimate of the coefficient on EZ2 (in the specifications where we also
control for GDP p.c.) implies that—compared to the general increase in banking integration in
the group of industrial economies—cross-border banking activities between the euro area countries
increased by 40% − 45% after the adoption of the single currency (exp(0.35) = 1.41). While this
19

We also specified the EU 1 and EU 2 indicator variables in an alternative way. Specifically we run models where the
EU 1 and the EU 2 dummies do not include the euro area countries. In these specifications (reported in Supplementary
Appendix Table B) the coefficient on the EZ2 indicator is around 0.35 − 0.40. The coefficient on EU 2 indicator is
also positive (around 0.58 − 0.70), although the estimate is not always statistically significant. In contrast the EU 1
and EZ1 variables enter both with insignificant point estimates.

11

effect is large, it is smaller in magnitude than the estimates of Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2008),
Lane (2006a), de Santis and Gerard (2006) and Coeurdacier and Martin (2009), who, using IMF
survey data and cross-sectional approaches, estimate that the euro has increased bilateral equity
and bond holdings by around 100%, if not more. Our more conservative estimates stems from
the inclusion of country-pair fixed-effects that accounts for all time-invariant bilateral factors that
affect financial linkages. When we do not include country-pair fixed-effects, we also find significantly
larger coefficients. We similarly find larger coefficients when we simply control for country (rather
than country-pair) fixed-effects or when we perform random effects estimation.
Yet, the interpretation of our within results is somewhat different than the cross-sectional
estimates. The coefficient on EZ2 in Table 2 measures the average increase in bilateral banking
activities in a pair of countries that has adopted the euro compared to the evolution of international
banking activities in the control group of countries. The cross-sectional estimates in contrast
measure how much larger are financial linkages of the euro area countries compared to that of other
economies in the post-1999 period.
The average bilateral effect of the euro on cross-border banking activities reported in Panel A of
Table 3 is also lower than the estimates of Spiegel (2009a,b), who, using BIS consolidated banking
statistics for Portugal and Greece over the period 1985 − 2006, finds that the single currency
increased banking activities three-fold. Besides the different sample period, the main reason for
this difference is the extent of the data. Spiegel (2009a,b) focuses on two small euro area countries,
while we investigate the impact of the single currency in all twelve initial members of the euro
area.20 We thus explored whether the impact of the single currency was larger for small euro area
countries compared to large economies. The estimates (not reported for brevity) are similar for
the two group of countries (small and large) and almost identical to the coefficient reported in
Panel A of Table 3.21 Our results on the bilateral euro effect is also in line (though a bit more
conservative) with the estimates of Blank and Buch (2007), who find that the euro increased crossborder bank assets and liabilities by around 80% and 35% respectively. While these authors also
estimate country-pair fixed-effect models using a similar dataset, their panel just covers five pre
and five post 1999 observations. Our much larger time-dimension allows us to better account for
20

While we include in the specification country-pair fixed-effects to account for all time-invariant country-pair
factors, Spiegel (2009a,b) includes source-country and recipient-country fixed-effects and directly controls for bilateral
gravity factors (such as distance and common language). When we replace the country-pair fixed-effects with country
fixed-effects the coefficient on the indicator variable that takes on the value one when both countries are euro area
members retains significance and becomes significantly larger, much closer to Spiegel’s estimate.
21
We thank Mark Spiegel for proposing this robustness check.

12

trends in both the control and the treatment group of countries.
Panel B of Table 3 reports results of otherwise similar to Panel A specifications, estimated only
in the EU15 sub-sample. Although in Panel A we control for both unilateral and bilateral effects
of EU membership, one may worry that there are different dynamics in the EU and the larger
group of industrial countries. To account for this, we re-estimated the specifications in the EU15
sample. The coefficient on the indicator that switches to one for the twelve countries that adopted
the single currency after 1999 remains statistically different than zero in all permutations. This
reassures that (the more efficient) estimates in the full sample of countries do not reflect an EU-wide
effect or different patterns in banking activities in the EU. The coefficient drops somewhat, implying
that banking activities among the euro area countries increased by 25% (exp(0.21 − 0.25) − 1 =
23% − 29%), compared to the evolution of banking integration in the three European countries that
have opted out of the currency union.

3.2

Channels

We now investigate the role of the exchange rate regime, harmonization policies in financial services,
and trade on financial integration. This allows us to understand the underlying reasons for the total
effect of the euro documented in Table 3. We start examining the effect of each channel. We then
simultaneously control for all of these factors. Finally we explore the sensitivity of our results.

Exchange rate risk The most immediate effect of the euro was to eliminate currency risk among
member countries. Even before 1999 exchange rate fluctuations among the legacy currencies were
limited. One of the criteria of the Maastricht Treaty of 1992 that set the rules for monetary union
was that member countries had to join the exchange-rate mechanism (ERM II) for two consecutive
years without devaluating its currency during the period. Yet, although exchange rate variability
was lower for European countries participating in the ERM in the nineties than in previous years,
foreign investors still had to bear a risk of an abrupt misalignment or a currency attack (as for
example in the UK in September of 1992, in France in early 1993, or in Spain in 1992 and 1993).
To investigate the effect of exchange rate variability risk, in columns (1)-(2) of Table 4 we
f
augment the baseline specification with the bilateral exchange rate flexibility measure, ERi,j,t
, based

on ”fine” classification of Reinhart and Rogoff (2004).22 The coefficient on the variable that reflects
22
Since the product of log GDP p.c. enters always with a highly significant coefficient, we always include it in the
specifications. The results are similar if we drop this control variable from the estimation.

13

the bilateral flexibility of the exchange rate regime is negative and significant at the 1% confidence
level.23 This suggests that banking activities have increased significantly among pairs of countries
that have adopted more rigid currency regimes. This finding fits with the evidence from the ”fear
of floating” literature (e.g. Calvo and Reinhart (2002); Klein and Shambaugh (2008); Gelos and
Wei (2005)). This research argues that in order to attract foreign capital, emerging economies are
unwilling to let their currencies float; and even when monetary authorities in developing countries
argue that they do not manage the currency in practice they do so (Reinhart and Rogoff (2004)).
While this body of work focuses on developing economies, our panel evidence in Table 4 shows a
similar pattern across developed countries.
In addition to its direct effect on integration, controlling for exchange rate flexibility also makes
the coefficient on the indicator variable that equals one when the two countries are members of
the euro area (EZ2i,j,t ) insignificant. While in some perturbations (reported below in Table 5) the
estimate on the EZ2 retains significance, this is only at 10% − 20%. In addition the estimate falls
considerably even when it is significant. This suggests that the positive effect of the single currency
mainly comes from the elimination of currency risk.

Legislative Harmonization

The euro was supported by various legislative and regulatory har-

monization policies in financial services. Although some reforms occurred before 1999 (mainly with
the adoption of the First and the Second Banking Directive), European banking markets remained
fragmented till the eve of the monetary union (e.g. Hartmann et al. (2003)). The main objective of
the Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP) was to tackle this issue and with its various legislative
acts to create a single liquid financial market (e.g. Enriques and Gatti (2007)).
In columns (3)-(4) of Table 4, we augment the baseline specification with our newly constructed
harmonization index (HARM ONi,j,t ) that sums the log number of the transposed Directives of
the FSAP across the two countries (LEX) in each year. We remove (for the time) the exchange
rate regime index from the set of explanatory variables, since we want to investigate the role of
each channel one at a time. The coefficient on HARM ON is positive and significant at the 1%
level. This implies that legislative and regulatory harmonization policies in financial services had
a significant positive effect on cross-border banking integration. As we control for EU and euro
area membership (with the four indicator variables), the significantly positive estimates on the
23

We also estimated models using the sum of the exchange rate grid of the two countries. The results are similar.
We also used the product of the logs of the two countries’ classification score. The bilateral exchange rate regime
index enters always with a negative and significant estimate.

14

bilateral harmonization index suggests that legislative harmonization in financial markets also had
a first-order effect on cross-border banking integration that works on top of the general positive
effect of the euro area membership.
Once we control for legislative-regulatory policies among the EU-members states, the coefficient
on the indicator variable that equals one when both counterparts are members of the Eurozone,
EZ2, drops compared to the unconditional estimates (in Table 3). It retains significance though (at
the 10%). This suggests that while financial sector harmonization policies did boost cross-border
banking activities, the effect of the euro on integration goes only partially through legislative
harmonization in financial services.
The significant correlation between legislative harmonization and financial integration reveal
that legal system differences may explain the lack of international diversification. The empirical
literature on law and finance shows that country-level differences in investor protection can explain
a sizable portion of the size of domestic financial markets (see La Porta et al. (2008) for a review).
Our results contribute to this body of work by showing that legal harmonization has also an effect on
bilateral financial linkages and can thus explain the lack of cross-border investment (see Shleifer and
Wolfenzon (2003) for a theoretical exposition). Most likely the effect of legislative harmonization
policies in financial services is larger than our estimates suggest, since our index contains some
measurement error. The transposition of the Directives into the domestic legal order differs to
some extent across the EU. Some countries for example implement stricter regulatory practices
than the ones specified in each Directive, while other countries go for minimum harmonization (see
Enriques and Gatti (2007) for a detailed analysis). Moreover some Directives leave considerable
room to member states for modifications, exemptions, and partial implementation (as for example
the Takeover Bids Directive), while other Directives are quite comprehensive detailing all necessary
ingredients of domestic legislation (as for example the Market Abuse Directive and to a lesser
extent the Prospectus Directive). Most importantly, actual enforcement of the EU legislation
differs considerably across the EU (e.g. Djankov et al. (2003, 2008)) and thus the de-facto impact
of the transposition might also be different than the de-jure effect that our estimates reflect.

Trade

Are trade in goods and trade in assets complements or substitutes? While it is quite chal-

lenging to establish causation, ample studies show a strong correlation between trade and financial
integration (see for example Aviat and Coeurdacier (2007)). A volumious literature also shows that

15

the euro had a positive effect on goods trade.24 Thus, another potential channel explaining the
spur in financial integration among the euro area countries compared to other developed economies
could stem from increased trade in goods. To account for this channel, in columns (5) and (6) of
Table 4, we augment the baseline specification with the average of the log of bilateral exports and
imports as a share of the two countries’ population (T RADEi,j,t ), using data from IMF’s Direction
of Trade Database.25
The coefficient on T RADEi,j,t is positive and significant, suggesting that trade in goods and
bank claims go in tandem (e.g. Rose and Spiegel (2004) and Rose (2005)). Compared to the
previous literature our results demonstrate that the strong trade-finance nexus is present even
when we control for country-pair fixed-effects and global trends. Yet, trade linkages cannot explain
the total impact of the euro on integration at all. The coefficient on the EZ2 indicator in columns
(5)-(6) is quite similar to the analogous estimates in Table 3. In addition the estimate remains
statistically significant at the 1% level. Thus while trade is a significant correlate of financial
integration, it can not account for the large effect of monetary union documented in Table 3.

All channels There is a possibility that each channel is proxying one another. Thus, in Table 5
we augment the specification with all three variables that capture the exchange rate channel, the
legislative harmonization policies in financial markets, and trade. We also explore the sensitivity
of our results by presenting results with the alternative exchange rate index (ERc ) based on the
”coarse” regime classification (in columns (5)-(8)) and the harmonization index (HARM ON ) using
only the initial 21 Directives of the FSAP (in columns (3), (4), (7), and (8)). As we lose 15% of
our sample when we control for trade (due to some gaps on IMF’s Direction of Trade Statistics),
in Table 6 we report otherwise identical to Table 5 specifications, but without trade in the RHS.26
The ER index that sums (the log) of the exchange rate regime index of the two countries
enters with a negative coefficient in all permutations of Tables 5 and 6. The coefficient drops by
20% − 50% compared to the estimates in columns (1)-(2) of Table 4, where we didn’t control for
legislative harmonization policies in financial services and trade. Yet the estimate is statistically
24

While initial (cross-sectional) studies document an (unrealistically) high effect (e.g. Rose (2000)), recent (panel)
studies estimate that the single currency increased bilateral trade approximately by 8% − 14% (e.g. Flam and
Nordstrom (2008)).
25
We also experiment with other measures of trade, such as the (log and the level) of average bilateral exports and
imports as a share of GDP, finding similar results.
26
Supplementary Appendix Table C reports analogous specifications but with an alternative way to specify the 4
EU and EMU indicator variables. In these specifications the EU 1 and the EU 2 dummies do not include the euro
area countries.

16

significant in all but two of the sixteen specifications. Turning now to the effect of legislative
harmonization policies in financial markets, the results in Tables 5 and 6 show that the FSAP
had a significantly positive impact on spurring cross-border banking activities across Europe. In
all specifications the harmonization index enters with a coefficient that is at least two standard
errors above zero. The estimate (around 0.07 − 0.09) is also quite similar to the more parsimonious
specifications in columns (3)-(4) of Table 4. As we control for exchange rate fluctuations, GDP
differences, and trade, this result is encouraging for European policy makers, who are in the process
of further promoting legislative and regulatory harmonization in financial markets. Trade continues
to enter with a significantly positive elasticity. As long as the estimate is not driven exclusively by
reverse causation, this suggests that besides more immediate effects, the euro could speed financial
integration indirectly through goods market integration.
To get an estimate of the relative importance of the three channels we also estimated standardized beta coefficients. The average value of the beta coefficient for the bilateral exchange rate
index in Table 5 is −0.06. This implies that a one standard deviation fall in ER that makes the
exchange rate regime more rigid is associated with a 0.06 increase in the dependent variable. The
average value of the standardized coefficient for the bilateral harmonization index (HARM ON ) is
somewhat larger, 0.075, while trade’s beta coefficient is on average 0.14.
In almost all perturbations in Tables 5 and 6 the coefficient on EZ2 turns insignificant. Even
in the specifications that the estimate retains significance, this is borderline and the coefficient
drops considerably compared to the unconditional estimates in Table 3. Combined with the results
in Table 4, the elimination of exchange rate risk seems to be the most important channel. Yet,
legislative harmonization policies in financial services have also crucially contributed to the spur of
cross-border financial linkages across the EU in the past decade. In contrast goods trade, while a
highly significant correlate of banking integration (with the largest ”standardized” coefficient), is
not behind the large unconditional effect of the single currency documented in Table 3.27

Sensitivity Analysis

We explored extensively the sensitivity of our results. As already shown in

Table 3 we estimated the specifications only in the 1990s and the 2000s to account for potentially
different dynamics in the two sub-periods. Moreover, as the results in Tables 5 and 6 show our
results are not sensitive to different ways measuring the nature of the exchange rate regime or the
27

This is not to say that other policies and reforms did not have any effect. The EMU project included many
policies that is hard-to-precisely pin down and measure. See Kalemli-Ozcan et al. (2010) for a detailed summary of
the technical and infrastructure steps that the EU bodies have taken to homogenize the various market segments for
financial services.

17

legislative harmonization policies of the FSAP.
In Table 7 we check whether the results are driven by Luxemburg and Switzerland, the two
countries with the largest share of foreign bank and liabilities in our sample.28 Columns (1)-(4)
report simple specifications (analogous to the models in Table 3) that estimate the total effect of
the single currency on banking integration. The coefficient on the indicator variable that takes on
the value one when both countries are members of the euro area retains its economic and statistical
significance. The most conservative estimate in column (4) implies that following the adoption of
the euro cross-border banking activities by approximately 50%, compared to the general increase
in the other industrial economies (exp(0.402) = 1.49). Yet once we control for the nature of
the exchange rate regime and legislative harmonization (in (5)-(6)) the estimate on EZ2 turns
insignificant as in our previously reported results; and although trade in goods is correlated with
banking activities (column (7)-(8)), this cannot account for the effect of single currency on financial
integration.
In Table 8 we control for structural features of the domestic banking system in countries i and
j. This is a necessary robustness check as there is concern that the implementation of the FSAP
directives was driven by local conditions in the banking system.29 We do so using three timevarying proxies of bank’s health and profitability from the latest update of World Bank’s Financial
Structure Database (Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine (2000)). In columns (1)-(2) we control for
banks’ overhead costs, while in (3)-(4) we control for banks’ profitability using the average value
of banks’ net interest revenue as a share of total assets (the Data Appendix gives detailed variable
definitions). Both measures of banking performance enter with insignificant estimates. In (5)-(6)
we control for competition in the banking system with a concentration index that equals the share
of the assets of three largest banks as a share of assets of all commercial banks. The coefficient is
indistinguishable from zero. More importantly, controlling for structural features of the banking
system has no effect on our main results. Cross-border banking activities increase significantly
when countries adopt more rigid exchange rate arrangements (such as joining the euro). Moreover,
international financial linkages are stronger among countries with more similar legal and regulatory
rules in financial services.
We have performed many other sensitivity checks:30 First, to partly account for reverse causa28

The results are similar if we exclude only Luxemburg or only Switzerland or if we also drop the United Kingdom.
We thank an anonymous referee for pointing out this possibility.
30
All Supplementary Appendix Tables with the additional sensitivity checks are available at:
http://www.dartmouth.edu/˜elias.
29

18

tion we have run regressions using lagged values of all explanatory variables (see Supplementary
Appendix Table D). We have also estimated 2SLS specifications using lagged trade as an instrument
for contemporaneous trade (see Supplementary Appendix Table E). The results are quite robust
and the estimates unaffected. Second, we have also analyzed assets and liabilities separately, as
there is always a possibility that the euro might have affected them differently. The regressions
(reported on Supplementary Appendix Table F) show similar patterns. Third, we also controlled
for a bilateral measure of nominal exchange rate volatility (following Devereux and Lane (2003)).
Again all our results are robust to the inclusion of this control, which (as in and Lane (2006a)) appears with an insignificant coefficient (Supplementary Appendix Table G). The insignificant effect
of nominal exchange rate volatility suggests that foreign banks were particularly concerned with
currency risk rather than with (relatively small) swings in the exchange rate. Fourth, we used an
alternative legislative harmonization index in financial services that changes when the two countries have adopted exactly the same Directive. The results (reported in Supplementary Appendix
H) are unchanged and if anything stronger. Finally, although the universal banking structure in
Europe (see Allen et al. (2004)) implies that all the FSAP directives are relevant for banks, we
also specified a banking legislative harmonization measure that only reflects the Directives that are
relatively more relevant to banking (i.e. excluding those ones which are relatively more important
for security and insurance markets) finding similar results (Supplementary Appendix Table I).31

4

Conclusion

The introduction of the euro has been one of the most important policy experiments in international
economics over the past decades. The initial focus of the literature was to investigate the effect of the
euro on trade integration. Following the development of new datasets on cross-border investment,
recent studies examine the euro’s impact on financial integration, documenting a large effect. Yet,
we still do not know the exact mechanism through which the euro affects financial integration. This
is the main task we undertook in this paper.
We construct a new dataset of legislative-regulatory harmonization policies in financial intermediation across the European Union in the last decade and then merge it with the confidential
version of BIS’s Locational Banking Statistics that records bilateral financial linkages among twenty
31

In particular, in Supplementary Appendix Table I we use the directives numbered 2, 5, 8, 14, 19, 26 and 27 of
Table 1. This follows the recent Commission study on the evaluation of the FSAP by Malcolm, Tilden and Wilsdon
(2009)). We are grateful to Ana Margarida Monteiro, and the other experts of the ECB Financial Law department
for clarifying these issues.

19

industrial countries in the past thirty years. The rich panel structure allows us to reassess the euro’s
impact on financial integration accounting for all time-invariant country-pair factors, such as trust,
culture, and information frictions.
First, our ”within” before-after analysis shows that while the total effect of the euro on financial
integration is highly significant, it is quantitatively much smaller from what has been reported in
the previous studies that relied on cross-sectional approaches and data covering the last decade.
Second, our ”channels” analysis shows that the euro’s impact is primarily driven by the elimination of currency risk across member countries. We also document that legislative-regulatory
harmonization policies in financial markets, albeit far from perfect (Enriques and Gatti (2007),
have contributed significantly to the spur of cross-border lending and investment across Europe;
these integration reforms therefore explain a sizable portion of the aggregate effect of the euro. In
contrast, while goods trade is a significant correlate of cross-border lending, it can not explain the
euro’s large impact on financial integration.
Our results have some straightforward policy implications. The fact that legislative-regulatory
harmonization policies have a direct effect on financial integration on top of all the other channels
and country/time factors is quite encouraging for European policy makers, who are currently in
the process of promoting further harmonization. Future research should investigate the effect of
such legislative reforms on other aspects of integration, such as cross-border M&A activity, vertical
and horizontal FDI, outsourcing, return co-movement, and risk-taking by banks.

20

5

Data Appendix

Banking Integration 1 [BI1]: Banking integration index based on bilateral cross-border holdings
(stocks) of banks. Data on bank’s cross-border bilateral stocks of assets and liabilities come from
the confidential version of BIS’s Locational Banking Statistics. For each country-pair and year
there are up to four observations. i ) asset holdings (stocks) of banks located in country i in all
sectors of the economy in country j; ii ) asset holdings (stocks) of banks located in country j in
all sectors of the economy in country i; iii ) liabilities (stocks) of banks located in country i to
country j. iv ) liabilities (stocks) of banks located in country j to country i. The data is originally
expressed in current US dollars. First, we deflate the four series with the US deflator. Second, we
standardize the series by dividing asset and liabilities with the sum of the two countries population
in each year (using data from World Bank’s World Development Indicators Database). Third, we
take the average of the log value of real bilateral assets and liabilities in each year. Source: Bank
of International Settlements, Locational Banking Statistics (2008).
Banking Integration 2 [BI2]: Banking integration index based on bilateral cross-border
gross flows of banks. Data on bank’s cross-border bilateral gross flows of assets and liabilities come
from the BIS Locational Banking Statistics. For each country-pair and year there are up to four
observations. i ) asset flows of banks located in country i in all sectors of the economy in country j;
ii ) asset flows of banks located in country j in all sectors of the economy in country i; iii ) liability
flows of banks located in country i to country j. iv ) liability flows of banks located in country j to
country i. The data is originally expressed in current US dollars. First we deflate the four series
with the US deflator. Second we take the absolute value of (net) flows. Third, we standardize the
series, by dividing asset and liability flows with the sum of the two countries population in each
year (using data from World Bank’s World Development Indicators Database). Fourth, we take the
average of the log value of real bilateral gross flows in assets and liabilities in each year. Source:
Bank of International Settlements, Locational Banking Statistics (2008).
Euro Area Both [EZ2]: Bilateral index of membership in the euro area. The measure is an
indicator variable that takes on the value one if both countries are members of the euro-zone in
year t and zero otherwise. Source: European Central Bank.
Euro Area One [EZ1]: Bilateral index of membership in the euro area. The measure is an
indicator variable that takes on the value one if only one country is member of the euro-zone in
year t and zero otherwise. Source: European Central Bank.

21

European Union Both [EU 2]: Bilateral index of membership in the EU. The measure is an
indicator variable that takes on the value one if both countries are members of the EU in year t
and zero otherwise. Source: EU Commission.
European Union One [EU 1]: Bilateral index of membership in the EU. The measure is an
indicator variable that takes on the value one if only one country is member of the EU in year t
and zero otherwise. Source: EU Commission.
Exchange Rate Flexibility [ER]: Bilateral index of the flexibility of the exchange rate, based
either on the ”fine” or ”coarse” regime classification of Reinhart and Rogoff (2004). In the ”fine”
classification the country-specific index ranges from 1 to 14 where lower values suggest a more
rigid regime, whereas in the ”coarse” classification the index ranges from 1 to 5. We construct
the bilateral index by taking the sum of the log classification of countries i and j in the beginning
(January) of each year t (ERi,j,t = ln(ERi,t ) + ln(ERj,t )). Source: Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff
(2008) and Reinhart and Rogoff (2004).
Nominal Exchange Rate Volatility [ERV OL]: Standard deviation of the log first difference
of the monthly bilateral exchange rate for each year over the period 1978 − 2007. V OLERij =
ST DEVt [∆ ln(ei,j,m )] where ei,j,m is the monthly nominal exchange rate between countries i and
j. The index follows Devereux and Lane (2003). Source: ECB.
Legislative Harmonization in Financial Services [HARM ON ]: Index of regulatorylegislative harmonization in financial services based on the transposition of the Directives of the
Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP). The FSAP was launched in 1998 and included 27 EUwide legislative acts (the Directives) that require from member countries to transpose in due time
to the domestic legal order. Until the official completion of the plan in the end of 2003, the
EU legislative bodies (the Commission and the Council) had initiated 21 of these laws. The
remaining 6 Directives were initiated before the end of our sample and thus we include them in our
analysis. However, Directives do not become immediately enforceable across the EU. EU member
states have considerable discretion in the transposition (adoption) of these acts. We construct the
bilateral harmonization index in three steps. First, for each country we define 27/21 indicator
variables that equal one starting at the year of the transposition of each Directive into national
law and zero otherwise. Second, we create a country-time varying legislation measure ranging
from 0 to 27/21 by summing the values of the 27/21 indicator variables for each country (LEXi,t ).
Third, we take the sum of the log value of the legislation measure for each country in each year (i.e.
HARM ONi,j,t ≡ ln(1+LEXi,t )+ln(1+LEXj,t )). The data is retrieved from the EU Commission’s

22

league tables (http://ec.europa.eu/internal market/finances/index en.htm). The Commission also
provides links to the national legislative acts of the EU15 member countries. We were thus able
to track down the exact timing of national legislative acts that transposed the Directives. Source:
EU Commission League Tables.
Alternative Legislative Harmonization in Financial Services [HARM ON − ALT ]: Alternative index of regulatory-legislative harmonization in financial services based on the transposition of the Directives of the Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP). The index is constructed
in two steps. First, for each country-pair we define 27 indicator variables. Each dummy variable
(LEX − ALTi,,j,t ) equals one starting at the year of the transposition of each Directive into national law by both countries and zero otherwise. Second, we we create the alternative legislative
harmonization measure by summing the values of these 27 indicator variables (LEX − ALTi,,j,t ).
K=27

P
HARM ON − ALTi,j,t ≡ ln
LEX − ALTi,,j,t . The results with this index are reported in
k=1

Supplementary Appendix Table H. Source: EU Commission League Tables.
Banking Legislative Harmonization in Financial Services [HARM ON − BAN K]: The
index of legislative harmonization policies in banking is based on the Directives of the the Financial
Services Action Plan (FSAP). Using the classification of the Directives into banking, insurance, and
capital markets (from Malcolm, Tilden, and Wilsdon (2009)) we construct this measure similarly
to the HARM ON index, but we use information only on the seven Directives that were more
relevant for banking activities. These Directives are numbered 2, 5, 8, 14, 19, 26 and 27 in Tables
1 and 2. See also Supplementary Appendix Table A. The results with this index are reported in
Supplementary Appendix Table I. Source: EU Commission League Tables.
Trade [T RADE]: Index of bilateral trade intensity/integration. The measure is the log of
bilateral real (deflated with the US price deflator) exports and imports as a share of two country’s
population. Source: IMF’s Direction of Trade Database (2008).
Real Per Capita GDP [GDP ]: Index of the economic importance of the two countries. The
measure is the log of the product of real per capita GDP of the two countries in each year. Source:
World Bank’s World Development Indicators Database (2008).
Bank Net Interest Margin [M ARGIN ]: Accounting value of bank’s net interest revenue as
a share of its interest-bearing (total earning) assets. Source: Financial Structure Database, Beck,
Demirgüç-Kunt and Levine (2000). Original Source: Fitch’s BankScope Database.
Bank Overhead Costs [OV ERHEAD]: Accounting value of a bank’s overhead costs as a
share of its total assets. Source: Financial Structure Database, Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt and Levine
23

(2000). Original Source: Fitch’s BankScope Database.
Bank Concentration Index [CON CEN T RAT ION ]: Assets of three largest banks as a
share of assets of all commercial banks. Source: Financial Structure Database, Beck, DemirgüçKunt and Levine (2000). Original Source: Fitch’s BankScope Database.

24

References
[1] Alfaro, L., Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Volosovych, V., 2008. Why doesn’t capital flow from rich to poor
countries? An empirical investigation. Review of Economics and Statistics 90(2), 347–368.
[2] Allen, F., Chui, M., Maddaloni, A., 2004. Financial systems in Europe, the USA and Asia.
Oxford Review of Economic Policy 20(4), 490–508.
[3] Aviat, A., Coeurdacier, N., 2007. The geography of trade in goods and assets. Journal of
International Economics 71(1), 22–51.
[4] Baldwin, R. A., 2006. The euro’s trade effects. ECB Working Paper Series No. 594.
[5] Bank of International Settlements, Monetary and Economic Department, 2003a. Guide to
international financial statistics. BIS (Basle, Switzerland) Papers No. 14, February.
[6] Bank of International Settlements, Monetary and Economic Department 2003b. Guide to international banking statistics. BIS (Basle, Switzerland) Papers No. 16, April.
[7] Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., Mullainathan, S., 2004. How much should we trust difference in
differences estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1), 249–275.
[8] Blank, S., Buch, C., 2007. The Euro and cross-border banking: evidence from bilateral data.
Comparative Economic Studies 49(2), 389–410.
[9] Buch, C., 2003. Information or regulation: what drives the international activities of commercial banks? Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 35(6), 851–869.
[10] Buch, C., Driscoll, J., Ostergaard, C., 2009. Cross-border diversification in bank asset portfolios. Unpublished manuscript.
[11] Calvo G., Reinhart, C., 2002. Fear of floating. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(2), 379–408.
[12] Coeurdacier, N., Martin, P., 2009. The geography of asset trade and the euro: insiders and
outsiders. Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 23(2), 90–113.
[13] De Santis, R., Gerard, B., 2006. Financial integration, international portfolio choice and the
European monetary union. ECB Working Paper No. 626.
[14] Devereux, M., Lane, P., 2003. Understanding bilateral exchange rate volatility. Journal of
International Economics 60(1), 109–132.
25

[15] Djankov, S., La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 2003. Courts. Quarterly Journal
of Economics 118(2), 453–517.
[16] Djankov, S., La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 2008. The law and economics of
self-dealing. Journal of Financial Economics 88(3), 430–465.
[17] Ekinci M., Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Sørensen, B., 2008. Financial integration within EU Countries:
the role of institutions, confidence and trust. NBER Working Paper 13440.
[18] Enriques, L., Gatti, M., 2007. Is there a uniform EU securities law after the Financial Services
Action Plan? SSRN, Mimeo.
[19] Flam, H., Nordström, H., 2006. Euro effects on the intensive and extensive margins of trade.
IIES Seminar Paper No. 750. Revised version available at: http://www-2.iies.su.se/˜flamh/.
[20] Forum on Cross-Border Financial Groups,
what regulation and supervision?

2009. Cross-border banking in Europe:

Unicredit Group Discussion Paper. Available at:

http://www.unicreditgroup.eu/.
[21] Gelos, G. R., Wei, S.-J., 2005. Transparency and international investor behavior. Journal of
Finance 60(6), 2987–3020.
[22] Gertler, M., Rogoff, K., 1990. North-south lending and endogenous capital market inefficiencies. Journal of Monetary Economics 26(2), 245–266.
[23] Giannetti, M., Yafeh, Y., 2008. Do cultural differences between contracting parties matter?
Evidence from syndicated bank loans. ECGI Finance Working Paper No. 224/2008.
[24] Guiso, L., Sapienza, P., Zingales, L., 2009. Cultural biases in economic exchange? Quarterly
Journal of Economics 124(3), 1095–1131.
[25] Hale, G., Spiegel, M., 2009. Who drove the boom in euro denominated bond issues? Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper Working Paper 2008–20.
[26] Hartmann, P., Maddaloni, A., Manganelli, S., 2003. The Euro-area financial system: structure,
integration and policy initiatives. Oxford Review of Economic Policy 19(1), 280–313.
[27] Ilzetzki E., Reinhart, C. M., Rogoff, K. S., 2008. Exchange rate arrangements entering the 21st century:

which anchor will hold?

Mimeo. Data available at:

http://www.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/rogoff/Recent Papers Rogoff.
26

[28] Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Manganelli, S., Papaioannou, E., Peydró, J.-L., 2010. Financial integration
and risk sharing: the role of monetary union, forthcoming in: Reichlin, L. (Ed.), The Euro at
Ten, 5th European Central Banking Conference, ECB.
[29] Klein, M. and Shambaugh, J., 2008. The dynamics of exchange rate regimes: fixes, floats, and
flips. Journal of International Economics 75(1), 70–92.
[30] La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1997. Legal determinants of external finance. Journal of Finance 52(3), 1131–1150.
[31] La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1998. Law and finance. Journal of
Political Economy 106(6), 1113–1155.
[32] La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 2008. The economic consequences of legal
origins. Journal of Economic Literature 46(2), 285–332.
[33] Lane, P.R., 2006a. Global bond portfolios and EMU. International Journal of Central Banking
2(1), 1–23.
[34] Lane, P.R., 2006b. The real effects of european monetary union. Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(1), 47–66.
[35] Lane, P.R., 2009. EMU and financial integration, forthcoming in: Reichlin, L. (Ed.), The Euro
at Ten, 5th European Central Banking Conference, ECB.
[36] Lane, P. and Milesi-Ferretti, G. M., 2008. International investment patterns. Review of Economics and Statistics 90(3), 538–549.
[37] Malcolm, K., M. Tilden, T. Wilsdon., 2009. Evaluation of the economic impacts of the financial services action plan. CRA International report prepared for the European Commission,
Internal Market and Services DG.
[38] Martin, P., Rey H., 2004. Financial supermarkets: size matters for asset trade. Journal of
International Economics 64(2), 335–361.
[39] Mian, A., 2006. Distance constraints: the limits of foreign lending in poor economies. Journal
of Finance 61(6), 1465–1505.
[40] Mundell, R., 1961. A theory of optimum currency areas. American Economic Review 51(4),
509–517.
27

[41] Obstfeld, M., Rogoff, K., 2000. The six major puzzles in international economics: is there a
common cause? In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
ILL.
[42] Papaioannou, E., 2009. What drives international financial flows? Politics, institutions and
other determinants. Journal of Development Economics 88(2), 269–281.
[43] Papaioannou, E., Portes, R., 2009. Costs and benefits of running an international currency.
European Commission, DG-EC/FIN, Special Report on the European Economy, forthcoming.
[44] Papaioannou, E., Portes, R., 2010. The international role of the euro: a status report, forthcoming in: EMU@10, Buti, M., Deroose, S., Gaspar, V. (Eds), European Commission, DGEC/FIN, European Economy Economic Papers, pp 317.
[45] Portes, R., Rey, H., 2005. The determinants of cross-border equity flows. Journal of International Economics 65(2), 269–296.
[46] Portes, R., Rey, H., Oh, Y., 2001. Information and capital flows: the determinants of transactions in financial assets. European Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings) 45(4-6),
783–796.
[47] Reinhart, C., Rogoff, K., 2004. The modern history of exchange rate arrangements: a reinterpretation. Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1), 1–48.
[48] Rose, A., 2000. One market, one money: estimating the effect of common currencies on trade.
Economic Policy 30(1), 7–45.
[49] Rose, A., 2005. One reason countries pay their debts: renegotiation and international trade.
Journal of Development Economics 77(1), 189–206.
[50] Rose, A., 2009. Is EMU becoming an optimum currency area? The evidence on trade and
business cycle synchronization, forthcoming in: Reichlin, L. (Ed.), The Euro at Ten, 5th
European Central Banking Conference, ECB.
[51] Rose, A., Spiegel, M., 2004. A gravity model of sovereign lending: trade, default, and credit.
IMF Staff Papers 51(1), 50–63.
[52] Shleifer, A., Wolfenzon, D., 2003. Investor protection and equity markets. Journal of Financial
Economics 66(1), 3–27.

28

[53] Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1997. A survey of corporate governance. Journal of Finance 52(2),
737–783.
[54] Spiegel, M., 2009a. Monetary and financial integration: evidence from the EMU. Journal of
the Japanese and International Economies 23(2), 114–130.
[55] Spiegel, M., 2009b. Monetary and financial integration in the EMU: push or pull? Review of
International Economics 17(4), 751–776.
[56] Wei, S.-J., 2000. How taxing is corruption on international investors? Review of Economics
and Statistics, February 82(1), 1–11.
[57] Wooldridge, P. D., 2002. Uses of the BIS statistics: an introduction. BIS (Basle, Switzerland)
Quarterly Review, March.

29

Table 1: Legislative Measures (Directives) of the Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP)
Directive No. Directive Title

Deadline

1 1998/26/EC Implementation of the Settlement Finality Directive
2 2000/46/EC Directive on the taking up, pursuit and prudential supervision of the businesses of electronic money institutions
3 2000/64/EC Directive amending the insurance directives and the ISD to permit Information exchange with third countries
4 2001/17/EC Directive on the reorganisation and winding-up of Insurance undertakings
5 2001/24/EC Directive on the reorganisation and winding-up of banks
6 2001/65/EC Directive amending the 4th and 7th Company Law Directives to allow fair value accounting
7 2001/86/EC Directive supplementing the Statute for a European Company with regard to the envolvement of employees
8 2001/97/EC Directive amending the money laundering directive
9 2001/107/EC 1st Directive on UCITS (Undertakings for Collective Investments in Transferable Securities)
10 2001/108/EC 2nd Directive on UCITS (Undertakings for Collective Investments in Transferable Securities)
11 2002/13/EC Directive amending the solvency margin requirements in the insurance directives
12 2002/47/EC Directive on financial collateral arrangements
13 2002/65/EC Directive on the Distance marketing of Financial Services
14 2002/87/EC Directive on the supervision of credit institutions, insurance undertakings and investment firms in a financial conglomerate
15 2002/83/EC Solvency 1 Directive for life insurance
16 2002/92/EC Directive on insurance mediation
17 2003/6/EC Directive on insider dealing and market manipulation
18 2003/41/EC Directive on the prudential supervision of pension funds
19 2003/48/EC Directive on the taxation of savings income in the form of interest payments
20 2003/51/EC Directive modernising the accounting provisions of the 4th and 7th Company Law Directives
21 2003/71/EC Directive on prospectuses

27/04/2002
17/11/2002
20/04/2003
5/5/2004
9/10/2004
10/10/2004
15/06/2003
13/08/2003
13/08/2003
20/09/2003
17/12/2003
1/01/2004
11/8/2004
20/09/2003
15/01/2005
12/10/2004
23/09/2005
1/1/2004
1/01/2005
1/07/2005

22 2004/25/EC Directive on Take Over Bids
23 2004/109/EC Transparency Directive
24 2004/39/EC Directive on Markets in Financial Instruments (update of ISD) - MiFID
25 2005/56/EC 10th Company law Directive on cross-border mergers
26 2006/48/EC Directive on the relating to the taking up and pursuit of the business of credit institutions
27 2006/49/EC Directive on the capital adequacy of investment firms and credit institutions

5/20/2006
1/20/2007
1/20/2007
12/15/2007
12/31/2006
12/31/2006

The Table reports the timing of circulation by the EU Commission of the 27 Dircetives of legislative-regulatory harmonization in banking, insurance, and capital markets included in the
Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP). Section 2.2 and the Supplementary Appendix give details for each of the FSAP Directives.

Table 2: Transposition Date (Year Quarter) for the Directives of the Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP)
Directive

AT

BE

DE

DK

ES

FR

FI

GR

IE

IT

LU

NL

PT

SE

UK

1998/26/EC
2000/46/EC
2000/64/EC
2001/17/EC
2001/24/EC
2001/65/EC
2001/86/EC
2001/97/EC
2001/107/EC
2001/108/EC
2002/13/EC
2002/47/EC
2002/65/EC
2002/87/EC
2002/83/EC
2002/92/EC
2003/6/EC
2003/41/EC
2003/48/EC
2003/51/EC
2003/71/EC

1999 Q4
2002 Q2
2003 Q3
2003 Q3
2003 Q3
2004 Q1
2004 Q4
2003 Q2
2003 Q3
2003 Q3
2003 Q3
2003 Q4
2004 Q4
2005 Q1
2003 Q3
2004 Q4
2005 Q1
2005 Q3
2004 Q1
2005 Q1
2005 Q3

1999 Q2
2003 Q2
2004 Q1
2004 Q4
2004 Q4
2005 Q1
2004 Q4
2004 Q1
2004 Q2
2004 Q2
2004 Q1
2005 Q1
2006 Q1
2005 Q1
2004 Q2
2005 Q1
2005 Q3
2006 Q4
2005 Q3
2006 Q1
2006 Q3

1999 Q4
2002 Q3
2002 Q1
2003 Q4
2004 Q1
2004 Q4
2004 Q4
2002 Q3
2004 Q1
2004 Q1
2004 Q1
2004 Q2
2004 Q4
2005 Q1
2004 Q1
Not Yet
2004 Q4
2005 Q3
2005 Q1
2004 Q4
2005 Q3

2000 Q2
2005 Q1
2004 Q1
2006 Q3
2004 Q2
2002 Q1
2004 Q2
2005 Q1
2004 Q1
2005 Q3
2004 Q1
2004 Q4
2005Q3
2004 Q3
2004 Q1
2005 Q3
2005 Q2
2005 Q4
2004 Q2
2002 Q1
2005 Q2

1999 Q4
2002 Q4
2002 Q4
2003 Q4
2005 Q2
2004 Q1
2006 Q3
2003 Q3
2004 Q1
2004 Q1
2004 Q1
2002 Q4
Not Yet
2005 Q2
2004 Q1
2006 Q3
2005 Q4
2005 Q1
2004 Q1
2005 Q1
2005 Q1

2001 Q2
2003 Q1
2006 Q1
2005 Q1
2004 Q4
2004 Q4
2005 Q3
2004 Q1
2003 Q4
2003 Q4
2004 Q2
2005 Q1
2005 Q2
2004 Q4
2004 Q2
2005 Q4
2005 Q3
2006 Q2
2003 Q4
2004 Q4
2005 Q3

1999 Q4
2003 Q1
2004 Q2
2004 Q2
2004 Q2
2004 Q4
2004 Q4
2003 Q2
2004 Q3
2004 Q3
2004 Q2
2004 Q1
2005 Q2
2004 Q3
2004 Q2
2005 Q3
2005 Q3
2006 Q2
2004 Q1
2004 Q4
2005 Q3

2000 Q1
2003 Q2
2004 Q4
Not Yet
2006 Q2
2006 Q2
2006 Q2
2005 Q4
2004 Q4
2004 Q4
2005 Q1
2004 Q4
2005 Q2
2006 Q2
2005 Q1
2005 Q1
2005 Q3
2005 Q3
2005 Q1
2006 Q3
2005 Q4

1999 Q1
2002 Q2
Not Yet
2003 Q2
2004 Q2
2004 Q4
2006 Q4
2003 Q3
2003 Q4
2003 Q4
2005 Q1
2004 Q1
2004 Q4
2005 Q1
2005 Q1
2005 Q1
2005 Q3
2005 Q3
2003 Q4
2005 Q1
2005 Q3

2001 Q2
2002 Q2
Not Yet
2003 Q2
2004 Q3
2005 Q1
2005 Q4
2004 Q1
2003 Q4
2003 Q4
2004 Q1
2004 Q3
2005 Q4
2005 Q3
2004 Q1
2006 Q2
2005 Q2
Not Yet
2005 Q2
Not Yet
Not Yet

2001 Q1
2002 Q2
2001 Q3
2004 Q2
2004 Q2
2006 Q2
2006 Q3
2004 Q4
2003 Q1
2003 Q1
2004 Q2
2005 Q3
Not Yet
2006 Q4
2004 Q2
2005 Q4
2006 Q2
2005 Q3
2005 Q2
2006 Q2
2005 Q3

1999 Q1
2002 Q3
2003 Q1
2004 Q2
2005 Q2
2005 Q3
2005 Q1
2001 Q4
2005 Q3
2005 Q3
2003 Q4
2004 Q2
2006 Q1
2007 Q1
2003 Q4
2005 Q3
2005 Q4
2006 Q1
2004 Q1
2005 Q3
2005 Q3

2000 Q1
2002 Q1
2000 Q4
2003 Q2
2006 Q4
2004 Q2
2005 Q4
2004 Q2
2004 Q1
2004 Q1
2003 Q4
2004 Q2
Not Yet
Not Yet
2003 Q4
2006 Q4
2006 Q2
2006 Q1
2005 Q3
2005 Q1
2005 Q2

2000 Q1
2002 Q2
2000 Q3
2006 Q2
2006 Q1
2004 Q1
2004 Q4
2005 Q1
2004 Q2
2004 Q2
2004 Q2
2005 Q2
2004 Q2
2006 Q3
2004 Q2
2005 Q3
2005 Q3
2006 Q1
2005 Q3
2006 Q1
2005 Q3

1999 Q4
2002 Q2
2003 Q2
2003 Q2
2004 Q2
2004 Q4
2004 Q4
2004 Q2
2004 Q1
2004 Q1
2004 Q1
2005Q4
2004Q4
2004 Q3
2005 Q1
2005 Q1
2005 Q3
2005 Q4
2005 Q1
2005 Q1
2005 Q3

2004/25/EC
2004/109/EC
2004/39/EC
2005/56/EC
2006/48/EC
2006/49/EC

2006 Q2
2007 Q4
2007 Q2
2007 Q4
2007 Q1
2007 Q4

2007 Q3
2007 Q4
2008 Q3
2008 Q3
2007 Q4
2007 Q4

2006 Q3
2007 Q4
2007 Q1
2007 Q2
2006 Q4
2006 Q4

2005 Q2
2007 Q4
2007 Q2
2007 Q2
2007 Q1
2007 Q1

2007 Q3
2007 Q4
2007 Q3
Not Yet
2008 Q1
2008 Q1

2006 Q2
2007 Q4
2007 Q4
2008 Q3
2007 Q2
2007 Q2

2006 Q4
2007 Q4
2007 Q1
2007 Q4
2007 Q1
2007 Q1

2006 Q2
2007 Q4
2007 Q2
Not Yet
2007 Q3
2007 Q3

2006 Q2
2007 Q4
2007 Q2
2008 Q2
2007 Q1
2007 Q1

2007 Q4
2007 Q4
2007 Q4
2008 Q3
2007 Q1
2007 Q1

2006 Q2
2007 Q4
2008 Q3
2007 Q1
2007 Q4
2007 Q4

2007 Q4
Not Yet
2007 Q4
2008 Q3
2007 Q1
2007 Q1

2006 Q4
2007 Q4
2007 Q4
Not Yet
2007 Q2
2007 Q2

2006 Q3
2007 Q4
2007 Q1
2008 Q1
2007 Q1
2007 Q1

2006 Q2
2007 Q4
2007 Q1
2007 Q4
2007 Q1
2007 Q1

The Table reports the year and quarter of the transposition of each of the 27 Directives of the Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP) by EU15 countries. See Section 2.2 on details of the
FSAP. Table 1 reports a brief description of each Directive. Supplementary Appendix Table A gives a brief description of each Directive. Data on the transposition of the legislativeharmonization Directives are retrived from the EU Commission and each of the EU15 countries.

Table 3: EU membership, Euro area membership, and Banking Integration
Panel A: Panel Fixed-Effect Estimates in the Full Sample of Countries
Sample Period: 1978-2007

Sample Period: 1990-2007

BI1-Stocks
(1)

BI2-Flows
(2)

BI1-Stocks
(3)

BI2-Flows
(4)

BI1-Stocks
(5)

BI2-Flows
(6)

BI1-Stocks
(7)

BI2-Flows
(8)

euone (EU1 )
t-stat

-0.6286
(4.01)

-0.441
(3.45)

-0.473
(3.27)

-0.3297
(2.76)

-0.4963
(2.76)

-0.5421
(3.91)

-0.4317
(2.62)

-0.4991
(3.90)

euboth (EU2 )
t-stat

-0.0454
(0.30)

0.1406
(1.25)

-0.0372
(0.28)

0.1453
(1.42)

-0.0958
(0.62)

-0.0308
(0.26)

-0.136
(1.05)

-0.0575
(0.57)

euroone (EZ1 )
t-stat

-0.0082
(0.05)

0.0357
(0.24)

-0.308
(2.00)

-0.1719
(1.20)

-0.0655
(0.47)

-0.0138
(0.11)

-0.2365
(1.88)

-0.128
(1.04)

euroboth (EZ2 )
t-stat

0.6241
(3.53)

0.535
(4.13)

0.3474
(2.56)

0.3431
(3.24)

0.5417
(4.41)

0.4692
(5.16)

0.368
(3.68)

0.3539
(4.48)

3.0715
(8.08)

2.1272
(7.69)

3.1000
(8.47)

2.0623
(7.58)

Real p.c. GDP (GDP )
t-stat
Year FE
Country-Pair FE

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Observations
Within R-squared
Country-pairs

5566
0.500
190

5566
0.566
190

5566
0.596
190

5566
0.613
190

3385
0.321
190

3386
0.378
190

3385
0.440
190

3386
0.427
190

Table 3: EU membership, Euro area membership, and Banking Integration (cont.)
Panel B: Panel Fixed-Effect Estimates in the EU15 Sample of Countries
Sample Period: 1978-2007

Sample Period: 1990-2007

BI1-Stocks
(1)

BI2-Flows
(2)

BI1-Stocks
(3)

BI2-Flows
(4)

BI1-Stocks
(5)

BI2-Flows
(6)

BI1-Stocks
(7)

BI2-Flows
(8)

euroone (EZ1 )
t-stat

-0.1272
(0.51)

-0.0858
(0.48)

-0.2914
(1.24)

-0.1871
(1.07)

-0.1598
(0.77)

-0.0823
(0.47)

-0.2451
(1.16)

-0.1341
(0.75)

euroboth (EZ2 )
t-stat

0.4007
(2.21)

0.2593
(2.01)

0.2484
(1.75)

0.1654
(1.52)

0.2981
(2.43)

0.2527
(2.79)

0.2276
(2.21)

0.2099
(2.59)

2.8298
(5.37)

1.7456
(4.93)

2.2911
(4.19)

1.3923
(4.05)

Real p.c. GDP (GDP )
t-stat
Year FE
Country-Pair FE

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Observations
Within R-squared
Country-pairs

2260
0.624
105

2259
0.687
105

2260
0.704
105

2259
0.720
105

1679
0.525
105

1678
0.580
105

1679
0.585
105

1678
0.602
105

The Table reports panel fixed-effect estimates. All specifications include year fixed-effects and country-pair fixed-effects. Panel A reports coefficients estimated in the full
sample of countries, while Panel B reports coefficients of otherwise identical specifications estimated only in countries that are EU members. In both Panels, columns (1)-(4) give
coefficients of specifications estimated in the period 1978-2007, while columns (5)-(8) report coefficients of specifications estimated in the period 1990-2007.
In odd-numbered columns, the dependent variable (banking integration) is the average of the log of real bilateral assets and liabilities holdings of banks in countries i and j in
year t , standardized by the sum of the two countries' population in each year (BI1 ). In even-numbered columns, the dependent variable (banking integration) is the average of the
log of real bilateral gross flows in assets and liabilities of banks in countries i and j in year t , standardized by the sum of the two countries' population in each year (BI2 ). EU1 is
an indicator (dummy) variable that takes on the value of one if only one counterpart in each pair of countries is member of the EU in year t and zero otherwise. EU2 is an
indicator (dummy) variable that takes on the value one if both countries are members of the EU in year t and zero otherwise. EZ1 is an indicator (dummy) variable that takes on
the value of one if only one counterpart in each pair of countries is member of the euro area in year t and zero otherwise. EZ2 is an indicator (dummy) variable that takes on the
value one if both countries are members of the euro area in year t and zero otherwise. Real p.c. GDP is the log of the product of real per capita GDP of the two countries in year
The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. t -statistics based on country-pair specific (clustered) heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation are reported
in parenthesis below the coefficient estimates. The Table also reports the number of country-pairs, the number of observations, and the within R-squared.

Table 4: Euro Membership, Exchange Rate Regime, and Banking Integration
Panel Fixed-Effects Estimates
Exchange Rate Regime

Legislative Harmonization

Trade

BI1-Stocks
(1)

BI2-Flows
(2)

BI1-Stocks
(3)

BI2-Flows
(4)

BI1-Stocks
(5)

BI2-Flows
(6)

euone (EU1 )
t-stat

-0.4337
(2.91)

-0.3020
(2.50)

-0.4661
(3.27)

-0.3239
(2.75)

-0.6409
(4.46)

-0.4527
(3.84)

euboth (EU2 )
t-stat

-0.0684
(0.53)

0.1242
(1.23)

-0.0882
(0.70)

0.1001
(1.02)

-0.0733
(0.57)

0.1249
(1.23)

euroone (EZ1 )
t-stat

-0.8097
(4.42)

-0.5265
(3.31)

-0.4089
(2.64)

-0.2596
(1.79)

-0.2799
(1.82)

-0.1480
(1.02)

euroboth (EZ2 )
t-stat

-0.1504
(1.04)

-0.0104
(0.08)

0.2426
(1.71)

0.2503
(2.27)

0.3256
(2.59)

0.3125
(3.18)

Exchange Rate (ER )
t-stat

-0.2828
(4.52)

-0.2007
(3.66)
0.1075
(2.90)

0.0951
(2.95)
0.2618
(3.75)

0.1878
(3.09)

Financial Legislation (HARMON )
t-stat
Trade (TRADE )
t-stat
Real p.c. GDP
t-stat

3.1393
(8.72)

2.1783
(8.36)

3.0307
(7.92)

2.0914
(7.55)

3.7237
(11.57)

2.6419
(10.77)

Observations
Within R-squared
Country-pairs

5566
0.606
190

5566
0.618
190

5566
0.599
190

5566
0.616
190

4882
0.668
190

4882
0.653
190

The Table reports panel fixed-effect estimates. All specifications include year fixed-effects and country-pair fixed-effects. In oddnumbered columns, the dependent variable (banking integration) is the average of the log of real bilateral assets and liabilities
holdings of banks in countries i and j in year t , standardized by the sum of the two countries' population in each year (BI1 ). In evennumbered columns, the dependent variable (banking integration) is the average of the log of real bilateral gross flows in assets and
liabilities of banks in countries i and j in year t , standardized by the sum of the two countries' population in each year (BI2 ).
EU1 is an indicator variable that takes on the value of one if only one counterpart in each pair of countries is member of the EU in
year t and zero otherwise. EU2 is an indicator variable that takes on the value one if both countries are members of the EU in year t
and zero otherwise. EZ1 is an indicator variable that takes on the value of one if only one counterpart in each pair of countries is
member of the euro area in year t and zero otherwise. EZ2 is an indicator variable that takes on the value one if both countries are
members of the euro area in year t and zero otherwise. Real p.c. GDP is the log of the product of real per capita GDP of the two
countries in year t . Exchange Rate is a bilateral time-varying measure of the flexibility of the exchange rate regime (based on the
“fine” classification of Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) and Ilzetzki, Reinhart and Rogoff (2008)). Financial Legislation is a bilateral
time-varying measure of legislative and regulatory harmonization policies in financial services based on the transposition of the 27
Directives Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP). Trade is the log of real imports and exports as a share of the two countries' GDP.
The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. t -statistics based on country-pair specific (clustered)
heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation are reported in parenthesis below the coefficient estimates. The Table also reports the number
of country-pairs, the number of observations, and the within R-squared.

Table 5: Euro Membership, Exchange Rate Regime, Financial Legislation Harmonization Policies, Trade, and Banking Integration
Fine Classification &
FSAP 27 Directives

Fine Classification &
FSAP 21 Directives

Coarse Classification &
FSAP 27 Directives

Coarse Classification &
FSAP 21 Directives

BI1-Stocks
(1)

BI2-Flows
(2)

BI1-Stocks
(3)

BI2-Flows
(4)

BI1-Stocks
(5)

BI2-Flows
(6)

BI1-Stocks
(7)

BI2-Flows
(8)

euone (EU1 )
t-stat

-0.6098
(4.24)

-0.4329
(3.69)

-0.61
(4.24)

-0.4332
(3.70)

-0.6055
(4.22)

-0.425
(3.63)

-0.6057
(4.22)

-0.4252
(3.63)

euboth (EU2 )
t-stat

-0.1279
(1.05)

0.0799
(0.83)

-0.1285
(1.05)

0.0788
(0.82)

-0.126
(1.03)

0.08
(0.84)

-0.1266
(1.04)

0.0789
(0.83)

euroone (EZ1 )
t-stat

-0.5811
(3.55)

-0.3512
(2.35)

-0.5815
(3.55)

-0.3521
(2.36)

-0.4326
(2.81)

-0.2735
(1.90)

-0.4333
(2.82)

-0.2749
(1.91)

euroboth (EZ2 )
t-stat

0.0377
(0.27)

0.1153
(0.97)

0.0373
(0.26)

0.1143
(0.97)

0.1869
(1.51)

0.1964
(2.06)

0.1861
(1.51)

0.1949
(2.04)

Exchange Rate (ER )
t-stat

-0.1222
(2.15)

-0.0744
(1.40)

-0.122
(2.15)

-0.074
(1.40)

-0.1311
(2.29)

-0.1034
(1.92)

-0.1310
(2.29)

-0.1031
(1.92)

Financial Legislation (HARMON )
t-stat

0.0829
(2.44)

0.0743
(2.47)

0.0852
(2.44)

0.0775
(2.50)

0.0832
(2.49)

0.0728
(2.45)

0.0856
(2.49)

0.0760
(2.49)

Trade (TRADE )
t-stat

0.2451
(3.48)

0.1736
(2.84)

0.245
(3.48)

0.1733
(2.84)

0.2441
(3.48)

0.1726
(2.83)

0.2440
(3.47)

0.1723
(2.82)

Real p.c. GDP (GDP )
t-stat

3.7212
(11.67)

2.637
(10.98)

3.7198
(11.67)

2.6354
(10.98)

3.7105
(11.61)

2.6317
(10.98)

3.7092
(11.61)

2.6303
(10.98)

Yes
Yes
4882
0.672
190

Yes
Yes
4882
0.656
190

Yes
Yes
4882
0.672
190

Yes
Yes
4882
0.656
190

Yes
Yes
4882
0.672
190

Yes
Yes
4882
0.657
190

Yes
Yes
4882
0.672
190

Yes
Yes
4882
0.657
190

Year FE
Country-Pair FE
Observations
Within R-squared
Country-pairs

Table 5 Notes
The Table reports panel fixed-effect estimates. All specifications include year fixed-effects and country-pair fixed-effects. In odd-numbered columns, the dependent variable
(banking integration) is the average of the log of real bilateral assets and liabilities holdings of banks in countries i and j in year t , standardized by the sum of the two countries'
population in each year (BI1 ). In even-numbered columns, the dependent variable (banking integration) is the average of the log of real bilateral gross flows in assets and
liabilities of banks in countries i and j in year t , standardized by the sum of the two countries' population in each year (BI2 ).
EU1 is an indicator variable that takes on the value of one if only one counterpart in each pair of countries is member of the EU in year t and zero otherwise. EU2 is an
indicator variable that takes on the value one if both countries are members of the EU in year t and zero otherwise. EZ1 is an indicator variable that takes on the value of one if
only one counterpart in each pair of countries is member of the euro area in year t and zero otherwise. EZ2 is an indicator variable that takes on the value one if both countries
are members of the euro area in year t and zero otherwise. Real p.c. GDP is the log of the product of real per capita GDP of the two countries in year t .
Exchange Rate is a bilateral time-varying measure of the flexibility of the exchange rate regime based on the “fine” (in columns (1)-(4)) or the coarse (in columns (5)-(8)
classification of Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) and Ilzetzki, Reinhart and Rogoff (2008)). Financial Legislation is a bilateral time-varying measure of legislative and regulatory
harmonization policies in financial services based on the transposition of the 27 Directives Financial Services Action Plan (in columns (1), (2), (5) and (6)) or the initial 21
Directives (in columns (3), (4), (6), and (7)). Trade denotes the log of real bilateral imports and exports as a share of the two countries' GDP. The Data Appendix gives detailed
variable definitions and data sources. t -statistics based on country-pair specific (clustered) heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation are reported in parenthesis below the
coefficient estimates. The Table also reports the number of country-pairs, the number of observations, and the within R-squared.

Table 6: Euro Membership, Exchange Rate Regime, Financial Legislation Harmonization Policies, and Banking Integration
Fine Classification &
FSAP 27 Directives

Fine Classification &
FSAP 21 Directives

Coarse Classification &
FSAP 27 Directives

Coarse Classification &
FSAP 21 Directives

BI1-Stocks
(1)

BI2-Flows
(2)

BI1-Stocks
(3)

BI2-Flows
(4)

BI1-Stocks
(5)

BI2-Flows
(6)

BI1-Stocks
(7)

BI2-Flows
(8)

euone (EU1 )
t-stat
euboth (EU2 )
t-stat
euroone (EZ1 )
t-stat

-0.4306
(2.93)

-0.2993
(2.51)

-0.4307
(2.93)

-0.2994
(2.51)

-0.4237
(2.88)

-0.2918
(2.45)

-0.4239
(2.88)

-0.2918
(2.45)

-0.107
(0.86)

0.0882
(0.91)

-0.1073
(0.87)

0.0875
(0.90)

-0.1054
(0.85)

0.0879
(0.91)

-0.1057
(0.86)

0.0871
(0.91)

-0.8603
(4.71)

-0.5716
(3.57)

-0.8606
(4.71)

-0.5725
(3.58)

-0.5384
(3.36)

-0.3579
(2.43)

-0.5388
(3.36)

-0.3592
(2.44)

euroboth (EZ2 )
t-stat
Exchange Rate (ER )
t-stat

-0.2043
(1.40)

-0.0599
(0.47)

-0.2046
(1.40)

-0.0609
(0.48)

0.1204
(0.95)

0.1571
(1.55)

0.1201
(0.95)

0.1558
(1.54)

-0.2662
(4.22)

-0.1849
(3.36)

-0.2662
(4.22)

-0.1847
(3.36)

-0.2964
(4.60)

-0.2265
(4.01)

-0.2966
(4.60)

-0.2264
(4.01)

Financial Legislation (HARMON )
t-stat
Real p.c. GDP (GDP )
t-stat

0.0854
(2.36)

0.0792
(2.51)

0.087
(2.34)

0.0819
(2.52)

0.0847
(2.39)

0.0774
(2.49)

0.0865
(2.38)

0.0802
(2.51)

3.1029
(8.55)

2.1445
(8.20)

3.1016
(8.54)

2.1428
(8.20)

3.0896
(8.56)

2.1380
(8.25)

3.0883
(8.55)

2.1364
(8.24)

Year FE
Country-Pair FE

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Observations
Within R-squared
Country-pairs

5566
0.608
190

5566
0.620
190

5566
0.608
190

5566
0.620
190

5566
0.610
190

5566
0.622
190

5566
0.610
190

5566
0.622
190

The Table reports panel fixed-effect estimates. All specifications include year fixed-effects and country-pair fixed-effects. For details on the specification, see the notes of Table
5. Table 6 reports otherwise identical to Table 5 specifications but without trade in the set of explanatory variables. The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and
data sources. t-statistics based on country-pair specific (clustered) heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation are reported in parenthesis below the coefficient estimates.

Table 7: Euro Membership, Exchange Rate Regime, Legislation Harmonization Policies in Financial Services, Trade, and Banking
Integration. Excluding Luxemburg and Switzerland
BI1-Stocks
(1)

BI2-Flows
(2)

BI1-Stocks
(3)

BI2-Flows
(4)

BI1-Stocks
(5)

BI2-Flows
(6)

BI1-Stocks
(7)

BI2-Flows
(8)

euone (EU1 )
t-stat

-0.6620
(3.81)

-0.4804
(3.46)

-0.5571
(3.47)

-0.4007
(3.12)

-0.5009
(3.12)

-0.3592
(2.83)

-0.5725
(3.60)

-0.403
(3.17)

euboth (EU2 )
t-stat

-0.0122
(0.08)

0.1535
(1.32)

0.0335
(0.28)

0.1841
(1.95)

-0.0542
(0.49)

0.1117
(1.29)

-0.1177
(0.96)

0.0704
(0.72)

euroone (EZ1 )
t-stat

0.0458
(0.24)

0.1580
(1.02)

-0.2300
(1.43)

-0.0379
(0.27)

-0.7252
(4.02)

-0.3977
(2.52)

-0.5873
(3.40)

-0.2977
(1.93)

euroboth (EZ2 )
t-stat

0.6737
(3.41)

0.5881
(4.19)

0.4113
(3.24)

0.4020
(4.06)

-0.0828
(0.59)

0.0378
(0.33)

0.0021
(0.01)

0.0665
(0.57)

Exchange Rate (ER )
t-stat

-0.2114
(3.52)

-0.1455
(2.70)

-0.1511
(2.59)

-0.1043
(1.94)

Financial Legislation (HARMON )
t-stat

0.1445
(3.77)

0.1261
(3.72)

0.1314
(3.46)

0.1135
(3.39)

0.2657
(3.64)

0.2104
(3.20)

Trade (TRADE )
t-stat
Real p.c. GDP (GDP )
t-stat

4.3749
(13.06)

3.0910
(12.43)

4.3889
(13.72)

3.103
(13.32)

4.0317
(12.11)

2.8181
(11.26)

Year FE
Country-Pair FE

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Observations
Within R-squared
Country-pairs

4482
0.515
153

4482
0.588
153

4482
0.665
153

4482
0.666
153

4482
0.677
153

4482
0.673
153

4159
0.688
153

4160
0.673
153

Table 7 Notes
The Table reports panel fixed-effect estimates. All specifications include year fixed-effects and country-pair fixed-effects. In odd-numbered columns, the dependent variable
(banking integration) is the average of the log of real bilateral assets and liabilities holdings of banks in countries i and j in year t , standardized by the sum of the two countries'
population in each year (BI1 ). In even-numbered columns, the dependent variable (banking integration) is the average of the log of real bilateral gross flows in assets and
liabilities of banks in countries i and j in year t , standardized by the sum of the two countries' population in each year (BI2 ).
EU1 is an indicator variable that takes on the value of one if only one counterpart in each pair of countries is member of the EU in year t and zero otherwise. EU2 is an
indicator variable that takes on the value one if both countries are members of the EU in year t and zero otherwise. EZ1 is an indicator variable that takes on the value of one if
only one counterpart in each pair of countries is member of the euro area in year t and zero otherwise. EZ2 is an indicator variable that takes on the value one if both countries
are members of the euro area in year t and zero otherwise. Real p.c. GDP is the log of the product of real per capita GDP of the two countries in year t .
Exchange Rate is a bilateral time-varying measure of the flexibility of the exchange rate regime based on the “fine” classification of Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) and Ilzetzki,
Reinhart and Rogoff (2008)). Financial Legislation is a bilateral time-varying measure of legislative and regulatory harmonization policies in financial services based on the
transposition of the 27 Directives Financial Services Action Plan. Trade denotes the log of real bilateral imports and exports as a share of the two countries' population. The
Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. t -statistics based on country-pair specific (clustered) heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation are reported in
parenthesis below the coefficient estimates. The Table also reports the number of country-pairs, the number of observations, and the within R-squared.

Table 8: Euro Membership, Exchange Rate Regime, and Banking Integration
Controlling for Structural Characteristics of the Banking System
Banking Characteristic

Bank Overhead Costs

Bank Interest Margin

BI1-Stocks BI2-Flows BI1-Stocks BI2-Flows
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Bank Concentration
BI1-Stocks BI2-Flows
(5)
(6)

euone (EU1 )
t-stat

-0.4600
(2.74)

-0.4937
(3.29)

-0.4471
(2.71)

-0.4775
(3.19)

-0.4558
(2.77)

-0.4878
(3.30)

euboth (EU2 )
t-stat

-0.1843
(1.49)

-0.0387
(0.39)

-0.1661
(1.37)

-0.0289
(0.29)

-0.1791
(1.48)

-0.0408
(0.41)

euroone (EZ1 )
t-stat

-0.7188
(4.55)

-0.4360
(3.17)

-0.6746
(4.32)

-0.4172
(3.02)

-0.6869
(4.36)

-0.4225
(3.05)

euroboth (EZ2 )
t-stat

-0.1193
(0.90)

0.0519
(0.49)

-0.0883
(0.66)

0.0626
(0.58)

-0.1045
(0.79)

0.0526
(0.48)

Exchange Rate (ER )
t-stat

-0.2781
(4.63)

-0.1659
(2.97)

-0.2592
(4.35)

-0.1581
(2.81)

-0.2626
(4.43)

-0.1602
(2.88)

Financial Legislation (HARMON )
t-stat

0.0657
(2.34)

0.0477
(1.81)

0.0677
(2.43)

0.0493
(1.91)

0.0781
(2.93)

0.0575
(2.32)

Trade (TRADE )
t-stat

0.0430
(0.75)

0.0395
(0.79)

0.0335
(0.59)

0.0340
(0.68)

0.0334
(0.58)

0.0338
(0.68)

Real p.c. GDP (GDP )
t-stat

2.6301
(6.98)

1.8637
(6.11)

2.3856
(6.20)

1.6479
(5.25)

2.3608
(6.11)

1.6352
(5.27)

Banking Characteristic Country i
t-stat

-0.0890
(0.59)

0.0778
(0.51)

0.9594
(1.02)

-0.2890
(0.25)

4.6699
(1.24)

4.4691
(1.19)

Banking Characteristic Country j
t-stat

0.0775
(0.54)

0.0866
(0.68)

1.6263
(0.74)

0.5172
(0.28)

-0.4615
(0.17)

-1.5221
(0.55)

Year FE
Country-Pair FE

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Observations
Within R-squared
Country-pairs

2958
0.4592
190

2959
0.432
190

2942
0.4359
190

2943
0.4164
190

2942
0.4364
190

2943
0.4176
190

Table 8 Notes
The Table reports panel fixed-effect estimates. All specifications include year fixed-effects and country-pair fixed-effects. In oddnumbered columns, the dependent variable (banking integration) is the average of the log of real bilateral assets and liabilities
holdings of banks in countries i and j in year t , standardized by the sum of the two countries' population in each year (BI1 ). In evennumbered columns, the dependent variable (banking integration) is the average of the log of real bilateral gross flows in assets and
liabilities of banks in countries i and j in year t , standardized by the sum of the two countries' population in each year (BI2 ).
EU1 is an indicator variable that takes on the value of one if only one counterpart in each pair of countries is member of the EU in
year t and zero otherwise. EU2 is an indicator variable that takes on the value one if both countries are members of the EU in year t
and zero otherwise. EZ1 is an indicator variable that takes on the value of one if only one counterpart in each pair of countries is
member of the euro area in year t and zero otherwise. EZ2 is an indicator variable that takes on the value one if both countries are
members of the euro area in year t and zero otherwise. GDP is the log of the product of real per capita GDP of the two countries in
year t . Exchange Rate is a bilateral time-varying measure of the flexibility of the exchange rate regime (based on the “fine”
classification of Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) and Ilzetzki, Reinhart and Rogoff (2008)). Financial Legislation is a bilateral timevarying measure of legislative and regulatory harmonization policies in financial services based on the transposition of the 27
Directives Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP). Trade is the log of real imports and exports as a share of the two countries'
In all specifications we control for time-varying structural features of the banking system in country i and country j . In columns (1)(2) we control for banks net interest margin. In columns (3)-(4) we control for banks' overhaed costs, while in columns (5)-(6) we
control for a measure of banks' competition. All variables come from World Bank's Financial Structure Database (Beck, DemirgüçKunt and Levine (2000)). As these variables become available after the late 1980s, all specifications in Table 8 are estimated in the
period 1990-2007.
The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data sources. t -statistics based on country-pair specific (clustered)
heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation are reported in parenthesis below the coefficient estimates. The Table also reports the number
of country-pairs, the number of observations, and the within R-squared.

