NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ENDOGENOUS COST-EFFECTIVENESS ANALYSIS IN HEALTH CARE TECHNOLOGY
ADOPTION
Anupam Jena
Tomas Philipson
Working Paper 15032
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15032

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2009

We thank James Raftery for his generous provision of the NICE data and Kris Hult for excellent research
assistance. We are also thankful to seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute Meetings,
The Wharton School, The University of Chicago, and Duke University for their helpful comments.
This project was partly supported by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences through Medical
Scientist National Research Service Award 5 T32 GM07281 (Jena), and the Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality through UCLA/RAND Training Grant T32 HS 000046 (Jena) and The George
Stigler Center at The University of Chicago (Philipson). The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Anupam Jena and Tomas Philipson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Endogenous Cost-Effectiveness Analysis in Health Care Technology Adoption
Anupam Jena and Tomas Philipson
NBER Working Paper No. 15032
June 2009, Revised October 2010
JEL No. I0,I1,I11,I18
ABSTRACT
Increased health care spending has been argued to be largely due to technological change. Cost-effectiveness
analysis is the main tool used by private and public third-party payers to prioritize adoption of the
new technologies responsible for this growth. However, such analysis by payers invariably reflects
prices set by producers rather than resources used to produce treatments. This implies that the “costs”
in cost-effectiveness assessments depend on endogenous markups which are, in turn, influenced by
demand factors of patients, doctors, and payers. Reimbursement policy based on endogenous cost-effectiveness
levels may therefore bear little relationship to efficient use of scarce medical resources. Using data
on technology appraisals in the United Kingdom, we test for conditions under which adoption based
on endogenous cost-effectiveness may lead to adoption of more inefficient treatments in terms of resource
use.
Anupam Jena
Department of Medicine
Massachusetts General Hospital
55 Fruit Street
Boston, MA 02114
jena.anupam@mgh.harvard.edu
Tomas Philipson
Irving B. Harris Graduate School
of Public Policy Studies
The University of Chicago
1155 E 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
t-philipson@uchicago.edu

1. Introduction
New medical technologies are often argued to be a leading force behind the
growth in health care spending.1

In order to manage the costs imposed by such

technologies and to prioritize health care dollars, both public and private payers have
increasingly demanded evidence on combined measures of the benefits and costs of new
technologies. These measures include cost-effectiveness, cost-utility, and cost-benefit
analysis, hereafter referred to collectively as CE analysis.2 It is self-evident that payers
should attempt to maximize the returns in health they obtain from the limited resources
available for health spending. CE analysis is the main method used for this purpose.3
For example, CE thresholds, which dictate that a given technology will be reimbursed
only if costs per quality-adjusted life year (QALY) are below a given threshold, is one
way in which CE-based adoption is implemented in practice.

The most prominent

examples are the United Kingdom (UK) National Institute for Clinical Excellence
(NICE) and Australia’s Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee.4

As a

consequence of the extensive use of CE analysis by payers, an enormous health
economics literature has developed and shown the conditions under which CE analysis,
when applied under a fixed budget constraint, can lead to gains in efficiency. Indeed, the
amount of work done on the CE of medical technologies may perhaps be the largest field
within health economics, particularly in European countries where such analysis guides a
large share of public technology adoption and reimbursement.
When CE analysis is used to guide reimbursement in practice, however, the costs
incorporated into these assessments are the prices charged to payers by producers or
innovators, rather than the societal resource costs used in production. This is almost
inevitable as producers in any industry are never eager to share their data on production
1

See e.g. Newhouse (1992) and recent summary by Chandra and Skinner (2008).
The literature on these methods is vast, but for examples, see Weinstein and Stason (1977), Johanneson
and Weinstein (1993), Gold et al. (1996), Meltzer (1997), Drummond et al. (1997), Garber (2000).
3
Building on the area-variations literature, others have suggested that cost-effectiveness analysis of
‘accountable care organizations’ rather than of specific treatments may be efficient (Chandra, Fisher, and
Skinner; 2010).
4
Bethan et al. (2001) report on Australia. While prior to 1993 no European countries formally required
pharmacoeconomic assessments of new products (Drummond et al., 1993), most of the 13 European
countries evaluated in a later analysis (Drummond , 1999) had or were in the process of developing formal
agencies responsible for such assessments.
2

3

costs. Therefore, prices – marked up over costs – determine the CE levels observed for
new innovations, not the production costs which ordinarily determine the efficient use of
resources.
This paper examines how using prices rather than costs impacts the usefulness of
CE analysis in guiding health care resource allocation. When prices impact the likelihood
of technology adoption and are chosen to maximize expected profits given this
uncertainty, observed CE levels will be endogenous. They will be determined by firms’
incentives to mark up technologies above their production costs, which will in turn
depend on how CE analysis is used in reimbursement. For example, if a third-party only
pays for technologies that are cheaper than a fixed CE threshold, as done in the UK,
manufacturers may find it in their best interest to price up to that threshold regardless of
production costs. Treatments may appear equally cost-effective due to the adoption
policy of the payer, despite varying greatly in the extent to which patients are willing to
pay above production costs. More generally, demand-side factors that drive markups also
drive observed CE levels.

In fact, because producers face two customers, payers

adopting the technologies and patients or doctors using them, we show that the pricesensitivity of both parties jointly determines the markup. In short, observed CE levels
will depend on how CE assessments are used in technology adoption. The traditional
“bang-for-the-buck” rationale for CE policies may therefore fail because demand factors
are included in the “buck”. The overall argument of this paper, therefore, is that the
rationale for using CE assessments for health care adoption is weakened when those
affected by such adoption policies act in their own self-interest.
Section 2 of this paper begins by deriving a specific condition for when CE
rankings of treatments based on endogenous measures will deliver different rankings than
when based on exogenous production costs – we term this a ‘reversal.’ The possibility of
such reversals is central to understanding whether the use of CE analysis by payers will
lead to efficient adoption (or not) of technologies with the largest health impacts and the
cheapest production costs. Reversals occur when markups are negatively related with
production costs so that treatments with the lowest resource use are also those marked up
the most. We characterize what drives markups in a non-standard environment of dual
demand by patients/doctors and payers. In particular, we show how public CE-based
4

reimbursement policies drive markups in conjunction with patient demand, and hence
determine the level of endogenous cost-effectiveness chosen by firms seeking
reimbursement. We argue that a central issue affecting reversals is whether there is
heterogeneity across treatments in the adoption behavior of payers.
Section 3 proposes a simple test whether existing adoption policies may lead to
CE reversals based on a simple heterogeneity test. Regressing adoption decisions on
observed endogenous CE levels and a set of covariates, in our case

disease-class

dummies, we argue that a simple F-test indicates the possibility of reversals. Using data
on treatment adoption decisions by the National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence (NICE) in the United Kingdom from 1999 to 2005, we find evidence
suggestive of the possibility of such reversals.
Lastly, we conclude in Section 4 by discussing several shortcomings of the paper
and some of the future research areas they suggest.
2. Exogenous versus Endogenous Cost-Effectiveness
This section derives the relationship between exogenous cost-effectiveness, which
depends on exogenous resource costs of production, and endogenous cost-effectiveness,
which relies on prices faced by payers.
2.1 Basic Framework
We interpret cost-effectiveness determination in a standard quantity-quality
framework of a monopolist. Consider a single treatment that provides an exogenous,
homogenous incremental benefit in health q over a baseline treatment. The treatment is
assumed to be produced by a monopolist who charges an incremental price p. The health
benefit q may be the incremental extension in quality-adjusted life years due to treatment
(as perhaps revealed by data from clinical trials) and can generally be interpreted in
standard economic formulations as the quality of the product. Compared to a baseline
treatment, we assume there is a constant marginal cost c(q) of producing a treatment of a
given quality level.
In this framework, we define the exogenous incremental cost-effectiveness ratio
(ICER) to be the cost per unit of quality as in:
5

CE 

c
q

(1)

The numerator is the exogenously determined incremental resource cost to society per
person utilizing treatment, and the denominator is the incremental health benefit among
those utilizing treatment. In the Appendix, we discuss the conditions under which this is
consistent with traditional static efficiency criteria.5
The endogenous cost-effectiveness ratio uses the price faced by payers as the
relevant cost, rather than the cost of resources utilized for production, and is given by:
CE N 

p
q

(2)

If m denotes the markup above costs, it is defined as p = m·c. It follows immediately that
the two forms of cost-effectiveness are related by:

CE N  m  CE

(3)

This implies that resource allocation decisions based on endogenous cost-effectiveness
may be inefficient even when exogenous cost-effectiveness analysis would deliver
efficient resource allocation. In particular, treatment adoption based on endogenous CE
may lead to the selection of less cost-effective treatments in terms of resource costs. We
discuss conditions under which the two norms of cost-effectiveness involve “reversals” in
the sense that

CE  CE '

&

CE N  CE ' N

(4)

Such CE-reversals, or equivalently in the other direction, amount to changes in the
ranking of CE levels from best to worst. These reversals occur when the offsetting
markup differences are larger than the exogenous cost-effectiveness differences;

m CE '

m' CE

(5)

5

Jena and Philipson (2009) discuss the inefficiencies implied by using a static efficiency criterion such as
cost-effectiveness to guide technology adoption. Static criteria measure consumer benefits relative to costs
and take innovation as given. To maximize dynamic efficiency, it may be desirable to lower costeffectiveness levels that raise producer surplus and thus incentives to innovate.

6

This takes place when markups are negatively related to production costs so that low-cost
treatments are marked up relatively more. For example, compared to medical devices,
drugs may have smaller marginal costs of production yet face larger markups due to
inelastic demand or patent protection.
2.2 Expected profit maximization and cost-effectiveness levels
As the markup of prices over costs is the key determinant of the concordance
between endogenous and exogenous CE, it is important to understand what drives
markups. When there are third-party payers, such as private- or public insurers, markups
are non-standard as producers face two demand sides; the payer adopting the treatment
and the patients or doctors using it. The price-sensitivity of both sets of customers will
affect pricing.
More precisely, if the demand price (patient cost-sharing) is given by s(p) for a given
price, then the quantity demanded D(s(p),q) falls in the demand price and rises with
quality. If the technology is adopted by the payer, the producer collects the variable
profit induced by the pricing, but if it is not adopted he earns no profits. Let the
probability of adoption be denoted A(p,q) given the price and quality. We assume it is
differentiable and decreasing function of price but an increasing function of quality. A
special case would be when the chance of coverage is decreasing in the endogenous costeffectiveness ratio of the technology, i.e. A(p,q)≡ A(p/q). Thus, both forms of demand
depend negatively on price (“cost”) and positively on quality (“effectiveness”).6
Given the two components of demand, the expected profits are the post-approval
profits discounted by the probability of treatment adoption:
E[ ]  max A( p, q )  D( s ( p ), q )[ p  c(q )]  A( p )   ( p )
p

(6)

Throughout, we treat quality as exogenous and previously determined before the pricing
decision and often suppress it to limit notation. We assume that the probability of
acceptance and ex-post profits are well-behaved in the sense that A(p) is differentiable

6

For example, when the binary demand of the payer is determined by an unknown reservation price R
(“CE-threshold”) distributed according to the cdf denoted G(r;q), the acceptance function is given by
A(p,q)=Pr(r>p)=1-G(p;q).

7

and strictly decreasing and π(p) is differentiable, concave, and has a unique profitmaximizing price.
The probability of technology adoption, the variable profits conditional on
reimbursement, and the expected profits are illustrated in the figure below.
FIGURE 1—Probability of treatment adoption, variable and expected profits

Adoption Probability
1

Profits

A(p)

π(p)

A(p)π(p)

0
Price, p
These expected profits imply that in raising price, the producer must take into account
two types of buyers—the third-party payer making the treatment adoption decision and
the patients or providers using the product once adopted. The optimal price balances the
profit impacts of the two demand sides and interior price satisfies the necessary firstorder condition:
A'   A '  0

(7)

The gain in profits conditional on adoption at a higher price must be balanced with the
larger chance of not being adopted. Throughout we assume there is a unique optimal
price.7
This optimal balance between adoption and ex-post profits has two direct
implications. First, producers will not set price low enough to guarantee acceptance since
7

A sufficient condition for a unique optimum is that A’(0)=0 and that -A’/A is increasing in price. Then
there is a unique price at which the increasing function –A’/A crosses the function π’/ π which is decreasing
in the relevant range of prices below the optimal ex-post price (at which it is zero).

8

the probability of rejection, 1-A, is strictly positive at the optimal positive price.
Producers take the risk of rejection in exchange for the larger profits obtained when the
submitted treatment is adopted. Second, the price that maximizes expected profits (Aπ) is
lower than the price that maximizes standard profits conditional on reimbursement (π).
This follows from the fact that the first-order condition can be restated as

 '  ( A' / A)  0 so that the ex-ante optimal price is on the upward sloping part of the
inverted U-shaped profit function π in Figure 1. Intuitively, pricing above the ex-post
optimal price lowers both ex-post profits and the chance of approval and so can never be
optimal. Producers do not necessarily raise price enough to maximize ex-post profits for
fear of not getting the technology approved at such a high price.
Rearranging the necessary first order condition, it can be written as a modified
Lerner condition for the optimal percentage markup as in:8
(p-c)/p = 1/[εD + εA]

(8)

where εA =-A’p/A and εD =-Dpp/D are the absolute values of the price-elasticities of the
two forms of demand. This generalized markup condition has several implications. First,
the markup falls with the price-sensitivity of both forms of demand. Under one extreme,
if there is no impact of raising price on approval then εA = 0 and the markup satisfies the
standard Lerner condition of ex-post profits. Hence, the price sensitivity of the approval
decision lowers markups below the standard level. On the other extreme, if there is no
impact of price on ex-post demand, as may be the case when demand prices or co-pays
do not vary the supply price, then εD = 0 and the price is governed by adoption behavior
alone. For example, public payers may differentially adopt treatments based on the
severity or prevalence of a disease.

Alternatively, certain diseases may have more

politically influential interest groups (e.g. HIV/AIDS or breast cancer in the US) and
therefore face easier approval.
A second implication of this generalized Lerner condition is that pricing may
occur where ex-post demand by patients/doctors is inelastic. That would never occur
under standard profit-maximization, since raising price would raise ex-post profits by

8

The FOC may written as εA=( π’*p)/π and (π’*p)/π=([Dp(p-c) + D]*p)/(D*(p-c))=-εD + p/(p-c).

9

increasing revenue and reducing total costs. However, such a rise in ex-post profits on the
margin may be optimal when it traded off against the lower chance of reimbursement.
The final and most important implication of the Lerner condition is that if both
demand sides affect markups, differences between observed endogenous costeffectiveness rankings and unobserved exogenous rankings may occur. In particular, the
two cost-effectiveness levels are related according to:
CEN=CE/[1-1/(εD + εA)]

(9)

As a consequence, when demand elasticities counteract cost differences, selecting
treatments based on endogenous cost-effectiveness will lead to adoption behavior that
selects treatments that do not deliver the largest health benefits for a given amount of
resources used to produce them.
Section 3: Causes of reversals in cost-effectiveness

In this section, we discuss factors that lead to the selection of inefficient
treatments when adoption is based on endogenous cost-effectiveness levels rather than
exogenous ones. Given that demand behavior reflects the difference between the two
forms of CE as indicated in (9), of central importance is demand heterogeneity across
treatments with similar exogenous cost-effectiveness levels.
Generally, for a given demand or supply factor represented by the scalar z, the
price for a given quality level may depend on both demand and supply conditions as in:9
p(q,z) = m(q,z)c(q,z)

(10)

If the two cost-effectiveness measures are denoted by CE(q,z) = c(q,z)/q and CEN(q,z) =
p(q,z)/q, then a sufficient condition for reversals to occur is that an increase in the factor
has opposing effects on CE measures:
(

dCE dCE N
)(
)0
dz
dz

(11)

This condition can be rewritten as:
[µ m + µc][µc] < 0

(12)

9

For example, under expected profit maximization the parameters (z1,z2,z3) may reflect acceptance-, patient
demand-, and cost parameters in the expected profits V=A(p;z1)[D(p,q;z2)(p-c(q;z3))].

10

where µm = mz*z/m and µc = cz*z/c are the markup and cost elasticities with respect to the
factor z. If the factor raises costs, µc > 0, then it raises exogenous cost effectiveness CE.
But if the factor lowers markups more than it raises costs, µ m + µc < 0, then the factor
lowers endogenous cost-effectiveness CEN as it is the product of the two.
3.1 Reversals due to differential demand behavior
If two treatments have the same production costs and quality they have the same
exogenous cost-effectiveness, CE. However, if the two treatments differ in either forms
of demand, i.e. approval by a third-party or ex-post demand by patients and providers,
then they may have different levels of endogenous cost-effectiveness.
3.1.1 Reversals due to differential patient and doctor demand behavior
First consider the extreme case when all treatments are adopted by the payer,
A=1, regardless of their cost-effectiveness. This is arguably the case in the US where
FDA approval of a technology is sufficient for coverage by the public payers Medicare
and Medicaid. In this setting, expected profits Aπ reduce to post-approval profits and
optimal pricing satisfies the standard condition; π’=0. In this standard case of markup
determination, the elasticity of patient or doctor demand yields the markup:
m = 1/(1-1/εD)

(13)

Therefore, reversals may occur when the lower costs treatments are also the most
inelastically demanded by patients or doctors. In particular, a negative relationship
between markups and costs of production may occur when low cost treatments are
produced in less competitive markets or when low cost treatments such as
pharmaceuticals are more marked up than devices or surgery.
3.1.2 Reversals due to differential adoption behavior
As an illustration, consider when public payers follow a reservation price policy,
adopting only treatments priced below the reservation price. In the UK, this is often
described as a “CE-threshold” policy in which only technologies whose CE levels are
below a given threshold T are adopted; A(p/q) =0 if p/q > T and A(p/q) = 1 if p/q ≤ T.
Furthermore, suppose cost-sharing has no variable component, as might be true if there is
11

a fixed payment for filling a given prescription, s(p) = s. In this case, as both demand
elasticities are zero below the threshold (εD = εA =0), optimal pricing would lead to the
endogenous CE set to the threshold. This would, in turn, induce markups that are
inversely related to the exogenous CE levels:
CEN = T  m·CE = T  m = T/CE
The adoption rule therefore induces markups that are negatively related to resource costs.
Because of this negative relationship, changes in real resource use – as reflected by
exogenous CE levels – would have no impact on endogenous levels of CE used for
payment purposes.10
3.1.3 Reversals due to differential adoption and production costs
If two treatments differ only in costs but are of equal quality then there is a
reversal whenever price is lower for the more expensive treatment11
c < c’ & p > p’
In this case, the factor z shifts both the cost c(q;z) but also the markup m(q;z) because
markups cannot be constant (constant elasticity) when A is bounded. The effect on cost
differences is illustrated in Figure 3. Among treatments of the same quality, this figure
shows two curves that map out the optimal price of a treatment as an increasing function
of the treatment’s exogenous CE level where the slope is affected by the endogenous
markup.
FIGURE 3—Reversals due to adoption and cost-differences across treatments

10

This is, of course, true as long as exogenous CE levels are not higher than the threshold, in which case
the technology would presumably not be presented to the payer for adoption in the first place.
11
It may appear that the two forms of cost-effectiveness yields the same ranking of treatments differing in
costs when both forms of demand are of constant elasticity. However, the bounded function A cannot be of
constant elasticity throughout its support.

12

High Adoption
Disease Class

Price

Low Adoption
Disease Class

pH
pM
pL

cL

cH

Costs and Exogenous CE
Holding quality constant, the x-axis corresponds both to different cost levels and
exogenous CE levels. The top line traces out the profit-maximizing price charged by a
firm whose product treats a disease that has a high probability of public adoption at any
given level of submitted cost-effectiveness. Similarly, the lower line characterizes the
optimal price for treatments in disease classes that are less favorably adopted. Now,
consider two treatments of differing costs of production, cL < cH. For a given cost level,
it is clear that the price will be higher in the higher approval class; that is, pL < pH for the
same cost level cL. This directly implies a change in rankings from treatments having the
same exogenous CE to having strictly different endogenous CE levels. In addition, full
reversals may occur when politically motivated adoption behavior is negatively related to
resource costs. For example, suppose a treatment is more expensive to produce and is in
the low acceptance disease class; the profit-maximizing price is pM. If the lower-cost
treatment is in the high acceptance class, then its profit-maximizing price is pH which is
higher than pM. In this case, a full reversal will occur when the lower-cost treatment – in
a resource sense – is in a class that is less politically favored by the public payer.
3.2 Reversals due to differential quality

13

When treatments vary in quality, reversals occur when quality raises one form of costeffectiveness while lowering the other:
(

dCE dCE N
)(
)0
dq
dq

(14)

This condition can be rewritten as
[µ m + µc -1][µc -1] < 0

(15)

where µm and µc are the elasticities of markups and costs with respect to quality. If costs
alone do not rise as fast as quality, µ c<1, then exogenous cost-effectiveness CE falls with
quality. But if markups and costs together rise as fast as quality, µ

m

+ µc > 1, then

endogenous cost-effectiveness CEN rises with quality. Thus, markups and costs may both
rise in the same direction with quality, yet still lead to reversals in endogenous and
exogenous cost-effectiveness. Similarly, costs may rise faster than quality when quality
rises, µc >1, while markups fall in quality enough so that prices do not rise as fast as
quality, µ m + µc < 1.
3.3 Generalizing to other payer and demand environments
Our analysis can be generalized to broader objective functions of producers in
environments with many different payers and patient/doctor demand structures. In reality
and more generally, treatment adoption decisions involve multiple payers, disease
indications, patient groups, and doctor groups that are linked to each other by price.
Suppose profits to producers are represented by the general function V(p,q;z)
where z is a set of parameters that describes the payer and demand environment. When
there is a single payer, the expected profits discussed earlier may be written as:
V(p,q,z) = A(p;z1)[D(p,q;z2)(p-c(q;z3))]

(15)

Now suppose that there are multiple payers involved, denoted by k = 1, 2,.., K, each with
different approval behavior and possibly ex-post profits to the producer. In this case, the
general profit function may be written:
V(p,q;z) = F[A1(p;z),π1(p;z),… . ,AK(p;z),πK(p;z)]

(16)

For a general profit function V, reversals driven by demand conditions will occur as long
as the endogenously chosen price is affected by demand conditions, holding costs of
production constant. Because this is nearly always true, reversals will be likely under

14

those general conditions as well. More precisely, for the general profit-function the
necessary FOC determining the optimal price satisfies:
dV
( p, q; z )  0
dp

(17)

If z is a scalar demand parameter, then the implicit function theorem directly implies it
will affect pricing whenever:
dp  d 2V / dpdz

0
dz
d 2V / dp

(18)

If the SOC is satisfied then the denominator is non-zero and dp/dz will be non-zero
whenever d2V/dpdz is non-zero. In other words, if the FOC is shifted by the demand
parameter z, so that d2V/dpdz is non-zero, then dp/dz will be non-zero as well. This
implies that in order to check for the potential possibility of cost-effectiveness reversals,
one need only check for heterogeneity in a demand parameter that has a non-zero cross
partial for the profit function V. For example, when there is a single payer which induces
the profit function (15) and heterogeneity in factors affecting the probability of adoption
(e.g. z1 reflecting preference towards treatments for diseases with larger influence on the
political process), reversals will occur because the partial dV/dpdz = (Apz1)(D*(p-c)) +
(Az1)[Dp*(p-c) + D)] is generally non-zero.
4. Testing for heterogeneity in adoption behavior: an analysis of NICE

Heterogeneity

in

adoption

policies

across

types

of

treatments

(e.g.

pharmaceuticals vs. devices vs. procedures) or disease classes is a sufficient condition for
reversals to occur. Using data on treatment adoption decisions by the National Institute
for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) in the United Kingdom, this section discusses
tests for such heterogeneity in adoption behavior. Co-pays in the UK’s National Health
Service (NHS) do not depend on producer prices so that the relationship between the two
forms of cost effectiveness becomes is driven by approval behavior CEN = CE/[1-1/εA].
Thus, our tests for approval heterogeneity may be interpreted as sufficient conditions for
reversals in the context of NICE.
3.1 Background on NICE
15

Introduced in 1999 as a special health authority for England and Wales, the initial
purview of NICE was to make recommendations to the British National Health Service
(NHS) on the coverage of selected new and existing medical technologies and to develop
clinical guidelines (Buxton, 2001). Although other countries have developed similar
organizations, NICE was the first national agency with the power to guide technology
adoption for all new health technologies including pharmaceuticals, procedures, and
devices (Schulper et al., 2001). While NHS authorities were initially mandated to take
into account but not necessarily follow NICE’s advice, in 2002 they became legally
obligated to fund treatments recommended by NICE. The initial spectrum of assessments
by NICE included pharmaceuticals, medical devices, procedures, diagnostic and
screening technologies, and health promotion programs, but most referrals to date have
concerned either pharmaceuticals or devices.
Following the selection of technologies to be assessed, NICE commissions or
accepts reports from several sources, including the supply side (manufacturers), the
demand side (professional and patients’ groups), and independent sources (academics).
The evidence typically gathered for a given technology includes its clinical effectiveness,
cost per quality-adjusted-life-year (QALY) gained, and impact on costs borne by the
NHS (Raftery, 2001). After gathering this information, NICE first issues a provisional
appraisal, which is reviewed by the parties involved, followed by a final appraisal to the
NHS. According to guidelines set forth by the Secretary of State for Health, the final
guidance rendered by NICE should account for the clinical priorities of the NHS, the
need of patients under consideration, the cost-effectiveness of the treatment, and the
strength of clinical evidence and cost-effectiveness estimates (Buxton, 2001).
The final guidance issued by NICE summarizes whether a treatment is
recommended to the NHS and the reasoning behind the decision.

The appraisal

committee makes one of four recommendations: the technology can be recommended
with no restrictions, recommended with minor restrictions, recommended with major
restrictions, or not recommended.

If a manufacturer is unsatisfied with the

recommendation, it can appeal the decision.
3.2 Data on technology approvals by NICE
16

Since its inception in 1999, NICE has published 141 guidances.

Our data

analyzes the 86 guidances submitted to NICE between the years 1999 and 2005—the
dates of guidance publication range from 2001 to 2007.12

We define a particular

treatment as each combination of a drug or technology and the disease it addresses. Since
the same drug or technology may be used to treat multiple diseases or the drug or
technology may have different parts that must be recommended separately, a single
guidance may contain multiple treatments. Our database, therefore, has 145 treatments in
the 86 guidances we examine, and the unit of observation is a treatment. Table 1
provides descriptive statistics on these guidances in terms of endogenous CE levels (p/q)
as well as acceptance behavior (A).
TABLE 1—Descriptive statistics of NICE guidance data

Total no. of guidances
Treatments recommended by NICE
Yes
Yes, with minor restrictions
Yes, with major restrictions
No
No. of guidances with published CE
Endogenous CE (Cost per QALY (£)) by
range of estimate
Low estimate
High estimate
Mean estimate
Endogenous CE (Cost per LYG (£) ) by range
of estimate
Low estimate
High estimate
Mean estimate
Avg. of est. mean cost per QALY or LYG (£)
Range of est. mean cost per QALY or LYG
Less than £10,000

145
Percent
30
32
22
16
76
No. of
treatments
35
37
51

Mean
12,297
43,673
28,132

Std.
Dev.
11,704
35,701
18,798

20
22
26
76

8,276
19,506
17,397
24,710

6,304
13,744
11,404
17,380

Percent
22

Between £10,000 and £20,000

25

Between £20,000 and £30,000

18

12

We are thankful to James Raftery for providing us with his detailed collection of these guidances. We do
not have data on guidances submitted after 2005, which compromise the remainder of the 141 guidances
noted above.

17

Between £30,000 and £40,000
16
More than £40,000
18
Source: NICE published treatment guidances, 1999 – 2005.
Of the 145 NICE guidances present in our data, 23 (16%) were not recommended by
NICE, 32 (22%) were recommended with major restrictions, 46 (32%) were
recommended with minor restrictions, and 44 (30%) were recommended with no
restrictions.

A “no” recommendation is given for either poor cost-effectiveness or

insufficient evidence to warrant the use of the treatment. While treatments with major
restrictions are still recommended by NICE, such treatments are only recommended for
either second-line use by those refractory to alternative treatments or by targeted
subgroups with severe disease. Recommendations with minor restrictions limit use in
one of several ways; e.g. recommendations may require the particular treatment to be the
least costly option, may require specialist supervision, or may require treatment
monitoring. The treatments that are recommended as “yes” without any restrictions can
be used routinely and as the primary treatment for a disease. Overall, 84% of treatments
included in our data were recommended with no, minor, or major restrictions.
For those guidances for which cost-effectiveness is reported13, NICE measures
cost-effectiveness in two ways, cost per quality-adjusted life year (QALY) gained and
cost per life year (LY) gained, both measured relative to some baseline treatment.
Quality-adjusted life years differ from life years gained by incorporating both quality and
quantity of life into measures of a treatment’s effectiveness. Cost-effectiveness ratios are
calculated in the usual manner.14
Because measuring effectiveness precisely can be difficult, NICE guidances often
report high, mean, and low estimates of cost per quality-adjusted life year or standard life
year gained for each treatment. For those treatments for which high and low estimates
exist, Table 1 presents the average cost per QALY or LY gained within each range. The
13

As shown in Table 1, NICE does not always report cost-effectiveness for each treatment so estimates
only exist for roughly half (76/145) of the observations in our data.
14
For example, if a new drug costs £15,000 and the existing treatment costs £5,000, the numerator in the
cost per QALY (or LY) gained measurement is £10,000. If the new treatment adds 0.9 QALYs and the
previous treatment added 0.4 QALYs, the denominator is 0.5 QALYs. Therefore, the cost per QALY is
£10,000/0.5 = £20,000.

18

within-treatment variability is substantial—the estimates of average cost per QALY or
LY gained vary from roughly £12,000 (low-estimate group) to £44,000 (high estimate
group) in our data.
In order to have a unified cost-effectiveness measure for our subsequent analysis,
we do not distinguish between QALYs and standard LYs and assume that the cost per
QALY or LY gained takes on either the mean cost per QALY gained or mean cost per
LY gained, depending on which variable exists for a given treatment.

Under this

measure, the mean cost per QALY or LY gained is approximately £24,710 with a
standard deviation of £17,380.

3.3 Heterogeneity and endogeneity bias
Our theoretical analysis implies that heterogeneity in treatment adoption across
either treatment types or disease classes is central to reversals. However, estimating the
impact of observed cost-effectiveness on the probability of adoption is hampered by the
fact that adoption and observed cost-effectiveness levels are endogenously determined..
To illustrate the implications of this endogeneity bias, consider two treatments; the first is
adopted with certainty (A=1) and the second is adopted with some probability that
depends negatively on the submitted cost-effectiveness level (A’<0). This would lead to
an ex-post optimal monopoly price for the first treatment but a lower price for the second
one. Acceptance would therefore be high for the first treatment with a high endogenous
CE level but low for the second treatment with a low endogenous CE. Heterogeneity may
therefore imply an unconditional positive relationship between adoption and endogenous
CE even though the relationship is negative conditionally. More precisely, for two
treatments with different adoption functions A1 and A2 that induce prices p(A1) > p( A2 ),
it may well be true that A1 (p(A1)) < A2 (p( A2 )). A sufficient “diagnostic” test for the
presence of heterogeneity in the case of NICE would therefore be an increasing
relationship between adoption and endogenous CE levels as it would never be observed if
the adoption-function A(.) was homogeneous and decreasing in endogenous CE levels

19

across all treatments. In this homogeneous case, the unconditional relationship between
approval and endogenous CE would depict the homogenous function A.
Table 1 discussed above provides information about this unconditional
relationship in the data. We group the mean cost per QALY or LY gained into five
categories: less than £10,000, between £10,000 and £20,000, between £20,000 and
£30,000, between £30,000 and £40,000, and more than £40,000. The proportion of
treatments within each range is fairly similar, with approximately 34% of treatments
having cost-effectiveness levels above commonly reported thresholds of NICE adoption
(~£30,000). Using these data, Figure 4 plots the unconditional relationship between a
treatment’s endogenous CE and the probability of NICE recommendation—the reduced
form of the acceptance function A(p/q) in our analysis. The figure illustrates our
diagnostic test of a non-monotonic relationship between endogenous CE and acceptance
and is suggestive that heterogeneity in acceptance across treatments may be present.

FIGURE 4—Endogenous cost-effectiveness and the probability of treatment acceptance,
NICE 1999-2005
1
0.9
0.8

Probability of acceptance

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
< 10,000 £

10,000 - 20,000 £ 20,000 - 30,000 £ 30,000 - 40,000 £ 40,000 - 50,000 £
Cost-effectiveness (£ per QALY/LYG)

20

> 50,000 £

Source: NICE published treatment guidances, 1999 – 2005.
In addition, Figure 4 is also consistent with the discussed prediction that under uncertain
adoption, optimal pricing will result in a strictly positive fraction of treatments being
rejected as firms trade off higher ex-post profits due to higher prices with the increased
probability of rejection that these higher prices induce.
3.4 Heterogeneity and reversals: NICE adoption behavior by disease class
Our analysis implies that differences in treatment adoption behavior across
treatment types (pharmaceuticals vs devices vs procedures) or disease classes will induce
reversals in CE rankings. We test for heterogeneity in adoption behavior across disease
classes; Table 2 specifies how the probability of acceptance of treatments by NICE has
varied by disease class and endogenous cost-effectiveness levels.15
TABLE 2—Number of treatments submitted and accepted by disease class and
endogenous cost-effectiveness, NICE 1999-2005

Endogenous Cost-effectiveness (1,000£/QALY)
Disease Class
< 20
20 - 40 >40 Total % accepted
Arthritis
5/5
2/2
0/1
8
88
Cancer
14/14
8/9
2/3
26
92
Heart
7/7
4/4
0/0
11
100
Infectious
2/2
2/5
2/5
12
50
Mental
4/5
1/2
0/1
8
63
Prevention
2/2
2/2
0/0
4
100
Other
3/3
2/2
2/2
7
100
Total
38
26
12
76
84
% accepted
97
81
50
84
Source: NICE published treatment guidances, 1999 – 2005.
Each cell reports the number of accepted treatments/submitted
treatments for a given disease class and endogenous costeffectiveness range.
Table 2 first illustrates that the NICE guidances in our data span a relatively large group
15

Of course, an ideal empirical test of reversals would be to test how well exogenous and endogenous CE
measures align by ranking treatments according to their exogenous and endogenous CE levels. This is
infeasible as markups are unobservable, a standard and central empirical problem in industrial organization
more generally.

21

of diseases and categories of treatment. Of the 76 guidances considered, 26 (34%) were
for cancer, 11 (14%) were for heart disease, 12 (16%) were for infectious disease, 8
(11%) were for mental health, and so on. Next, for a given range of cost-effectiveness
(columns), each row of Table 2 displays both the number of treatments accepted by and
submitted to NICE for a given disease. For example, out of 14 treatments for cancer with
submitted CE levels below 20,000 £/QALY, 14 were accepted by NICE with minor,
major, or no restrictions. For cancer treatments with submitted CE levels in the range of
20,000 – 40,000 £/QALY, 8 out of 9 treatments were adopted by NICE, while in the
range of 40,000 £/QALY and above, 2 of 3 submitted treatments were accepted.
Importantly, however, in the same ranges of 20,000 – 40,000 £/QALY and greater than
40,000 £/QALY, respectively, 2 out of 5 treatments for infectious disease were accepted.
In the same respective ranges, 1 out of 2 and 0 out of 1 submitted treatments for mental
health were accepted. This table suggests that differential adoption behavior by NICE
towards specific diseases may exist. This should, of course, be qualified by the power
issues that are present—the data at hand are clearly limited by the number of guidances
issued to date and the broad range of diseases covered.
The data in Table 2 suggest a general methodology to test for the potential of CE
reversals, namely by testing whether the probability of treatment acceptance depends not
only on submitted cost-effectiveness, but on the disease class of the treatment as well.
Table 3 specifies such a test and reports the coefficients of a linear probability model of
the impact of cost-effectiveness and disease class on the probability of treatment
acceptance by NICE. The linear probability model was selected due to well-known
problems with logit or probit specifications in fitting the full acceptance levels displayed
in the descriptive table. While sample size considerations prohibit a fully interacted
model of the differential impact of disease class on the CE-adoption relationship, our
model employs indicators for disease classes to determine how and whether specific
disease classes affects the probability of adoption, conditional on endogenous CE levels.
The excluded disease class was the smallest class, diabetes. A necessary implication of a
homogeneous acceptance function A across disease classes is that the dummies have no
effect and that variation in adoption is fully explained by endogenous CE alone.
.
22

TABLE 3—Impact of endogenous cost-effectiveness and disease class on probability of
treatment acceptance

Probability of treatment acceptance
Mean cost-effectiveness (1,000£/QALY)

-0.009*
(0.002)
Cancer
-0.034
(0.098)
Heart
-0.031
(0.122)
Infectious
-0.322*
(0.120)
Mental health
-0.310*
(0.132)
Prevention
-0.008
(0.171)
Constant
1.154
(0.096)
0.38
R2
F-test of equality of disease indicators
p = 0.03
Source: NICE published treatment guidances, 1999 –
2005.
Table presents coefficients of a linear
probability model of the impact of cost-effectiveness
and disease class (excluded class: diabetes) on the
probability of treatment adoption by NICE. Standard
errors are in parentheses. * Significant at p < 0.05.

Table 3 demonstrates a statistically significant negative relationship between endogenous
cost-effectiveness and the probability of treatment acceptance; the probability of
acceptance declines by an estimated 0.009 (s.e. 0.002) for every 1,000 £/QALY increase
in the submitted CE level. In addition, compared to the excluded class of diabetes, each
of the diseases presented in Table 3 has a lower estimated probability of acceptance, with
infectious disease and mental health being the only diseases with statistically significant
effects (-0.322 (s.e. 0.120) and -0.310 (s.e. 0.132), respectively). This suggests the
possibility of heterogeneity in treatment acceptance across disease classes, holding
submitted CE constant.
The existence of the possibility of reversals therefore boils down to testing
23

whether there are class differences in adoption behavior, which can be succinctly
summarized by an F-test of whether the coefficients on the disease-dummies are the
same. An F-test of the equality of disease dummies, in fact, rejects the null hypothesis
that adoption behavior is identical across disease classes (p = 0.03).
4. Conclusion

This paper examined the efficiency implications of CE-based technology adoption
in the presence of optimal pricing by firms. Such pricing implies that observed costeffectiveness levels are endogenous to the CE criteria used to guide payer adoption
decisions. Our main finding was that endogenous cost-effectiveness may not be a good
guide to resource allocation and may not relate in a systematic way to exogenous
measures that reflect true resource costs. We showed that this may be important for
threshold adoption policies commonly employed by NICE in the UK. This occurs
because both patient/doctor demand factors and adoption policies determine prices but
not resource costs. The end result is that the intended value of using CE analysis, to
economize on resource costs used to deliver health care, may not be fulfilled.
Our analysis has several important limitations that future research may
successfully address. First, one major identification issue facing any analyst is that actual
production costs are unobservable to both econometricians and reimbursement
authorities. Endogenous CE rankings are observable while exogenous CE rankings are
not.

The fact that markups are unobservable is, of course, well-known and long-

recognized in empirical industrial organization. This issue led us to state our results as
sufficient conditions for reversals across a distribution of treatments rather than as
documented reversals in the sample at hand. More work is needed to derive results that
apply to a given sample of observed quality-, price- and demand data, such as those
reflected in the NICE data analyzed here.
Second, we did not consider the possibility of endogenous effectiveness or quality
induced by technology adoption criteria. This would be important when pricing affects
effectiveness through demand. For example, in the case of vaccines, lower prices lead to
greater vaccination and socially beneficial “herd immunity”, thereby raising
effectiveness.

Similar issues may arise for other links between demand and
24

effectiveness, for instance “learning by doing” in the adoption of new technologies
(Chandra and Staiger, 2007). Reductions in price for a device used in surgery may lead
to increased utilization, greater learning by doing, and ultimately increased effectiveness.
The full endogeneity of both prices and effectiveness deserves further analysis in order to
better understand the efficiency implications of cost-effectiveness based reimbursement.
Adaptive cost-effectiveness adoption in which future prices are not restricted by initial
launch prices may be an efficient method of dealing with both endogenous costs and
effectiveness.
Third, our analysis did not consider the implications for comparative effectiveness
of multiple competing treatments. Such an analysis would consider the duopoly and
oligopoly pricing implications of making reimbursement decisions contingent on multiple
industry prices and quality levels, as opposed to the single price and quality of a
monopolist.

When setting prices, producers presumably take into account how

reimbursement authorities use CE levels of competing treatments, e.g. through branded or
generic reference pricing, for similar conditions.

The industrial organization of

endogenous cost-effectiveness analysis, and its impact on health care spending, is an
important area of future research.
Fourth, we did not analyze how transparency of public decision-making affects
cost-effectiveness reversals. In our analysis of the NICE data, endogenous CE levels do
not perfectly predict adoption decisions in the sense of goodness-of-fit. This suggests
that other unspecified political considerations affect adoption. Making such criteria
explicit would lead to increased efficiency if producers did not waste development and
application costs on rejected treatments. This efficiency role of transparency needs to be
better understood and can be assessed by the goodness-of-fit of the transparent criteria
used in explaining payer adoption decisions.
Lastly, the impact of endogenous innovation incentives needs to be better
understood. The work of Lakdawalla and Sood (2006, 2008) analyze the implications for
innovation of the two-part pricing induced by insurance reimbursement with co-pays. The
implications of payer reimbursement policies, such as those based on CEA, on
appropriation by innovators is an important area of future research.

25

Despite these possible further implications of our analysis, however, we believe
the overall concern that we raise deserves serious consideration in evaluating the gains
from using CE analysis for efficient resource allocation. The overall point, that adoption
policies may not have their intended efficiency effects when those affected by them act in
their own interest, should feature more prominently into the design of future
reimbursement systems and enable more appropriate growth in health care spending.

26

References

Buxton, M. Implications of the Appraisal Function of the National Institute for Clinical
Excellence (NICE). Value in Health 4 (2001): 212-16.
Chandra, A. and Staiger, D. “Productivity Spillovers in Healthcare: Evidence from the
Treatment of Heart Attacks,” Journal of Political Economy 115 (2007): 103-140.
Chandra, A. and Skinner, J. “Technology Growth and Expenditure Growth in Health
Care,” Working paper (2010).
Chandra, A., Fisher, E., and Skinner, J. “Outcomes Assessment and Health Care
Reform,” Working paper (2010).
Drummond, M.F., O’Brien, B., Stoddart, G.L, and Torrance, G.W., Methods for the
Economic Evaluation of Healthcare Programmes, Oxford University Press (1997).
Garber, Alan M., “Advances in Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of Health Interventions,” in
Handbook of Health Economics. Edited by J. Newhouse and A. Culyer, 2000,
Elsevier B.V., North Holland.
Gold, M.R., Siegel, J.E., Russell, L.B., and Weinstein, M.C., Cost-Effectiveness in
Health and Medicine, Oxford University Press (1996).
Jena, A.B. and Philipson, T.J. “Cost-Effectiveness as a Price Control,” Health Affairs 26
(2007): 696 – 703.
Jena, A.B. and Philipson, T.J. “Cost-Effectiveness Analysis and Innovation,” Journal of
Health Economics 27 (2008): 1224-1236.
Johannesson, M., and Weinstein, M.C., “On the Decision Rules of Cost-Effectiveness
Analysis,” Journal of Health Economics 12 (1993): 459-467.
Lakdawalla, D., and Sood, Neeraj, “Health Insurance as a Two-part Pricing Contract,”
NBER Working Paper 12681 (2006).
Lakdawalla, D., and Sood, Neeraj, “Innovation and the Welfare Effects of Public Drug
Insurance,” Journal of Public Economics 93 (2009): 541-548.
Meltzer, D., "Accounting for Future Costs in Medical Cost-Effectiveness Analysis,"
Journal of Health Economics 16 (1997): 33-64.
Newhouse, J. ”Medical care costs: how much welfare loss?,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 6 (1997): 3–21.
National Institute for Clinical Excellence. NICE’s Guide to the Technology Appraisal
27

Process, London: NICE, April 2004.
Raftery, James. NICE: Faster Access to Modern Treatments? Analysis of Guidance on
New Health Technologies. British Medical Journal 323 (2001): 1300-03.
Raferty, James. “Review of NICE's recommendations, 1999-2005,” BMJ 332 (2006):
1266-1268.
Schulper, M., M. Drummond, and O’Brien, B.. Effectiveness, Efficiency, and NICE.
British Medical Journal 322 (2001): 943.
Weinstein, M.C., and Stason, W.B., “Foundations of Cost-Effectiveness Analysis for
Health and Medical Practices,“ New England Journal of Medicine 296 (1977):
716-721.

28

Appendix
Relationship between social surplus and cost-effectiveness criteria
Given the inverse demand function p(y,q) corresponding to the demand function d(p,q),
the social surplus from an invention is given by:
∫ [p(s,q)-c]ds = g - yc
Here, the gross consumer surplus is denoted by g = ∫p(s,q)ds and the second term, yc, is
the total cost of production. Therefore, the social surplus is larger for one product over
another if:
g - yc > g’- y’c’
At equal quantities, y = y’, this is equivalent to:
(g/y - g’/y’)/(c-c’) > 1
where the numerator is the incremental gross surplus for the average individual.
Treatment of quality q is incrementally more cost-effective than treatment of quality q’,
i.e. (q-q’)/(c-c’) > 1,, whenever the average gross surplus equals the quality level:
g/y = q
In other words, when quality levels represent average willingness to pay, the two criteria
coincide. This may be interpreted as a cost-utility- or a willingness-to-pay criterion and
previous analysis has analyzed the differences between these criteria at length. For
example, standard justifications using $100,000 per quality adjusted life year as a
threshold for payer adoption of technologies is based on the value of a healthy life-year
of $100,000, g/y = $100,000, derived from empirical studies of labor markets or other
tradeoffs between income and mortality.

29

