NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WAGE DISPERSION IN THE SEARCH AND MATCHING MODEL WITH INTRA-FIRM
BARGAINING
Dale T. Mortensen
Working Paper 15033
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15033

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2009

The financial support of the National Science Foundation and the Danish National Research Foundation
is acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Dale T. Mortensen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Wage Dispersion in the Search and Matching Model with Intra-Firm Bargaining
Dale T. Mortensen
NBER Working Paper No. 15033
June 2009
JEL No. E24,J3,J64
ABSTRACT
Matched employer-employee data exhibits both wage and productivity dispersion across firms and
suggest that a linear relationship holds between the average wage paid and a firm productivity. The
purpose of this paper is to demonstrate that these facts can be explained by a search and matching
model when firms are heterogenous with respect to productivity, are composed of many workers, and
face diminishing returns to labor given the wage paid to identical workers is the solution to the Stole-Zwiebel
bilateral bargaining problem. Helpman and Iskhoki (2008) show that a unique single wage (degenerate)
equilibrium solution to the model exists in this environment. In this paper, I demonstrate that another
equilibrium exists that can be characterized by a non-degenerate distribution of wages in which more
productive firms pay more if employed workers are able to search. Generically this dispersed wage
equilibrium is unique and exists if and only if firms are heterogenous with respect to factor productivity.
Finally, employment is lower in the dispersed wage equilibrium than in the single wage equilibrium
but this fact does not imply that welfare is higher in the single wage equilibrium.

Dale T. Mortensen
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2600
and NBER
d-mortensen@northwestern.edu

1

Introduction

The simplicity of the canonical search and matching model oﬀers many advantages for the purpose of understanding the determinants of unemployment. Furthermore, the model explains wage dispersion and a positive cross
Þrm correlation between wage and productivity in the heterogeneous Þrm
case. However, the assumptions that a Þrm is composed of a single worker
and employer and that there is no search on-the-job are obviously limiting
restrictions. For example, the model in the form does not speak directly to
the well known correlation between productivity and Þrm size (Bartelsman,
Haltiwanger and Scarpetta (2008)). The principal purpose of this paper is
to demonstrate that the canonical model’s implications for wage dispersion
continue to hold and are consistent with these addition facts when the model
is generalized to allow for many worker Þrms provided that search on-the-job
is possible.
A model of strategic bilateral wage bargaining when Þrms employ many
worker is formulated and solved by Stole and Zwiebel (1996). In their formulation, the employer bargains with each worker as though he or she were the
marginal employee. Because the wage outcome decreases with the number
of workers employed in the diminishing returns case, they show that there
is an incentive to "over employ" as a means of reducing the wage paid to
all workers. Recently, Helpman and Iskhoki (2008) demonstrate that StoleZwiebel wages paid to identical workers are equalized across employers in
a steady state search equilibrium when the production technology exhibits
diminishing returns with respect to labor, even when Þrm factor productivities diﬀer. This result would seem to contradict the claim of this paper.
However, the Helpman-Iskhoki analysis does not consider the possibility of
search on-the-job. If allowed, a dispersed wage equilibrium also exists.
In this paper, the wage paid at every point in time is the solution to the
Stole-Zwiebel bargaining problem. In this enviroment, I start by verifying
the Helpman-Iskhoki conclusion that a single wage equilibrium always exists.
Next I demonstrate that a second equilibrium exists characterized by wage
dispersion if Þrms diﬀer with respect to productivity and search by employed
workers is not ruled out by assumption. Furthermore, generically there is
only one disperse wage equilibrium in which more productive employers over
a higher wage. Finally, I establish that employment is lower in the dispersed
wage equilibrium than in the single wage equilibrium. However, because
aggregate employment in the single wage equilibrium exceeds the social opti2

mum for the reasons pointed out by Stole and Zwiebel (1996), social welfare
need not be lower in the dispersed wage equilibrium.
There is clearly a relationship between the dispersed wage equilibrium in
the search and matching model and the equilibrium wage distribution implied by the dynamic monopsony models of Burdett and Judd (1983) and
Burdett and Mortensen (1998); particularly with the reinterpreted version
of the Burdett-Mortensen model found in Mortensen (2003). Although the
relationship is close, the results are not isomorphic. Wage dispersion in the
both models arises because a continuum of wage-employment combinations
exist that yield the same expected return to posting a vacancy. When the
cost of posting vacancies is linear and the same for all Þrms, the equilibrium
wage-employment relationship lies along this locus for each level of productivity. When Þrms diﬀer with respect to productivity, the wages paid by more
productive employers are higher at any level of employment. The search and
matching model with diminishing returns to labor shares this feature with
the Burdett-Mortensen dynamic monopsony model. However, forward looking strategic wage setting behavior by employers in the dynamic monopsony
model generates dispersion even when there are no diﬀerences in Þrm productivity for strategic reasons that are not present when the wage is the outcome
of a bargaining problem over current output, as assumed in this paper. For
this reason, there is generally is no disperse wage equilibrium in the search
and matching model when Þrms are homogenous.

2

The Model

The labor market is composed of a unit measure of employers and a continuum of identical workers of size !. Labor is the only input and production is
generally subject to diminishing returns. Let p(x)f(n) denote the production
function of Þrm x ∈ [0, 1] where the variable n is a measure of employment
and p(x) is total factor productivity. The base line production function f(n)
is increasing and concave. Without loss of generality, Þrms with a higher
index x are (weakly) more productive in the weak sense that x > x0 implies
p(x) ≥ p(x0 ). Given this convention, x is equal to the Þrm’s percentile rank
in the distribution of productivity.
Workers are identical and can be either employed or not. While unemployed they receive an income b, which I interpreted as the ßow value of
home production. While employed, they earn a wage w which is determined
3

as the outcome of a bilateral bargaining problem speciÞed later. A worker
can choose to search or not at a unit intensity in the both unemployment
and employment states. Finally, all agents are risk neutral.

2.1

Worker Search

The workers’ common value of unemployment solves the Bellman equation
½ Z
¾
(1)
rU = b + max λφ max hW (w) − U, 0i dF (w) − εφ
φ∈{0,1}

where φ is an indicator that takes the value 1 if the worker searches and 0
otherwise, ε is a small Þxed cost of search, b represents the value of home
production, r is the interest rate, λ is the job Þnding rate, δ is the job
destruction rate, W (w) is the value of employment at wage w and F (w) is the
distribution of wage oﬀers. The value of employment is the expected present
value of the worker future income when employed. For a Þrm paying wage
w, the state contingent value of employment satisÞes the Bellman equation
rW (w) =

© R w + δ(U − W (w))
ª . (2)
+ maxφ∈{0,1} λφ max hW (z) − W (w), 0i dF (z) − εφ .

Of course, the worker can choose whether or not to search when employed
as well as when unemployed and does so to maximize expected future income.
Although the "search technology" as represented by the oﬀer arrival rate
may be diﬀerent in the two states, we assume they are same in the paper for
simplicity. For the same reason we also assume that the out of pocket cost
of search ε > 0 is trivial. Hence, the worker’s optimal search strategy is

1 if unemployed and 1 − F (b) > 0

1 if employed at value W and and 1 − F (w) > 0
φ(w) =
(3)

0 otherwise

In words, a worker searches if and only if the expected gain in value is
positive. By implication, trade requires that the highest wage oﬀered in the
market exceed the value of home production. Furthermore, all but those
employed at the highest oﬀer, w, search if wages are disperse. Below I only
consider the case in which trade takes place in equilibrium so that φ(b) = 1
and assume that φ(w) = 1 if and only if 1 − F (w) > 0.
4

Given that employed workers do search, they move if and only if oﬀered
a strictly higher employment value. Hence, for a Þrm that pays w, the
separation rate is
s(w) = δ + λφ(w)(1 − F (w)).
(4)

Because an unemployed worker accepts all oﬀers in equilibrium and an employed worker accepts only if oﬀered a higher wage, the expected yield per
vacancy advertised is
·
¸
u + (1 − u)φ(w)G(w)
h(w) = η
(5)
u + (1 − u)φ(w)

where u is the unemployment rate, G(w) is the fraction of employed workers
at Þrms that pay wage w or less, and η is the rate at which employers contact
searching workers per vacancy posted. Because s(w) is decreasing and h(w)
is increasing, an increase in the wage reduces turnover if and only if employed
workers search.
Note that equation (4) and (2) imply W 0 (w) = 1/(r + s(w)). Hence, by
rearranging terms and integrating by parts, equation (2) can be rewritten as
Z w
(r + δ) (W (w) − U) = w − rU + λφ(w)
[W (z) − W (w)] dF (z)
w
¶
Z wµ
1 − F (z)
dz.
= w − rU + λφ(w)
r + s(z)
w
Therefore equation (1) and the deÞnition of the reservation wage U = W (w)
b
imply that an unemployed worker accepts a job oﬀer if and only if the wage
exceeds the solution to
¶
Z wµ
1 − F (z)
w
b = b + λ[1 − φ(w)]
b
dz.
(6)
r + s(z)
w
b

In other words, if employed workers search, then the reservation wage is the
value of home production. But, if there is no incentive to search on-the-job,
then the reservation wage is equal to the value of home production plus the
option value of continued search.

2.2

Wage Bargaining

A Þrm cannot commit to long term contracts and the employer bargains with
each worker individually, Stole and Zwiebel (1996) show that the solution to
5

a strategic non-cooperative bilateral bargaining in this environment yields
a wage-employment proÞle that reßect Shapley values. SpeciÞcally, Stole
and Zwiebel assume that the current wage is the outcome of a sequence
of bilateral negotiations with its employees where each is regarded as the
marginal worker. Costless renegotiation takes place whenever a worker leaves
or is hired. In this paper, we adopt this wage determination model.
To justify their assumption, Stole and Zwiebel design a extensive form
strategic bilateral bargaining game of a general Rubinstein (1982) kind between the employer and marginal worker. The game is composed of a sequence of negotiation rounds in which the role of the proposer alternates
between worker and employer while the other party either accepts or rejects
the proposed split of the surplus value attributable to employing the marginal worker. The game continues until either an agreement is reached or
negotiations break down. The default position of the employer is no revenue
and for the worker is a wage equivalent w.
b
As the Þrm’s gross proÞt ßow is
π(n, p) = pf(n) − wn,

(7)

renegotiation with the marginal worker under complete information leads
immediately to an agreement that can be characterized by the following
surplus sharing rule
µ
¶
∂w
0
βπ n (n, p) = β pf (n) − w −
n = (1 − β) (w − w)
b .
(8)
∂n

where β, the worker’s share of surplus, represents the bargaining power of the
marginal workers. It can be interpreted as the probability that the worker
makes the oﬀer in any bargaining round. As Stole and Zwiebel show, the
solution to this diﬀerential equation, the wage bargaining outcome function,
is the generalized Shapley value
Z 1
1−β
w(n, p) = (1 − β)w
b+p
z β f 0 (zn)dz
(9)
0

which is a decreasing function of employment given diminishing returns.
Stole and Zwiebel assume that the worker can instantaneously Þnd employment elsewhere at the wage w
b if bargaining breaks down. However, given
search friction, we follow Cahuc et al. (2007) and Helpman and Iskhoki
(2008) by supposing that unemployed search is the workers outside option in
6

the bargaining problem. Of course, in the linear production function case,
f(n) = n, the wage reduces to that in the canonical model, the weighted
average of the reservation wage and labor productivity. If the production
function is Cobb-Douglas of the form f (n) = nα ,α ∈ (0, 1) then the wage
equation is also linear in average product per worker,
µ
¶
βα
pf(n)
w(n, p) = (1 − β)w
b+
.
(10)
1 − β + βα
n

However, this equation does not imply that the wage varies with p in equilibrium because employment is endogenous.
Were Þrms composed of a single worker, the employer clearly has an
incentive to renegotiation if that employee receives an outside oﬀer to the
extent that doing so might aﬀect retention. Cahuc, Postel-Vinay and Robin
(2006) allow outside oﬀer matching in such an environment. However, there
are also good reasons for the employer to adopt a policy of not to respond
to outside oﬀers. As Mortensen (1978) points out, oﬀer matching encourages
ineﬃcient rent seeking search eﬀort. As a consequence, Postel-Vinay and
Robin (2004) show that conditions exist for which an employer would commit
exante not to match. In fact, except in jobs where worker productivity is
general and observable to third parties, anecdotal evidence suggests that this
policy dominate in the labor market.
In the case of multi-worker Þrms, interpersonal comparison of earning
of observably identical workers provide another reason for a "non-response"
policy. Oﬀer matching induces intra-Þrm wage dispersion, which is can be
costly to the extent that equity norms are important. Also dispersion of
this form violates antidiscrimination laws when workers are interchangeable
in the Þrm. For these reasons, I require equal treatment for observably
equivalent workers, which rules out oﬀer matching in the environment under
study. Instead, a worker stays if doing so yields a higher value under the
current and expected future wage agreements.

2.3

Job Vacancies

A Þrm chooses to post v vacancies. The hire ßow yield per vacancy is h(w)
and the separate rate is s(w) as deÞned respectively by equations (4) and
(5). Hence, the law of motion for a Þrm’s labor force is
nú = vh(w(n, p)) − s(w(n, p))n
7

(11)

where w(n, p) denotes the Stole-Zwiebel wage outcome function deÞned in
equation (9). The value of the Þrm satisÞes the following continuous time
Bellman equation
¾
½
π(n, p) − cv
(12)
rV (n, p) = max
+J(n, p) [h(w(n, p)v − s(w(n, p))n]
v≥0
where c is the cost of posting a vacancy and J(n, p) = ∂V /∂N is the value of
the marginal worker to the Þrm. By the envelope theorem, the value of the
marginal worker satisÞes
rJ(n, p) = π n (n, p) − s(w(n, p))J(n, p)
+Jn (n, p) [h(w)v(n, p) − s(w)n]
+J(n, p) (h0 (w)v(n, p) − s0 (w) n)wn (n, p),

(13)

v(n, p) = arg max {h(w(n, p))vJ(n, p) − cv}

(14)

where
v≥0

is the optimal number of vacancies posted. The Þrst term on the RHS of
(13) is the proÞt earned on the marginal worker as deÞned in equation (7),
the second term is the cost of separations per worker, and the last two terms
account for the total eﬀect of an additional worker on the capital gain or loss
associated with any rate of change in the size of the labor force.
There are two eﬀects of adding a worker to the Þrm’s labor force that are
not present in the canonical model search and matching model. However, the
Þrst of the two, the impact of a change in size on the value of the marginal
match, is not unfamiliar when labor productivity diminishes. The second
eﬀect, represented by the last term on the RHS of (13), is more novel. This
negative eﬀect on the marginal value represents the fact than an increase in
the number of employees drives down the wage thereby decreasing the yield
on vacancies, h(w), and increasing the separation rate, s(w). Of course,
equations (9) and (4) imply that this eﬀect is present if and only if employed
worker search or the wage paid by the Þrm is not the lowest in the market.
These facts provide the rational for all of the original results found in the
paper.
Because the vacancy posting cost, c, is constant by assumption, the Þrm
posts no vacancies if the vacancy posting cost exceeds the expected return,
h(w(n0 , p)J(n0 , p), evaluated at its initial labor force size n0 . In this case,
the Þrm either allows its labor force to fall through attrition until equality
8

holds or it immediately lays oﬀ the redundant workers if doing so is costless.
Once its steady state size is achieved, the Þrm posts the vacancies needed to
replace those that quit. On the other hand, if the return exceeds the cost,
the Þrm instantaneously hires the workers required to achieve an equality
between the marginal cost and expected return to posting a vacancy. In
sum, the Þrm’s labor force size quickly adjusts to its steady state, which is
deÞned by the requirement that the cost of posting a vacancy is equal to its
expected return
c = h(w(n, p))J(n, p),
(15)
where the number of vacancies posted,
v(n, p) =

s(w(n, p))n
,
h(w(n, p))

(16)

is that required to keep the labor force at the desired steady state size. In the
job search literature, equation (15) is referred to as the "free entry" condition
for vacancy creation.

2.4

Labor Market Matching

The aggregate ßow of matches that form per period is determined by an
increasing, concave, and homogenous of degree one matching function of the
aggregate number of vacancies and searching worker, denoted M(v, z). The
rates at which workers are randomly matched with vacant jobs and vacancies
with workers are respectively
λ = M(v, z)/z = m(θ)

(17)

η = M(v, z)/v = m(θ)/θ

(18)

z = [u + (1 − u)φ(w)] !

(19)

and
where m(θ) = M(θ, !),

is the measure of search workers, and θ = v/z is market tightness. Note that
θ = v/! when employed workers search.

9

3

Steady State Equilibria

3.1

Steady State Conditions

In a market steady state, the unemployment rate and the distribution of
employment over Þrms are stationary by assumption. As the steady state
unemployment rate equates the ßows in and out of employment, it satisÞes
u
δ
=
.
1 − u m(θ)

(20)

The analogous requirement that the ßow into employment with a Þrm that
oﬀers value w or less is equal to the ßow out determines the employment
weighted distribution of wages paid by employers, given any distribution of
values over vacancies oﬀered. Formally,
λF (w)u! = (δ + m(θ)φ(w)[1 − F (w)]) G(w)(1 − u)!
where the left side is the ßow of workers into employment paying wage w or
less and the right side is the ßow out. Hence, the steady state relationship
between the distribution of wages paid employed workers and the distribution
of wages oﬀered over vacancies is given by
G(w) =

δF (w)
.
δ + m(θ)φ(w)[1 − F (w)]

(21)

These steady state conditions equations (5) and (18) imply that vacancy
yield and the separation rate are inversely related in a steady state. That is,
¸
·
δm(θ)
u + (1 − u)φ(w)G(w)
(22)
=
h(w) = η
u + (1 − u)φ(w)
θs(w)
where

s(w) = δ + m(θ)φ(w)[1 − F (w)]

(23)

from (4) and (17).
To maintain employment at its steady state level n, an employer must
post v = s(w)n/h(w) vacancies. This fact and the steady state relationship
between the vacancy yield and the separation rate function given by (22),
(23), imply that the eﬀect of adding a worker to future turnover costs can be
expressed as
J(n, p) (h0 (w)v(n, p) − s0 (w) n)wn (n, p) = −2J(n, p)m(θ)φ(w)F 0 (w)g(w, p)
(24)
10

where from equation (9)
g(w, p) ≡ −wn (w, p)n(w, p) = −n(w, p)p

Z

1

1

z β f 00 (zn(w, p))dz > 0

(25)

0

and n(w, p) is the inverse of the Stole-Zwiebel wage function deÞned in equation (9).
At this point, I remind the reader that a reduction in the wage has no
eﬀect on either the vacancy yield or the separationn rate if theo wage paid is
(w)
the lowest in the market. Namely, because limw↑w F (w)−F
= 0 and the
w−w
b from (8), equation (13) can be
sharing rule implies βπ n = (1 − β) (w − w)
rewritten as

(1−β)(w−w)/β
b

if w = w

r+s(w)
J(n(w, p), p) =
(26)

(1−β)(w−w)/β
b

if w > w
(r+s(w)+2m(θ)g(w,p)φ(w)F 0 (w)

where w is the lower support of F (w).
The function g(w, p) plays a crucial role in the analysis in the paper.
It represents the absolute amount by which the wage bill paid to existing
employees falls when a new worker is hired or rises when an existing employee
leaves the Þrm. Because
µ
¶
β
w = (1 − β)w
b+
pnα−1
1 − β + βα
in the log linear production function case from (10),
Z 1
1
nz β f 00 (zn)dz
(27)
g(n, p) = −p
0
Z 1
1−β−αβ
α−1
z β dz = (1 − α)α (w − (1 − β)w)
b .
= (1 − α)αpn
0

in the Cobb-Douglas case. Note that the function happens to be independent
of Þrm productivity.

3.2

Degenerate Wage

I begin by verifying the Helpman-Iskhoki Þnding that a steady state equilibrium exists with the property that the "law of one price" holds. Since
11

employed workers do not search is such an equilibrium (φ(w) ≡ 0), the
FONC for an optimal choice of vacancies, c = h(w)J(n(w, p)) and equation
(26) imply that the common wage paid is
µ
¶
β
(r + δ)cθ
w=w
b+
.
1−β
m(θ)

Since c/h(w) is the expected cost of Þlling a vacancy, the diﬀerence between
the wage paid and the reservation wage demand is the amortized expected
cost to the employer of Þnding a replacement for the marginal worker. This
fact generalized the Stole-Zwiebel Þnding that wage paid must equal the
worker’s outside option in a model without matching friction.
Of course, equations (22) and (23) require that s(w) = δ and h(w) =
m(θ)/θ and
µ
¶
µ
¶
w−w
b
β
w
b = b + m(θ)
=b+
cθ
r+δ
1−β
from equation (6). Hence, the solution to the system for the wage is
¶
µ
cθ
β
(r + δ + m(θ))
w =b+
1−β
m(θ)

(28)

Finally, the steady state value of labor market tightness satisÞes the
employment identify
Z 1
m(θ)!
= (1 − u) ! =
n(w, p(x))dx.
(29)
δ + m(θ)
0
Definition 1: A degenerate steady state equilibrium is a wage w and a
market tightness parameter θ that satisfy (28), and (29) .
The following conditions are maintained:
Assumption 1: The job Þnding rate m(θ) is increasing and strictly concave
function of θ and m(0) = 0, and limθ→0 {θ/m(θ)} = 0.
Assumption 2: The baseline production function f(n) is increasing, strictly
concave thrice diﬀerentiable, and satisÞes the Inada conditions, limn→0 f 0 (n) =
∞ and limn→∞ f 0 (n) = 0.
Proposition 1 A unique degenerate steady state equilibrium with positive
market tightness exists.
12

Proof. Since (28) deÞnes a continuous and strictly increasing functional
relationship between w and θ, the right side of (29) can be represented as a
continuous decreasing function of θ. As the LHS is continuos and increasing
in θ, there is at most one solution for θ. Because the LHS is zero when
θ = 0, but the RHS is strictly positive, the equilibrium tightness is unique
and strictly positive.

3.3

Equilibrium Wage Dispersion

Next, I turn to the principal focus of the paper, the implications of searchon-the job for wage dispersion in the canonical matching model. If wage
are disperse and employed workers search (φ(w) = 1) as a consequence, the
reservation wage is w
b = b by equation (6), the value of home production.
Therefore, the free entry condition for vacancy creation (15) and equation
(26) imply that the lowest wage paid in a market steady state is
¶
µ
c
β
w = b+
(r + δ + m(θ))
(30)
1−β
h(w)
µ
¶
β
cδm(θ)
= b+
(r + δ + m(θ))
1−β
(δ + m(θ))θ
where the second equality follows from (22) and (23). Equation (26) also
implies that any equilibrium wage oﬀer density must satisfy
F 0 (w) =

h(w) (1 − β) (w − b)/β − c(r + s(w))
, w ∈ (w, w).
2cm(θ)g(w, p)

(31)

m(θ)δ
,
θs(w)

(32)

where
h(w) =
and

s(w) = δ + m(θ)[1 − F (w)].

(33)

Whether g(w, p) is invariant with respect to p is important for our analysis. Indeed, in the special case in which g(w, p) is independent of p, (31)
is an ordinary diﬀerential equation that can be unique solved for the oﬀer
distribution for any speciÞcation of an initial condition, the value of F (w).
This case is unique to the Cobb-Douglas production function speciÞcation.

13

Lemma 2 The only baseline production functions in the set that satisfy Assumption 2 and ∂g(w, p)/∂p ≡ 0 are members of the log linear family.
Proof. From equation (9), the function n(w, p) is the unique solution to
Z 1
1−β
w − (1 − β)w
b
=
z β f 0 (zn)dz.
p
0

By implication, n(w, p) is a function of the LHS of this expression and so is
any function of n(w, p). Hence, gp (w, p) ≡ 0 together with the deÞnition (25)
require
¶
µ
Z 1
1
w − (1 − β)w
b
= −n
z β f 00 (zn)dz
a
p
0

for some constant a > 0. Given thee fact,
Z 1
1
z[af 0 (zn) + z β nf 00 (zn)]dz = 0
0 =
0

m
0
af (n) = −nf 00 (n)∀n ∈ [0, 1].

together with f(0) = 0 and f 0 (n) > 0 imply f (n) = n1−a /(1 − a), 0 < a < 1.
Suﬃciency is implied by equation (27).
When the eﬀect of adding a worker to turnover costs, the denominator
of (31), is not invariant to productivity, then the wage oﬀer density depends
on the productivity of any Þrm paying w. In this case, another diﬀerential
equation is needed to fully describe an equilibrium wage oﬀer distribution.
Let ω(x), x ∈ [0, 1], represent a function that assign a steady state wage
rate to Þrm x and let z(x) denote the fraction of vacancies posted by those
with productivity less than or equal to that the Þrm of productivity rank x.
We seek a steady state equilibrium in which more productive employers pay
more, at least weakly. Given ω0 (x) ≥ 0, z(x) = F (ω(x)) and, consequently,
z0 (x) = F 0 (ω(x))ω0 (x). Hence,
ω 0 (x) =

2cm(θ)g(n(ω(x), p(x)))z0 (x)
, x ∈ [0, 1)
h(ω(x)) (1 − β)) (ω(x) − b)/β − (r + s(ω(x)))c

(34)

which provides one of the two diﬀerential equations for the system. The other

14

is supplied by the employment identity
µ
¶
δz(x)
m(θ)!
(1 − u)!G(ω(x)) =
δ + m(θ) δ + m(θ)[1 − z(x)]
Z x
n(ω(z), p(z))dz, , x ∈ [0, 1]
=
0

By diﬀerentiating both side and solving the result for z0 (x), one obtains
!
Ã
2
(δ
+
m(θ))
(δ
+
m(θ)[1
−
z(x)])
z0 (x) =
n(ω(x), p(x)), x ∈ (0, 1).
δm(θ)!
(35)
Of course, in addition
Z 1
m(θ)!
=
n(ω(z), p(z))dz.
(36)
δ + m(θ)
0

3.4

Existence and Uniqueness

Definition 3 A monotone increasing steady state dispersed wage equilibrium
is an increasing wage assignment function ω : [0, 1] → [ω(0), ω(1)] , a vacancy
c.d.f. z : [0, 1] → [0, 1], and a market tightness parameter θ that satisfy
equations (34), (35), and (36).
The following fact rules out multiple disperse wage equilibria except in
the case of a Cobb-Douglas production function.
Lemma 4 If employed worker search and ∂g(w, p)/∂p 6= 0, then Þrms that
pay the same wage w must have the same productivity.
Proof. Because the free entry condition, equation (26), can be written as
c=

h(w)(w − b)
,
r + s(w) + 2m(θ)g(w, p)F 0 (w)

ω(x1 ) = ω(x2 ) = w implies g(w, p(x2 )) − g(w, p(x1 )) = 0 for all x1 and x2 .
For a given value of the tightness parameter θ, one can use the phase
diagram implied by the ODE system to characterize the set of solutions to
the equations that could serve as possible wage oﬀer distributions when p(x)
15

is continuous. Although the phase space generally has three dimensions with
each point representing a particular (z, ω, x) combination, a slice of the space
at any given value of x has the qualitative properties illustrated in Figure 1.
The curve in the space with end points labeled w0 and w1 is the locus along
which the denominator of the expression on the right side of equation (34)
is zero. In other words, the curve is deÞned by
¶
µ
m(θ)δ
(1 − β) (ω − b)/β − (r + δ + m(θ)[1 − z(x)])c = 0
θ(δ + m(θ)[1 − z(x)])
(37)
where w0 is the solution for ω when z(0) = 0 and w1 is the solution when
z(1) = 1. Because the curve is independent of x, it is in the same position
in Figure 1 for all x.
The curves in the phase diagram represented by arrows are the solution
trajectories of the system where the points of each indicates the "direction
of motion" as x increases. Note that there are two solution trajectories that
initiate from any point on the curve deÞned by (37). Local multiplicity
arises because ω0 (0) converges to inÞnity as any such point is approached. In
other words, the standard suﬃcient condition for a unique local solution to
the ODE system, Lipschitz continuity, does not hold. However, because the
RHS of (35) is always strictly positive, all solution trajectory that initiate
above and to the right of the curve are unique and tend toward the north east
in the diagram while only those to the left of it move northwest. Obviously,
only the former can represent a possible oﬀer distribution density function
since F 0 (w) = z0 (x)/ω0 (x) > 0 implies that z0 (x) > 0 must hold. Finally,
for each candidate, the upper support of the distribution, w, is the value of
ω at the point where the trajectory intersects the line z = 1.
Still, we need two initial conditions to determine a unique particular
solution. Of course, equation (30) provides one; namely, ω(0) = w = w0
from (30) and (37) given the equilibrium value of θ. As an implication
of Lemma (2), one can generally infer the second boundary condition. In
the absence of a mass point in the distribution of productivity at it’s lower
support, equivalently p(x) is strictly increasing at x = 0, then F (w) = 0. In
other words, the candidate solution for the wage oﬀer distribution function in
this case is the trajectory that originates at the point (ω(0), z(0)) = (w0 , 0).
An equilibrium value of the market tightness solves equation (36) when its
RHS is evaluated using the oﬀer distribution candidate uniquely associated
with the solution value of θ. Obviously, equation (30) implies that the lowest
16

wage of the candidate distribution increases with market tightness. Since
s(w) increases and h(w) decreases with θ from (32) and (33), equation (31)
and F 0 (w) = z0 (ω(x))/ω0 (x) > 0 imply that the slopes of the all the solution
trajectories fall continuous with θ. As a consequence, the wage distribution is
stochastically increasing in θ which implies that the RHS of (36) is positive,
continuous and decreasing function of θ.
To sum up, the following results holds.
Proposition 5 If the productivity distribution is atomless (p(x) is continuous and strictly increasing), a montone steady state equilibrium exists. Except
in the case of the log linear family of production functions, there is only one
and it is atomless.
Corollary 6 If the production function is Cobb-Douglas, then a continuum
of equilibria exists even if all Þrms are equally productive.

3.5

The Cobb-Douglas Case

The fact that a continuum of equilibria exist in the Cobb-Douglas case is
somewhat disturbing, since that speciÞcation is particularly convenient in
empirical work. Of course, no actual production function is exactly log linear. Hence, we can regard the disperse wage equilibrium of interest as that
associated with the requirement that there is no mass point at the lowest
wage, at least when there is no mass point of Þrms with the lowest productivity.
Moreover, the assumption that the cost of posting vacancies is a constant
if also a simpliÞcation. Since adjustment to steady states is not instantaneous in fact, a convex cost of vacancy posting is a more realistic speciÞcation assumption. In this case, the increasing marginal cost function c0 (v)
would replace c in all the equations above. It is a straight foreword but
time consuming to show that all the other equations of the model as well
as the arguments made hold in this generalization, at least in steady state.
Furthermore, multiplicity also vanishes in the Cobb-Douglas case.
Proposition 7 If the cost of posting vacancies is increasing and strictly convex, then employers pay the same wage if and only if they are of the same
type.

17

Proof. In this speciÞcation, the free entry can be written as
µ
¶
h(w)(w − b)
s(w)n(w, p)
0
=
,
c
h(w)
r + s(w) + 2m(θ)g(w, p)F 0 (w)

(38)

in any steady state. As c00 (·) > 0 and np > 0 both hold, ω(x1 ) = ω(x2 ) if and
only if p(x1 ) = p(x2 ).

4

Comparing the Equilibria

As h(w) < m(θ)/θ from (32) when employed workers search, the lower support of the wage distribution in the disperse equilibrium is greater than the
equilibrium single wage when evaluated at the same level of market tightness
by equations (28) and (30). Workers receive more rent when they search
while employed because the cost of replacing the marginal worker is higher
given the same arrival rates. Because higher wages lower the incentive to
post vacancies, the level of market tightness will be lower and unemployment will be higher in the disperse wage equilibrium. Indeed, an application
of the argument used to prove existence and uniqueness of the dispersed
wage equilibrium implies that the following relationship between wages and
employment in the two equilibria.
Proposition 8 Market tightness is lower in a dispersed wage equilibrium
than in the single wage equilibrium and the equilibrium single wage is less
than the upper support of the equilibrium wage oﬀer distribution.
Proof. Suppose that employed worker search and for the moment consider
the case in which value of market tightness in the degenerate equilibrium;
call it θ∗ . When θ = θ∗ , In this case, w0 > w∗ in Figure 1 which implies
that all the wages in the support of the candidate distribution exceed w∗ .
As a consequence, the LHS of (36) is strictly greater than the RHS when
θ = θ∗ which in turn implies that the unique value of θ in the disperse wage
equilibrium is strictly less than θ∗ . Obviously, an analogous argument implies
that the value of θ for which the upper support of the wage distribution is
equal to w∗ is such that the LHS of (36) is strictly greater than the RHS.
Hence, the support of the equilibrium wage distribution includes the single
wage equilibrium in its interior.
Employment is lower in the disperse wage equilibrium because employed
workers have an incentive to search for a higher paying job. As a consequence
18

of search on-the-job, the separation rate is higher than it would be for all
but the highest paying Þrm and, consequently, turnover cost per worker are
higher. In addition, the act of hiring another worker reduces the wage paid
which adversely aﬀect the net change in employment attributable to posting
a vacancy. Both eﬀects reduced the incentive to hire which results in lower
employment in steady state.
Does lower employment imply less welfare in the dispersed wage equilibrium? Not necessarily. As Stole and Zwiebel (1996) point out in a particular
equilibrium setting, their bilateral intra-Þrm bargaining solution provides
an incentive for employers to "over employ" as a means of driving down
wage costs. Cahuc, Marque, and Wasmer (2007) suggest that this conclusion
continues to hold in search equilibrium when Þrms are composed of many
workers and Þrms are equally productive. Below I extend the ineﬃciency
result to include the case of heterogenous Þrms. Hence, wage dispersion and
the additional search it induces oﬀ sets to some extent the incentive to over
employ.
Suppose that the planner chooses vacancies for every Þrm to maximize
the expected present value of aggregate income including home production.
As is well known, search externalities generally exist in a matching model.
However, as both Pissarides (1984) and Hosios (1990) have shown, these are
internalized in the canonical search and matching model if the employers’
share of match rent is equal to the elasticity of the matching function with
respect to vacancies. In this section, I demonstrate that employment in the
single wage equilibrium exceeds the solution to the planner’s problem when
the Hosios condition holds and production exhibits diminishing returns. In
addition to excessive employment, workers are generally misallocated across
Þrms as well when Þrm productivities diﬀer.
The law of motion for employment in Þrm x is
n(x)
ú
= v(x)q(θ) − δn(x), x ∈ [0, 1]
where v(x) represents vacancies posted and θ is market tightness. Letting
Ψ represent the maximal expected value of future aggregate income, the

19

continuous time Bellman equation is

R1
p(x)f(n(x))dx


³
´

R01
R

 +b 1 − n(x)dx − c 1 v(x)dx
´ R0
i
h ³ 0R
rΨ = max
1
1
v(x) 
n(x)dx
−
v(x)dx
+λ
θ
1
−


0
0

R1

+ 0 Ψn(x) [v(x)q (θ) − δn(x)] dx













(39)

where Ψ is the value of the optimal program, Ψn(x) is its partial derivative
with respect to n(x), and λ is the shadow price of market tightness. The
FONCs for interior vacancy choices are for every x ∈ [0, 1]
Ψn(x) q(θ) − λ − c = 0
µ
¶ Z 1
Z 1
λ 1−
n(x)dx +
Ψn(x) v(x)q0 (θ) dx = 0
0
0
¶ Z 1
µ
Z 1
n(x)dx −
v(x)dx = 0
θ 1−
0

0

where
ú n(x)
(r + δ) Ψn(x) = p(x)f 0 (n(x)) − b − λθ + Ψ

by the envelope theorem.
In steady state, the marginal value of a worker is the same across Þrms.
Letting Ψn(x) = Ψn for all x, market tightness satisÞes
Ψn [q(θ) + θq 0 (θ)] − c = 0
where the common marginal value of a worker solves
¶
µ
θq 0 (θ)
0
(r + δ) Ψn = p(x)f (n(x)) − b −
cθ, x ∈ [0, 1]
q(θ) + θq 0 (θ)

(40)

(41)

and total employment satisÞes
θq(θ)!
m(θ)
=
=
δ + m(θ)
δ + θq(θ)

Z

1

n(w, p(x))dx.

(42)

0

However, in a degenerate wage market equilibrium, equations (8) and
(28) require
¶
µ
cβθ
0
β (p(x)f (n(x)) + g(p(x), w) − w) = (1 − β) w − b −
1−β
20

where
pf 0 (n(w, p(x))) + g(w, p(x)) − w =

(r + δ)c
q(θ)

which together imply
·
¸
β
(r + δ) c
w =b+
+ cθ
1−β
q(θ)
In combination, these equations require
p(x)f 0 (n(x))) + g(w, p(x)) − b −

(r + δ)c
β
cθ =
, x ∈ [0, 1]
1−β
(1 − β)q(θ)

(43)

while equation (40) and (41) require
¶
µ
¶
µ
q(θ)
(r + δ)c
θq0 (θ)
0
p(x)f (n(x)) − b −
cθ =
, x ∈ [0, 1]
0
0
q(θ) + θq (θ)
q(θ) + θq (θ)
q(θ)
(44)
Given the Hosios condition
1−β =1+

θq0 (θ)
θm0 (θ)
=
,
q(θ)
m(θ)

(45)

intra-Þrm bargaining generates two distortions. First, because the marginal
contribution to proÞt, p(x)f 0 (n(x)) + g(w, p(x)), is equalized across Þrms
in the degenerate wage equilibrium rather than the marginal products, the
allocation of workers across Þrms is not output maximizing except in the
Cobb-Douglas production function case where g(w, p(x)) is independent of
p(x). Second, because g(w, p(x)) > 0, employment in every Þrm is too high
given tightness.
Proposition 9 If the Hosios condition holds, then the value of market tightness in the single wage equilibrium exceeds that in the planner’s solution.
Proof. By comparison of (43) and (44), the solution for n(x) is larger to the
Þrst equation is larger than that of the second for all w and p(x) given that
g(w, p(x)) > 0 given the same value of θ. Hence, if the value of θ is chosen
to be the solution to the planner’s problem, the RHS of (42) exceeds the left
in the single wage equilibrium. Hence, the equilibrium value of θ, that which
equates to side, must be larger.
21

Although I did not allow for search on-the-job in formulating the social
planner’s problem, this restriction is not binding when the vacancy posting cost is linear. In steady state at least, the planner has no incentive to
reallocated workers across Þrms because total output is already maximized
given aggregate employment. However, because employment is too high in
the single wage equilibrium and the allocation of employment is sub-optimal
except in the case of a Cobb-Douglas production function, it is possible that
the dispersed equilibrium with search-on-the job yields higher welfare than
the single wage equilibrium.

5

Concluding Remarks

The purpose of this paper is to show that a dispersed wage steady state equilibrium exists in a version of the search and matching model in which Þrms
have many employees, face diminishing returns in production, and wages are
the outcome of intra-Þrm bargaining as modeled by Stole and Zwiebel (1996).
Helpman and Iskhoki (2008) establish that a unique single wage equilibrium
exists in this environment. In this paper, I prove that a generically unique
dispersed wage equilibrium also exists with the property that more productive Þrms pay higher wages if productivity diﬀers across Þrms and employed
workers are allowed to search. Finally, employment is lower in the dispersed
wage equilibrium but welfare need not be because employment exceeds the
social optimum in the single wage equilibrium. Excessive employment arises
because employing another worker reduces the wage paid to all employees
when the wage is the outcome of the Stole-Zwibel bilateral bargaining game.
Employment is higher in the dispersed wage equilibrium because search by
employed workers labor turnover and wage competition between Þrms and
eﬀects reduce the incentive to create jobs.
The obvious unanswered question has to do with stability of equilibrium.
Will the market converge to the single wage or to the disperse wage steady
state equilibrium? When the market is not in steady state, the nature of
the wage equation implies that wages will diﬀer and, consequently, employed
worker will search. Is this fact suﬃcient to guarantee continued search in
the transition and hence convergence of the market distribution to the nondegenerate steady state? Answering this question is a subject for future
theoretical research.

22

References
[1] Bartelsman, E., J. Haltiwanger, and S. Scarpetta (2008), "Cross Country Diﬀerences in Productivity: The Role of Allocative Eﬃciency," University of Maryland, mimeo.
[2] Burdett, K, and K. Judd (1983) "Equilibrium Price Dispersion," Econometrica, 51(4) :955-969.
[3] Burdett, K, and D.T. Mortensen (1998) “Wage Diﬀerentials, Employer
Size and Unemployment," International Economic Review 39: 257-273.
[4] Cahuc, P., F. Marque, and E. Wasmer (2007) "A Theory of Wages
and Labor Demand with IntraÞrm Bargaining and Matching Frictions,"
forthcoming in the International Economic Review.
[5] Cahuc, P., F. Posel-Vinay, J-M Robin (2006) “Wage Bargaining with
On-the-job Search: Theory and Evidence”, Econometrica, 74(2), 32364.
[6] Helpman, E., and O. Iskhoki (2008) "Labor Market Rigidities, Trade,
and Unemployment," NBER Working Paper 13365.
[7] Hosios, A.J. (1990). “On the Eﬃciency of Matching and Related Models
of Search and Unemployment”, Review of Economic Studies, 57(2): 27998.
[8] Mortensen, D.T., (1978). “SpeciÞc capital and labor turnover," The Bell
Journal of Economics 9:572. 586.
[9] Mortensen, D.T. (2003) Wage Dispersion, Why are similar worker paid
diﬀerently?, MIT Press.
[10] Pissarides, C.A., (1984). "Eﬃcient Job Rejection," Economic Journal,
Conference Papers.
[11] Postel-Vinay, F. and J.-M. Robin (2004) “To Match Or Not To Match?
Optimal Wage Policy with Endogenous Worker Search Intensity”, Review of Economic Dynamics, 7(2), 297-331.
[12] Smith, E. (1999), "Search, Concave Production, and Labor Force Size,"
Review of Economic Dynamics, 2(2): 456-471.
23

[13] Stole, L.A., J. Zwiebel (1996) "Intra-Firm Bargaining under NonBinding Contracts," Review of Economic Studies 63:375-410.

24

