                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE ABCS OF CHARITABLE SOLICITATION

                                            Jonathan Meer
                                           Harvey S. Rosen

                                        Working Paper 15037
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15037


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2009




We are grateful to Kevin Cotter, Bruce D. Freeman, Jean Grossman, William Hardt, Caroline Hoxby,
John List, Brian McDonald, Ashley Miller, Liam P. Morton, Sriniketh Nagavarapu, Deborah Prentice,
Andres Santos, Julie Shadle, Jeffrey H. Yellin, seminar participants at Northwestern and Stanford
Universities, and participants in the Middlebury Conference on Charitable Giving for useful suggestions.
Zhihao Zhang provided excellent research assistance. This research was supported in part by Princeton’s
Center for Economic Policy Studies, in part by the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research,
and in part by the Koret Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Jonathan Meer and Harvey S. Rosen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The ABCs of Charitable Solicitation
Jonathan Meer and Harvey S. Rosen
NBER Working Paper No. 15037
June 2009
JEL No. D64,I22

                                                ABSTRACT

A substantial experimental literature suggests that a personal solicitation is an effective way to induce
people to make charitable donations. We examine whether this result generalizes to a non-experimental
setting. Specifically, we estimate the effect of a marginal personal solicitation using observational
data on alumni giving at an anonymous research university, which we refer to as Anon U. At Anon
U, volunteers use lists provided by the Development Office to telephone classmates and solicit them
for donations. The names on these lists are always in alphabetical order. The volunteers who do the
soliciting often run out of time before they reach the end of their lists. These observations suggest
a simple strategy for testing whether personal solicitation matters, viz., examine whether alumni with
names toward the end of the alphabet are less likely to give than alumni with names toward the beginning,
ceteris paribus. If so, then a marginal personal solicitation matters.

Our main finding is that location in the alphabet – and hence, a personal solicitation – has a strong
effect on probability of making a gift. A rough estimate of the elasticity of the probability of giving
with respect to the probability of receiving a personal solicitation is 0.15. However, there is no statistically
discernible effect on the amount given, conditional on donating. We also find that women respond
more strongly to a personal solicitation than men. This is consistent with a robust result in the psychology
literature, that women find it more difficult than men to refuse requests that they perceive as being
legitimate.


Jonathan Meer
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
jmeer@stanford.edu

Harvey S. Rosen
Department of Economics
Fisher Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
HSR@princeton.edu
1. Introduction

       At least since the time of de Tocqueville, observers have marveled at the generosity that

Americans exhibit toward one another. In 2005, they recorded over $183 billion of charitable

donations on their tax returns (Statistics of Income Bulletin [2008]), a figure that includes only

itemized contributions and does not count the value of time spent volunteering. But charitable

institutions generally do not rely only on people’s generous spirits and wait passively for dona-

tions. Rather, they actively encourage potential donors to make gifts.

       Are these solicitation activities effective? Anecdotal evidence suggests that the answer is

overwhelmingly yes (Bekkers and Wiepking [2007]). In a way, this is unsurprising—it’s hard to

imagine the people who are asked to contribute to a charity won’t be more likely to give than

people who are not. A more interesting question is whether additional solicitations matter – if a

potential donor doesn’t respond to several requests to give, can a marginal solicitation have an

effect? A closely related question is if certain types of solicitation activities are more effective

than others, and if so, by how much. For example, what is the differential impact of a solicitation

that is done in person as opposed to a letter, and is the impact primarily on the likelihood that an

individual makes a donation (the extensive margin) or the amount given conditional on making a

gift (the intensive margin)?

       Relatively little research has been done on the effectiveness of additional solicitations.

Two papers, both using responses from small surveys, are relevant. Diamond and Noble [2001]

find that in response to frequent solicitations, donors develop defense mechanisms such as simp-

ly throwing out mail requests. They provide no quantitative estimate of the impact of an addi-

tional solicitation. . Using self-reported measures of solicitation frequency and giving behavior,
                                                                                                                 2


Van Diepen et al. [2006a] find that additional appeals initially generate more donations, but after

some point, donees become irritated and may actually reduce their giving.

        On the other hand, the differential impacts of alternative types of solicitation activities

have been the subject of an extensive experimental literature.1 An important finding in this litera-

ture is that the level of scrutiny associated with the solicitation matters. That is, individuals be-

have differently when their behavior is more observable, for example, when the solicitation is

done personally rather than by mail. This has been documented both in laboratory experiments

(Andreoni and Petrie [2004], Anderson and Stafford [2009]) and field experiments (Landry et al.

[2006], Alpizar et al. [2008]). Some papers written on field experiments also allow us to learn

whether alternative methods of solicitation are more likely to affect whether an individual is

makes a gift (the extensive margin) or the amount of the gift, conditional on making a gift (the

intensive margin).2 For example, List and Lucking-Reiley [2002] examine the effects of seed

money, which signal that the charity is worthwhile by showing that others have already contri-

buted, and find that there are strong effects on both the extensive and intensive margins. Huck

and Rasul [2007] find that different mechanisms of solicitation, like rebates or matching grants,

also have effects on both the probability of making a gift and the size of the gift itself, condition-

al on making one. Meanwhile, Landry et al. [2006] find that lotteries increase giving almost en-

tirely through their effect on the extensive margin. It appears, then, that there are no general re-

sults with respect to whether donative behavior is more sensitive to various treatments on the in-

tensive or extensive margins.


1
  A theoretical analysis of the impact of solicitation is included in Andreoni and Payne [2003].
2
  The papers describing laboratory experiments are largely silent on this issue. They focus primarily on measuring
the proportion of subjects who completely free ride under given conditions, and the unconditional mean donation.
In general, the papers do not report the mean donation conditional on making a donation, and how it varies with the
experimental situation.
                                                                                                  3


       All of this begs the question of whether the results from experiments generalize to actual

settings. Levitt and List [2007] argue that field experiments are likely to produce results that ge-

neralize than laboratory experiments, but ultimately, whether they generalize is an empirical

question. This observation is particularly cogent in the case of charitable giving, because the

constraints associated with the design of field experiments tend to lead to both relatively small

sample sizes and amounts donated. This leads to the question of whether there are any studies on

solicitation using observational data that can be compared to the experimental results. The empir-

ical literature using observational data is rather thin. Yoruk [2006] uses individual-level data

from a survey to estimate the impact of solicitation on total charitable giving. However, the date

used in that study have an important limitation. An individual is counted as having been solicited

if he or she received any solicitations during the year, and there is no information about whether

the charity to which the individual actually contributed did in fact solicit him or her. Van Diepen,

Donkers and Franses [2006b] found that direct mailing solicitations increase giving to a group of

charitable institutions in the Netherlands, but the solicitations appear to have had a substantial

informational component. Thus, one cannot determine whether the increased giving was due to

the solicitation per se or the information about the charities. Schervish and Havens [1997] ana-

lyze survey data that ask individuals whether they have been solicited by charitable organiza-

tions, and find that individuals who have been solicited make larger donations. However, the di-

rection of causality is unclear; one does not know whether people give money because they are

solicited or they are solicited because they give money, or some third variable (such as a family

history of support of charities) drives both.

       Several papers have used observational data to study the solicitation activities of institu-

tions of higher education, which, like other organizations that rely heavily on donations, have
                                                                                                                           4


sophisticated fundraising organizations.3 Gottfried and Johnston [2006] and Leslie and Ramey

[1988] both examine data at the university level to assess the efficacy of these solicitation activi-

ties. However, they can only focus on fairly crude indicia of solicitation, such as the percent of

alumni contacted. Another problem with using university-level data is that the direction of cau-

sality again may be an issue – it seems just as plausible that the percent of alumni contacted is a

function of the university’s resources as vice versa.

         This paper uses observational data from an anonymous research university to estimate the

impact of a marginal personal solicitation on donative behavior. At this institution, which we will

refer to as Anon U, volunteers use lists provided by the Development Office to telephone class-

mates and ask them to make a donation. The names on these lists are always in alphabetical or-

der. The volunteers who do these personal solicitations generally go through their lists in order

but often run out of time before they reach the end.4 These observations suggest a simple strategy

for determining whether a marginal personal solicitation matters, viz., examine whether alumni

with names toward the end of the alphabet give less than alumni with names toward the begin-

ning of the alphabet, ceteris paribus. If so, then a marginal personal solicitation matters.5

         In Section 2 we discuss the data. Section 3 presents our model and results. Our main find-

ing is that location in the alphabet has a strong effect on probability of making a gift. In our basic

model, an alumnus in the first part of the alphabet (A through F) is 1.2 percentage points (off a

baseline of 22 percent) more likely to make a donation than an alumnus toward the end of the

alphabet (S through Z). On the other hand, conditional on giving, the amounts donated are not

3
  In 2007, institutions of higher learning raised about $8 billion from their alumni (Council for Aid to Education
[2008]).
4
  One volunteer told us, “Naturally, I tend to start at the top of the lists that I am given and sometimes do not get to
the end of the list. This does not seem like a big deal, but that happens to the bulk of my solicitation team.”
5
  It is possible that volunteers put less effort into the solicitation of individuals toward the end of the alphabet. In this
case, the impact of alphabetical placement on giving reflects “effective solicitation,” which depends on both the li-
kelihood of being solicited and the intensity of the solicitation, conditional on being solicited. Our data do not allow
us to identify separately these two effects.
                                                                                                   5


sensitive to the name’s placement in the alphabet. That is, solicitation affects the extensive mar-

gin of giving but not the intensive margin. We also show that our findings are not driven by a

correlation between an individual’s income and the location of his or her name in the alphabet.

           These finding suggest that the experimental results with respect to the importance of the

level of scrutiny generalize to real world settings. As noted above, the experimental results with

respect to the impacts on the intensive and extensive margins are mixed; our findings suggest

that, at least in our observational setting, the experimental results indicating small impacts on the

intensive margin are more valid. This difference between the effects on the intensive and exten-

sive margins is consistent with models in which individuals donate to charities in order to avoid

the solicitor’s disapproval. In this case, the donation per se is perceived as eliminating the stig-

ma; the amount given, conditional on giving, has no additional impact. The results can also be

rationalized by a model in which people have in mind a certain amount to give, but do not make

that gift unless asked.6 Section 4 concludes with a summary and suggestions for future research.



2. Data and Econometric Model

           Both the construction of our analysis sample and econometric model are informed by the

practices of Anon U’s Development Office. The fundraising year begins on July 1. During the

next eleven months, every alumnus receives at least two mailings and, in recent years, several

emails as well. In general, few personal solicitations are made during this 11-month period, ex-

cept for a small number of very large donors. In June, the strategy shifts. Alphabetical lists with

names of alumni who have not contributed at this point are given to alumni volunteers, who are




6
    Andreoni and Payne [2003] lay out such a model.
                                                                                                                         6


asked to make a personal solicitation, generally by telephone.7 The total number of volunteers in

a given year is about 2500 (a figure that has been fairly steady over time), and each list has about

20 names. Alumni who have contributed during the previous 11 months are not subject to any

further solicitation in June. Our analysis sample consists of the alumni who have not given as of

June. These are the givers who are subject to the “treatment” of a marginal personal solicitation

— provided that a volunteer actually gets to their names on the list. Our goal is to estimate the

impact of an incremental solicitation that is done personally rather than by mail.8 In other set-

tings, as well, the incremental effect of a given type of solicitation is relevant, because as Van

Diepen, Donkers and Franses [2006] point out, it is typical for individuals to be solicited mul-

tiple times by a given charity.

         As noted above, our analysis relies on the assumption that volunteers go through their

lists in alphabetical order. Of course, this need not strictly be the case. Volunteers might, for ex-

ample, contact friends before going through the rest of the list. But provided that the names of

friends are random with respect to position in the alphabet,9 all this does is introduce some noise

into the relationship between solicitation and alphabetical placement; it does not negate the un-

derlying premise of the analysis — if a marginal personal solicitation matters and individuals at

the beginning of the alphabet are more likely to be solicited, then individuals at the beginning of

the alphabet should be more likely to give.


7
  A relatively small proportion of the calls are made by current students. They are generally given lists of alumni
from classes that have relatively few volunteers.
8
  This assumes that the effect of a marginal solicitation by mail in June is zero. This is a reasonable assumption, giv-
en that individuals have already rejected a number of mail solicitations. Apparently, the Development Office be-
lieves this assumption is correct. After all, the option of sending another letter or email is still available in June, yet
the Development Office chooses to follow the much more costly strategy of a personal solicitation. To the extent
that some individuals would in fact have responded to a mail solicitation in June, our estimates will overstate the
effect of a marginal personal solicitation.
9
  At Anon U, neither academic nor residential assignments are made alphabetically. Hence, there is no reason to
believe that there will be a correlation between position in the alphabet and whether the volunteer has a personal
relationship with an individual on his or her list.
                                                                                                    7


       Another problem could arise if the Development Office systematically assigned different

parts of the alphabet to specific solicitors. However, discussions with Anon U solicitors and the

staff of the Development Office indicate that this is not the case. The only non-random aspect of

the assignment is by region; solicitors are matched to alumni who live in their general vicinity.

       2.1 Data

       Our primary data source is the administrative archives of Anon U’s Development Office,

which contain information on all alumni donations from 1983 to 2007. The data are proprietary

and sensitive, and individuals’ names were stripped from the records before being made availa-

ble to us. For purposes of this study, however, we were provided with the first initial of each

alumnus’s last name. Our data also indicate whether an alumnus’s initial changes (due, for ex-

ample, to the adoption of a new name with marriage), so it is possible for a given individual’s

position in the alphabet to change over time.

       Our unit of observation is a yearly giving opportunity. For example, if an individual has

been an alumna for 5 years, she accounts for 5 giving opportunities in our analysis, starting in the

first fiscal year after graduation. Multiple gifts for the same purpose in the same year are

summed together. The Development Office data also include information on academic major, the

alumnus’s undergraduate extracurricular activities, post graduate education, occupation, resi-

dence, and whether he or she is married to another graduate of Anon U.

       Anon U’s Registrar supplemented these data with information on SAT scores, academic

honors, ethnicity, type of high school, summary evaluations made by the Admissions Office dur-

ing the application process, and grade point average. The Registrar’s data are available only for

the classes of 1972 and onwards, so we restrict most of our analysis to this group of individuals.

This gives us 583,496 observations, representing 35,583 alumni. After removing those who give
                                                                                                                    8


in the first 11 months of the year, we are left with 331,824 observations representing 32,152

alumni. We delete 22,929 observations because of missing or unreliable data on covariates. This

leaves 308,895 observations on 30,148 alumni. Of these observations, 68,516 (or 22.18 percent)

are associated with a gift.

         2.2 Econometric Specification

         We noted earlier that being solicited may have different effects on the decision whether

or not to donate — the extensive margin — than on the decision how much to donate, condition-

al on making a gift — the intensive margin.10 A statistical model that allows for this possibility is

therefore needed. We assume that each alumnus first chooses whether or not to make a gift and

then, conditional on making a gift, decides how much to donate. Following Huck and Rasul

[2007], a natural specification is a hurdle model. In our context, the first step in the implementa-

tion of the hurdle model is to estimate a probit for whether or not the individual makes a gift. The

second step is to use ordinary least squares on the positive observations to analyze the decision

about how much to give. An assumption is needed to make causal inferences from the second-

stage estimates, namely, that the second stage is conditionally independent of the first. We dis-

cuss this further below.

         It is straightforward to use the estimates from these two steps to calculate unconditional

marginal effects on the mean level of giving; this allows us to characterize the effect of solicita-

tion on giving taking into account both the impacts on the intensive and extensive margins.11 We



10
   Thus, for example, it would not be appropriate to use a Tobit model, which imposes the constraint that the mar-
ginal effect of a given variable on the probability of giving and the marginal effect on the amount given are the same
up to a constant of proportionality.
11
   Denote the amount of giving as Y, and the vector of right hand side variables as X. Then the first stage of the es-
timation gives results for Pr[Y>0|X] and the second stage gives E[Y|X,Y>0]. The unconditional value of giving,
E[Y|X], is Pr[Y>0|X]*E[Y|X,Y>0]. The marginal effects, ∂E[Y|X]/∂X, are straightforward to compute, and standard
errors are obtained using the delta method.
                                                                                                   9


correct for correlation among the error terms for any given individual with a clustering procedure

in both the probit and OLS models.

       An alternative two-step procedure, suggested by Heckman [1979], can also be used to es-

timate the amount of giving, conditional on it being positive. Heckman’s model augments the

OLS equation in the second stage with the inverse Mills ratio. There is some controversy in the

literature with respect to which estimator is superior (Leung and Yu [1996]); hence, a sensible

approach is to estimate the model both ways. We show below that our substantive results are es-

sentially unchanged when we use Heckman’s method.

       An immediate issue is the choice of functional form to represent the relationship between

an alumnus’s position in the alphabet and giving behavior. There is no obvious answer, but our

conversations with several of Anon U’s volunteers indicate that solicitation efforts drop off pre-

cipitously toward the end of the alphabetical lists, rather than in a continuous fashion. Therefore,

we employ a step function specification. Alumni are assigned a one if the first letters of their last

names fall between A and F, G and L, and M and R, respectively, and zero otherwise. The omit-

ted category is S to Z. As noted toward the top of Appendix Table A1, which shows the sum-

mary statistics for our analysis sample, 29.4 percent of the observations fall between A to F, 25.4

percent between G to L, 22.7 percent between M and R, and the rest between S and Z. We expe-

rimented with both a tighter specification (which constrains the relationship between giving and

position in the alphabet to be linear) and a more flexible specification (which has more group-

ings). As shown below, our substantive results are unchanged.

       We include on the right hand side all the variables listed in Table A1. For each set of di-

chotomous variables, the “omitted category” is the variable that is excluded from the regressions.

We have a series of variables about each alumnus that has been shown in previous studies to ex-
                                                                                                            10


ert an important influence on alumni giving (Cunningham and Cochi-Ficano [2002], Shulman

and Bowen [2001]). These include years since graduation, gender, ethnicity, SAT scores, ranking

of the candidate by the admissions office when they applied to Anon U, course of study, and post

baccalaureate education. The literature also shows that alumni giving is heavily influenced by the

affinity that they develop for their schools as undergraduates. Participation in varsity sports and

membership in fraternities are two ways in which such affinities develop (Clotfelter [2001],

Monks [2003]); we also include variables relating to these activities. The model also includes

time effects, class effects, and location effects. The year effects reflect the impacts of the busi-

ness cycle, the stock market, and so on.12 The year effects also account for the size of Anon U’s

fundraising staff and the amount of its fundraising expenditures, which vary from year to year.

The class effects control for common influences on alumni in the same class, such as the political

milieu when they were undergraduates, the presence of certain professors or administrators, and

so on.

         A final econometric issue relates to the fact that our data contain a few very large out-

liers. For example, the four largest gifts in our sample are $500,000 or more. To address this is-

sue, we use the logarithm of the amount of giving on the left hand side of the OLS equation. As

an additional check to make sure that outliers are not driving our results, we estimate the OLS

equation with the top one percent of the observations eliminated. As shown below, the substan-

tive results with respect to the impact of the last name are not affected.

3. Results

         In this section, we first present our basic results. This is followed by a discussion of some

alternative specifications that allow us to assess the robustness of our findings.


12
  Bristol [1991] emphasizes the role of the stock market and Ehrenberg and Smith [2001] document the importance
of macroeconomic conditions.
                                                                                                  11


        3.1 Basic Model

        Column (1) of Table 1 shows the marginal effects of the alphabet position variables on

the probability of making a gift. The figures in parentheses are standard errors. In addition to the

variables listed in the table, the models include the other right hand side variables mentioned in

the previous section, which are suppressed for brevity.

        To begin, consider the first entry in the column (1). The coefficient, 0.0117, suggests that,

relative to an individual toward the end of the alphabet (S through Z), an individual at the begin-

ning of the alphabet (A through F) is about 1.2 percentage points more likely to make a gift. The

coefficient is statistically significant, with p = 0.009. Recalling that the baseline proportion of

alumni who make gifts in this sample is 22 percent, the difference is quantitatively substantial.

An alumnus whose name begins with G through L is 0.88 percentage points more likely to give

than an individual whose name is at the end of the alphabet; the effect is significant at p = 0.057.

For individuals whose names begin with M through R, the point estimate of the difference from

those at the end of the alphabet is minuscule (-0.04 percentage points) and one cannot reject the

hypothesis that it is zero.

        The results from column (1) suggest that there is in fact an alphabet effect — people

whose last names are toward the beginning of the alphabet are more likely to give than those

whose names are at the end. However, the effect is not monotonic. It is driven primarily by the

differences between alumni in the first half of the alphabet relative to those in the second half of

the alphabet. In any case, the results are consistent with the hypothesis that a marginal personal

solicitation matters.

        Because some people at the end of the alphabet are solicited, and some people at the be-

ginning of the alphabet are not, our estimates of the impact of alphabetical placement are likely
                                                                                                                    12


to be lower bounds. To go beyond this qualitative statement requires information on how much

more intensely the beginning of the alphabet is solicited than the end. We would interpret our

estimates rather differently if we believed that individuals at the beginning of the alphabet were

five percent more likely to be solicited rather than 50 percent more likely. It was not possible to

conduct a systematic survey of the volunteers to obtain data on the differential. However, on the

basis of conversations with several volunteers, a reasonable estimate is that a typical solicitor

contacts about 80 percent of the names in the A-F range, and about 60 percent in the S-Z range.

In conjunction with our econometric results, this suggests that a rough estimate of the elasticity

of the probability of giving with respect to the probability of being contacted is 0.15.13 Should

one characterize this as a large or small response? It appears non-trivial, but whether engaging

more volunteers is cost-effective from the university’s standpoint also depends on the time and

effort involved in doing so, and we have no information on this matter.14

         Column (2) of Table 1 shows the impact of position in the alphabet on the log of the

amount of the gift, conditional on a gift being made. In contrast to the result in column (1), there

is no statistically discernible alphabet effect. The impact of being in the first quarter of the al-

phabet is 3.8 percent with a standard error of 2.4 percent, so one cannot reject the hypothesis that

it is zero. The effect of a last name between G and L is small and insignificant (-0.04 percent, s.e.

= 2.56 percent), and the effect of having a last name between M and R is similar in magnitude to

that of the A through F category, and similarly insignificant (4.2 percent, s.e. = 2.7 percent).




13
   A 1.2 percentage point increase off of a base of 22 percent is a 5 percent difference in the probability of giving. A
20 percentage point increase off a base of 60 percent is a 33 percent increase in the probability of being solicited.
The elasticity is therefore 5/33 or 0.15.
14
   To the extent that making a donation in one period increases the probability of making a donation in subsequent
periods (that is, giving is habit forming), then the long-run effect of making a donation could be larger. See Meer
[2009].
                                                                                                   13


       Column (3) combines the estimates from columns (1) and (2) to examine the uncondi-

tional effect on the amount of giving. Being in the first quarter of the alphabet is associated with

giving that is 5.7 percent (s.e. = 2.8 percent) higher than being in the last quarter of the alphabet;

being in the second quarter of the alphabet is also statistically significant from zero, but smaller

than the first-quarter effect (3.7 percent, s.e. = 2.2 percent). This is a relatively small effect on

the unconditional mean of giving of about $110. In light of the results from columns (1) and (2),

this is not surprising: combine a substantial alphabet effect on the extensive margin with essen-

tially no effect on the intensive margin, and the result is unlikely to be large

       Taken together, the results in columns (1) and (2) suggest that a personal solicitation has

little effect on the amount a donor chooses to give, only on whether the donor chooses to give.

The notion that the impact of a personal solicitation is less on the intensive margin than the ex-

tensive margin is much in the spirit of Landry et al.’s [2006] field experiment on charitable ap-

peals. They find that participation rates are higher for individuals who are solicited door-to-door

than for those who are solicited by mail, although the amounts given, conditional on making a

gift, are higher for those solicited by mail. They surmise that the social pressure of being ap-

proached in person leads to this result. In this case, at least, it appears that experimental results

generalize well to actual behavior.

       3.2 Variables Possibly Correlated with Placement in the Alphabet

       Unfortunately, our data include no direct information on income, an important determi-

nant of giving (Shulman and Bowen [2001, p. 404]). To the extent that placement in the alphabet

is correlated with income, this could bias our estimates. We know of no evidence that such a cor-

relation exists. Einav and Yariv [2006] show that last names affect publication records in aca-

demic economics, but this is a very specific and narrow set of individuals. Indeed, they document
                                                                                                                     14


that the effect is due to particular norms in the economics profession, and does not carry over

even to other academic disciplines. Jurajda and Munich [2007] show that the probability of gain-

ing admission to certain select universities in the Czech Republic depends on an applicant’s

place in the alphabet, but even if this phenomenon also exists in the United States, our sample

consists of individuals who all attended the same school.

         Although we lack annual income data, for a large subset of our alumni, we have informa-

tion that is closely related to permanent income, occupation and field.15 We have these variables

for 206,943 observations, representing 19,737 alumni.16 The proportion of individuals in this

sample who make a donation in June, conditional on not having made a donation before, is 26.1

percent, somewhat higher than the 22.2 percent figure for our basic sample. Table A1 shows the

occupations and fields for this sample. The fields of education, finance, health care and law are

highly represented. We re-estimate our basic models with this subsample including the occupa-

tion and field data in order to see whether our substantive results are sensitive to their inclusion.

         To establish a baseline for this exercise, we begin by estimating our model using only the

sample of alumni for whom we have occupation and position, but without including these va-

riables. These results are recorded in columns (1a), (2a) and (3a) of Table 2. We next augment

this model with the occupation and position variables; these results are in columns (1b), (2b), and

(3b). The results suggest that in this subsample: a) the impact of position in the alphabet is

somewhat larger than in the sample as a whole; but b) the qualitative effects are the same; and c)

these effects do not change when the occupation and position variables are added to the model.


15
   In this context, it is important to note that a number of the variables in our basic specification are also correlated
with permanent income, including gender, ethnicity, college major and grade point average, advanced degrees, years
since graduation, and location. Cunningham and Cochi-Ficano [2002] point out that SAT scores are closely related
to family socioeconomic status as well.
16
   Due to lack of reliable data regarding the start- and stop-dates of occupation and field, these variables indicate
whether the alumnus was ever involved in that field or occupation, rather than whether they are involved during the
particular year of observation.
                                                                                                                    15


We conclude that it is unlikely that our results with respect to alphabetical placement are being

driven by the omission of income from our set of right hand side variables.

         We also note that if donative behavior differed systematically by position in the alphabet,

then we would expect the proportion of alumni who failed to make a gift by June to differ by al-

phabetical group. But this appears not to be the case. The proportions are remarkably similar:

56.5 percent for A through F, 56.7 percent for G through L, 57.2 percent for M through R, and

57.0 percent for S through Z.

         A more systematic test for whether alphabetical placement reflects something other than

personal solicitation effects is suggested by the fact that our analysis sample consists only of

alumni who fail to make donations during the first 11 months of the annual giving cycle. Sup-

pose that position in the alphabet is merely picking up the effect of income, or, for that matter,

any other variable that might be correlated with giving. Then our results with respect to the im-

pact of alphabet on donative behavior should be about the same for individuals who made a gift

during the first 11 months of the cycle and those who made a gift in June. To investigate this

possibility, we use the data from the entire year to estimate the probability that the alumnus made

a gift during the first 11 months (that is, the dependent variable is an indicator for making a gift

in the first 11 months). Thus, we are measuring the effect of alphabet position on alumni who did

not receive the “treatment” of a marginal personal solicitation. We find that position in the al-

phabet has no statistically discernible effect on the probability of making a gift. For instance, the

impact of having a last name between A and F is -7.5x10-6, and with a standard error of 0.00517;

one cannot reject the hypothesis that it is zero. This lends credence to the notion that our findings

reflect a true solicitation effect.17


17
 To explore further whether placement in the alphabet reflects something other than a solicitation effect, we esti-
mate regressions of a variety of outcome variables on the alphabet step function. We find either no statistically dis-
                                                                                                                       16


         3.3 Alphabetical Placement and Functional Form

         As noted above, there is some arbitrariness to the step function that we adopt to charac-

terize the relationship between placement in the alphabet and giving. To assess the sensitivity of

our results to this functional form, we begin by estimating a variant of our model in which the

effect is constrained to be linear. The results imply that being one letter closer to the end of the

alphabet leads to a 0.065 (s.e. = 0.023) percentage point lower probability of making a gift. Thus,

moving from A to S is associated with a roughly 1.2 percentage point lower probability, not un-

like the result in Table 1. Turning to the intensive margin, the amount of the gift falls by only

0.07 percent for each letter by which the alumnus is closer to the end of the alphabet, and it is

estimated imprecisely (s.e. = 0.13 percent). This is again consistent with the step function speci-

fication in Table 1. In short, the substantive results that emerge when we use a linear functional

form are essentially the same.

         We also experimented with a more flexible specification than the one in our basic model.

It allows a separate coefficient for every letter in the alphabet. We found that one cannot reject

the hypothesis that, within each category, the coefficients for each letter are equal. For example,

in the model that examines the extensive giving margin, we conducted a joint test of the hypo-

thesis that the coefficients are equal within each of the four groups. The associated p-value is

0.17. For the intensive margin, the p-value associated with the corresponding test is 0.11. Thus,

the data do not allow us to distinguish among last names on a letter-by-letter basis. However,

when we estimated a model with a few more groupings than in our canonical specification, we

obtained results that are very much in line with the results in Table 1. For instance, dividing the

alphabet into six categories yields essentially identical results for A to D (1.4 percent, s.e. = 0.63

cernible effect of alphabet (for example, on whether the individual ever worked in the field of finance or as an ex-
ecutive) or, more rarely, a statistically significant effect that is quantitatively minuscule (for example, being in the A
through F category increases grade point average by 0.012 points (s.e. = 0.0052) on a four-point scale).
                                                                                                                    17


percent), E to H (1.5 percent, s.e. = 0.66 percent), and I to L (1.4 percent, s.e. = 0.71 percent).

Meanwhile, indicators for M to P (0.40 percent, s.e. = 0.65 percent) and Q to T (0.55 percent, s.e.

= 0.65 percent) are not significantly different from the omitted category, U to Z. 18

         3.4 Alphabet Effects and Time

         As technology such as e-mail, cell phones, and voicemail has become more widespread,

the cost of making a personal appeal to each alumnus has fallen.19 In our context, this means that

it is easier for volunteers to reach the end of their alphabetical lists. Hence, if our results are real-

ly due to differential solicitation efforts, then the impact of placement in the alphabet should di-

minish over time. To determine whether this is the case, we interact the alphabet position va-

riables with indicators for three time periods: (1) 1983-1995, a period during which the new

communications technology was relatively rare; (2) 1996-2000, during which much of this tech-

nology was being adopted; and (3) 2001-2007, when such technology had become mainstream.

The early period – between 1983 and 1995 – is excluded as the comparison group.

         The results are in Table 3, which shows the combination of each main effect and the rele-

vant interaction. As expected, during the early period the effect is larger for the front half of the

alphabet, with the indicators for A-F and G-L both being around 1.4 percentage points and sig-

nificant. Using the same approximations as before, the implied elasticity of the probability of

making a gift with respect to the probability of being solicited is 0.24.20 The effect for M-R is

significant at p = 0.14 and the point estimate is larger than the corresponding coefficient in Table


18
   Complete results for these specifications are available upon request.
19
   This raises the question of whether an e-mail solicitation should be considered “personal.” Clearly, a blast e-mail
to everyone on the list is not particularly personal. However, e-mails can be customized (at relatively low cost to the
solicitor) to make them far more personal than a form letter. Members of younger classes are particularly accus-
tomed to online communication of a personal nature.
20
   This calculation assumes that the difference in the probability of being solicited from the front to the back of the
alphabet is the same as in the calculation reported previously. To the extent that this difference was larger in the
earlier period, which seems likely, the elasticity of the probability of giving with respect to the probability of being
solicited will be smaller.
                                                                                                                      18


1. During the middle period, 1996-2000, the alphabet effect diminishes somewhat. In particular,

the M-R effect for that period is small and insignificantly different from zero, providing some

evidence that technology is allowing solicitors to get further down their lists. The estimates for

the late period reflect the full impact of improvements in communications technology. The esti-

mate for A-F is relatively small and not significant at conventional levels (p = 0.15); the G-L ef-

fect is also insignificant. In short, the results in Table 3 are consistent with the notion that im-

provements in communications technology have reduced the cost of person-to-person solicitation

and made it easier for solicitors to reach alumni who are further down their lists. Turning to the

amount of the gift, conditional on giving, no clear patterns emerge. Technology has not had any

discernible effect on the impact of a personal solicitation on the intensive margin.

         A possible alternative interpretation of Table 3 is that improvements in technology have

made it easier to make a contribution to Anon U before June. This would imply that, in recent

years, the individuals who reach June without having made a gift are relatively unresponsive to

solicitations, accounting for the lack of an alphabet effect. If this were the case, though, we

would expect to see the proportion of alumni who made a gift in June (conditional on making

any gift at all during the year) to have fallen over time. If anything, however, the proportion of

procrastinators has increased over time. A least squares regression of the proportion of alumni

who make a gift in June (conditional on making any gift at all during the year) on time yields a

significant coefficient of 0.00265 (s.e. = 0.000108). We conclude that the results in Table 3 are

not due to improvements in technology (or any other changes over time) that have induced

alumni at Anon U to procrastinate less.21

         3.5 Gender

21
  A related but distinct issue is whether the alphabet effect varies over the life cycle. Interacting the alphabet indica-
tors with years since graduation yields no statistically discernible effect, with the three interaction terms insignifi-
cant at p = 0.413.
                                                                                                                19


        It is well documented that charitable behavior differs by gender (see, for example, An-

dreoni and Vesterlund [2001] and Meer and Rosen [2009]). We therefore estimate our model

separately by gender to see if a personal solicitation has different effects for men and women.

The results are shown in Table 4 and indicate that women react more strongly. Specifically,

women in the first quarter of the alphabet are 1.5 percentage points more likely to make a gift

than those at the end of the alphabet while for men the comparable figure is only 0.9 percentage

points.22 The latter value is only significant at p = 0.11. This finding is consistent with a robust

finding from the psychology literature, viz., women find it more difficult than men to refuse re-

quests that they perceive as being legitimate. (See, for example, Eagly [1983].) Importantly,

though, solicitation does not affect the intensive margin for either gender

        3.6 Outliers

        As noted above, Anon U received a few very large gifts. An important question is wheth-

er these outliers are driving our results with respect to amounts given. We therefore re-estimated

our model for the log of giving dropping the top one percent of the observations. As a further

check, we estimated the model in levels rather than logs, again dropping the top one percent of

the observations. The log and level results for the amount given, conditional on giving, are in

columns (1a) and (2b) of Table 5, respectively. A glance at the table indicates that, in both speci-

fications, the effect of placement in the alphabet remains small and insignificant. Thus, our find-

ing that solicitation does not affect the intensive margin is neither an artifact of the logarithmic

specification nor due to the influence of outliers. Looking at the unconditional marginal effect on

giving in column (1b) shows similar results to column (3) in Table 1, indicating that outliers

have little effect on our estimates of the overall effect of solicitation on giving.


22
 The baseline giving rates are essentially the same for the two groups; 21.87 percent for men and 22.85 percent for
women.
                                                                                                  20


       3.7 Alternative Econometric Specification

       An alternative econometric estimator augments the OLS equation for the amount given

with the inverse Mills ratio generated by the first stage probit (Heckman [1979]). This model ex-

plicitly allows for correlation between the errors in the first and second stage equations. The eco-

nometric literature indicates that the desirability of this estimator relative to the hurdle model is

unclear. In particular, Leung and Yu [1996] observe that even if the errors in the true model are

correlated, the hurdle model may, under certain circumstances, yield better estimates. In any

case, it seems sensible to re-estimate the model using Heckman’s approach to see if the substan-

tive results are affected. These estimates imply that the marginal effect on gift size, conditional

on making a gift, are 0.0320 (s.e. = 0.0307) for A to F; -0.0043 (s.e. = 0.0307) for G to L; and

0.0414 (s.e. = 0.0304) for M to R. Comparing these results to those in column (2) of Table 1, we

see that they are essentially the same. Estimates of the unconditional marginal effects on the

amount of the gift are similarly consistent to those in column (3) of Table 1. Hence, our results

are robust with respect to this change in econometric specification.



4. Summary and Conclusions

       We have examined whether charitable donations respond to a marginal personal solicita-

tion using observational data on alumni giving at an anonymous research university. Our test re-

lies on the fact that at this university, volunteers use lists provided by the fundraising office to

telephone classmates and solicit them for donations. The names on these lists are always in al-

phabetical order and the volunteers who do the soliciting often run out of time before reaching

the end of their lists This observation suggests a simple strategy to test whether solicitation mat-

ters, viz., examine whether alumni with names toward the end of the alphabet are less likely to
                                                                                                   21


give than alumni with names toward the beginning of the alphabet, ceteris paribus. If so, then a

personal solicitation matters.

        Our main finding is that location in the alphabet has a strong effect on the probability of

making a gift. In our basic specification, the probability that an individual in the first part of the

alphabet makes a gift is 1.2 percentage points higher than the probability for an individual in the

last part of the alphabet. Using this estimate, along with a rough figure for the difference in the

probabilities of being solicited, we calculate that the elasticity of the probability of making a gift

with respect to the probability of being asked is about 0.15. The notion that the level of personal

scrutiny associated with a solicitation has an important effect on giving behavior is consistent

with the experimental literature. In this case, then, the results from laboratory and field experi-

ments generalize to real world settings.

        We also find that being solicited does not affect the amount given, conditional on donat-

ing. Thus, a personal solicitation does affect giving, but only on the extensive margin. The expe-

rimental literature has produced mixed results on the relative impacts of solicitation on the exten-

sive and intensive margins; our findings suggest that, at least in this context, the studies that find

little effect on the intensive margin are more applicable to the real world.

        An important caveat is that these results regarding the intensive margin are unlikely to

apply to the very largest gifts. One can easily imagine that when major donors are identified,

fundraising organizations solicit them vigorously, and the skill with which this solicitation is

done substantially affects the amount given. Hence, our results might best be thought of as ap-

plying to “rank and file” rather than elite givers. Unfortunately, statistical analysis of this latter

group is problematic because their numbers are so small and the development office tailors its

solicitation strategies to their specific tastes and interests.
                                                                                              22


                                          References

        Alpizar, Francisco, Fredrik Carlson, and Olof Johansson-Stenman. “Anonymity, Reci-
procity, and Conformity: Evidence from Voluntary Contributions to a National Park in Costa Ri-
ca.” Jounral of Public Economics. Vol. 92, No. 5-6, p. 1047-1060. June 2008.

       Anderson, Lisa and Sarah Stafford. “An Experimental Study of the Effect of Announce-
ments on Public Goods Contributions.” Working Paper, College of William and Mary, 2009.

      Andreoni, James and Abigail Payne. “Do Government Grants to Private Charities Crowd
Out Giving or Fundraising?" American Economic Review, 93(3), June 2003, pp. 792-812.

      Andreoni, James and Regan Petrie. “Public Goods Experiments Without Confidentiality:
A Glimpse into Fundraising.” Journal of Public Economics. Vol. 88, No. 7-8, p. 1605-1623. July
2004.

       Andreoni, James and Lisa Vesterlund. “Which is the Fairer Sex? Gender Differences in
Altruism.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. Vol. 116, No. 1, p. 293. Feb 2001.

       Bekkers, René and Pamala Wiepking. “Generosity and Philanthropy: A Literature Re-
view.” Working Paper, Utrecht University, October 2007.

       Bristol, Ralph, “How Much Will Alumni Give in the Future?” Planning for Higher Edu-
cation 20, Winter 1991-92, pp. 1-12.

       Clotfelter, Charles, “Who Are the Alumni Donors? Giving by Two Generations of Alum-
ni from Selective Colleges,” Nonprofit Management and Leadership 12, Winter 2001, pp. 119-
138.

        Council for Aid to Education. “Contributions to Colleges and Universities up by 6.3 Per-
cent to $29.75 Billion.” February 20, 2008.
http://www.cae.org/content/pdf/VSE%202007%20Survey%20Press%20Release.pdf

       Cunningham, Brendan and Carlena Cochi-Ficano, “The Determinants of Donative Reve-
nue Flows from Alumni of Higher Education: An Empirical Inquiry," Journal of Human Re-
sources 37, no. 3, Summer 2002, pp. 540-569.

        Diamond, William and Stephanie Noble. “Defensive Responses to Charitable Solicita-
tions.” Journal of Interactive Marketing 15, No. 3, Summer 2001, pp. 2-12.

      Duan, Naihua, Willard G. Manning, Jr., Carl N. Morris and Joseph P. Newhouse,
“Choosing between the Sample-Selection Model and the Multi-Part Model,” Journal of Business
and Economic Statistics 2, No. 3, July 1984, pp. 283-289.

      Eagly, Alice H., “Gender and Social Influence—A Social Psychological Analysis,”
American Psychologist¸ September 1983, pp. 971-981.
                                                                                           23


       Eckel, Catherine and Philip Grossman. “Rebate versus Matching: Does How We Subsid-
ize Charitable Contributions Matter?” Journal of Public Economics. Vol. 87, No. 3-4. March
2003, p. 681-701.

        Ehrenberg, Ronald and Christopher L. Smith, “The Sources and Uses of Annual Giving
at Private Research Universities,” Economics of Education Review 22, June 2003, pp. 223-341.

      Einav, Liran and Leeat Yariv, “What’s in a Surname? The Effects of Surname Initials on
Academic Success,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(1), Winter 2006, pp. 175–188

       Gottfried, Michael A. and Erica L. Johnston, “Solicitation and Donation: An Econometric
Evaluation of Alumni Generosity in Higher Education,” Working Paper, The Wharton School,
University of Pennsylvania, 2006.

       Heckman, James J., “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error,” Econometrica 47,
1979, pp. 153-161.

       Huck, Steffen and Imran Rasul, “Comparing charitable Fundraising Schemes: Evidence
from a Natural Field Experiment, Working Paper, University College London and Else, October
2007.

      Jurajda, Stepan and Daniel Münich, Admission to Selective Schools, Alphabetically,
Working Paper, Cerge-EI, November 2007.

       Landry, Craig, Andreas Lange, John List, Michael Price, and Nicholas Rupp. “Toward an
Understanding of the Economics of Charity: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics. Vol. 121, No. 2, p. 747-782. May 2006.

       Landry, Craig, Andreas Lange, John List, Michael Price, and Nicholas Rupp. “Is a Donor
in Hand Better than Two in the Bush? Evidence from a Natural Field Experiment.” Working Pa-
per, August 2007.

        Leslie, L.L., and G. Ramey, “Donor Behavior and Voluntary Support for Higher Educa-
tion Institutions,” Journal of Higher Education, 59, 1988, pp. 115-132.

      Leung, Siu Fai and Shihti Yu, “On the Choice Between Sample Selection and Two-Part
Models,” Journal of Econometrics 72, 1996, pp. 197-229.

       Levitt, Steven D. and John A. List, “What Do Laboratory Experiments Measuring Social
Preferences Reveal About the Real World?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 21, no 2, Spring
2007, pp. 153-174.

        List, John and David Lucking-Reiley. “The Effects of Seed Money and Refunds on Cha-
ritable Giving: Experimental Evidence from a University Capital Campaign.” Journal of Politi-
cal Economy. Vol. 110, No. 1. February 2002, p. 215-233.
                                                                                             24


        Meer, Jonathan. “The Habit of Giving.” Working Paper, Stanford University. November
2008.

        Meer, Jonathan and Harvey S. Rosen, “Altruism and the Child-Cycle of Charitable Dona-
tions,” American Economic Journal: Policy, forthcoming, 2009.

        Monks, James, “Patterns of Giving to One’s Alma Mater among Young Graduates from
Selective Institutions,” Economics of Education Review 22, 2003, pp. 121-130.

      Morgan, John and Martin Sefton. “Funding Public Goods with Lotteries: Experimental
Evidence.” Review of Economic Studies. Vol. 67, No. 4. October 2000, p. 785-810.

       Schervish, Paul G. and John J. Havens, “Social Participation and Charitable Giving: A
Multivariate Analysis,” Voluntas: International Journal of Voluntary and Non-Profit Organiza-
tions Vol. 8, No. 3, 1997, pp., 235-260.

        Shulman, James L. and William G. Bowen, The Game of Life, Princeton University
Press: Princeton, 2001.

        Statistics of Income Bulletin, Historical Tables, US Government Printing Office, Wash-
ington, DC, Winter 2008.

      Van Diepen, Merel , Bas Donkers and Philip Hans Franses, “Irritation Due to Direct Mail
from Charities,” Working Paper, Erasmus Institute of Management, May 2006.

        Van Diepen, Merel, Bas Donkers and Philip Hans Franses, “Dynamic and Competitive
Effects of Direct Mailings,” Working Paper, Erasmus Institute of Management, August 2006.

      Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, The
MIT Press: Cambridge, Massachusetts, 2002.

       Yoruk, Baris. “How Responsive are Charitable Donors to Requests to Give?” Working
Paper No. 653, Boston College, October 2006.
                                                                                                                      25


                                               Table 1†
                             Impact of Alphabetical Placement on Donations

                                                    (1)                       (2)                         (3)
                                                Probability           Log Amount of Gift          Unconditional Effect
                                             of Making a Gift        Conditional on Giving            on Giving

                                                0.0117***                     0.0358                   0.0571***
                A to F
                                                (0.00449)                    (0.0244)                   (0.0284)

                                                0.00881*                    -0.00041                    0.0374*
                G to L
                                                (0.00465)                   (0.0257)                    (0.0215)

                                                 -0.00041                     0.0418                    0.00683
                M to R
                                                (0.00471)                    (0.0270)                   (0.0217)

      Number of Observations                     308,857                     68,575                     308,857


†
 Column (1) shows the incremental effect on the probability of making a gift of placement in the alphabet in a given
year, and column (2) shows the effect on the logarithm of amount of the gift. The baseline giving rate is 22.2 per-
cent. The figures in column (1) are marginal effects generated by a probit model, and the figures in column (2) are
generated by OLS. Column (3) combines these, and shows the unconditional marginal effects on total giving. The
figures in parentheses are standard errors; coefficients that are statistically significant at the 1% level are noted with
***, those significant at the 5% level are noted with **, and those significant at the 10% level are noted with *.
Standard errors are adjusted for clustering based on individuals. In addition to the variables listed, the regressions
include the variables listed in the Appendix, as well as location effects, time effects, and class effects, which are not
reported for brevity. Full results are available upon request.
                                                                                                                     26


                                               Table 2†
                             Impact of Alphabetical Placement on Donations
                                     Field and Occupation Sample

                                  Baseline Specification Estimated with Field and Occupation Sample

                                        (1a)                      (2a)                      (3a)
                                     Probability           Log Amount of Gift        Unconditional Effect
                                  of Making a Gift        Conditional on Giving          on Giving

                                      0.0210***                   0.0264                  0.0991***
                 A to F
                                      (0.00599)                  (0.0282)                  (0.0289)

                                       0.0107*                   -0.00291                    0.0464
                 G to L
                                      (0.00614)                  (0.0293)                   (0.0294)

                                       0.00269                    0.0436                     0.0226
                 M to R
                                      (0.00626)                  (0.0312)                   (0.0300)

               Number of
                                       206,907                    53,957                    206,907
              Observations



                                                 Field and Occupation Indicators Included

                                        (1b)                      (2b)                      (3b)
                                     Probability           Log Amount of Gift        Unconditional Effect
                                  of Making a Gift        Conditional on Giving          on Giving

                                      0.0221***                   0.0377                    0.106***
                 A to F
                                      (0.00595)                  (0.0274)                   (0.0285)

                                       0.0114*                   0.00246                    0.0504*
                 G to L
                                      (0.00608)                  (0.0286)                   (0.0289)

                                       0.00039                    0.0490                     0.0292
                 M to R
                                      (0.00621)                  (0.0303)                   (0.0295)

               Number of
                                       206,907                    53,957                    206,907
              Observations

†
 Columns (1a), (2a), and (3a) are generated by the same model as the estimates in columns (1), (2) and (3), respec-
tively, of Table 1. However, the model is estimated using only the observations for which we have individuals’
fields and occupations. Columns (1b), (2b), and (3b) show the estimates when this basic model is augmented with
the field and occupation variables. The baseline giving rate is 26.1 percent. The figures in columns (1a) and (1b) are
generated by a probit model, and the figures in columns (2a) and (2b) are generated by OLS. Columns (3a) and (3b)
combine these estimates and show the unconditional marginal effects on total giving. The figures in parentheses are
standard errors; coefficients that are statistically significant at the 1% level are noted with ***, those significant at
the 5% level are noted with **, and those significant at the 10% level are noted with *.Standard errors are adjusted
for clustering based on individuals. In addition to the variables listed, the regressions include the variables listed in
the Appendix, as well as location effects, time effects, and class effects, which are not reported for brevity. Full re-
sults are available upon request.
                                                                                                                  27


                                               Table 3†
                       Effect of Time on the Impact of Alphabetical Placement

                                                  (1)                       (2)                       (3)
                                              Probability           Log Amount of Gift        Unconditional Effect
                                           of Making a Gift        Conditional on Giving          on Giving

                                               0.0142**                    0.0204                   0.0597**
                       1983-1995
                                               (0.00557)                  (0.0316)                  (0.0235)

                                               0.0122**                    0.0585                   0.0682**
     A to F            1996-2000
                                               (0.00603)                  (0.0363)                  (0.0294)

                                                0.00851                    0.0360                    0.0462*
                       2001-2007
                                               (0.00593)                  (0.0313)                   (0.0279)

                                               0.0135**                   0.0591*                   0.0637**
                       1983-1995
                                               (0.00541)                  (0.0330)                  (0.0250)

                                                0.0109*                    0.0118                    0.0519*
     G to L            1996-2000
                                               (0.00621)                  (0.0386)                   (0.0303)

                                                0.00262                   -0.0482                   -0.00097
                       2001-2007
                                               (0.00610)                  (0.0327)                  (0.0284)

                                                0.00869                    0.0281                     0.0390
                       1983-1995
                                               (0.00594)                  (0.0332)                   (0.0250)

                                                -0.00041                   0.0512                    0.00898
     M to R            1996-2000
                                               (0.00623)                  (0.0400)                   (0.0304)

                                                -0.00966                   0.0478                    -0.0301
                       2001-2007
                                               (0.00626)                  (0.0353)                   (0.0296)

      Number of Observations                    308,857                    68,575                    308,857


†
 Column (1) shows the incremental effect on the probability of making a gift of placement in the alphabet during
each of the indicated times periods. For each time period, the effect is calculated as the sum of the main effect and
the interaction between that time period and the relevant section of the alphabet. Column (2) shows the same infor-
mation for the logarithm of amount of the gift. The figures in column (1) are marginal effects generated by a probit
model, and the figures in column (2) are generated by OLS. Column (3) combines these estimates and shows the
unconditional marginal effects on total giving. The figures in parentheses are standard errors; coefficients that are
statistically significant at the 1% level are noted with ***, those significant at the 5% level are noted with **, and
those significant at the 10% level are noted with *. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering based on individuals.
In addition to the variables listed, the regressions include the variables listed in the Appendix, as well as location
effects, time effects, and class effects, which are not reported for brevity. Full results are available upon request.
                                                                                                                       28


                                             Table 4†
                     Impact of Alphabetical Placement on Donations by Gender

                                                                    Male

                                         (1a)                      (2a)                      (3a)
                                      Probability           Log Amount of Gift        Unconditional Effect
                                   of Making a Gift        Conditional on Giving              on
                                                                                           Giving

                                        0.00893                    0.0305                    0.0453*
                  A to F
                                       (0.00567)                  (0.0316)                   (0.0269)

                                        0.00648                   0.00362                     0.0291
                  G to L
                                       (0.00592)                  (0.0333)                   (0.0280)

                                        -0.00247                   0.0440                    -0.00199
                 M to R
                                       (0.00591)                  (0.0351)                   (0.0279)

               Number of
                                        204,028                    44,623                    204,028
              Observations



                                                                   Female

                                         (1b)                      (2b)                       (3b)
                                      Probability           Log Amount of Gift          Overall Effect on
                                   of Making a Gift        Conditional on Giving            Giving

                                       0.0152**                    0.0359                   0.0686**
                  A to F
                                       (0.00723)                  (0.0362)                  (0.0317)

                                         0.0101                    -0.0147                    0.0376
                  G to L
                                       (0.00736)                  (0.0381)                   (0.0320)

                                        0.00262                    0.0195                     0.0146
                 M to R
                                       (0.00767)                  (0.0396)                   (0.0332)

               Number of
                                        104,829                    23,952                    104,829
              Observations

†
  Columns (1a), (2a), and (3a) are generated by the same model as the estimates in columns (1), (2) and (3), respec-
tively, of Table 1. However, the model is estimated using only the observations on males. Columns (1b), (2b), and
(3b) show the estimates when the model is estimated for females. The baseline giving rates are 21.87 percent for
men and 22.85 percent for women. The figures in columns (1a) and (1b) are generated by a probit model, and the
figures in columns (2a) and (2b) are generated by OLS. Columns (3a) and (3b) combine these estimates and show
the unconditional marginal effects on total giving. The figures in parentheses are standard errors; coefficients that
are statistically significant at the 1% level are noted with ***, those significant at the 5% level are noted with **,
and those significant at the 10% level are noted with *. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering based on individ-
uals. In addition to the variables listed, the regressions include the variables listed in the Appendix, as well as loca-
tion effects, time effects, and class effects, which are not reported for brevity. Full results are available upon request.
                                                                                                                     29


                                              Table 5†
                            Impact of Alphabetical Placement on Donations
                                   Top 1 Percent of Gifts Dropped

                                                       (1a)                       (2a)
                                                Log Amount of Gift          Amount of Gift
                                               Conditional on Giving      Conditional on Giving

                                                       0.0274                       -2.80
                             A to F
                                                      (0.0226)                     (8.76)

                                                      -0.00334                      -1.61
                             G to L
                                                      (0.0240)                     (3.26)

                                                       0.0262                      4.94
                             M to R
                                                      (0.0247)                    (10.07)

                           Number of
                                                       67,889                     67,889
                          Observations



                                                       (1b)                       (2b)
                                                Log Amount of Gift           Amount of Gift
                                                Unconditional Effect       Unconditional Effect
                                                    on Giving                  on Giving

                                                     0.0532***                      1.42
                             A to F
                                                      (0.0205)                     (2.07)

                                                      0.00354*                      1.18
                             G to L
                                                      (0.0211)                     (2.20)

                                                      0.00150                       0.84
                             M to R
                                                      (0.0212)                     (2.27)

                           Number of
                                                       67,889                     67,889
                          Observations


†
 Column (1a) shows the incremental effect of placement in the alphabet on the logarithm of the amount of the gift in
a given year, and column (2a) shows the effect on the level of the amount of the gift. In both columns, the largest
one percent of donations are dropped and estimation is by OLS. Column (1b) uses the same specification as column
(3) in Table 1, dropping the top one percent of donations, while column (2b) uses the same procedure, except with
the level of the amount of the gift. The figures in parentheses are standard errors; coefficients that are statistically
significant at the 1% level are noted with ***, those significant at the 5% level are noted with **, and those signifi-
cant at the 10% level are noted with *. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering based on individuals. In addition to
the variables listed, the regressions include the variables listed in the Appendix, as well as location effects, time ef-
fects, and class effects, which are not reported for brevity. Full results are available upon request.
                                                                                                                  30


                                                   Appendix

                                                  Table A1*
                                 Variable Definitions and Summary Statistics

                                                                                                         Standard
     Variable                                    Description                                   Mean
                                                                                                         Deviation

    TotalYear         Total giving for year (2007 dollars) conditional on making a gift        492.00     6399.9

   LogTotalYear       Log of giving for year (2007 dollars) conditional on making a gift        4.38       1.43

     Didgive                            1 if any donation given in year                         0.222      0.416

       AtoF           1 if the first initial of the individual’s last name is in A through F    0.293      0.455

       GtoL           1 if the first initial of the individual’s last name is in G through L    0.255      0.436

      MtoR            1 if the first initial of the individual’s last name is in M through R    0.227      0.419

       StoZ           1 if the first initial of the individual’s last name is in S through Z    0.226      0.418

    Yearssince                        Number of years since graduation                          12.70      7.90

    Yearssince2                  Number of years since graduation, squared                      223.6      243.5

   Spouseisalum                          1 if the spouse is an alumnus                          0.102      0.303

       Male                                 1 if the alumnus is male                            0.661      0.473

  Race/Ethnicity

      White                      Omitted Category: 1 if the alumnus is White                    0.786      0.410

     Amerind                        1 if the alumnus is a Native American                      0.00429    0.0654

      Black                                1 if the alumnus is Black                           0.0929      0.290

     Hispanic                             1 if the alumnus is Hispanic                         0.0460      0.209

      Asian                                1 if the alumnus is Asian                           0.0749      0.263

Secondary Schooling

      Public             Omitted Category: 1 if the alumnus attended public school              0.587      0.492

     Boarding                     1 if the alumnus attended boarding school                     0.135      0.342

      Private                      1 if the alumnus attended private school                     0.262      0.440

      Schloth                  1 if the alumnus attended another type of school                0.0208      0.143

                      SAT math score. Scores prior to 1996 are adjusted to reflect re-
     SATmath                                                                                    701.0      77.9
                                     centering of the scoring scale.
                       SAT verbal score. Scores prior to 1996 are adjusted to reflect
    SATverbal                                                                                   699.7      78.4
                                    recentering of the scoring scale.
                                                                                                          31


 Admissions Office
 “Non-Academic”
    Ranking
                         Omitted Category: 1 if the alumnus received the highest non-
         A                      academic ranking from the admissions office                 0.0326   0.178

                       1 if the alumnus received the second highest non-academic ranking
         B                                                                                  0.465    0.499
                                           from the admissions office
                        1 if the alumnus received the third highest non-academic ranking
         C                                                                                  0.417    0.493
                                           from the admissions office
                       1 if the alumnus received the fourth highest non-academic ranking
         D                                                                                  0.0806   0.272
                                           from the admissions office
                        1 if the alumnus received the fifth highest non-academic ranking
         E                                                                                  0.0046   0.0677
                                           from the admissions office

 Admissions Office
“Academic” Ranking
                       Omitted Category: 1 if the alumnus received the highest academic
         A                           ranking from the admissions office                     0.153    0.360

                         1 if the alumnus received the second highest academic ranking
         B                                                                                  0.407    0.491
                                           from the admissions office
                       1 if the alumnus received the third highest academic ranking from
         C                                                                                  0.271    0.444
                                              the admissions office
                       1 if the alumnus received the fourth highest academic ranking from
         D                                                                                  0.161    0.367
                                              the admissions office
                       1 if the alumnus received the fifth highest academic ranking from
         E                                                                                  0.0090   0.0946
                                             the admissions office

     Clubsport                       1 if the alumnus played on a club team                 0.110    0.313

      Honors                1 if the alumnus graduated magna, summa, or cum laude           0.427    0.495

       Greek                1 if the alumnus was a member of a fraternity or sorority       0.647    0.478

      Athlete                        1 if the alumnus played a varsity sport                0.302    0.459

       Major

      Molbio           Omitted Category: 1 if the alumnus majored in molecular biology      0.0215   0.145

                         1 if the alumnus majored in Anthropology, Urban Studies, or
Small Social Science                                                                        0.0340   0.181
                                                  Sociology.

      English                         1 if the alumnus majored in English                   0.113    0.317

    Economics                       1 if the alumnus majored in Economics                   0.0707   0.256

   Public Policy                   1 if the alumnus majored in Public Policy                0.0545   0.227

  Political Science               1 if the alumnus majored in Political Science             0.0883   0.284

    Psychology                      1 if the alumnus majored in Psychology                  0.0534   0.225
                                                                                                        32


     History                        1 if the alumnus majored in History                   0.113    0.317

      MAE             1 if the alumnus majored in Mechanical/Aerospace Engineering        0.0330   0.179

                      1 if the alumnus majored in Electrical Engineering or Computer
     EE/CS                                                                                0.0553   0.229
                                                  Science

   Arch & Civ          1 if the alumnus majored in Architecture or Civil Engineering      0.0659   0.248

                     1 if the alumnus majored in Art, Art History, Classics, East Asian
Small Humanities      Studies, Linguistics, Music, Near Eastern Studies, Philosophy,      0.128    0.335
                             Religion, or Languages and Literature departments
                     1 if the alumnus majored in “Engineering”, Operations Research
Small Engineering                                                                         0.0274   0.163
                            and Financial Engineering, or Chemical Engineering
                     1 if the alumnus majored in Applied Mathematics, Astrophysics,
  Small Sciences      Biochemistry, Biology, Chemistry, Ecology and Evolutionary          0.141    0.348
                           Biology, Geology, Mathematics, Physics, or Statistics

      Minor

    No Minor               Omitted Category: 1 if the alumnus received no minor           0.778    0.416

African/African-     1 if the alumnus received a minor in African or African-American
                                                                                          0.0306   0.172
American Studies                                  Studies

American Studies           1 if the alumnus received a minor in American Studies          0.0196   0.139

      Latin                      1 if the alumnus received a minor in Latin               0.0019   0.0433

     Finance                    1 if the alumnus received a minor in Finance              0.0025   0.0501

     Theater                    1 if the alumnus received a minor in Theater              0.0151   0.122

  Public Policy              1 if the alumnus received a minor in Public Policy           0.0473   0.212

                     1 if the alumnus received a minor in Architecture, Basic Engineer-
Other Engineering    ing, Bioengineering, Electrical Engineering, Geological Engineer-    0.0164   0.127
                              ing, Management, Materials Sciences, or Robotics.
                      1 if the alumnus received a minor in Applied and Computational
  Other Sciences      Mathematics, Biophysics, Cognitive Studies, Environmental Stu-      0.0255   0.158
                               dies, Science in Human Affairs, or Neuroscience.

Other Humanities           1 if the alumnus received a minor in a humanities field        0.0526   0.223

    Teaching                   1 if the alumnus received a teaching certificate           0.0241   0.153

     Reunion                 1 if the year after graduation is some multiple of 5         0.179    0.383

Post Baccalaureate
    Education

    NoPostAB            Omitted Category: 1 if the alumnus has no advanced degree         0.663    0.473

      PhD                    1 if the alumnus has a Ph.D. or equivalent degree            0.0636   0.244

     Masters                           1 if the alumnus has a masters                     0.124    0.329
                                                                                                          33


        JD                               1 if the alumnus has a JD                         0.0865    0.281

     MDDDS                         1 if the alumnus has a medical degree                   0.0504    0.218

      MBA                              1 if the alumnus has an MBA                         0.0684    0.252

     Field**
       Arts                    1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Arts field              0.0705    0.256

    Agriculture            1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Agriculture field           0.0023    0.0477

   Architecture            1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Architecture field          0.0284    0.166

 Pharmaceuticals         1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Pharmaceuticals field         0.0228    0.149

 Communications          1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Communications field           0.103    0.303

    Consulting              1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Consulting field           0.0947    0.293

    Education               1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Education field             0.122    0.327

     Finance                 1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Finance field              0.174    0.379

Health Care (Busi-
                           1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Health Care field            0.170    0.376
 ness/Industry)

    Hospitality             1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Hospitality field          0.0051    0.0715

   Information
                                1 if the alumnus ever worked in the IT field                0.115    0.319
   Technology

       Law                     1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Law field                0.187    0.390

  Manufacturing           1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Manufacturing field          0.0690    0.253

      Retail                  1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Retail field             0.0230    0.150

  Transportation          1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Transportation field         0.0092    0.0952

Federal Government       1 if the alumnus ever worked for the Federal Government           0.04406   0.2052

 State Government          1 if the alumnus ever worked for a State Government             0.0440    0.205

Foreign Government        1 if the alumnus ever worked for a Foreign Government            0.0039    0.0622

 Nongovernmental
                               1 if the alumnus ever worked in the NGO field               0.0315    0.175
   Organization

     Religion                1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Religion field            0.0119    0.109

      Other                    1 if the alumnus ever worked in another field                0.276    0.447

   Multilateral
                     1 if the alumnus ever worked in the Multilateral Organization field   0.0022    0.0474
   Organization

     Military                  1 if the alumnus ever worked for the Military               0.0072    0.0846
                                                                                                               34



   Occupation**
    Government
     Worker                   1 if the alumnus ever worked as a government worker        0.0107        0.103

   Miscellaneous
                         1 if the alumnus ever worked in some miscellaneous occupation   0.0891        0.285
      Worker

  Physician/Dentist           1 if the alumnus ever worked as a physician or dentist      0.133        0.339

    White Collar            1 if the alumnus ever worked in a white collar occupation     0.300        0.458

      Attorney                     1 if the alumnus ever worked as an attorney            0.261        0.439

     Executive                    1 if the alumnus ever worked as an executive            0.483        0.500


*Figures are based on 308,857 observations on gift-giving from 1983 to 2007. 30,148alumni who graduated from
1972 to 2005, excluding the classes of 1993, 1994, and 1996, are represented.
**Figures for the field and occupation samples are based on 206,907 observations on 19,737 alumni.
