NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INFORMATION, ANIMAL SPIRITS, AND THE MEANING OF INNOVATIONS
IN CONSUMER CONFIDENCE
Robert B. Barsky
Eric R. Sims
Working Paper 15049
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15049

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2009

The authors gratefully acknowledge helpful comments and suggestions from Susanto Basu, Alan Blinder,
John Cochrane, Olivier Coibion, Daniel Cooper, Mike Elsby, Yuriy Gorodinchenko, Christopher House,
Peter Ireland, Lutz Kilian, Miles Kimball, Guido Lorenzoni, Serena Ng, Matthew Shapiro, Robert
Solow, Frank Vella, two anonymous referees, and seminar participants at Boston College, Johns Hopkins,
Michigan, the Wharton School, the Russell Sage Foundation, and the NBER Summer Institute in Monetary
Economics. We also thank John Fernald for providing his quarterly utilization-corrected TFP measure.
Robert Barsky acknowledges generous support as a visiting scholar at the Russell Sage Foundation
and the Bank of Israel. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Robert B. Barsky and Eric R. Sims. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Information, Animal Spirits, and the Meaning of Innovations in Consumer Confidence
Robert B. Barsky and Eric R. Sims
NBER Working Paper No. 15049
June 2009, Revised August 2010
JEL No. E2,E3,E32
ABSTRACT
Innovations to measures of consumer confidence convey incremental information about economic
activity far into the future. Comparing the shapes of impulse responses to confidence innovations in
the data with the predictions of a calibrated New Keynesian model, we find little evidence of a strong
causal channel from autonomous movements in sentiment to economic outcomes (the “animal spirits”
interpretation). Rather, these impulse responses support an alternative hypothesis that the surprise
movements in confidence reflect information about future economic prospects (the “information” view).
Confidence innovations are best characterized as noisy measures of changes in expected productivity
growth over a relatively long horizon.
Robert B. Barsky
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
barsky@umich.edu
Eric R. Sims
University of Notre Dame
ericsims@umich.edu

1

Introduction

In the popular press and much of the business community it continues to be an article of
faith that “consumer con…dence” has an important role – both prognostic and causal – in
macroeconomics. On the other hand, the stance of the rather limited academic literature on
con…dence is far more ambiguous. The judgments range from the conclusion that con…dence
measures have an important role both in prediction and in understanding the causes of business
cycles, to the view that they contain important information but have little causal role, to the
verdict that they have no value even in forecasting.
There are, broadly speaking, two contrasting approaches to the role of con…dence in macroeconomics. The …rst, which we will refer to as the “animal spirits” view, posits autonomous
‡uctuations in beliefs that in turn have causal e¤ects on economic activity. In the proceedings of
a symposium on the causes of the 1990-1991 recession, both Hall (1993) and Blanchard (1993)
regard exogenous movements in consumption as a cause of business cycles. Indeed, Blanchard
proposes that the cause of the recession was a powerful, long-lasting negative consumption shock
associated with an exogenous shift in pessimism that had a causal e¤ect on overall aggregate
demand. While not fully pursuing the idea in his brief paper, Blanchard proposes that one
might be able to test this hypothesis on the basis of the observation that such an exogenous
shift in pessimism ought to have only temporary e¤ects on consumption.1
The second view of con…dence –what we will call the information or news view –suggests
that a relationship between innovations in measures of consumer con…dence and subsequent
macroeconomic activity arises because con…dence measures contain fundamental information
about the current and future states of the economy. For example, Cochrane (1994b) proposes
that consumption surprises proxy for news that consumers receive about future productivity
that does not otherwise show up in econometricians’information sets. His attempt to reconcile
VAR evidence with theory closely anticipates the “news”approach to business cycles of Beaudry
and Portier (2004, 2006). They analyze models where agents become aware of changes in future
productivity orthogonal to current productivity. The information or “news”view of con…dence
supposes that con…dence innovations might contain similar information.
In Section 2, we show that unexplained movements in responses to forward-looking questions
from the Michigan Survey of Consumers have powerful predictive implications for the future
paths of macroeconomic variables. In the context of trivariate VARs, the impulse responses of
consumption and income to innovations in consumer con…dence measures are signi…cant, slowly
buidling, and apparently permanent. Con…dence is not Granger-caused by income or consumption, nor are its innovations highly correlated with innovations in those variables. These
1

In some ways, a limiting case of animal spirits appears in the “sunspot” literature. Though pinned down
only by extrinsic coordinating variables, expectations in the equilibria of these models are self-ful…lling, and thus
rational. (see Farmer (1999)). The existence of sunspot equilibria depend on strong increasing returns, supply
externalities, or other mechanisms that are typically not accepted as empirically plausible. The notion of animal
spirits in this paper does not encompass sunspots.

1

observations point to the conclusion that our measures of consumer con…dence are not merely
noise, nor are they simply re‡ections of information contained in other variables with which
they are correlated. The fact that con…dence innovations have implications for consumption
and income many periods in the future suggests that there is at least some truth to the news
view of con…dence. Permanent movements in consumption and income must re‡ect corresponding movements in technology, which is putatively una¤ected by animal spirits. If con…dence
contained no news about future fundamentals and the relationship between con…dence and subsequent activity re‡ected only animal spirits e¤ects, one would expect to see at most transitory
responses of consumption and income to con…dence innovations.2
In Sections 3 and 4 – the heart of the paper – we attempt to gauge the extent to which
these impulse responses indicate a causal channel from sentiment to economic outcomes (the
animal spirits view), as opposed to the alternative scenario under which the surprise con…dence
movements summarize news about economic prospects received by consumers (the news view).
To provide a framework for distinguishing these alternative interpretations of con…dence, we
present in Section 3 a relatively standard New Keynesian DSGE model with two main shocks
of interest.3 The …rst is a re‡ection of genuine news that productivity will grow more rapidly
for a substantial period of time into the future (the “news shock”). The second shock, inspired
by Lorenzoni (2009), arises because we permit households to observe only a noise-ridden signal
of the news shock. We interpret the noise as an “animal spirits shock”, as it is associated with
optimism or pessimism that –while not ex ante irrational –is erroneous from the point of view
of an outside observer with knowledge of the shocks. A series of positive animal spirits shocks
might capture the possibility that periods such as the 1920s or 1990s were fueled by optimism not
warranted by fundamentals, while a predominance of negative shocks would usher in a period of
excessive pessimism. We model con…dence as a composite signal re‡ecting both fundamentals
and noise, so that con…dence innovations are a linear combination of the structural shocks in
the model.
In the model, animal spirits shocks are associated with transitory changes in consumption
and income that attenuate over time. News shocks about future productivity are followed by
gradual movements in the macroeconomic variables that are not subsequently reversed. Because
the theoretical response to an animal spirits shock is reverting while the theoretical response
to a news shock is not, it appears at …rst blush that one might successfully distinguish animal
spirits shocks from news shocks using a structural VAR with a long-run restriction. Blanchard,
Lorenzoni, and L’Hullier(2009) indicate that this is not likely to be the case. These authors
2

This is not to say that a long-run restriction in a VAR context allows us to disentangle information and
animal spirits e¤ects when both are present. See below.
3
Because of the assumed frictions in the model (price stickiness, habit formation, and adjustment costs), there
exist parameter con…gurations in which news and animal spirits can induce business cycle-like ‡uctuations. The
model is thus not necessarily subject to the co-movement “problem”highlighted by Beaudry and Portier (2004)
and Jaimovich and Rebelo (2008).

2

show, in the context of a model somewhat simpler than ours but incorporating essentially the
same signal extraction problem, that a structural VAR is unable to recover the shocks from the
model.4 Thus we need to use an alternative method to identify the shocks and disentangle the
information component of con…dence from the animal spirits component.
We begin Section 4 by estimating an expanded VAR with the variables implied by the model
augmented with a measure of con…dence. As in the three variable systems of Section 2, the
results show that con…dence innovations are associated with little immediate response of real
activity but prolonged subsequent growth in consumption and income. Positive con…dence
innovations are associated with a substantial drop in in‡ation, and – importantly – a marked
increase in real interest rates. Next, by minimizing the distance between these empirical impulse
responses and those generated from simulations of the model (and making use of some additional
information about moments of the data), we estimate the deep parameters of the model via
indirect inference. This allows us to compute impulse responses to the true structural shocks,
variance decompositions of con…dence and the other variables in the model, and – using the
Kalman smoother –approximate historical decompositions.
The results are unambiguous. At the estimated parameters, while animal spirits and pure
noise (e.g. measurement error in con…dence) together account for about half the innovation
variance in con…dence, animal spirits e¤ects are very weak and thus account for essentially none
of the relationship between con…dence and future consumption or income. In a revealing counterfactual exercise, we repeat the simulation of the model –this time imposing parameters that
are intended not to match the data but to maximize the causal e¤ect of animal spirits on subsequent activity. Estimating the VAR on these simulated data, we …nd that the impulse responses
look very di¤erent from the empirical impulse responses. Strong animal spirits e¤ects imply
that con…dence innovations are associated with much stronger initial jumps in consumption and
income than in the data. The parameters favoring large animal spirits e¤ects also fail to deliver
the fall in in‡ation and rise in real interest rates in response to a con…dence innovation that are
striking features of the empirical impulse responses.
We are able to reject the hypothesis that animal spirits shocks (as speci…ed in this paper) are an important source of the observed relationships between con…dence innovations and
macroeconomic variables. On the other hand, we …nd convincing evidence in favor of the information interpretation of con…dence. Though the implications of con…dence innovations for
4

One way of thinking about this is as follows. An expectation on the part of consumers that their consumption
would decline over time following a period of high con…dence would be tantamount to an awareness on the part
of these agents that they were in the grip of animal spirits. This would be incompatible with the maintained
hypothesis of optimization, including rational signal extraction. Because in the VAR framework consumers and
the econometrician form the same expectations as a function of lagged variables, if the econometrician could
compute an impulse response that implies reverting behavior of consumption, so could the consumer. This
argument indicates that the econometrician cannot recover the animal spirits shock by inverting the VAR, but
leaves open the possibility that the econometrician can uncover the underlying shocks and their impulse response
functions by estimating the model.

3

output and spending at short horizons are far too small for con…dence to be primarily a re‡ection
of changes in current fundamentals, the longer horizon implications are far too large and signi…cant for con…dence innovations not to be conveying information about future fundamentals.
Our results suggest that there are news shocks about future productivity not wholly re‡ected in
current productivity, and that these shocks account for a signi…cant fraction of the innovation in
measured con…dence, as well as the lion’s share of the nexus from con…dence to future activity.
In Section 5, we ask the question “What exactly is this news that agents are receiving?”Responses to little-used survey questions on “news heard”do help somewhat to explain con…dence
innovations, but with only a very modest incremental R2 . The news accounting for innovations
in our con…dence measures is apparently not primarily tangible macroeconomic or other national
news. Rather, we conclude, con…dence data aggregate many pieces of disparate information in
the hands of various consumers.
Section 6 contains a brief summary and conclusions.

2

Con…dence and Forecasts of Economic Activity

How does a surprise movement in con…dence a¤ect our forecasts of future income and consumption? A standard …rst pass at answering this question is to run a VAR with consumption, income
and a measure of con…dence, and to consider the partial derivatives of consumption and income
at various horizons with respect to innovations in the con…dence variable. These can be thought
of in terms of the generalized impulse response function of Pesaran and Shin (1998). Though
the result coincides with that from a recursive system with the con…dence variable ordered …rst,
it is important to stress that we are not setting up a structural VAR model. At this point, we
interpret impulse response functions not as dynamic responses to structural shocks but in terms
of the displacement of forecasts implied by unexpected movements in con…dence.
Ultimately, of course, we are not primarily interested in forecasting. Generalized impulse
response functions have been criticized because they do not correspond to the causal dynamic
responses from any “identi…ed”model. Although this exercise may appear unguided by theory
at this point, its full justi…cation will come in the next section where –in the spirit of indirect
inference –we compare the results from an empirical VAR to those arising from application of
the same VAR speci…cation to data generated from a structural DSGE model with news and
animal spirits shocks.
One might also want to know whether con…dence has incremental e¤ects on forecasts of future
activity once we account for the current innovations in consumption and income. That would
suggest considering the impulse response to a con…dence innovation ordered last in a recursive
system. Note that when we do orthogonalize the shocks we decline to take a position on which
orthogonalization is the “true”one. Because we consider only the responses to E5Y innovations,
ordered either …rst or last, we never have to choose an ordering between consumption and income.
Once again, our concern at the moment is with the extent to which con…dence innovations alter
4

our forecasts of future activity.

2.1

Con…dence Data

The survey measure that we will make the most use of in this paper, which we call E5Y,
summarizes responses to the following question: “Turning to economic conditions in the country
as a whole, do you expect that over the next …ve years we will have mostly good times, or
periods of widespread unemployment and depression, or what?” The variable is constructed as
the percentage giving a favorable answer minus the percentage giving an unfavorable answer
plus one hundred.5 Our particular a¢ nity for this question arises from the fact that it is aimed
at gauging expectations over a relatively long horizon, and because of its speci…city as to the
relevant time frame.6 However, its correlation with the responses to a similar question specifying
a horizon of only twelve months (a variable we call E12M) is 91 percent, and its correlation
with another concerning expected changes in personal …nancial situation over the next twelve
months is 85 percent. The correlation of E5Y with the overall expectations component of the
Michigan index exceeds 95 percent. Our results in this section are essentially unchanged by the
substitution of either of these alternative expectations variables.
Figure 1 plots E5Y and E12M against time. Both series undergo repeated dramatic swings
though (as we would expect) the twelve-month-ahead expectations are more volatile than those
with a …ve year horizon. Both variables are persistent yet are, as clearly indicated by standard
tests, stationary. The cross-correlogram between E5Y and the conventional Hodrick-Prescott
detrended GDP (not shown) indicates that the expectations are by no means a re‡ection of
current output; the contemporaneous correlation between detrended GDP and E5Y is essentially
zero. E5Y is negatively correlated with the output gap lagged several periods, and positively
correlated with the gap several quarters ahead.

2.2

Three Variable VAR

We include real GDP, real consumption of goods and services, and E5Y in a VAR system with
four lags.7 We estimate the system in the levels of the variables. Our results are nearly identical
when imposing a cointegrating relationship between consumption and income. We show the
impulse responses to a con…dence innovation with E5Y ordered …rst in Figure 2. The shaded
areas represent one standard error percent bias-corrected bootstrap con…dence bands of Kilian
(1998).
5

Thus a value of 100 is a “neutral“ position, while a value of 140 means that the fraction of responses re‡ecting
optimism about the future exceeds the fraction re‡ecting pessimism by forty percentage points.
6
Some might argue as well that this question gives the animal spirits hypothesis its “best shot”. One argument
is that individuals are likely to be more sober-minded in assessing family resources than in forming expectations
about the national economy. Another is based on animal spirits models that focus on strategic complementary;
in those models beliefs about the economic activities of other agents are central.
7
The data on GDP and consumption come from the BEA’s NIPA accouts. The sample period runs 1960:12008:4.

5

An innovation to E5Y has very small implications for both consumption and output on
impact. The small impact e¤ects are followed by slowly-building, signi…cant, and apparently
permanent responses of both consumption and output. A one standard deviation innovation to
E5Y predicts levels of output and consumption that are roughly 0.6 percent higher forty quarters
hence; further, the long run responses of both consumption and GDP to an E5Y innovation are
statistically signi…cant at better than the 95 percent level. E5Y innovations thus rather clearly
convey important information about the future time paths of real activity variables, most notably
at longer horizons.
To what extent, however, are innovations in E5Y simply re‡ective of information already
contained in consumption and income innovations? To address this possibility, we re-order the
variables in the system such that E5Y is orthogonalized with respect to income and consumption.
Figure 3 presents impulse responses with this ordering. The qualitative features of the impulse
responses are una¤ected by the alternative orthogonalization. In particular, E5Y innovations
still predict slowly-building and permanent responses of both output and consumption. The
point estimates are slightly smaller than in the case with E5Y ordered …rst, with a one standard
deviation innovation to E5Y prognostic of long run increases in both consumption and output
of slightly more than 0.5 percent (as opposed to 0.6 percent with E5Y ordered …rst).
Figure 4 graphically depicts the fraction of the variance of consumption, income, and E5Y
accounted for by E5Y innovations under both orthogonalizations. Ordered …rst, E5Y innovations account for more than half of the forecast error variance of income and consumption at long
horizons. Even after orthogonalization with respect to consumption and income, innovations to
E5Y still account for more than 30 percent of the long horizon forecast error variance of both
income and consumption. We can thus easily reject the hypothesis that E5Y simply re‡ects
information available in income and consumption innovations. The fact that the qualitative results hold regardless of whether or not E5Y is …rst orthogonalized with respect to consumption
indicate that the shape of the impulse responses is due heavily to Granger causality from E5Y
to both consumption and output. Reduced form innovations in income, consumption and con…dence are signi…cantly, though rather modestly, mutually correlated. E5Y is not Granger-caused
by income or consumption and responds mostly to its own innovation.
We now examine several variations on the three variable VAR using alternative measures of
consumer con…dence. First, we substitute the relative score from the question on the Michigan
Survey concerning expected personal …nancial situation (PFE) in place of E5Y. This question
gauges expectations analogously to E5Y and E12M, although it speci…cally asks for expectations concerning personal situations as opposed to aggregate expectations.8 The second
8

Dominitz and Manksi (2004) express doubt that consumers can give meaningful responses to survey questions
concerning aggregate as opposed to individual expectations, and they point to the higher volatility of responses
to questions like E5Y versus questions like PFE as support. Given the structure of the questions, however,
we would in fact expect aggregate questions to have greater volatility even if individuals are equally capable
of answering both kinds of questions accurately. For example, even in severe recessions most people do not

6

modi…cation is to use the Index of Consumer Sentiment (ICS) in place of the purely forwardlooking survey questions. While the ICS is the most reported measure of consumer con…dence
(both by the press and in the academic literature), it is an average of survey responses to
both forward-looking and retrospective questions, and thus its interpretation is unclear. For a
more detailed description of these alternative con…dence measures and their statistical relationships with E5Y, please contact the authors, or visit the Michigan Survey of Consumers website
(http://www.sca.isr.umich.edu/).
Figure 5 presents impulse responses to con…dence innovations in our three variable system
with three alternative measures of con…dence: E5Y, PFE, and ICS. There is very little qualitative
or quantitative di¤erence between the results using E5Y or any of the other broad con…dence
measures. Use of other alternative con…dence measures such as E12M or the expectations
component of the survey also makes little di¤erence. Any disparity between our results and
others in the literature is due to something other than the measure of con…dence chosen.9
Alternative measures of consumption and output (for example, durable goods consumption or
private sector GDP) also produce very similar impulse responses. In summary, innovations
in expectational variables from the Michigan Survey of Consumers have slowly-building, longlasting implications for future consumption and output.

2.3

Relation to Cochrane (1994a, 1994b) and Carroll, Fuhrer, and
Wilcox (1994)

Cochrane (1994a) estimates two-variable VARs with consumption and income. His principal
result is that innovations in consumption are associated with large subsequent movements in
income that swamp the response of income to its own innovation, at least at longer horizons. At
the shorter horizons, most of the movement in income is explained by its own innovation, but
the “e¤ects“ of a consumption innovation build over time so that much or all of the permanent
component of GDP appears to be captured by innovations in consumption. In short, results
from this two variable VAR suggest that “consumption shocks”convey information about income
many periods into the future. As Cochrane (1994b) stresses, a natural explanation for the …nding
that consumption innovations predict much of future output is that agents have some advance
knowledge about future income that they use when making consumption decisions. This has
come to be known in the literature as the “news shock”hypothesis.
Our three-variable VARs can be thought of as an extension of Cochrane’s exercise. E5Y
personally experience layo¤s. The typical respondent who says that the national economy will exhibit “periods
of widespread unemployment or depression” is predicting that a signi…cant minority of others will experience
layo¤s while his or her own income is stable by comparison.
9
The key di¤erence is that we focus on both short-run and medium to longer run links between con…dence and
activity. Since the short-run implications of a con…dence innovation are modest, researchers that focused on the
short-run found only a modest role for con…dence. Also important is the di¤erence between impulse responses,
which o¤er point estimates of the e¤ect of con…dence innovations on forecasts, and incremental R2 measures,
which measure the extent to which forecast errors are reduced by inclusion of con…dence in the information set.

7

can be thought of as a signal about of expectations of future output. One might then entertain
the hypothesis that E5Y is a su¢ cient statistic for agents’knowledge about future output. If
this were the case, when E5Y is ordered …rst, the impulse responses of income and consumption
to a consumption innovation would be modest; the news shock, which shows up in Cochrane’s
two-variable VAR as a consumption innovation would show up mostly in the response to the
E5Y innovation. Alternatively, along the lines of the simplest versions of the permanent income
hypothesis, consumption might be a su¢ cient statistic for “news”, so that when consumption
is ordered before E5Y, the latter variable is redundant. The variance decompositions in Figure
4 indicate that neither of these polar hypotheses holds; both consumption and E5Y contain
information about the future that is not contained in the other measure.
Our …nding that unexpected increases in con…dence imply predictably higher subsequent
consumption is also related to the results of Carroll, Fuhrer, and Wilcox (1994), who focus on
one-period-ahead consumption growth. As noted above, this Granger causality from con…dence
to consumption (as well as income) growth is responsible for the shape of the impulse responses
we estimate.
Carroll, Fuhrer, and Wilcox (1994) regard the Granger causality as, in part, a failure of
the partial equilibrium permanent income hypothesis along the lines of short-term stickiness of
consumption. Our …nding that consumption tracks predictable income increases over a three
year period suggests that the predictability of consumption growth is better thought of in terms
of an the general equilibrium endowment economy of Lucas (1978), in which consumers believe
that income will be higher in the future, but can in the aggregate do little to increase current
consumption in anticipation. One implication of this interpretation is that positive con…dence
innovations should be associated with increases in expected real rates of return. This implication
will be explored in some detail in the next sections, and we will see that, in addition to being
an implication of a simple general equilibrium model, it also holds in the data.

3

News and Animal Spirits in a DSGE Model

It is clear that innovations to consumer con…dence have interesting implications for economic
activity, but it is di¢ cult to interpret the meaning of the impulse responses without imposing
more structure. In this section we develop a structural model to help understand the reducedform impulse response analysis of Section 2.
We incorporate consumer con…dence into a medium scale dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model that is fairly standard. In addition to the “usual” frictions – price
rigidity, habit formation, and adjustment costs – we also include in the model “news shocks”
about future productivity growth, of which agents only observe a noisy signal.10 We interpret
10

There is a growing literature studying the e¤ects of noise, broadly de…ned, and economic ‡uctuations (Lorenzoni (2009), Angeletos and La’O (2009a and 2009b), Beaudry and Portier (2004), Blanchard, L’Hullier, and
Lorenzoni (2009)).

8

noise innovations in the signal about productivity growth as animal spirits shocks. A positive
animal spirits shock means that agents are overly optimistic relative to the true state of the
economy. Because the model is a fairly standard New Keynesian DSGE model, we leave a full
description and derivation to the Appendix. Here we focus on how we incorporate news, animal
spirits, and con…dence into the model.
We assume that the log of neutral technology, at , follows a random walk with drift:
at = at

1

+ gt

1

+ "a;t

gt = (1
a )g + a gt 1 + "ga ;t
We assume that the drift term itself follows a stationary AR(1) process, with unconditional
mean g . The drift term is dated t 1, so that there is some predictability of technology
growth. Because of this predictability, we can interpret shocks to the expected growth rate (i.e.
"ga ;t ) as “news shocks” in the sense de…ned by Beaudry and Portier (2004) and others. The
shock "a;t is the conventional surprise technology shock.
While we assume that agents can observe the level of technology period by period, we allow
them to observe only a noisy signal of the growth rate. Formally:
st = gt + "s;t
The shock "s;t is assumed to be white noise. We will interpret it as the animal spirits shock.
Following a positive animal spirits shock the agents in the economy will erroneously expect
higher subsequent productivity growth.
We assume that agents use the Kalman …lter to form forecasts of the unobserved growth rate.
To illustrate the mechanisms at work, Figure 6 shows impulse responses of at , gt , and gtjt to each
of the three shocks involving technology for the parameterization: = 0:8, "a = 1, "g = 0:1,
and "s = 0:1. Note that in response to a surprise technology shock, "a;t , the perceived growth
rate increases very slightly because agents attach some weight to the possibility that trend
technology growth is on the high side but was buried in noise in the past.
We assume that con…dence follows a univariate …rst-order autoregression:
E5Yt = (1
e )E5Y + e E5Yt 1 + ut ;
where the innovation in con…dence, ut , is a function of the underlying structural shocks in the
economy. Because agents cannot observe the individual structural shocks, ut is a linear combination of the perceived innovation in the level of current technology, the perceived innovation
in the expected growth rate of technology, and a pure noise term:
ut = 1 at at 1 gt 1jt 1 + 2 gtjt
a gt 1jt 1 + 3 "c;t
The shock "c;t is a white noise process normalized to have variance of unity. It can be interpreted
as measurement error in the con…dence data.
The remainder of the model is standard and is presented in the Appendix. We solve the
model by inducing stationarity through appropriate normalizations and then log-linearizing the
equations about the balanced growth path.
9

4

Estimation

We estimate the parameters of the model by minimizing the distance between impulse responses
generated from simulations of the model and those from the actual data, thereby providing a
connection to our earlier reduced form impulse response analysis. This form of estimation does
not necessarily require that the empirical VARs we estimate have a structural interpretation,
or even that they are correctly speci…ed. Rather, we take the empirical impulse responses as
interesting statistics that a well-speci…ed structural model should be capable of matching.
We calibrate several of the uncontroversial parameters to conventional values used in the
literature. These parameter values can be found in Table 1. The unit of time is taken to be a
quarter. The discount factor is set to 0.99. Capital’s share of income from a constant returns
to scale Cobb-Douglas production function is set to 0.36. We assume a quarterly depreciation
rate on capital of 0.03. The steady state growth rate of technology, g , is set to 0.33 percent.
Given the calibration of capital’s share of income, this implies steady state growth in output per
worker of about 2 percent, which is consistent with post-war US data. As described in more
detail in the Appendix, the model assumes a government which consumes a stochastic share of
output.11 We …x the steady state share of private output consumed by the government at 20
percent. We also …x the persistence and standard deviation of government spending shocks at
0.95 and 0.25 percent, respectively. These numbers were obtained by regressing the government
spending share on its own lag. Given these …xed parameters of the model, 57 percent of output
goes to private consumption in the steady state while 23 percent goes to private investment.
These numbers are all in line with the post-war US data.
We estimate the remaining parameters of the model to match as closely as possible impulse
responses to VARs estimated in the data. While this is a limited information approach, it focuses
the estimation on the question at hand – why are con…dence innovations prognostic of future
movements in economic activity? Our estimation strategy is similar to those of Rotemberg and
Woodford (1997) and Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005).
For our estimation we focus on impulse responses from a somewhat larger system than
that shown in Section 2. In addition to con…dence, consumption, and output, we also include
measures of in‡ation and the real interest rate in the reduced form VAR model. The reasons for
this are twofold. First, because the New Keynesian model is about the interaction of real and
nominal variables, the responses of in‡ation and interest rates help to identify the parameters
of the model. Second, variation in real interest rates is a central part of the general equilibrium
story when there are shocks to expectations about future technology. Our measure of in‡ation
is the annualized percentage change in the CPI, while our measure of the real interest rate is
the three month treasury bill rate less one quarter ahead expected in‡ation (both expressed at
annualized rates), where the expected in‡ation number is taken from the Michigan Survey of
11

Government spending is an inessential component of the model. Stochastic …scal shocks are included so
that the number of structural shocks is equal to the number of variables in the empirical VAR.

10

Consumers.
The impulse responses and con…dence bands are shown in Figure 7. The responses of
consumption and income to a con…dence innovation (ordered …rst) are very similar to what was
shown in the case of the three variable VARs of Section 2. Positive con…dence innovations are
also associated with a persistent fall in in‡ation and a marked increase in the real interest rate.
Let M denote a stacked vector of these estimated impulse responses. We include the
responses of all …ve of the variables in the above VAR to all …ve orthogonalized innovations in
M , using a recursive ordering corresponding with the order in which the variables are listed
above. We include the responses at horizons from impact to twenty quarters. Altering the
horizons for the included impulse responses makes little di¤erence for the results. In addition
to the impulse responses, we include two other moments in the vector M –the autocorrelation
and the standard deviation of the growth rate of output per worker. Including these additional
moments is important for two reasons. First, productivity growth in the data is approximately
white noise. Because we assume a serially correlated drift term in the process for technology,
it is important that the variance of news shocks not be too large relative to the variance of
level shocks; otherwise the resulting productivity series will exhibit too much autocorrelation.
Secondly, including an unconditional measure of volatility is important because in conventional
impulse response analysis the size of shocks is normalized (Canova and Sala (2009)).
For a given parameter vector , with dimension q 1, we simulate H data sets from the
model, each of the same size as the dataset used to estimate our empirical VARs.12 The shocks
used to generate the simulations are drawn from mean zero normal distributions. For each
simulated data set, we estimate the same …ve variable VAR as above (again with four lags), and
compute impulse responses using the same recursive ordering. We then average the impulse
responses over the H simulations and compare the averaged responses to the impulse responses
from the actual data. Finally, we iterate on our guess of
to minimize the weighted distance
between the model simulated and data moments.
Let M( ) denote the h 1 vector of impulse responses and moments from the simulated
data for a given parameter vector, . Our estimator is the solution to the following problem:
b = arg min
( ) = (M
M( ))0 W 1 (M
M( ))
W is a diagonal matrix whose elements are equal to the variance of the empirical moments of
the actual data. These variances are the sample variances from bootstrap simulations of the
empirical VAR. Weighting the discrepancy between data and model responses by the inverse of
the variances of the responses in the data places more weight on responses which are estimated
with more precision.
Under regularity conditions, the limiting distribution of
is approximately:13
12

In practice, each arti…cial data set contains T + 100 observations, where T is the number of observations in
the actual data set. We discard the …rst 100 observations so as to limit the in‡uence of starting values.
13
See Smith (1993) or Dejong and Dave (2007).

11

1

1

T 2(
) ! N (0; D0 W 1 D )
)
The matrix D = @M(
is a h q Jacobian matrix of derivatives of the moments with respect to
@
the parameters. In practice, we calculate this matrix numerically, evaluating it at the estimated
parameter vector. As our model is overidenti…ed (h > q), we can easily construct formal tests
of model …t similarly to Hansen’s (1982) J test.

4.1

Results

The parameter estimates and standard errors for our benchmark estimation of the model are
presented in Table 2. We use H = 2500 simulations.
The …rst four parameters in Table 2 concern the con…dence equation in the model: 1 is the
coe¢ cient on the innovation in perceived current technology, 2 is the coe¢ cient on innovation
in the perceived growth rate, 3 governs the importance of noise, and e governs the persistence
of con…dence. Consistent with the impression conveyed by a time series plot of the data,
con…dence is estimated to be highly persistent but stationary ( e = 0:94). The coe¢ cient on
the expected growth rate innovation is much larger than the coe¢ cients on the innovation in
current technology and noise, though this partly re‡ects the fact that the innovation variance of
the expected growth rate is much smaller than the other two disturbances that a¤ect con…dence.
The next three parameters in the table govern the stochastic process for technology. The
standard deviation of current technology shocks is much higher than the standard deviation of
news shocks (0.58 vs. 0.17). News shocks are estimated to be fairly persistent, with ga = 0:73.
These parameters imply that a one standard deviation growth shock is expected to raise the
level of technology in the long run by 0.7 percent. The estimated standard deviation of current
technology shocks is in line with estimates based on Solow residual regressions.
The next three parameters in the table describe the central bank’s interest rate rule. We …nd
that interest rates are fairly persistent ( i = 0:66), with the bank responding fairly aggressively
to both deviations of in‡ation from target and deviations of output growth from trend ( = 1:31
and y = 0:94, respectively). The estimated standard deviation of monetary policy shocks is
0.13 percent.
Our estimate of the degree of habit formation in consumption, , is 0.31. This is lower
than most estimates, which are in the neighborhood of 0.5 to 0.8. Nevertheless, the standard
error on is large and does not permit rejection of the hypothesis of values in this range. Our
estimate of the elasticity of the capital adjustment cost function is = 0:16, while our estimate
of the Frisch labor supply elasticity is = 1:32. The number for the labor supply elasticity
is consistent with a wide range of empirical estimates, including Kimball and Shapiro’s (2003)
central estimate of unity.
The elasticity of demand for intermediate goods is estimated to be about 13, implying a
steady state markup of price over marginal cost of 7.5 percent, which is broadly consistent with

12

the estimates in Basu and Fernald (1997). We estimate the Calvo parameter, , governing
price-stickiness, to be 0.76. This implies an average duration between price changes of about a
year, and is in the range of both micro (Bils and Klenow (2004)) and macro (Gali and Gertler
(1999)) estimates. The estimated standard deviation of animal spirits shocks is 0.13.
Figure 8 shows the empirical impulse responses to a con…dence innovation from the …ve
variable VAR in the data (solid line), the 90 percent bootstrap con…dence region from the data
(shaded gray area), and the average responses to a con…dence innovation from the simulations
of the model at the estimated parameters (dashed line). The dotted lines give the 90 percent
con…dence region from the simulations. Overall, the model does a good job of replicating the
responses in the data. The averaged simulated responses from the estimated model lie within
the con…dence bands of the responses in the data at most horizons. Further, the implied
dynamics in the model are similar –qualitatively, and, for the most part, quantitatively.14 The
responses of the variables of the model to the other orthogonalized VAR innovations closely
replicate their empirical counterparts, but are omitted for space considerations. The mean
autocorrelation of productivity growth across the simulations comes out to be 0.05 (as opposed
to 0.03 in the data), while the volatility of productivity growth is 0.71 percent (as opposed to
0.67 in the data).
Figure 9 shows the responses of selected variables to both news and animal spirits in the
theoretical model at the estimated parameter values. The impact e¤ect of a favorable news
shock on output is approximately zero, though the point estimate is negative.15 Thereafter
output smoothly approaches its new steady state value. Note that this output movement
occurs because output tracks movements in true technology, not because news shocks induce
large business cycle deviations from trend. In response to good news, in‡ation falls on impact
in response and is estimated to be fairly persistently below its steady state. Real interest
rates rise, which is consistent with the expected growth in consumption following such a shock.
Con…dence is persistently high following a good news shock.
The most notable feature of the theoretical impulse responses to an animal spirits shock is
the negligible movement in output. The response of output to a positive animal spirits shock is
slightly negative on impact (as is the response to a news shock) before becoming slightly positive
and reverting. In‡ation falls in response to an animal spirits shock, while real interest rates
and consumer con…dence rise. The magnitudes of the in‡ation and real rate responses are not
negligible, though not overwhelming either. None of these responses to animal spirits are very
persistent. In the model at the estimated parameter values, agents quickly learn about the
reliability of signals regarding the growth rate. The …nal graph in Figure 9 shows the response
14

A partial exception is the case of the real interest rate, which rises more markedly in the data than in the
model simulation.
15
Though not shown, consumption rises and investment falls on impact. The negative impact e¤ect of a news
shock and the negative co-movement between consumption and investment are consistent with the responses
estimated in Barsky and Sims (2010).

13

of con…dence to a pure noise shock (which, by construction, has no e¤ect on any of the other
variables in the model).
Table 3 presents the variance decomposition of con…dence, consumption, and output at
various horizons in the model at the estimated parameter values. News shocks explain roughly
one half of the innovation variance in measured con…dence. Animal spirits shocks explain 25
percent of the con…dence innovation variance, pure noise (measurement error) accounts for 22
percent, and the innovation in the current level of technology accounts for a mere 1 percent.
News shocks have only a small quantitative impact on either consumption or output at high
frequencies, but account for a growing share of the forecast error variance of these variables at
longer horizons. Though news shocks do not induce business-cycle like co-movement at very
high frequencies, they account for over half of the forecast variance of output and consumption at
long horizons. Animal spirits shocks account for negligible shares of the forecast error variances
of consumption and output at all frequencies.16
Although it is not possible to recover exactly the underlying deep shocks from structural
estimation, it is possible to form retrospective estimates of the underlying states and shocks using
the Kalman smoother. Given retrospective estimates of the states, we can recover estimates
of the underlying shocks, which allows us to compute historical simulations. Figure 10 plots
historical decompositions of consumer con…dence, indicating the role of each of the four shocks
leading to movements in con…dence in the model. In panel (a) we see that news shocks account
for most of the middle to low frequency movements in con…dence. In particular, bad news
shocks account for the simultaneous productivity growth slowdown and low con…dence of the
1970s and good news shocks for the reverse situation in the 1990s. As shown in panel (b),
animal spirits shocks are not responsible for sustained movements in con…dence despite their nonnegligible contribution to the con…dence innovation. Technology shocks account for essentially
no movements in measured con…dence, while measurement error accounts for a fair degree of
the movements in con…dence over time (panels (c) and (d)).
It is clear that news shocks are an important source of variation in con…dence. The variance
decompositions indicate that animal spirits have a signi…cant e¤ect on con…dence innovations,
but negligible e¤ects on consumption and income. Thus the relationship between con…dence
and the activity variables is almost entirely driven by news shocks. Con…dence innovations
are noisy signals about medium term economic growth, but the noise itself has few interesting
economic consequences.
According to our model, growth in technology is exogenous. The news driven relationship
between con…dence innovations and subsequent economic activity is not causal; it simply re‡ects
the fact that news shocks provide advance knowledge of productivity developments that would
occur irrespective of consumer beliefs. One might wonder how the interpretation would change if
16

Preference, government spending, and monetary policy shocks account for the remaining forecast variance
of output and consumption.

14

technology were endogenous. If animal spirits or other demand shocks cause short run increases
in activity, these might ultimately lead to a rise in TFP through learning-by-doing or some
similar endogenous growth mechanism. Thus we might mistakenly be concluding that news
shocks are the driving force rather than the demand shocks which are sparking the endogenous
growth. But the fact is that there are not substantial short run increases in economic activity
following a con…dence innovation, and the prerequisite for endogenous growth is not met. It
appears that foreseeable shifts in exogenous technical progress are the most natural way to
explain the delayed “reaction”of activity to con…dence innovations.
Our result that con…dence innovations are highly correlated with innovations to trend productivity growth is perhaps surprising to observers who place little faith in the survey responses
of ordinary households. As such, we close the empirical section of the paper with a bit of
non-structural corroborating evidence. Figure 11 plots the HP trend growth rate of labor productivity (the BLS measure of output per hour in the non-farm business sector) along with E5Y.
The positive co-movement between these series is strong, and is consistent with our structural
econometric analysis.

4.2

Discussion

At the estimated parameter values of our model, animal spirits shocks have very little e¤ect
on the real variables of the model – with the exception of the real interest rate. It turns out
that it is di¢ cult for an innovation to a signal about some underlying fundamental (whether
or not the signal is ultimately valid) to have much of an e¤ect on economic activity for any
realistic parameter values. On the “supply side”, the reason is that, in the absence of any
change in current marginal productivity, it is di¢ cult to get the substantial increase in labor
input needed to produce signi…cantly increased output.17 This is by now a well-understood
di¢ culty of generating business cycles from news about future technology. The same di¢ culty
holds for animal spirits shocks, which in our model are simply false news shocks. In this sense
the fact that animal spirits e¤ects have a hard time generating business cycle-like movements in
output is not surprising.
To understand what happens on the “demand side”, consider the general equilibrium of a
pure endowment economy along the lines of Lucas (1978). Even though households would like,
for a given interest rate, to increase their consumption immediately in response to a good signal,
the interest rate must adjust so that consumption is equal to the endowment each period. In
this framework, neither news nor animal spirits shocks can have any e¤ect at all on output and
consumption.
Of course, this extreme scenario does not characterize our model, which features capital and
endogenous labor e¤ort. However, the same general equilibrium mechanism is at work. As
17

Indeed, for our estimated parameter, there is a slight decrease in labor supply on impact. A drop in labor
input in response to news shocks is a common result in DSGE models.

15

shown in Figure 9, in the estimated model real interest rates rise on impact in response to
positive news about future productivity growth. This occurs regardless of whether the signal
is genuine news or an animal spirits shock. The increase in the real rate works to suppress the
increase in demand and leaves quantity variables largely unchanged in response to a positive
signal. Only after the level of technology begins to change following a true news shock do
quantity variables move substantially.
It appears that for animal spirits to have important economic consequences, the general
equilibrium forces working against them must be weak. To verify this conjecture, we conduct
an experiment in which we pick the parameters of the model not to match any features of the
data but rather to maximize the real e¤ects of animal spirits shocks. The resulting responses
of output and other key endogenous variables under this parameter con…guration are shown in
Figure 12. It is clear that there do exist parameterizations of the model in which animal spirits
can “matter”.18
The parameter con…guration leading to large real e¤ects of animal spirits is precisely one
which mitigates general equilibrium mechanisms. In particular, the “optimal”parameter vector
includes = 0:999 and y = 0. In other words, prices are almost perfectly rigid and the central
bank does not adjust interest rates to output ‡uctuations. From the interest rate rule, the
virtual absence of movements in in‡ation combined with the absence of interest rate responses
to output, real interest rates e¤ectively become …xed. In this case, consumption must jump
to its expected steady state level in response to signals observed by consumers (the “random
walk” property of the partial equilibrium version of the permanent income hypothesis). This
parameter con…guration is essentially identical to the one emphasized in Blanchard, L’Hullier,
and Lorenzoni (2009).
In addition to being at odds with the microeconomic evidence on price adjustment (Bils
and Klenow (2004)), these parameters also lead to counterfactual implications for the model
responses to a con…dence innovation. As an interesting exercise, we …x = 0:999 and y = 0,
and repeat our estimation exercise from above. In other words, …xing these two parameters, we
estimate the remaining parameters to best match the empirical impulse responses from our …ve
variable VAR. The impulse responses to a con…dence innovation for the best-…tting combination
of parameters are shown in Figure 13. It is immediately obvious that the …t is much worse.
The responses of both output and consumption to a con…dence innovation are largest on impact
as opposed to at longer horizons, and neither in‡ation nor the real interest rate move at any
horizon. The formal likelihood ratio statistic is over 200, easily rejecting this restricted version
of the model in favor of the unrestricted version estimated above. At parameter con…gurations
not very far from this extreme (e.g. a Calvo parameter of = 0:9 instead of near unity), animal
18

Even so, while the magnitude of the impact response of output under this parameter con…guration is large,
the response is not very persistent. This is a generic issue with these models –under Kalman learning, agents
soon realize their mistakes and the e¤ects of erroneous optimism/pessimism quickly vanish.

16

spirits simply cease to have large e¤ects. It appears necessary to almost literally “turn o¤”
general equilibrium to give animal spirits much chance of mattering.
We began this project focusing on the long run implications of con…dence for economic activity. We initially took this lack of reversion in the responses to be evidence against an important
animal spirits component. The theoretical result of Blanchard, L’Hullier, and Lorenzoni (2009)
that in the signal extraction framework there can be no ex ante reversion to any structural
shock, forced us to reconsider this argument. It remains true that the presence of a powerful
long-run response of output to con…dence is evidence for an news component of con…dence. If it
were not the case that con…dence innovations are often indicative of true permanent technology
movements there would be no reason for such behavior. However, as Blanchard, L’Hullier, and
Lorenzoni (2009) correctly assert, in the signal extraction model the absence of mean reversion
in the response of consumption to the composite signal measured by con…dence does not prove
that there is not also an important animal spirits e¤ect. It is now clear that the principal
feature of the data that refutes the importance of animal spirits is not the absence of long-run
reversion but the near zero responses of consumption and output to a con…dence innovation at
short horizons. The fact that the empirical responses of quantity variables at high frequencies
are small suggests animal spirits are relatively unimportant.
One limitation of the approach in this paper is that our model of con…dence concerns beliefs
about an exogenous fundamental variable (namely productivity growth). We do not cover the
case in which the con…dence concerns not an agent’s own beliefs about fundamentals but higher
order beliefs as in Angeletos and Lao, (2009a) and (especially) (2009b). In such models, a belief
that other agents have optimistic forecasts of economic activity is potentially expansionary. Such
models seem to us to have signi…cant potential, but are not currently in a dynamic form that
can be used directly for estimation of a structural model. At the same time, we suspect that
the same general equilibrium forces that limit animal spirits e¤ects in our model would also put
a damper on animal spirits e¤ects in this alternative environment.

5

What is the News?

In the VARs estimated in this paper, E5Y and other overall con…dence measures are roughly
exogenous. With E5Y ordered …rst, more than 95 percent of the forecast error variance of
con…dence is explained by its own innovation at every horizon. Even when con…dence is allowed
to respond contemporaneously to innovations in other macroeconomic variables, the fraction of
the forecast error variance of con…dence attributable to its own innovation always exceeds 85
percent.
What kinds of news might explain these surprise movements in consumer con…dence? In
addition to the questions discussed in Section 2, the Michigan Survey also asks respondents to
report any recent “news heard” concerning the economy. In light of our results of the previous section pointed towards the “information” or news view of con…dence, it seems natural to
17

conclude with a brief investigation of the relationship between this reported economic news and
responses to the survey questions concerning overall expectations of aggregate and individual
economic conditions.
Survey respondents give answers to a question asking them to report favorable or unfavorable economic news, and their answers are tabulated into arbitrary, but generally well-de…ned,
categories.19 Figure 14 presents spike plots for several of the more popular response categories
across time. Many categories record very few responses in a typical quarter. The most consistently popular concern news about prices and news about employment. Other responses stand
out in particular time periods. Examples are a high incidence of mention of “energy crisis”
during periods of the 1970s and early 1990s as well as news heard concerning the stock market
sporadically across the sample period, but most frequently during the 1990s.20
In Table 4 we present coe¢ cient estimates from regressions of the E5Y innovations from
the VARs of Section 2 on selected categories of news. Most of the news heard categories have
coe¢ cients of the expected signs – favorable news is positively correlated with the con…dence
innovation and vice versa. Favorable or unfavorable news about general prices and favorable
news about the stock market are signi…cant covariates with the E5Y innovation at the 10 percent
level or better. News about employment and favorable news about the stock market are
insigni…cantly correlated with the E5Y innovation. Unfavorable news about government policies
also has a statistically signi…cant coe¢ cient at the 10 percent level. The adjusted R2 from
these regressions ranges from 0.10 to 0.15, suggesting that the bulk of E5Y innovations remain
inexplicable from particular categories of news heard. Use of other more obscure categories of
news heard produce insigni…cant coe¢ cient estimates that frequently reduce the adjusted R2 in
the regressions. We also ran a speci…cations that included the news heard variables in the VARs
directly. This produced impulse responses of consumption and income which were much weaker
than when using the broader con…dence measures.
Innovations to measures of consumer con…dence evidently convey information about income
many periods into the future, much of which is not re‡ected in current consumption or income
innovations, and the surprise movements in the con…dence measures are not attributable to
tangible news. Some might …nd it surprising that the answers of largely naïve respondents to
rather crude questions could be so informative. As emphasized in Cochrane (1994b), however,
such expressions of surprise fail to recognize the role of information aggregation. As Cochrane
puts it (see p. 350), “Ask a consumer about next year’s GDP, and he will say ‘I don’t know.’ But
he may know that his factory is closing, and hence he is consuming less. This idiosyncratic shock
19

The speci…c questions are: “During the last few months, have your heard of any favorable or unfavorable
changes in business conditions?” If the answer is yes, the follow up question is: “What did you hear?”
20
The data summarizing responses to the “news heard”questions do not have the statistical properties of
“news” in the rational expectations sense. Rather, the data on news reports are highly serially correlated. This
may be due to gradual di¤usion of news reports along the lines of Carroll’s (2003) epidemiological model, or it
may re‡ect merely the wording of the question, which refers to news heard in the “last several months”.

18

is correlated with future GDP.”Just as consumption data aggregate idiosyncratic information,
consumer con…dence data aggregate information from many sources and many individuals.

6

Conclusion

This paper has sought to provide an answer to an unresolved question in economics: what is
the economic meaning and signi…cance of consumer con…dence? We began by showing that
surprise movements in con…dence are prognostic of long-lasting movements in macroeconomic
variables. While on its face this seems to be prima facie evidence that consumer con…dence
conveys information about economic fundamentals, econometric issues that arise in the context
of signal extraction problems limit the conclusions that can be drawn from the reduced form
relationships in the data. We therefore proceeded to develop and estimate a DSGE model
encompassing both the animal spirits and information views of con…dence.
Our empirical
results suggest that fundamental news is the main driving force behind the observed relationship
between con…dence and subsequent economic activity. Animal spirits shocks have only limited
e¤ects. Our analysis sheds light on the general equilibrium mechanisms that make it di¢ cult
for non-fundamental noise to generate large economic ‡uctuations.

19

References
[1] Angeletos, George-Marios and Jennifer La’o. “Income Information, Higher Order Beliefs,
and Price Inertia.” Journal of Monetary Economics. October 2009, 19-37.
[2] Angeletos, George-Marios and Jennifer La’o. “Noisy Business Cycles.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009.
[3] Barsky, Robert B. and Eric R. Sims. “News Shocks and Business Cycles.” Working paper,
University of Notre Dame, 2010.
[4] Beaudry, Paul and Franck Portier. “An Exploration into Pigou’s Theory of Cycles.”Journal
of Monetary Economics, September 2004, 1183-1216.
[5] Bils, Mark and Peter Klenow. “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices.” Journal of Political Economy, October 2004, 947-985.
[6] Blanchard, Olivier. “Consumption and the Recession of 1990-1991.” American Economic
Review, May 1993, 270-274.
[7] Blanchard, Olivier, Jean-Paul L’Hullier, and Guido Lorenzoni. “News, Noise, and Fluctuations: An Empirical Exploration.” NBER WP 15015, 2009.
[8] Calvo, Guillermo. “Staggered Prices in a Utility Maximizing Framework.”Journal of Monetary Economics, September 1983, 383-398.
[9] Canova, Fabio and Luca Sala. “Back to Square One: Identi…cation Issues in DSGE Models.”
Journal of Monetary Economics, May 2009, 431-449.
[10] Carroll, Christopher D. “Macroeconomic Expectations of Households and Professional Forecasters.”Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 2003, 269-298.
[11] Carroll, Christopher D., Je¤rey C. Fuhrer and David W. Wilcox. “Does Consumer Sentiment Forecast Household Spending? If so, Why?” American Economic Review, December
1994, 1397-1408.
[12] Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans. “Nominal Rigidities
and the Dynamic E¤ects of a Shock to Monetary Policy.” Journal of Political Economy,
February 2005, 1-45.
[13] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali and Mark Gertler. “Monetary Policy and Macroeconomic
Stability: Evidence and Some Theory.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, 2000, 147180.

20

[14] Cochrane, John H. “Permanent and Transitory Components of GNP and Stock Prices.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1994a, 241-266.
[15] Cochrane, John H. “Shocks.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, December 1994b, 295-364.
[16] Dejong, David and Chetan Dave. Structural Macroeconometrics. Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 2007.
[17] Dominitz, Je¤ and Charles Manksi. “How Should We Measure Consumer Con…dence?”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 2004, 51-66.
[18] Farmer, Roger. The Macroeconomics of Self-Ful…lling Prophecies. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press. 1999.
[19] Gali, Jordi and Mark Gertler. “In‡ation Dynamics: A Structural Econometric Analysis.”
Journal of Monetary Economics, October 1999, 195-222.
[20] Gertler, Mark. Course Notes for Graduate Macro I. New York University, 2000.
[21] Hall, Robert E. “Macro Theory and the Recession of 1990-1991.” American Economic
Review, May 1993, 275-279.
[22] Hall, Robert E. “Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle Permanent Income Hypothesis:
Theory and Evidence.”Journal of Political Economy, December 1978, 971-987.
[23] Hansen, Lars. “Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Estimators.”
Econometrica, July 1982, 1269-1286.
[24] Kilian, Lutz. “Small Sample Con…dence Intervals for Impulse Response Functions.”Review
of Economics and Statistics, May 1998, 218-230.
[25] Kimball, Miles S. and Matthew D. Shapiro. “Labor Supply: Are the Income and Substitution E¤ects Both Large or Both Small?” University of Michigan Working Paper, May
2003.
[26] Lorenzoni, Guido. “A Theory of Demand Shocks.”American Economic Review, December
2009, 2050-2084.
[27] Lucas, Robert E. “Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy.”Econometrica, November 1978,
1429-1445.
[28] Pesaran, H. Hashem and Yongcheol Shin. “Generalized Impulse Response Analysis in
Linear Multivariate Models.” Economics Letters, January 1998, 17-29.
21

[29] Rotemberg, Julio and Michael Woodford. “An Optimization Based Econometric Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, 297344.
[30] Smith, Anthony. “Estimating Nonlinear Time Series Models Using Simulated Vector Autoregressions.” Journal of Applied Econometrics, December 1993, S63-84.
[31] Woodford, Michael. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2003.

22

Appendix 1: Con…dence Data
Questions:
E5Y: Looking ahead, which would you say is more likely –that in the country as a whole we’ll
have continuous good times during the next …ve years, or that we’ll have periods of widespread
unemployment or depression, or what?
E12M: Now turning to business conditions in the country as a whole – do you think that
during the next twelve months we’ll have good times …nancially or bad times or what?
PFE: Now looking ahead –do you think that a year from now you (and your family living
there) will be better o¤ …nancially, worse o¤, or just about the same as now?
News Heard: During the last few months, have your heard of any favorable or unfavorable
changes in business conditions?
For most questions (including E5Y, E12M, and PFE), individuals are given three answer
choices that amount to “favorable”, “neutral”or “don’t know”, and “unfavorable”. The “relative
score” – the variable we use in this paper – is then constructed as the percentage giving a
favorable response less the percentage giving an unfavorable response plus one hundred. Thus,
a relative score of 100 indicates that an equal number of people gave a favorable response as
an unfavorable response. If 30 percent of respondents give a favorable response and 20 percent
given an unfavorable response, with the remaining 50 percent either “neutral”or “don’t know”,
then the relative score will be 110 (i.e. 30 –20 + 100). If, out of 100 people, 1 person switches
from an unfavorable response to a neutral response, the index score will go up by 1. If that
person switches from unfavorable to favorable, the index score goes up by 2. If someone leaves
the state of “neutral”to either “favorable”or “unfavorable”the index score moves up or down
by 1.
The Index of Consumer Expectations (ICE) is constructed based on the relative scores for
PFE, E12M, and E5Y as follows:
P F E + E12M + E5Y
+ 2:0
4:1134
The Index of Consumer Sentiment (ICS) is constructed based on the relative scores for
the PFE, E12M, and E5Y, plus two other questions. The …rst we’ll call PFP and is similar to
PFE, except that it asks respondents to make a comparison of their current …nancial situation
relative to one year ago. The second we’ll call DUR and it asks respondents whether or not
it is currently a good time to buy “large household items” (i.e. durable goods). The ICS is
constructed as:
ICE =

ICS =

P F E + E12M + E5Y + DU R + P F P
+ 2:0
6:7558
23

Appendix 2: Model
The model of Section 3 is a relatively standard DSGE model. It is comprised of households,
who consume …nal goods and supply labor; …nal goods …rms, who convert intermediate goods
into a …nal good; intermediate goods …rms, who are monopolistically competitive and face time
dependent nominal-price stickiness; capital goods producers, who produce capital using …nal
goods output, and who also face convex adjustment costs. The description here closely follows
the presentation in a set of notes prepared by Gertler (2000).
Households:
Household choose consumption, labor supply, and real holdings of riskless one period bonds
to maximize lifetime utility:
!
1
1+1=
X
N
t
t
E0 ln(Ct
Ct 1 )
max
Ct ;Nt Bt
1
+
1=
i=0
s.t.
Ct + Bt = wt Nt

Tt + (1 + rt 1 )Bt

1

+

t

is a discount factor, indexes the degree of habit persistence in consumption, and is the
Frisch labor supply elasticity. wt is the real wage, rt is the real interest rate, Tt is lump sum
taxes/transfers, and t denotes pro…ts. The solution to the problem is the familiar Euler
equation and intratemporal labor supply condition:

t
t
1=
Nt

1

=

Ct
Ct
= (1 + rt )
=

Et
1

Ct+1

Ct

t+1

t wt

Final Goods:
The …nal good is a CES aggregate of a continuum of intermediate goods, indexed by j:
Z 1
1
1
Yt =
Yt (j) dj
0

Final goods producers are competitive and take the price of intermediate goods as given. Cost
minimization yields the demand function for intermediate goods:
Yt (j) =
311

2 1
Z
4
The price index is Pt =
Pt (j)1 5

Pt (j)
Pt

.

0

Intermediate Goods:

24

Yt

Intermediate goods …rms, indexed by j along the unit interval, face the above demand curve
for their product. They have the following constant returns to scale production functions:
Yt (j) = At Kt (j) Nt (j)1
Capital is freely mobile across …rms, but is predetermined for the economy as a whole. Costminimization yields labor and capital demand curves:
wt =pt (j) = M Ct (j)(1

)At Kt (j) Nt (j)

Rt =pt (j) = M Ct (j) At Kt (j)

1

Nt (j)1

Rt is the real rental price of capital and wt is the real wage. M C is marginal cost.
Intermediate goods …rms are not freely able to adjust their prices period by period. They
face a constant probability, 1
, of being able to adjust their price in any period. A …rm able
to adjust its price at time t sets its price to maximize:
1
X
t+i 1
max
( )i Et
(Pt (j)Yt+i (j) T Ct+i (Yt+i (j))
Pt (j)
t Pt+i
i=0
i t+i
is the stochastic discount factor, and the problem is maximized subject to the demand
t
function for the intermediate good given above. The solution is an optimal reset price which
will be common across all …rms updating in any period:
P1
)i t+i
M Ct+i Yt+i (j)
Et
i=0 (
t
Pt = (1 + )
P1
)i t+i
Et
Yt+i (j)
i=0 (
t
1 + = 1 is the steady state gross markup. In the absence of price rigidity ( = 0), all …rms
would set price equal to a constant markup over marginal cost each period.
Capital Producers:
There are a continuum of capital producers along the unit interval, index by v. The production function for new capital is:
It (v)
Ytk (v) =
Kt (v)
Kt (v)
is an increasing and concave function. The …rm solves:
max

It (v);Kt (v)

Qt Ytk (v)

It (v)

RtK Kt (v)

Qt is the price of installed capital and RtK is the rental rate for producing new capital. The
…rst order conditions are:
Qt 0 ( ) = 1
It (v)
It (v) 0 It (v)
Qt
= Rtk
Kt (v)
Kt (v)
Kt (v)
The parameter denotes the elasticity of the adjustment cost function.
Aggregation, Policy, and Resource Constraints
25

One can show that the aggregate production function takes the same form as the production
function for intermediate goods producers in the region of the steady state:
Yt = At Kt 1 Nt1
The time subscript on the aggregate capital stock re‡ects that newly produced capital is not
available for one period, even though capital can move freely between intermediate goods …rms
within period. The aggregate capital stock accumulates according to:
It
Kt + (1
)Kt 1
Kt =
Kt
The aggregate resource constraint is:
Yt = Ct + It + Gt
We assume that the government consumes a stochastic share of output. We assume that the
government share of output follows a stationary AR(1) in the log:
G
G
G
ln
= (1
+ g ln
+ "G;t
g ) ln
Y t
Y
Y t 1
The government …nances its (exogenous) purchases with lump sum taxes on households, Tt .
The government sets monetary policy according to a Taylor type (1993) rule of the form:
it = i it 1 + (1
( t
) + (1
Y ) + "i;t
i)
i ) y ( Yt
Yt is output growth. We restrict the parameters of this rule to be leave the economy in the
region of determinacy (see Woodford (2003)).

26

Table 1: Calibrated Parameter Values
Parameter Value
0.99
0.36
0.03
0.0033

g
G
Y

0.20

G

0.95

G

0.0025

Note: these are the parameters of the model of Section 3 and the Appendix that are calibrated.

Table 2: Benchmark Parameter Estimates
Parameter 1
2
3
e
ga
Estimate
S.E.
Parameter
Estimate
S.E.

1.01
32.76 3.78
0.94
0.73
(0.63) (2.03) (0.81) (0.01) (0.08)

"ga

"a

y

0.17
0.58
1.31
0.94
0.66
(0.06) (0.12) (0.18) (0.12) (0.16)

Parameter
Estimate
S.E.
Parameter
Estimate
S.E.

i

"i

0.31
0.16
1.32
0.21
13.71
(0.31) (0.08) (0.86) (0.11) (6.03)

"s

0.76
0.13
(0.07) (0.08)

Note: this table shows parameter estimates from the model of Section 3. Standard errors are in
parentheses.

27

Table 3: Model Variance Decomposition
h = 1 h = 4 h = 8 h = 16 h = 20
News
E5Y

0.52

0.71

0.75

0.77

0.77

C

0.11

0.25

0.36

0.47

0.49

Y

0.02

0.11

0.31

0.46

0.49

E5Y

0.25

0.09

0.06

0.05

0.04

C

0.06

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.00

Y

0.01

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.00

E5Y

0.01

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.00

C

0.43

0.48

0.50

0.48

0.47

Y

0.13

0.54

0.57

0.50

0.48

0.22

0.19

0.19

0.18

0.18

Animal spirits

Technology

Noise
E5Y

Note: this table shows the fraction of the forecast error variance of the respective variables explained
by the structural shocks at di¤erent horizons in the model of Section 3 at the parameter values in Table
2.

28

Table 4
Regressions of Con…dence Innovations on News Heard Categories
News Heard Category

Coe¢ cient

Favorable Employment

0.248

0.113

0.140

(0.13)

(0.13)

(0.13)

1.001

0.889

1.005

(0.51)

(0.51)

(0.58)

-0.064

-0.071

0.035

(0.05)

(0.05)

(0.06)

-0.363

-0.342

-0.312

(0.13)

(0.13)

(0.15)

0.915

0.845

(0.38)

(0.38)

-0.235

-0.259

(0.16)

(0.17)

Favorable Prices
Unfavorable Employment
Unfavorable Prices
Favorable Stocks
Unfavorable Stocks
Favorable Government

0.342
(0.53)

Unfavorable Government

-0.604
(0.24)

Favorable Credit

-0.342
(0.27)

Unfavorable Credit

0.124
(0.19)

Energy Crisis

-0.393
(0.22)

Adjusted R2

0.10

0.12

0.15

Note: The above are coe¢ cient estimates from a regression of the reduced form innovation in
E5Y obtained from the three variable system described in Section 5 on the percentage of respondents
reporting having heard either favorable or unfavorable news concerning employment, prices, or stock
prices. The sample period is 1961:1 –2007:3. OLS standard errors are in parentheses.

29

Figure 1: E5Y and E12M
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
60

65

70

75

80

85

E5Y

90

95

00

05

E12M

Note: The above is a time series plot of E5Y and E12M over time. E5Y is the solid line; E12M is the dashed line.

Figure 2: Impulse Responses to E5Y Innovations (ordered first)

Note: These are impulse responses from a three variable VAR with E5Y, consumption, and GDP. The system
features 4 lags. E5Y is ordered first. The shaded areas are one standard error bootstrap confidence bands.

30

Figure 3: Impulse Responses to E5Y ordered last:

Note: These are IRFs from a three variable VAR with E5Y, consumption, and GDP. The system features 4 lags.
E5Y is ordered last. The shaded areas are one standard error bootstrap confidence bands.

31

Figure 4: Variance Decomposition in Three Variable VAR
E5Y due to E5Y Innovations

Consumption due to E5Y Innovations

GDP due to E5Y Innovations

1

1

1

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0

0

E5Y First
E5Y Last

0.4

0

10

20

30

0
0

40

E5Y due to Consumption Innovations

10

20

30

0

40

Consumption due to Consumption Innovations
1

1

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0

0
10

20

30

E5Y due to GDP Innovations

10

20

30

0

40

Consumption due to GDP Innovations
1

1

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0

0
10

20

30

40

40

10

20

30

40

GDP due to GDP Innovations

1

0

30

0
0

40

20

GDP due to Consumption Innovations

1

0

10

0
0

10

20

30

40

0

10

20

30

40

Note: These are variance decompositions from the three variable VARs whose IRFs are shown in Figures 2 and 3.
The solid lines show the case in which E5Y is ordered first; the dashed lines when E5Y is last.

Figure 5: Three Variable VARs with Other Confidence Measures

Note: These are IRFs with the confidence variable ordered first.

32

Figure 6: Actual and Perceived Growth Rates:
Growth Rate Responses to Level Shocks

Growth Rate Responses to Animal Spirits Shocks

0.02

0.14
Actual
Perceived

0.015

Actual
Perceived

0.12
0.1

0.01

0.08
0.06

0.005

0.04

0

0.02
-0.005

-0.01

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

-0.02

10

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Growth Rate Responses to News Shocks
Actual
Perceived

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

-0.05

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Note: These are theoretical IRFs of true and household perceived variables in the model of Section 3 to various
structural shocks.

Figure 7: Impulse Responses from Larger VAR:

Note: These are responses from a five variable system with E5Y, consumption, GDP, inflation, and the real interest
rate, with E5Y ordered first. See also the note below Figure 3.

33

Figure 8: Impulse Responses to Confidence from Estimated Model:

Note: The solid line is identical to the responses shown in Figure 7. The shaded gray area is the two standard error
empirical confidence band. The dashed line is the average estimated response from simulations of the model at the
estimated parameter values. The dotted lines correspond to the 2.5 and 97.5 percentiles of the simulated responses.
The units are points for confidence and percentage points for the other variables.

Figure 9: Selected Theoretical Responses to Shocks in Estimated Model:
Output to News Shock

Inflation to News Shock

1

Confidence to News Shock
7

0.2

6

0
0.5

5
-0.2
4

0
-0.4
-0.5

0

5

10

15

20

-0.6

3

0

5

10

15

20

2

0

Output to Animal Spirits Shock

Real Rate to News Shock
0.2

0.04

0.15

0.02

5

10

15

20

Inflation to Animal Spirits Shock
0.05
0
-0.05

0.1

0

0.05

-0.02

-0.1

0

0

5

10

15

20

-0.04

-0.15

0

Confidence to Animal Spirits Shock

10

5

15

20

-0.2

Real Rate to Animal Spirits Shock
0.1

4

4

0.08

3.5

3
2
1

0

5

10

15

20

0.06

3

0.04

2.5

0.02

2

0

1.5

-0.02

0

5

10

15

5

10

15

20

1

0

5

10

15

Note: these are theoretical IRFs in the model at the estimated parameter values to selected one standard deviation
shocks. The responses of the non-confidence series are scaled in percentage point terms.

34

20

Confidence to Noise Shock

5

0

0

20

Figure 10: Simulated Time Paths of Confidence:
(a) Component due to news
Confidence to News
140

130

Simulated
Actual

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

1965

1970

1975

1985

1980

1990

1995

2000

2005

(b) Component due to animal spirits
Confidence to Animal Spirits
140

Simulated
Actual

130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

35

1990

1995

2000

2005

(c) Component due to level shocks:
Confidence to Technology Shocks
140
Simulated
Actual

130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

1965

1970

1975

1985

1980

1990

1995

2000

2005

(d) Component due to noise:
Confidence to NoiseShocks
140

130

Simulated
Actual

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

1965

1970

1975

1985

1980

1990

1995

2000

2005

Note: The solid line shows the actual time path of E5Y; the dashed line shows the simulated time path as if the
respective shock were the only stochastic disturbance in the model.

36

Figure 11: Trend Productivity Growth and Confidence
.010
.008
.006
140
.004
120
.002
100
.000
80
60
40
60

65

70

75

80

85

90

95

Trend Productivity Growth

00

05

E5Y

Note: This is a plot of the HP trend (smoothing parameter 1600) growth rate of output per hour and E5Y.

Figure 12: Model Response of Output to Animal Spirits Shock under “Favorable”
Parameters
-3

Output to News Shock
1.8

3.6

-4

Inflation to News Shock

x 10

7.5

3.4

1.6

Real Rate to News Shock

7

3.2

6.5

1.4
3
1.2

x 10

6

2.8
5.5
2.6

1

5

2.4
0.8

4.5

2.2
0.6
0.4

0

5

10

15

20

2

4

1.8

3.5

0

5

-3

Output to Animal Spirits Shock
2.5

0.7
0.6

x 10

10

15

20

0

5

-3

Inflation to Animal Spirits Shock
1

2

x 10

10

15

20

Real Rate to Animal Spirits Shock

0.8

0.5
1.5
0.6

0.4
1
0.3

0.4
0.5

0.2

0

0.2

0

0.1

0

5

10

15

20

-0.5

0

5

10

15

20

0

0

5

10

15

Note: This shows the theoretical IRF from the model of Section 3 at parameter values chosen to give animal spirits
shocks the largest real effects. Note that the units on the inflation and real rate responses are such that these
responses are less than 0.003 percentage points at per annum rates – in other words, essentially zero.

37

20

Figure 13: Responses to Confidence Innovation under “favorable” parameters

Note: This figure is similar to 8, but instead of generating the model simulated responses at the estimated
parameters, the model simulated responses are computed using a parameter configuration in which animal spirits
shocks can have large real effects.

38

Figure 14
Spike Plots of Responses in News Heard Categories

Note: These figures show the fraction of survey respondents reporting having heard news in each category in the
relevant quarter.

39

