NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CREDIT RATING CRISIS
Efraim Benmelech
Jennifer Dlugosz
Working Paper 15045
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15045

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2009

We thank Daron Acemuglo, Adam Ashcraft, George-Marios Angeletos, Bengt Holmstrom, David
Laibson, Chris Mayer, Ken Rogoff, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein and Luigi Zingales for insightful
discussions, as well as seminar participants at Harvard University, the 24th annual conference on Macroeconomics,
and the Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank for useful comments. We also thank and Anna-Kathrine
Barnett-Hart for help with the data. Shaunak Vankudre provided fantastic research assistance. All
errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Efraim Benmelech and Jennifer Dlugosz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Credit Rating Crisis
Efraim Benmelech and Jennifer Dlugosz
NBER Working Paper No. 15045
June 2009
JEL No. E44,G01,G21,G24,G38
ABSTRACT
Since June 2007, the creditworthiness of structured finance products has deteriorated rapidly. The
number of downgrades in November 2007 alone exceeded 2,000 and many downgrades were severe,
with 500 tranches downgraded more than 10 notches. Massive downgrades continued in 2008. More
than 11,000 of the downgrades affected securities that were rated AAA. This paper studies the credit
rating crisis of 2007-2008 and in particular describes the collapse of the credit ratings of ABS CDOs.
Using data on ABS CDOs we provide suggestive evidence that ratings shopping may have played
a role in the current crisis. We find that tranches rated solely by one agency, and by S&P in particular,
were more likely to be downgraded by January 2008. Further, tranches rated solely by one agency
are more likely to suffer more severe downgrades.

Efraim Benmelech
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer 233
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
effi_benmelech@harvard.edu
Jennifer Dlugosz
Harvard University
Department of Economics and HBS
Littauer 233
Cambridge, MA 02138
jdlugosz@hbs.edu

Introduction
By December 2008, structured ﬁnance securities accounted for over $11 trillion dollars worth of
outstanding U.S. bond market debt (35%).1 The lion’s share of these securities was highly rated by
rating agencies. More than half of the structured ﬁnance securities rated by Moody’s carried a AAA
rating – the highest possible credit rating. In 2007 and 2008, the creditworthiness of structured
ﬁnance securities deteriorated dramatically. 36,346 tranches rated by Moody’s were downgraded.
Nearly one third of downgraded tranches bore the AAA rating.
Both academics and practitioners have blamed structured ﬁnance for being, in part, responsible
for the current credit crisis. In September 2007, Princeton economist Alan Blinder wrote:
Part of the answer is that the securities, especially the now-notorious C.D.O.s, for
collateralized debt obligations, were probably too complex for anyone‘s good. Investors
placed too much faith in the rating agencies which, to put it mildly, failed to get it
right. It is tempting to take the rating agencies out for a public whipping. But it is
more constructive to ask how the rating system might be improved.2
The goal of our paper is to inform economists about the credit rating crisis of 2007-2008. We begin
by describing what happened to structured ﬁnance credit rating during the crisis of 2007-2008.
We then try to explain why the ratings collapsed. Using detailed information on rating decisions
made by Moody’s for every structured ﬁnance tranche, we document the ratings performance of
structured ﬁnance products since 1983. We augment the evidence on structured ﬁnance ratings
performance with data on rating transitions of all corporate bonds rated by Moody’s over the same
period. The data on corporate bonds is used as a benchmark for the true distribution of credit
ratings that are based on economic fundamentals. The comparison is important since many of
the new exotic structured ﬁnance products were engineered to obtain high ratings, but the credit
ratings were determined through cash ﬂow simulations which are prone to model errors.
Decomposing structured ﬁnance downgrades by collateral type, we ﬁnd that 64% of all downgrades in 2007 and 2008 were tied to securities that had home equity loans or ﬁrst mortgages as
collateral. Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) backed by asset-backed securities (ABS CDOs)
accounted for a large share of the downgrades, and some of the most severe downgrades. ABS
1

Aggregate structured ﬁnance balances are based on Securities Industry and Financial Markets Associations
(SIFMA) reports available at: http://www.sifma.org.
2
Blinder, Alan, Six Fingers of Blame in the Mortgage Mess, New York Times, 9/30/2007.

1

CDOs accounted for 42% of the total write-downs of ﬁnancial institutions around the world. As
of October 2008, Citigroup, AIG, and Merrill Lynch took write-downs totaling $34.1 billion, $33.2
billion, and $26.1 billion, respectively, due to ABS CDO exposure.3
Using micro-level data on the collateral composition of ABS CDOs we fdocument three features
of ABS CDOs: (i) a high concentration in residential housing – on average 70% of the underlying
securities were residential mortgage backed securities or home equity loan securities and 19% were
CDO tranches backed by housing assets, (ii) high exposure to the most risky segment of residential
housing: 54.7% of the assets of ABS CDOs were invested in home equity securities. (iii) Low intervintage diversiﬁcation: about 75% of ABS CDOs were comprised of mortgages that were originated
in 2005 and 2006.
We discuss possible explanations for the collapse of ABS CDOs ratings. Our regression analysis
shows that tranches rated only by one rater were more likely to be downgraded - a ﬁnding consistent
with issuers ‘shopping’ for the highest ratings available from the rating agencies. Consistent with
claims made in the news media, we ﬁnd evidence that S&P’s ratings were somewhat inﬂated. Our
regressions show that tranches that were rated only by S&P were more likely to be downgraded subsequently, than tranches rated by either Moody’s or Fitch. While some ‘rating shopping’ probably
took place, more than 80% of all tranches were rated by either 2 or 3 agencies and were less prone
to rating shopping. We also provide anecdotal evidence that one of the main causes of the credit
rating disaster was over reliance on statistical models that failed to account for default correlation
at a macroeconomic level. Given the uniformity of CDO structures and their highly-leveraged
nature (Benmelech and Dlugosz (2009)), any mistakes embedded in the credit rating model have
been compounded over the many CDOs structured by issuers using these models.
The rest of our paper is organized as follows. In Section 1 we explain the economics of structured
ﬁnance. Section 2 provides background on structured ﬁnance products. Section 3 describes our data
sources and provides summary statistics on the evolution of the structured ﬁnance market. Section 4
compares credit rating transitions of structured ﬁnance products to corporate and sovereign bonds.
Section 5 documents the collapse of ABS CDOs’ credit ratings. In Section 6 we study potential
reasons for the ratings’ collapse. Section 7 concludes.
3

See Table 9.

2

1.

Securitization and AAA rating

Securitization is a broad term that encompasses several kinds of structures where loans, mortgages,
or other debt instruments are packaged into securities. There are two basic types of securitization:
pass-through securitizations and tranched securitizations. Ginnie Mae and Freddie Mac have been
structuring pass-through mortgage securities since the 1970s. In a pass-through securitization, the
issuer pools a set of assets and issues securities to investors backed by the cash ﬂows. A single
type of security is issued so that each investor holds a proportional claim on the underlying assets.
Tranched securitizations are more complex. After pooling a set of assets, the issuer creates several
diﬀerent classes of securities, or tranches, with prioritized claims on the collateral. In a tranched
deal, like a collateralized debt obligation, some investors hold more senior claims than others.
In the event of default, the losses are absorbed by the lowest priority class of investors before
higher priority investors are aﬀected. Naturally, the process of pooling and tranching creates some
securities that are riskier than the average asset in the collateral pool and some that are safer.
While the beneﬁts from diversiﬁcation generated by of pooling of assets seem to be well understood, the economic role of tranching is less clear. According to DeMarzo and Duﬃe (1999) and
DeMarzo (2005), asymmetric information plays a key role in explaining the existence of tranched
securities. DeMarzo (2005) presents a model of a ﬁnancial intermediary that would like to sell assets about which it has superior information. When the number of assets is large and their returns
are imperfectly correlated, the intermediary maximizes his revenue from the sale by pooling and
tranching, as opposed to simply pooling or selling the assets individually. Similar to the inuition
in Myers and Majluf (1984) and in Gorton and Pennacchi (1990), pooling and tranching allows the
intermediary to concentrate the default risk in one part of the capital structure, resulting in a large
share of the liabilities being almost riskless which in turn reduces the overall lemons discount that
buyers demand.
Financial regulation provides additional motivation for pooling and tranching in the real world.
The extensive use of credit ratings in the regulation of ﬁnancial institutions created a natural
clientele for CDO securities. Minimum capital requirements at banks, insurance companies, and
broker-dealers, depend on the credit ratings of the assets on their balance sheets. Pension funds
also face ratings-based investment restrictions. CDO securitizations allow these investors to participate in asset classes from which they would normally be prohibited. For example, an investor

3

required to hold investment grade securities could not invest in B-rated corporate loans directly
but he could invest in a AAA-rated CLO security backed by a pool of B-rated corporate loans.
CDO securities yield a higher interest rate than similarly rated corporate bonds, making them an
attractive investment for ratings-constrained investors.
Asymmetric information and ﬁnancial regulation only partially explain the deal structures we
observe. A common feature of all structured ﬁnance deals, regardless of the type of underlying
collateral, is that a large share of the securities issued (typically 70-85%) are carved out as AAA.
While asymmetric information and ﬁnancial regulation can explain the motivation for creating
highly-rated securities, they do not explain the preponderance of AAA. Models of adverse selection
imply that the highest rated tranches should be structured to bear no risk, however, there is a
negligible diﬀerence between the conditional default probabilities of AAA, AA+ and AA rated
bonds. Investors should perceive AAA, AA+ and AA as similarly low risk based on this data, yet
AA+ and AA tranches are in short supply relative to AAA tranches. Similarly, ﬁnancial regulation
can explain the demand for highly-rated securities but not AAA in particular.
For example, the Investment Company Act of 1940 requires money market funds to hold highlyrated securities, but they are not required to be AAA rated. For example, while money market
funds are required by the Investment Company Act of 1940 to hold highly rated assets, they are
not required to be AAA-rated: ‘...the security has received a long-term rating from the Requisite
NRSROs in one of the three highest rating categories.’ which implies that AAA, AA+ and AA are
all eligible assets for money market funds.4
The adoption of Basel II, which ties bank capital requirements to credit ratings, provides additional demand for highly-rated securities. However, the role of Basel II in fueling the securitization
boom may be overstated since, by mid-2008, US banks were still not required to implement the
proposed rules.
Behavioral economics provides an additional insight as to why investors may demand AAA
securities even in the absence of ratings-based regulation. If investors use heuristics to classify
assets, as in Barberis and Shleifer (2003), and only AAA-rated securities are perceived to be
riskless, then issuers would cater to investor demand by carving out large portions of their deals
as AAA. Benmelech and Dlugosz (2008) argue that the uniformity of CDO structures suggest that
4
In addition, money market funds are not allowed to hold securities with a remaining maturity of 397 calendar
days or more, while a typical maturity of a CDO at the time of the issuance is between 5 and 7 years.

4

investor demand in general is an important determinant of deal structures.

2.

Structured Finance Background

The market for structured ﬁnance saw a remarkable development since the inaugural issue of
mortgage-backed securities by Bank of America in 1977. Ranieri (1996) attributes the creation
of structured ﬁnance products to concerns about the ability of thrifts – the major providers of
mortgages in the 1980s – to fund the growing demand for housing in the late 1970s and 1980s.
Wall Street attempted to address the impending demand by creating an alternative, more eﬃcient,
and less expensive sources of funds. According to John Reed, a former chairman of Citicorp:
“Securitization is the substitution of more eﬃcient public capital market for less eﬃcient, higher
cost, ﬁnancial intermediaries in the funding of debt instruments.”5 As of January 2008, there were
111,988 individual rated tranches outstanding worldwide with structured ﬁnance becoming the
largest ﬁnancial market in the world.

2.1.

Common Structured Finance Products

While there are many diﬀerent types of structured ﬁnance products, we provide a brief description
of the main types of structured ﬁnance instruments that appear in our data.
• Asset-backed securities (ABS) the general term for bonds or notes backed by pools of assets
rather than a single corporation or government. Common types of collateral for ABS are auto
loan receivables, student loan receivables, etc. ABS appear in our sample because they are
sometimes used as collateral for CDOs.
• Mortgage-backed securities (MBS) are asset-backed securities whose cash ﬂows are backed
by the principal and interest payments of a set of mortgage loans. MBS can be divided into
residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) and commercial mortgage-backed securities
(CMBS), depending on the type of property underlying the mortgages.
• Home Equity Loans securities (HEL) are residential mortgage-backed securities whose cash
ﬂows are backed by a pool of home equity loans.
5

See Kendall (1996).

5

• Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) are structured ﬁnance securities that are pooled and
tranched. CDOs are backed by a pool of assets, like other structured ﬁnance securities, but
they issue classes of securities with some investors having priority over others
• Collateralized bond obligations (CBOs) are CDOs backed primarily by high-yield corporate
bonds.
• Collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) are CDOs backed primarily by leveraged high-yield
bank loans.
• Collateralized mortgage obligations (CMOs) are CDOs backed by mortgage collateral (often
RMBS or CMBS rather than individual mortgages)

3.

Data and Summary Statistics

This section describes our data, and displays summary statistics on structured ﬁnance products.

3.1.

Sample Construction

Our analysis uses three main data sets: (i) Moody’s Structured Finance Default Risk Services
database, (ii) Moody’s Corporate Default Risk Services database, and (iii) Pershing Square’s Open
Source Research. The primary data source for this study is Moody’s Structured Finance Default
Risk Services (SF DRS) which covers all structured ﬁnance products issued since 1982. The Moody’s
data include a short description of the tranche, CUSIP number, amount issued , seniority, ﬁnal
maturity, and the currency in which it was issued for every structured ﬁnance security rated by
Moody’s. The data lists the initial Moody’s credit rating of all tranches rated by Moody’s and
tracks rating changes through September 2008. Finally, the Moody’s Structured Finance Default
Risk Services database also reports the date and amount of defaults for impaired tranches. As of
September 2008, there is rating data covering 179,760 tranches and 33,978 deals. Structured ﬁnance
products are classiﬁed into 7 broad deal types: Asset-Backed Securities (ABS), Colateralized Debt
Obligations (CDO), Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities (CMBS), Mortgage-Backed Securities
(MBS), Public Finance (PF), Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities (RMBS), and Other.
We augment the data with detailed information on 30,499 structured ﬁnance tranches from the
Open Source Research data set assembled by Pershing Square Capital Management, L.P. These
data have been collected by Pershing Square Capital Management, L.P in an attempt to improve
6

the level of disclosure in the marketplace on potential losses in the bond insurance industry. The
data include information on all CDOs of ABS that were insured by MBIA or AMBAC – a total of
534 CDOs – issued during the period 2005-2007. For each CDO in the data, all of the underlying
collateral assets are identiﬁed by CUSIP, along with a description of the collateral type, amount
outstanding, and initial and current (as of January 2008) rating by Fitch, Moody’s, and S&P, when
available. The data distinguish among subprime, midprime, Alt-A, and prime RMBS collateral
within the CDOs. Using detailed information on the underlying collateral of the CDOs, which are
structured ﬁnance products themselves, we obtain detailed information on collateral proﬁle and
liability structure for 30,499 individual structured ﬁnance tranches.
The third data set that we use is Moody’s Corporate Default Risk Servicesdatabase which
contains data for over 11,000 corporate entities, including more than 380,000 debts. The data
span the period from 1970 to September 2008 and include information on default, recovery, rating
history and outlook, as well as description of each security and information on the issuer.

3.2.

The Evolution of the Structured Finance Market

Table 1 displays the evolution of the structured ﬁnance market across deal types from 1983 to 2008.
Total number of structured ﬁnance tranches issued every year increased from 29 in 1983 to 1,581 in
1990, 9,353 in 2000, and 47,055 in 2006. While the year 2007 was on the track to surpass the record
numbers of 2006, the credit crisis that began in summer 2007 brought the market for structured
ﬁnance to a halt. The largest category of structured ﬁnance by number of tranches issued is RMBS
(89,573), followed by ABS (76,288), PF (32,351), and CDO (36,160). New issues of RMBS, and
ABS reached record levels in 2006, with 15,895 and 12,629 new tracnhes, respectively, while PF
reached its highest level of 5,303 new tranches in 2007. As Table 1 demonstrates, CDOs have been
the fastest growing sector of the structured ﬁnance market between 2003 and 2006; the number of
CDO tranches issued in 2006 (9,278) was almost twice the number of tranches issued in 2005 (4,706).
Figure 1 illustrates the dramatic growth in the dollar value of global CDOs issued compared to
all mortgage-related securities. Global CDO issuance went up from 157.4 billion dollars in 2004 to
551.7 billion in 2006. While it was expected that CDO issuance in 2007 would top the 2006 record,
total issuance declined to 502.9 billion as a result of the ﬁnancial turbulence that began in July
2007. As investors lost conﬁdence in credit ratings,, the market for structured ﬁnance products
issuanace dried up. CDO issuance fell to its lowest level since the mid-1990s, with a total of 53.1

7

billion dollars. Likewise, the number of all new structured ﬁnance tranches issued between January
and September 2008 fell to 6,644 from a peak of 47,055 tranches in 2006.

4.

Credit Rating: Structured Finance vs. Corporate Bonds

4.1.

Credit Rating Transitions of Structured Finance Products

Table 2 and Figure 2a display the behavior of structured ﬁnance rating transitions over time. We
form cohorts of all existing tranches that were rated as of January 1st of each year from 1990 to 2008.
Then, for each cohort, we calculate the number of downgrades, upgrades, and withdrawn ratings
over the course of the year.6 For example, the ﬁrst line of Table 2, Panel A tracks rating changes for
the cohort of securities that were rated as of 1/1/1990 from 1/1/1990 until 12/31/1990. As Table
2 shows, the total number of rated tranches as of 1/1/1990 was 2,825, out of which 85 tranches
were downgraded, none of the tranches were upgraded, and ratings were withdrawn for 48 tranches
by the end of 1990. It is important to note that Table 2 provides information for all outstanding
tranches at the time of the formation of the cohort, while Table 1 displays information on new
issues. Put diﬀerently, Table 1 illustrates the evolution of the structured ﬁnance market using data
on the ﬂow of new securities, while Table 2 presents rating transitions for the stock of structured
ﬁnance tranches. As Table 2 shows, the number of downgrades and upgrades were roughly similar
before 2002. Table 2 also reports the average magnitude of downgrades and upgrades, where a
change of one notch (say from A2 to A3) is coded as -1.0. For example a downgrade from Aa2 to
A2 would be coded as -3.0 (moving from Aa2 to Aa3 to A1, and then to A2). In 2002 and 2003, the
number of downgrades rose dramatically and exceeded the number of upgrades. Many collateralized
bond obligations were downgraded during this time as corporate credit quality deteriorated in the
economic slowdown of 2001-2002. Downgrades again fell below upgrades during the structured
ﬁnance boom of 2005 and 2006.
Downgrades of structured ﬁnance products spiked in 2007. Whereas the total number of
tranches outstanding increased from 71,462 to 94,127 by 31.7%, the number of downgrades sky
rocketed eightfold from 986 to 8,109. There were 36,880 downgrades of structured ﬁnance tranches
in the ﬁrst three quarters of 2008 overshadowing the cumulative total number of downgrades in
2005, 2006 and 2007. Downgrades were not only more common in 2007 and 2008 but also more
6
Rating is being withdrawn if the issuer refuses to provide information to the rating agency, or when the rating
agency decides that there is not enough information to continue and ascertain credit rating for the issue.

8

severe. The average downgrade was -4.7 in 2007, and -5.8 in 2008, compared to -2.5 in both 2005
and 2006. Meanwhile, upgrades were less frequent and smaller in magnitude on average. There
were 2,990 upgrades in 2007 and 1,269 in the ﬁrst three quarters of 2008. The average upgrade in
each year was 1.9 and 2.4 notches, respectively.
Panel A of Table 2 and Figure 2a present the total number of upgrade and downgrade actions
during a year of structured ﬁnance tranches. Since the rating of a tranche can change more than
once within each year, we also calculate the number of tranches aﬀected by an upgrade or downgrade
action within a year. The picture that emerges from Panel B is similar to the one portrayed by
Figure 2a; The deterioration in the credit quality of structured ﬁnance securities is most pronounced
in 2007-2008. During this period, 6.9% of tranches were aﬀected by downgrades and only 1.6%
of tranches were upgraded, on average. However in relative terms. the percentage ﬁgures show
that there was a deterioration in credit quality in 2002-2003 that was only slightly less severe than
the current crisis. In 2002-2003, 4.6% of tranches were aﬀected by downgrades and only 2% were
upgraded. The average downgrade in this period was 3.4 notches, compared to 5.2 notches in 20072008. However, the overall market was much smaller in 2002 than in 2008. The number of rated
tranches outstanding in 2002 was one tenth of the number outstanding in 2008. In dollar terms, the
structured ﬁnance market in 2002 was 54% of its size in 2008 (SIFMA Outstanding Bond Market
Debt Statistics).

4.2.

Credit Rating Transitions of Corporate Bonds

The previous subsection demonstrated that the magnitude of the credit rating crisis of 2007-2008
was unprecedented. For comparison, we now turn to analyze transitions in the credit ratings of
‘single-name’ corporate bonds. We use corporate bond rating transitions as a barometer to assess
what ‘normal’ rating transition should look like based on the fundamentals of the macroeconomic
environment.
Similar to the results displayed in Table 2, we report the total number of upgrade and downgrade
actions on corporate bonds in Panel A of Table 3, and the number of securities aﬀected by ratings
actions in Panel B. As before, we form cohorts of all corporate bonds with available credit rating as
of January, 1st of each year from 1990 to 2008, and calculate downgrades, upgrades and withdrawn
rating (WR) until the end of the year. The number of rated bonds in the sample ranges from 3,016
as of 1/1/1990 to 13,523 in 2004. Taken together, Tables 2 and 3 illustrate the impressive growth

9

in the structured ﬁnance market compared to the bond market. The number of rated structured
ﬁnance tranches grew by a factor of 40 from 2,825 to 112,908 in 2008, while in the bond market
the number of rated bonds in 2008 was roughly 4 times higher than its level in 1990.
Downgrades and upgrades of bonds occurred with similar frequency and magnitude before 1998.
Following the East Asian crisis, the number of downgrades increased to 1,524 in 1998 and 2,137 in
1999, while the number of upgrades was less than 800. It is also interesting to note that during
this global ﬁnancial crisis, there was no spike in structured ﬁnance downgrades (See Table 2 and
Figure 2a for comparison). Corporate bonds experienced a signiﬁcant credit deterioration in 2001
and 2002 mainly due to the bankruptcy wave of 2001 and a slowing economy during that time.
Nearly half of the downgrades in 2002 involved technology, telecommunications, and energy trading
ﬁrms. As Figure 2a demonstrates, downgrades of structured ﬁnance products increased during this
period, when many CBOs, backed predominantly by high-yield corporate bonds, were downgraded.
One important observation on corporate bonds’ rating performance is that the average change in
credit rating when there is an upgrade or downgrade is fairly stable and low (Figure 3b). Even
in the midst of the recession in 2000-2001 when more than 30% of the outstanding bonds were
downgraded at least once, the average downgrade was only 1.8 notches. Taken together, these
results suggest that corporate bonds rating were well calibrated to the underlying economic risk of
the issuer. In contrast, the average downgrade of structured ﬁnance products in 2007, and during
the ﬁrst three months of 2008 were 4.7 and 5.8 notches, respectively (Figure 3a), suggesting, that
the initial distribution of structured ﬁnance credit ratings was inﬂated.

4.3.

The Structured Finance Credit Rating Crisis

In this subsection we dig in to the structured ﬁnance rating crisis by examining downgrades by
deal type and identifying the asset classes that suﬀered the most severe downgrades. Table 4
presents information on downgrades across the four largest deal types: ABS, CDO, CMBS, and
RMBS. While RMBS accounted for most of the downgrades during the early to mid 1990s, very few
RMBS tranches were downgraded between 2000 and 2006. Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities
(CMBS) accounted for a signiﬁcant share of downgrades between 1994-1996 and 2004-2006, but
explain only 1% of the downgrades during the most recent crisis. In 2007-2008, nearly 95% of all
downgrades were tied to RMBS, ABS, or CDO securities.
Table 5 supplements the data in Table 4 by reﬁning the broad deal types with more detailed

10

information on the underlying assets. We report the asset types that experienced the highest (left
part of the table), and second highest (right part of the table) number of downgrades each year. For
example, in 2001 there were 97 downgrades of High-Yield CBOs (which is a subcategory of CDOs)
which accounted for 20% of downgrades in that year, followed by Balance Sheet CDOs (which is
also a subcategory of CDOs) with 57 downgrades. As Table 5 shows, 54% of all downgrades in
2007 – a total of 4,405 – were downgrades of residential Asset-Backed Securities backed by home
equity loans (HELs). The second largest sector in terms of number of downgrades in 2007 was MBS
collateralized by 1st mortgages (1,342 downgrades). Securities backed by home equity loans were
the worst performing assets in the ﬁrst three quarters of 2008 as well, followed by Resecuritization
CDOs with 2,476 downgrades (24% of the total downgrades).7
Another unique aspect of the downgrade wave of structured ﬁnance products in 2007 and 2008
is its concentration amongst AAA-rated tranches. The large magnitudes of the downgrades in the
structured ﬁnance market shown in Figure 4a suggests that many of the tranches downgraded in
2007 and 2008 were highly rated. 11,327 (31%) of all downgrade actions in the ﬁrst three quarters
of 2008 involved AAA rated tranches. In contrast, Figure 4b displays a very diﬀerent picture for
downgrades in the corporate bond market. With the exception of 1983 ery few AAA-rated corporate
bonds were downgraded between 1984 and 2008. The lack of downgrades of AAA securities in the
bond market is in particular pronounced during the 2001-2002 recession and is consistent with the
fairly small magnitude of downgrades in this sector, and the the fact that only a small share of
corporate bonds are rated AAA.

4.4.

Fallen Angels

Next we examine structured ﬁnance securities that suﬀered the most severe downgrades. From 1983
to 2008, 11% of tranches were eventually downgraded 8 or more notches (fallen angels), aﬀecting
11% of deals. Table 6, Panel B decomposes these fallen angel tranches by their original credit
rating. Tranches rated below Ba3 cannot fall more than 8 notches by deﬁnition (the lowest rating,
C, is precisely 8 notches below Ba3). Surprisingly, we ﬁnd that most fallen angels were originally
rated AAA (19%). Tranches originally rated Baa2 or A2 make up the next largest portions of
fallen angels at 12% and 9% respectively. Clearly, some of this is supply driven (every CDO has
7
Resecuritization CDOs is the term used by Moody’s for CDOs that are collateralized by securities that are
themselves structured. These securities are also referred to as ABS CDOs or Structured Finance CDOs. ABS CDOs
account for nearly 84% of all CDO downgrades in the recent crisis

11

a AAA tranche but not every CDO has a Aa1 tranche). Panel C shows that nearly all of the
fallen angel tranches (86%) were issued between 2006 and 2008, underlining the poor quality of
recent deals. In the previous section, we showed that ABS CDOs and deals backed by home equity
loans or ﬁrst mortgages account for a large fraction of total downgrades. Panel E shows that these
types of securities experienced the most severe downgrades as well. 69% of all tranches that were
downgraded 8 notches or more belong to deals backed by home equity loans or ﬁrst mortgages; 19%
belong to ABS CDOs. Clearly, these are the segments where the rating model failed most severely.
We now turn to analyze the failure of AAA-rated CDOs in 2008.

5.

The Collapse of ABS CDO’s Credit Ratings

Many of the downgrades in 2007-2008 were tied to CDOs backed by assets that are themselves
structured (ABS CDOs). This section conducts a systematic micro-level analysis of ABS CDOs
in an attempt to explain the collapse of this segment of the structured ﬁnance market. Our data
comes from the Open Source Research data set that was assembled by Pershing Square Capital
Management, L.P., and includes information on all CDOs of ABS insured by MBIA and AMBAC
issued between 2005 and 2007 (534 CDOs in total). For each CDO in the data, we observe the
CUSIP of each asset in the collateral pool, along with a description of collateral type, par value of
securities outstanding, and initial and current (as of January 2008) ratings by Fitch, Moody’s, and
S&P, when available. The data enables us to identify the underlying collateral of the CDOs at the
security level. There are 30,499 individual structured ﬁnance securities in the collateral pools of
the 534 ABS CDOs in the sample.

5.1.

What are ABS CDOs?

ABS CDOs were ﬁrst issued in 1999. Initially, ABS CDOs were diversiﬁed and collateralized by
ABS from diﬀerent sectors such as: aircraft ABS, mutual fund fees, manufactured housing. However
since 2003 the primary asset classes backing ABS CDOs have been subprime and non-conforming
RMBS and CDO tranches. ABS CDOs are broadly classiﬁed into 2 categories: (1) High Grade
ABS CDOs which are backed by AA and A-rated collateral, and (ii) Mezzanine ABS CDOs that
are backed by BBB collateral. Since AA or A-rated collateral provides low credit spreads the
opportunities for rating-based arbitrage are limited. As a result, high grade (HG) ABS CDOs are
highly leveraged, and larger, typically between $1 billion to $3 billion. According to Lancaster
12

et al. (2008): “Because of the commonly held belief was that the risk of default for high grade
collateral was close to zero, the credit support for a triple-B note can be less than 1%. Such a
highly leveraged structure, however, leaves little room for error, not only for the default risk,
but also for the timing of the cash ﬂows.”8 Mezzanine ABS CDOs are collateralized by mezzanine
tranches of subprime RMBS and other structured products. Mezzanine ABS CDOs are typically
smaller than High Grade ABS CDOs, with deal sizes ranging from 300millionto1.5 billion.

5.2.

The Collateral Structure of ABS CDO

Table 7 provides a detailed analysis of the collateral structure of 533 ABS CDOs.9 The table
reports summary statistics on the 534 collateral pools including the weighted average rating of
the underlying assets (weighted by the par value of the underlying securities) and a breakdown by
asset type and vintage. Portfolio allocation percentages are based on the par value securities in
each CDO’s collateral pool and then averaged across all CDOs.
The total total value of securities used as collateral for ABS CDOs is measured by the sum
of the book values of each of the securities in the collateral pool. There are on average 149.7
(median: 137) individual ABS securities in an ABS CDO, and the standard deviation is 73.1. The
smallest number of securities is 26, and one ABS CDOs (DORSTF ) has as many as 990 diﬀerent
tranches of ABS in its collateral pool. The average collateral amount is $1,006.7 million (median:
$849.7 million), with values ranging from $100 million for the smallest CDO, to $11,132 million
for the largest. Table 7 displays summary statistics on the composition of the collateral pools by
rating, asset type, and vintage. Since only a small fraction of the underlying collateral is rated by
Fitch, we calculate the weighted average rating of the securities in each collateral pool according
to S&P and Moody’s. Moody’s and S&P’s assessments of collateral quality are almost identical:
the weighted-average rating on the pools according to Moody’s ranges from Baa3 to Aaa, while
the weighted average rating according to S&P ranges from BBB- to AAA. The average CDO holds
collateral with a weighted average rating of A according to S&P and A2 according to Moody’s,
which are equivalent ratings across the two scales.
ABS CDOs invest in a variety of structured ﬁnance securities including RMBS, CMBS, Home
equity ABS, and other CDO tranches. Home Equity Loans (HEL) are the largest asset type,
8

Lancaster et al. (2008) p. 210, emphasis added.
While the Pershing Square Capital Management, L.P. data includes information on 534 ABS CDOs, there is 1
CDOs with incomplete information on its underlying collateral
9

13

accounting on average for 54.7% [median: 59.9%] of collateral pools on average. In a quarter of
the sample (133 CDOs), more than 83% of the collateral pool is invested in HEL, and in 10 cases,
the entire collateral pool is comprised of home equity loans. The next two largest asset classes in
which ABS CDOs are invested are tranches of other CDOs and RMBS. Tranches of other CDOs
account for 18.8% of the assets in BS CDOs on average, while RMBS account for 15% of collateral
pools. The share of Commercial Mortgage-backed Securities (CMBS) in ABS CDOs is smaller,
accounting on average for 4.6% of the entire collateral pool.
Table 7 also reports additional information on the kinds of mortgages underlying the RMBS or
CMBS that serve as collateral for the ABS CDOs, and their vintage. Midprime- and Subprimebased ABS account on average for 29.7% and 24.2% of the collateral, respectively, followed by
prime-mortgages with an average of 8.2%, and Alt-A (5.2%). Turning to vintage, following market
convention we use a 6-month resolution to deﬁne vintage, thus 2005H1 stands for the ﬁrst six
months of 2005, and 2006H2 for the second half of 2006. Since our sample covers most of the
ABS securities that were issued between 2005 and 2007, it is not surprising that more than 40%
of their assets are invested in 2005H2 and 2006H1 vintages. The mean vintage share of 2005H2
and 2006H1 are 21.0% and 23.4%, respectively, followed by 2006H2 (15.9%), 2005H1 (15.3%), and
2007H1 (7.3%).
Figures 5a through 5d plot the evolution of the ABX indices over time. The ABX indices were
launched by Markit in January 2006, each of the indices tracks the price of credit default insurance
on RMBS and other ABS backed by residential mortgages. There are ﬁve indices based on the
rating of the security being insured: AAA, AA, A, BBB, and BBB-. Each of the ﬁve rating-based
indices are calculated for a six-month vintage; Figure 5a presents the behavior of the AAA, AA, A,
BBB, and BBB- indices for the 2006H1 vintage, and Figures 5b, 5c, and 5d track the performance
of the indices by the vintages of 2006H2, 2007H1, and 2007H2, respectively.
Of the 533 ABS CDOs in our data, 299 can be clearly classiﬁed as High Grade with a collateral
weighted-average S&P rating of A, and 205 are Mezzanine Grade with an average collateral rating
of BBB.10 Table 8 decomposes the collateral in high grade and mezzanine ABS CDOs by vintage.
The table reports the mean share [median share is reported in brackets] of collateral assets in each
of the vintages 2005H1 through 2007H2. The last two columns of the table report the price of the
10
We lump together collateral ratings of A+, A, and A- as High Grade with an A rating category, and BBB+,
BBB, and BBB- as Mezzanine Grade with collateral rating of BBB.

14

corresponding ABX index based ion rating and vintage as of September, 25 2008. As the table
demonstrates, both High Grade, and Mezzanine Grade ABS CDOs have considerable exposure to
the 2005 and 2006 vintages. In the fourth column of the table we report the diﬀerence in vintage
share between High Grade and Mezzanine Grade ABS CDOs and its corresponding t-test for equal
means. Mezzanine Grade ABS CDOs have signiﬁcantly higher exposure to 2006H1 but High Grade
ABS CDOs have signiﬁcantly higher exposure to 2007H1 and 2007H2. The exposure of both classes
of CDOs to the 2007H2 is negligible, and is due to the decline in CDO issuance in the second half
of 2007 with the eruption of the credit crisis in July 2007.
The summary statistics in Tables 7 and 8, and Figures 5a-5d jointly point to the main woes of
the ABS CDOs issued between 2005 and 2007:
1. Lack of inter-sector diversification: high concentration in residential housing – on average
70% of the assets of ABS CDOs were invested in RMBS and Home Equity Securities, and
18.8% in other CDOs that are concentrated in the housing market as well.
2. Very high concentration in Home Equity ABS: especially the most risky segment of the
sector. On Average, 54.7% of the assets of ABS CDOs are invested in home equity securities
that include: ﬁrst-lien subprime mortgages, second-lien home equity loans, and home equity
lines of credit.
3. Low inter-vintage diversification: about 75% of ABS CDOs were comprised of 2005H1
through 2006H2 vintages, Figures 5a and 5b shows that the 2006H1 and 2006H2 vintages
performed miserably since summer 2007.

5.3.

The Consequences of the ABS CDOs Collapse

Table 9 provides information on aggregate crisis related write-downs as well as write-downs for
some of the largest ﬁnancial institutions in the world.11 As the table demonstrates, as of October
2008. Citigroup has written down $34.1 billion as a result of exposure to ABS CDOs, followed
by AIG with $33.2 billion, Merril Lynch with $26.1, Ambac ($11.1 billion), and Bank of America
($9.1 billion). As of February 2009, the total value of write-downs by ﬁnancial institutions around
the world was $520.1 billion, out of which $218.2 (42.0%) were due to exposure to ABS CDOs.
11

The data is from Creditﬂux a leading information source globally for credit trading and investing, credit derivatives, structured credit, distressed credit and credit research.

15

Write-downs driven by ABS CDOs were more than four times the size of corporate credit related
write-downs. North American banks accounted for the largest share of ABS CDO write-downs
followed by European banks and insurers and asset managers.

6.

Why did the Ratings Collapse?

After presenting the main facts about the credit rating crisis of 2007 and 2008, we turn to discuss
the potential reasons for this collapse. We consider two main candidate explanations for the surge in
downgrades of structured ﬁnance products and in particular of ABS CDOs. The ﬁrst is that rating
agencies were being deliberately aggressive in rating securities – assigning too high credit ratings to
structured ﬁnance products. We test one variant of this story which is based on ‘rating shopping’
in which issuers shop around among rating agencies for the highest rating, which might have led to
inﬂated rating of structured ﬁnance products. The second potential explanation is model error, in
particular underestimation of default correlation across ﬁrms or households. Of course these two
explanations are not mutually exclusive, for example, if a model error makes rating more lenient
and is public knowledge, then issuers will shop for the particular rating agency with the most lax
model.

6.1.

Ratings Shopping

Structured ﬁnance products often exploit rating-based arbitrage between the credit rating of the
securities they purchase as assets, and the rating of the liabilities that they issue. The credit rating
arbitrage is higher when liabilities are more leveraged – that is the gap between the credit rating
of the assets and liabilities is higher.12 Leveraging assets up and obtaining as high credit rating as
they can get may induce issuers to shop for rating. According to Nomura Fixed Income Research:
Rating shopping occurs when an issuer chooses the rating agency that will assign the
highest rating or that has the most lax criteria for achieving a desired rating. Rating shopping rarely involves corporate, sovereign, and municipal bonds. However, it is
common for securitization issues. Rating shopping has a strong eﬀect when one rating
agency’s criteria is much more lax than its competitors’ criteria. Unless investors demand multiple ratings on deals, issuers will tend to use only rating from the agency with
12

See Benmelech and Dlugosz (2008) for a discussion.

16

the most lenient standards. (Rating Shopping - Now the Consequences, Nomura Fixed
Income Research Report, February, 16, 2006. p. 1.)
While rating shopping has been suggested as one of the explanations for the poor performance of
structured ﬁnance products, there is little empirical research that evaluates the eﬀect of rating shopping on rating quality and performance. Bolton, Freixas and Shapiro (2008) and Damiano, Li and
Suen (2008), develop models in which a rating agency trades-oﬀ the value from inﬂating its client’s
rating against an expected reputation cost. In an alternative model, Skreta and Veldkamp (2008)
construct a model in which rating agencies report the true rating, however, rating of complex assets
such as CDOs may create systematic bias in disclosed ratings even if each of the raters disclose its
unbiased estimate of the asset’s true quality. Sangiorgi, Sokobin and Spatt (2009) develop a model
in which rating shopping is motivated by the regulatory advantages of high ratings. In a recent
empirical paper Becker and Millbourn (2008) show that competition between the rating agencies
following the entry of Fitch to the market controlled previously by the duopoly of Moody’s and S&P
led to more issuer friendly and less informative credit rating in the bond market. However, there
is little empirical evidence on the extent of rating shopping in the structured ﬁnance market. One
exception is the study of ABS rating migrations from January 1990 through June 2001, conducted
by Mark Adelson, Yu Sun, Panos Nikoulis, and James Manzi from Nomura Fixed Income Research.
The study ﬁnds that ABS rated by S&P alone were more likely to downgraded and that tranches
rated by both S&P and Moody’s were least likely to default. Our analysis below complements their
evidence by studying downgrades of securities during the 2005-2008 period when credit ratings of
many structured ﬁnance products collapsed.
Using data on 30,499 structured ﬁnance tranches, we examine whether the number of agencies
that rated a security can predict the probability of future downgrades.13 Structured ﬁnance tranches
are rated by Moody’s and S&P, and to a lesser degree by Fitch, hence the number of raters can
range from 0 to 3. Panel A of Table 10 reports the the number of raters for each security in our
sample.14 Almost 10% of the tranches in the sample are unrated, either because they are equity
tranches or privately-placed senior tranches. Tranches rated by only one agency account for 6.09%
of the sample, most of the tranches that were initially rated by one agency were issued in 2004 and
13
These 30,499 tranches are the collateral assets of the 534 ABS CDOs in the Pershing Square Capital Management
data.
14
We count the number of ratings available at the issuance of the security.

17

2005. Most of the tranches are rated by either 2 or 3 rating agencies; 17,721 (58.10%) are rated by
2 raters, and 8,033 tranches (26.34%) are rated by all three agencies. Panel B of Table 10 stratiﬁes
the data by number of raters and common deal types. Whereas RMBS and Home Equity securities
are more likely to be rated by only one rater, most CMBS and CDOs have either 2 or 3 raters.
The fact that most structured ﬁnance products are likely to be rated by at least 2 raters, and
especially complex assets such as CDOs, may suggest that the potential for rating shopping will be
mitigated by competition. Indeed, researchers at the Bank for International Settlements concluded
that rating shopping is not a signiﬁcant problem in practice since CDOs are commonly rated by two
raters.15 However, as Becker and Milbourn (2008) show for that bond market, competition among
raters led to less accurate, issuer friendly ratings. Furthermore, having more than one rater does
not necessarily dismiss the concern about rating shopping. If an issuer can threaten to use only
one rater when negotiating with two rating agencies, both raters may conform to lenient standards
even when jointly rating a security.
Table 11 provides additional summary statistics on securities rated by only one or by two rating
agencies. Panel A shows that conditional on having only one rater, 69.72% of the tranches (1,280
ranches) were rated by S&P, while 10% of the tranches were rated by Moody’s and 20% by Fitch.
Panel B displays the number of tranches rated by 2 agencies. The most common combination
of 2 agencies is S&P+Moody’s (15,266 tranches), followed by S&P+Fitch (1,265 tranches), and
Moody’s+Fitch (913 tranches). Finally, Table 12 presents the distribution of rating transition by
the number of raters. The Pershing Square Capital Management, L.P. data provides us with two
snapshots of credit rating at the tranche level,: (i) the rating at the issue date, and (ii) the rating as
of January 2008. We measure rating transition as the rating change from issuance to January 2008.
Consistent with the results in table 2 there are more downgrades than upgrades. Out of the 27,972
rated tranches in the sample, 4,938 (17.65%) were downgraded at least once, 1,015 (3.63%) were
upgraded, and 22,019 (78.72%) remain unchanged. Tranche downgrade frequency is increasing in
the number of raters: while 12.81% of the tranches with one rating are eventually downgraded, the
downgrade rate for tranches with 2 and 3 raters are 16.24% and 21.84%, respectively. One potential
explanation for the positive relation between number of raters and downgrades is that an omitted
variable correlated with number of rater also drives future downgrades. For example, if complex
CDOs that are harder to evaluate and hence are more prone to rating mistakes are required to have
15

Fender and Kiﬀ (2004).

18

at least 2 raters because of their complexity, then it is not surprising that the number of raters is
correlated with the likelihood of default.
To test the conjecture of ‘rating shopping’ we we run a probit regression relating the number
of raters to the likelihood of a rating downgrade:
P r(downgradei,as of Jan 2008 = 1) = Φ(Ratersi,issue dateβ + Vintagei Γ + Typei θ),

(1)

where Φ(·) is the is the standard normal cumulative distribution function, Ratersi,t=issue is a vector
that includes the number of raters or dummies for the identity of the raters. Vintagei is a vector of
vintage ﬁxed-eﬀects, and Typei is a vector of security-type ﬁxed eﬀects. We report the results from
estimating diﬀerent variants of regression 1 in Table 13. We report regressions marginal eﬀects and
standard errors are clustered at the security-type level (in parentheses).
The ﬁrst column in Table 13 reports the coeﬃcients from estimating regression 1 with dummies
for one and two raters. The the coeﬃcient on the one rater dummy suggests that securities rated
by one agency are 6.1 percentage points more likely to be downgraded. the eﬀect is signiﬁcant at
the 5% level, while the marginal eﬀect of the two raters dummy is close to zero and not statistically
signiﬁcant, This result is consistent with a ‘rating shopping’ argument in which tranches certiﬁed
by only one rater obtain inﬂated ratings. Column 2 includes dummies for one and three raters as
well as vintage and security-type ﬁxed eﬀects. As before, we ﬁnd that the likelihood of a downgrade
is higher when a security is rated only by one agency. While the marginal eﬀect of the three raters
dummy is positive and signiﬁcant as well, the one rater eﬀect is three times larger and is slightly
higher than the marginal eﬀect found in column 1.16 In the next two speciﬁcations reported in
the third and fourth columns we try to identify the relationship between the rater’s identity and
probability of subsequent downgrades. Our results show that after controlling for the number of
raters, tranches that were rated only by S&P were the most likely to be downgraded.
In unreported results we estimate a similar speciﬁcation to regression 1, in which the dependent
variable is the probability of an upgrade. Despite the fact that there are only few upgrades in the
sample we ﬁnd that tranches rated by S&P less likely to be upgraded with a year compared to those
rated by Fitch and Moody’s. These results are consistent with the downgrade results in Table 13.
Finally, in the last three columns of Table 13, we examine how the magnitude of the downgrade
(conditional on being downgraded) relates to the number of raters and the rater’s identity. Our
16

We cannot include all three dummies in one speciﬁcation because of perfect multicollinearity.

19

dependent variable is measured as the diﬀerence in the numeric scale between the initial rating at
the time of the issue, and the rating as of January 2008. A negative diﬀerence implies a downgrade.
Tranches rated by only one rater are not only more likely to be downgraded, but also experience
more severe downgrades. Likewise, tranches rated only by S&P experience larger downgrades than
those rated only by Fitch or Moody’s. Ashcraft Goldsmith-Pinkham and Vickery (2009) ﬁnd similar
results in a recent study of MBS ratings.
The results in Table 13 provide suggestive evidence that S&P’s ratings may have been inﬂated
and that ‘rating shopping’ may have played a role in the collapse of the structured ﬁnance market.
Industry experts questioned the S&P rating model and some of its underlying assumptions. On
December 19, 2005, S&P put 35 tranches from 18 diﬀerent deals on watch list following an update of
its CDO rating criteria. Out of the 18 deals, 14 carried ratings only from S&P. According to Mark
Adelson, director of structured ﬁnance research at Nomura Securities: “The absence of ratings
from a second rating agency on those 14 deals probably reﬂected ‘rating shopping’ by the deals’
issuers’.”17 The model used by S&P to rate CDOs backed by corporate debt included an assumption of zero correlation between companies in diﬀerent industries. According to Adelson (2008):
‘That assumption was very lenient and often allowed CDO issuers to achieve their target rating
levels with less credit enhancement than other rating agencies would have required.”18 Structured
ﬁnance experts at Wachovia Securities called the assumption ‘outdated and implausible’, specifically addressing the issue of rating shopping: “[g]iven S&P’s generous inter-industry correlation
assumption of 0%, it is not surprising that S&P has the dominant market share of the publicly
rated part of this market.”19
In Table 14, we repeat the previous analysis limiting the sample to tranches that were initially
rated AAA. We do this to alleviate concerns about diﬀerences between securities with very diﬀerent
ratings. Moreover, given that many of the tranches that were downgraded were originally rated as
AAA, we want to understand how important rating shopping was for this segment of the structured
ﬁnance market. As table 14 shows, we do not ﬁnd that the identity of the rater has any predictive
power for downgrades of AAA tranches. However, tranches rated by either two or three raters are
less likely to be downgraded compared to those rated by only one agency. When we compare the
eﬀect of one rater to that of two raters (ﬁrst column of the table) we ﬁnd that being rated by only
17

Adelson (2006) p. 1)
Adelson (2006) p. 1.
19
Cifuentes and Chen (2005)
18

20

one agency increases the probability of a downgrade by 13.8 percentage points.20 Moreover, the
last two columns of the table show that the probability of a downgrade signiﬁcantly declines with
the number of raters.

6.2.

The Failure of the Black Box

Rating agencies use diﬀerent models to assess credit risk. For example, Moody’s focuses on expected
loss while S&P focuses on default probability. In Table 15, we look for diﬀerences of opinion across
rating agencies for the securities in our sample by converting ratings to a numerical scale. In
general, ratings are similar across agencies. 81% of the tranches rated by both S&P and Fitch
bore the same initial rating and, the mean diﬀerence is -0.02 and the standard deviation is 0.601.
Similar results emerge when we compare S&P and Moody’s, and Moody’s and Fitch. While S&P
assign higher ratings than Moody’s, the bias is small (-0.26), and in 16,806 tranches, both assign
the same rating. Table 15 demonstrates that rating agencies tend to assign very similar ratings to
structured ﬁnance tranches, and that the diﬀerence between the ratings is typically small. Table
16 shows that the ratings of S&P, Moody’s and Fitch are highly correlated and that the correlation
coeﬃcient is between 0.962 and 0.983. While it is unlikely that Fitch, S&P and Moody’s colluded
in determining structured ﬁnance ratings, it is possible that competition among the raters leads to
a “race-to-the-bottom” where each of the agencies constructs a rating model that will produce high
ratings at the lowest cost.21 One common model used by the rating agencies is the mixed-binomial
model which is used in a wide class of models analyzing defaults. The key inputs in the binomial
model are the default correlations across and within sectors, which determine both the value that is
created from pooling assets together, and the tranching capacity of the pool. Appendix A presents
a simple version of Moody’s Binomial Model.
In January 2003, industry experts expressed concerns about a model risk, in which default
correlations, and especially exposure to macroeconomic shocks are underestimated.
It is impossible to specify a model that assumes no correlation among individual borrowers that can replicate the waves of corporate defaults that have been experienced in
the United States and Japan.There is a high degree of correlation among corporate borrowers because of a common dependence on the same set of macro factors...All three of
20
21

When we include one and three rater the eﬀect is smaller but not statistically signiﬁcant.
See Cifuentes (2008) for a similar argument.

21

the modeling approaches mentioned above ignore this link between speciﬁc macro shocks
and the default probability of each reference name.

This is the proverbial ‘making of a silk purse out of a sow’s ear’. Some argue that
there are pools of investors who strongly prefer low-risk pools of credit and the value
diﬀerence coming from structuring transactions for those investors. Veterans of the
security industry, like the authors, think model error...might explain more of the value
diﬀerence than investors would care to admit.

(van Deventer and Imai (2003). p.

255-256.)
Moody’s introduced the binomial model in 1996, and used diﬀerent variants of the model to rate
CBOs and CLOs, according to Cifuentes (2008) the binomial approach has performed well under
very stressful market conditions. In 2004, Moody’s changed its model to Gaussian Copula for
many structured ﬁnance products including ABS CDOs. In a technical document that is listing the
details of their new rating methodology Moody’s explains the need to revise their existing Binomial
model:
Over the past year and half, the structured ﬁnance cash ﬂow CDO transactions have
seen an increase concentration in a single asset sector, namely RMBS, in the collateral
pools. The highly concentrated collateral pools normally leads to a fat-tailed loss distribution, i.e. larger probability associated with high multiple defaults scenarios due to
the correlation among collateral assets. To better assess and capture this fat-tail eﬀect,
Moody’s introduced a new modeling framework in August last year, the Correlated Binomial Method (the CBM), in order to achieve a more accurate evaluation of he credit risk
embedded in this category of CDO transactions. (Moody’s Investors Service, September,
26, 2005. p. 2.)
According to Cifuentes (2008) ABS CDO which were rated with the new methodology have exhibited bad performance:
This new approach was introduced in the early 2000s. An approximate back-of-theenvelope calculation gives the impression that the so called default probability and correlation assumptions used with this new approach were more ‘relaxed’ than the assumptions

22

used with the Binomial method. Although this observation is by no means conclusive, it
points to the necessity to look into this issue more carefully. This might be the reason
behind the abysmal performance of CDO of ABS. (Cifuentes (2008) p. 9)
However what spurred the growth in ABS CDO that concentrated in residential housing, which
eventually became the worst performing segment of the structured ﬁnance market? According to
Lancaster et al. (2008), strict diversity requirements based on the diversity score of the Moody’s
model caused CDOs managers to purchase ABS from other sectors. This suggests that the rating
model is not only determined by the type of securities that are issued in the market place, but
rather has a causal eﬀect on the creation of new securities that cater to the model as well.

7.

The Future of Structured Finance

While securitization allows intermediaries to leverage their capital more eﬃciently, the recent credit
crisis has cast doubt on the future of structured ﬁnance. Will the market recover? Are some deal
types more likely to disappear than others?
In thinking about the future of structured ﬁnance, it may be useful to examine the past.
In 2002-2003, there was deterioration in the credit quality of structured ﬁnance securities that
was only slightly less severe than the current period, after adjusting for the size of the market.
Studying downgrades over this period, we ﬁnd that the following three deal types suﬀered the
most downgrades: High-Yield CBO, ABS backed by tobacco settlement bonds, and ABS backed by
manufactured housing. Downgrades of these three types of securities account for approximately 50%
of downgrade actions between 2002 and 2004. Figures 6a and 6b shows how the market for CBOs
and ABS backed by Manufactured Housing evolved after their poor performance in 2002-2004. We
focus on CBOs and ABS-Manufactured Housing given that tobacco settlement bond issuance is
sporadic and driven by tobacco litigation.22 In 2003, CBO issuance fell to 2.4% of its peak in
2000; in the following years it only recovered to 11% of that peak value. In 2004, ABS backed by
manufactured housing fell to 3.4% of its peak level in 1999; afterwards, maximum issuance only
reached 14% of its 1999 peak. According to de Servingy and Jobst (2007) the poor performance of
high-yield CBOs and the perception that they were very risky led to the disappearance of CBOs
22
Issuance of ABS backed by tobacco settlement bonds, in 2004, fell to 2% of its peak level in 2002. The number
of ABS Tobacco Settlements deals did not return to its previous levels, however in 2007, the dollar value of issuance
of these securities surpassed their 2002 level.

23

from the new issue market as illustrated by Figure 6a. The pattern of boom and bust in ﬁnancial
innovation is well documented.23
The collapse and the eventual disappearance of the CBO market potentially indicate that rating
models did not anticipate how badly the underlying assets would be hit in a recession. The evidence
from the recessions of 2001-2002 and 2008 suggests a pattern of boom and bust, where a certain kind
of structuring becomes widespread in good macroeconomic times and survives relatively unscathed
until the economic climate worsens.

8.

Summary and Conclusion

Academics, practitioners, and the media have apportioned a large share of the blame for the
current credit crisis to rating agencies. The purpose of our paper is not to point ﬁngers but rather
to provide facts about what happened to structured ﬁnance securities’ ratings in 2007-2008. Using
data from Moody’s on structured ﬁnance ratings and corporate bond ratings from 1983 to the
present, we put the size of the current rating crisis in context. While the percentage of tranches
downgraded remained below 10%, the frequency and magnitude of downgrades reached record
levels. In 2007 and 2008, respectively, 7.2% and 6.7% of structured ﬁnance securities rated by
Moody’s were downgraded and the average downgrade was 4.7 and 5.6 notches. Looking at the
history of structured ﬁnance ratings, we establish several facts.
First, from 1992 to 2001, downgrades and upgrades were relatively infrequent (1-2% of outstanding tranches) and roughly balanced. 2002 and 2003 saw a spike in downgrades which was
only slightly less severe than the current crisis – nearly 5% of tranches were downgraded 3 notches
on average but the overall market was much smaller at that time. The number of outstanding
structured ﬁnance securities in 2002 was roughly one third of the number outstanding in 2007 and
only one tenth the size of the market in 2008. Nearly 30% of downgrades in 2002 and 2003 aﬀected
tranches of high-yield collateralized bond obligations (CBOs), indicating that rating models did not
anticipate how badly these assets would perform in a recession. This prior incident is important
because it shows the beginnings of a pattern of boom and bust in the structured ﬁnance industry,
where a certain kind of structuring becomes widespread in good macroeconomic times and survives
relatively unscathed until the economic climate worsens.
Second, the current crisis is notable for the size and severity of downgrades. We show that in
23

See Persons and Warther (1997).

24

2007 and 2008, approximately 62% of downgrades can be attributed to securities backed by home
equity loans or ﬁrst mortgages. Examining securities that suﬀered the most severe downgrades (8
notches or more), we ﬁnd that the majority of these tranches come from deals backed by home
equity loans, ﬁrst mortgages, and CDOs of ABS. It is these asset classes for which the rating model
experienced the most dramatic failures. By now, it is well established that rating models failed to
properly account for correlation of home prices at the national level. ABS CDOs would also be
aﬀected by this, since they often contain RMBS as collateral. But ABS CDOs are also more sensitive
to errors in correlation assumptions, since they are higher level securitizations (securitizations that
contain securitized assets in their collateral pools). Structured ﬁnance securities that fell 8 or more
notches were most likely to be rated AAA.
Third, we compare the performance of structured ﬁnance ratings to the performance of corporate
bonds from 1983 to 2008. While corporate bonds are also sensitive to macroeconomic events,
the magnitude of downgrades is relatively low and stable over time. Even during the 2001/2002
recession when 30% of corporate bonds were downgraded, the average downgrade was only 1.8
notches. Downgrades of structured ﬁnance securities in the 2007/2008 crisis were much more
severe, averaging around 5-6 notches.
Using micro-level data on ABS CDOs – one of the structured asset classes that performed
relatively poorly in the recent crisis – we provide suggestive evidence that ratings shopping may
have played a role in the current crisis. Among 534 ABS CDOs issued between 2005 and 2007,
we ﬁnd that tranches rated solely by one agency, and by S&P in particular, were more likely to
be downgraded by January 2008. Further, tranches rated solely by one agency are more likely to
suﬀer more severe downgrades. Nevertheless, it is not clear that rating shopping led to the ratings
collapse as the majority of the tranches in our sample are rated by 2 or 3 agencies.

25

Appendix A
Mixed Binomial models are used in a wide class of models analyzing defaults.24 We start by
assuming that the default probability of a mortgage is a Bernoulli random variable, taking the
value of 1 with probability p and 0 with probability 1 − p. Next, we consider that we have a pool
of mortgages, where the default probability of mortgage i is denoted Xi , and is equal to 1 if the
mortgage defaults, and 0 otherwise. Each mortgages in the pool is assumed to have a diﬀerent
default probability, hence we need to randomize the default probability p. The randomization
of the default probability is achieved using a mixture distribution, which randomizes the default
distribution of the binomial model, inducing dependence between diﬀerent default probabilities.
The dependence that is generated by the mixing distribution mimics an environment in which
a pools of diﬀerent mortgages are subject to a common economic risk. Assume that the default
parameter p̃ ∈ [0, 1] is independent of the Xi ’s and that conditional on p̃ all the Xi’s are independent.
Denoting the density of p̃ by f we have
1
pf (p)dp

p̄ = E p̃ =
0

Using thw law of iterated expectations and variance decomposition, we have
ĒXi = p̄, V Xi = p̄(1 − p̄), and Cov(Xi , Xj ) = E(p̃2 ) − p̃2 ,
We can now express the default correlation as
ρ̄(Xi , Xj ) =

E(p̃2 ) − p̃2
.
p̄(1 − p̄)

(2)

As Lando (2004) shows, the default correlation is 0 if p̃ is constant. Moreover, the default correlation
in 2 is always nonnegative in this model.25
The total number of defaults among the pool of mortgages is Dn =

n

i=1

Xi , and EDN = np̄.

The variance of the total number of defaults in the mortgage pool is:
V Dn = np̄(1 − p̄) + n(n − 1)(E(p̃2) − p̃2 ).

(3)

V (Dn /n) = p̄(1 − p̄)/n + n(n − 1)/n2 (E(p̃2) − p̃2 ) → .E(p̃2) − p̄, as n → ∞

(4)

and

24
25

This section draws heavily from Lando (2004).
See Lando (2004) p. 217.

26

That is for large enough n, the variance of the default rate Dn /n is determined by that of the
distribution of p̃. Using the fact that when n is large, the realized frequency of defaults is almost
identical to the realized value of p̃, the distribution of defaults becomes that of p̃ and hence we can
show that:
o
P (Dn /n < θ) −→

f (p)dp ≡ F (θ), as n → ∞
θ

That is for large pool of assets, the distribution of p̃ determines the risk distribution of the portfolio,
the more variability in the mixture distribution of p̃, the more correlation of defaults there is, and
hence more weight on the tails of the distribution. Increasing the correlation between assets in the
collateral pool decreases the value of the most senior tranches as the likelihood of a large number
of defaults increases and more of the junior tranches are likely to be wiped out. On the other hand,
as the correlation increases, the value of the least senior tranches increases as well as more weight is
being put on the other tail of the distribution - and very few defaults are more likely as well. Hence
the mixing distribution in the binomial model is crucial not only for the value of diversiﬁcation of
the collateral pool, but also for the ability to carve highly rated risk-free tranches as well.

27

References
Ashcraft, Adam B., and Til Schuermann, “Understanding the Securitization of Subprime Mortgage
Credit,” Staﬀ Report no. 318, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staﬀ Reports (2008).
Ashcraft, Adam, Goldsmith-Pinkham, Paul, and James Vickery, “MBS Ratings and the Mortgage
Credit Boom,” Working paper (2009).
Adelson, M., and E., Bartlett, “ABS Credit Migrations,” Nomura Fixed Income Research, March
5th 2002, 2002.
Adelson, M., “Rating Shopping – Now the Consequences,” Nomura Fixed Income Research, February 16 2006, 2006.
Becker, Bo, and Tod Milbourn, “Reputation and Competition: Evidence from the Credit Rating
Industry,” Working paper, Harvard Business School (2008).
Benmelech, Efraim, and Nittai K., Bergman, “Collateral Pricing,” Journal of Financial Economics
Forthcoming (2008).
Benmelech, Efraim, and Jennifer Dlugosz, “The Alchemy of CDO Credit Rating” Journal of Monetary Economics Forthcoming (2009).
Bolton, Patrick, Xavier Freixas, and Joel Shapiro, “The Credit Rating Game” Working paper
(2008).
Cifuentes, Arturo., and Natasha, Chen, “The Young and the Restless: Correlation Drama and the
Big Three Rating Agencies,” Wachovia Securities, February 22 2005, 2005.
Cifuentes, Arturo., “Turmoil in u.S Credit Markets: The Role of the Credit Rating Agencies,” Testimony of Arturi Cifuentes, Managing Director Structured Finance Department, R. W. Pressprich
& Co. New York, NY Before the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Aﬀairs , April
22 2008, 2008.
Damiano, E., H. Li, and W., Suen, “Credible ratings” Theoretical Economics 3: 325-265 (2008).
DeMarzo, Peter M., “The Pooling and Tranching of Securities: A Model of Informed Intermediation,” Review of Financial Studies 18(1) (2005), 1-35.
de Servigny, and Norbert J., Jobst, The Handbook of Structured Finance, McGraw-Hill Professional, 2007.
DeMarzo, Peter M., and D., Duﬃe, “A Liquidity-Based Model of Security Design,” Econometrica
67 (1999), 65-99.
Fender I., and J., Kiﬀ, “CDO Rating Methodology: Some Thoughts on Model Risk and Its Implications” BIS Working Paper No. 163 (2004).
Gorton, Gary, and George Pennacchi, “Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity Creation,” Journal
of Finance 45 (1990), 49-71.
Hunt, John P., “Credit Rating Agencies and the “Worldwode Credit Crises”: The Limits of Reputation, the Insuﬃciency of reform, and a Proposal for Improvement,” Working paper 2008.
Kendall, Leon T., “Securitization: A New Era in American Finance,” in Fishman, Michael J.,
and Leon T., Kendall, A Primer on Securitization, The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, and London,
England, 1996.

28

Kashyap, Anil K., Raghuram G. Rajan, and Jeremy C. Stein, “Rethinking Capital Regulation,”
Working paper, Harvard University and University of Chicago, 2008.
Lancaster, Brian P., Glenn M., Schultz, and Frank J., Fabozzi, Structured Products and Related
Credit Derivatives, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey, 2008.
Lando, Davidi, Credit Risk Modeling Theory and Applications, Princeton University Press, Princeton and Oxford, 2004.
Mason, Joseph R., and Joshua Rosner, “Where Did the Risk Go? How Misapplied Bond ratings Cause Mortgage Backed Securities and Collateralized Debt Obligation Market Disruptions,”
Working paper 2007.
Merton, Robert C., “On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of Interest Rates,”
Journal of Finance 29 (1974), 449-470.
Myers, S., and N., Majluf “Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions when Firms have Information that Investors do not have,” Journal of Financial Economics 13 (1984), 187-221.
Persons, John C., and Vincent A., Warther “Boom and Bust Patterns in the Adoption of Financial
Innovations,” Review of Financial Studies 10(4) (1997), 939-67.
Ranieri, Lewis S., “The Origins of Securitization, Sources of Its Growth, and Its Future Potential,” in Fishman, Michael J., and Leon T., Kendall, A Primer on Securitization, The MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, and London, England, 1996.
Sangiorgi, Francesco, Jonathan Sokobin and Chester Spatt, “Credit-Rating Shopping, Selection
and the Equilibrium Structure of Ratings,” Working paper (2009).
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market Equilibrium Approach,” Journal of Finance 47 (1992), 143-66.
Skerta, Vasilliki, and Laura Veldkamp, “Ratings Shopping and Asset Complexity: A Theory of
ratings Inﬂation,” Working paper, NYU Stern (2008).
van Deventer, Donald and Kenji Imai, Credit Risk Models and the Basel Accord, John Wiley &
Sons, (Asia) Pte Ltd., Singapore, 2003.

29

Table 1:
Structured Finance Tranche Issuance By Year and Type

Year
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008 (a)

ABS(%)
0
16.7
3.6
9.1
11.3
11.3
10.6
13.4
18.5
22.6
25.3
26.4
29.8
32.7
37.0
37.7
38.2
39.0
39.0
37.9
36.8
35.6
34.1
31.6
29.4
26.3

CDO(%)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.1
0.7
1.1
1.0
0.8
1.9
1.8
1.7
2.1
3.3
4.5
6.1
7.4
8.9
10.8
13.5
15.5
16.6
18.9
20.4

CMBS(%)
0
0
0
0
0
0.3
0.9
1.0
1.0
1.2
1.9
2.3
2.6
2.6
2.7
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.1
5.4
5.6
5.8
5.8
5.8
5.5

MBS(%)
100.0
16.7
0
0
0
0
0.1
0.1
0.3
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0
0
0

PF(%)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.3
0.5
0.8
1.6
4.1
8.1
13.0
14.7
15.1
14.9
14.7
14.6
15.0
16.5
16.5
20.0

RMBS(%)
0
66.7
96.4
90.9
88.7
88.3
87.8
83.8
77.9
73.2
69.5
66.6
62.1
56.3
49.4
40.9
33.6
28.2
25.3
23.6
22.1
19.8
18.8
20.2
21.0
20.8

Other(%)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.3
0.9
1.2
1.5
2.0
2.2
2.7
4.9
4.5
6.9
7.2
7.8
8.5
9.5
10.2
10.8
10.8
9.3
8.3
7.1

Number of deals
1
6
28
77
142
300
705
1,010
1,333
1,704
2,105
2,571
2,988
3,567
4,088
5,050
6,010
6,856
7,667
8,704
9,893
10,964
12,208
14,371
16,890
19,715

This table presents percent of total issuance by number for main deal types as well as total issuance by
number. (a) Rating actions as of 9/22/2008.

30

Table 2:
Structured Finance Upgrades and Downgrades

Panel A: Total Upgrades and Downgrades*
Cohort formed:
1/1/90
1/1/91
1/1/92
1/1/93
1/1/94
1/1/95
1/1/96
1/1/97
1/1/98
1/1/99
1/1/00
1/1/01
1/1/02
1/1/03
1/1/04
1/1/05
1/1/06
1/1/07
1/1/2008ˆ

Rated
Tranches
2,825
3,993
5,571
7,290
9,320
11,083
13,403
15,298
18,214
20,419
23,358
26,905
31,901
38,147
43,476
52,843
71,462
94,127
442,908

DNG
#
85
155
87
149
192
148
175
49
447
330
463
476
1,847
2,515
1,798
874
986
8,109
36,880

DNG
Avg. change**
-1.2
-1.2
-1.8
-1.5
-2.8
-2.0
-2.7
-1.5
-2.4
-3.6
-1.5
-2.5
-2.9
-3.1
-3.6
-2.5
-2.5
-4.7
-5.6

UPG
#
122
131
237
352
272
439
366
380
642
557
720
699
1,216
2,202
2,748
2,990
1,269

UPG
Avg. change
0.0
0.0
2.1
1.5
1.9
1.7
1.9
1.5
2.0
2.2
2.3
1.7
1.8
2.5
2.4
2.2
2.3
1.9
2.4

WR
#
48
124
828
1,336
1,038
637
1,065
1,100
1,924
2,169
2,235
3,084
4,598
7,920
6,953
6,878
7,085
6,692
6,380

WR
percent
1.7%
3.1%
14.9%
18.3%
11.1%
5.7%
7.9%
7.2%
10.6%
10.6%
9.6%
11.5%
14.4%
20.8%
16.0%
13.0%
9.9%
7.1%
1.4%

UPG
% of tranches
0.0%
0.0%
2.2%
1.8%
2.5%
3.2%
2.0%
2.9%
2.0%
1.8%
2.7%
2.0%
2.2%
1.8%
2.7%
4.0%
3.5%
3.0%
0.3%

UPG&DNG
# of tranches
18
1
2
4
6
5
5
20
9
8
14
88
464

UPG&DNG
percent
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.2%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.1%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.1%
0.1%

Panel B: Tranches Aﬀected
Cohort formed:
1/1/90
1/1/91
1/1/92
1/1/93
1/1/94
1/1/95
1/1/96
1/1/97
1/1/98
1/1/99
1/1/00
1/1/01
1/1/02
1/1/03
1/1/04
1/1/05
1/1/06
1/1/07
1/1/2008(a)

Rated
Tranches
2,825
3,993
5,571
7,290
9,320
11,083
13,403
15,298
18,214
20,419
23,358
26,905
31,901
38,147
43,476
52,843
71,462
94,127
442,908

DNG
# of tranches
80
154
84
145
181
134
144
46
371
311
401
421
1,298
1,947
1,634
737
885
6,801
29,545

DNG
% of tranches
2.8%
3.9%
1.5%
2.0%
1.9%
1.2%
1.1%
0.3%
2.0%
1.5%
1.7%
1.6%
4.1%
5.1%
3.8%
1.4%
1.2%
7.2%
6.7%

UPG
# of tranches
121
131
236
350
269
439
359
374
638
545
710
681
1,168
2,138
2,495
2,834
1,254

* A single tranche downgraded k times in the year shows up k times. Tranches that are downgraded and withdrawn show up in the dng
column and the wr column. This is in contrast to Moodys method where a tranche that is downgraded then withdrawn in the same year
only shows up as withdrawn. ** Average size of a single downgrade action on a tranche (not just the diﬀerence in rating between beginning
31
of year and end of year) (a) Rating actions as of 9/22/2008.

Table 3:
Corporate Bonds Upgrades and Downgrades

Panel A: Total Upgrades and Downgrades*
Cohort formed:
1/1/90
1/1/91
1/1/92
1/1/93
1/1/94
1/1/95
1/1/96
1/1/97
1/1/98
1/1/99
1/1/00
1/1/01
1/1/02
1/1/03
1/1/04
1/1/05
1/1/06
1/1/07
1/1/2008 (a)

Rated
Bonds
3,016
3,115
3,582
3,899
4,229
4,599
5,124
6,727
8,514
10,623
11,867
12,437
12,885
13,056
13,523
13,305
12,727
12,586
12,753

DNG
#
349
343
582
465
398
342
441
732
1,524
2,137
1,752
3,190
5,027
2,453
1,233
1,424
2,107
1,539
1,482

DNG
Avg. change**
-1.5
-1.4
-1.4
-1.3
-1.3
-1.3
-1.3
-1.2
-1.6
-1.5
-1.6
-1.7
-1.8
-1.6
-1.3
-1.5
-1.3
-1.4
-2.2

UPG
#
287
231
141
142
264
426
457
522
577
800
898
807
431
611
1,540
1,626
1,687
1,869
367

UPG
Avg. change**
1.3
1.4
1.4
1.6
1.4
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.5
1.6
1.5
1.5
1.4
1.5
1.4
1.2
1.2
1.3

WR
#
321
326
621
772
435
445
520
754
985
1,117
1,398
1,989
2,068
2,579
2,425
2,425
2,082
1,851
1,517

WR
percent
10.6%
10.5%
17.3%
19.8%
10.3%
9.7%
10.1%
11.2%
11.6%
10.5%
11.8%
16.0%
16.0%
19.8%
17.9%
18.2%
16.4%
14.7%
11.9%

UPG
% of Bonds
9.4%
6.7%
3.9%
3.3%
5.9%
9.1%
8.6%
7.7%
6.5%
7.3%
7.3%
6.3%
3.2%
4.5%
10.8%
11.4%
12.2%
14.3%
2.9%

UPG&DNG
# of Bonds
3
7
6
2
12
3
4
7
11
36
37
43
23
22
34
23
162
41
5

UPG&DNG
percent
0.1%
0.2%
0.2%
0.1%
0.3%
0.1%
0.1%
0.1%
0.1%
0.3%
0.3%
0.3%
0.2%
0.2%
0.3%
0.2%
1.3%
0.3%
0.0%

Panel B: Bonds Aﬀected
Cohort formed:
1/1/90
1/1/91
1/1/92
1/1/93
1/1/94
1/1/95
1/1/96
1/1/97
1/1/98
1/1/99
1/1/00
1/1/01
1/1/02
1/1/03
1/1/04
1/1/05
1/1/06
1/1/07
1/1/2008 (a)

Rated
Bonds
3,016
3,115
3,582
3,899
4,229
4,599
5,124
6,727
8,514
10,623
11,867
12,437
12,885
13,056
13,523
13,305
12,727
12,586
12,753

DNG
# of Bonds
326
319
537
420
361
310
410
550
1,271
1,865
1,429
2,241
3,885
2,211
1,069
1,149
1,767
1,411
1,332

DNG
% of Bonds
10.8%
10.2%
15.0%
10.8%
8.5%
6.7%
8.0%
8.2%
14.9%
17.6%
12.0%
18.0%
30.2%
16.9%
7.9%
8.6%
13.9%
11.2%
10.4%

UPG
# of Bonds
285
209
138
130
251
420
443
516
555
771
870
778
416
591
1,459
1,520
1,555
1,802
367

* A single bond downgraded k times in the year shows up k times. Bonds that are downgraded and withdrawn show up in the dng column
and the wr column. This is in contrast to Moodys method where a bond that is downgraded then withdrawn in the same year only shows
up as withdrawn. ** Average size of a single downgrade action on a bond (not just the diﬀerence in rating between beginning of year and
32
end of year) (a) Rating actions as of 9/22/2008.

Table 4:
Structured Finance Downgrades by Cohort and Deal Type

Cohort formed:
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008 (a)

Rated
n (dng)
1
15
1
85
155
87
149
192
148
175
49
447
330
463
476
1847
2515
1798
874
986
8109
36880

ABS
n(dng)
8
1
10
12
31
14
12
1
55
15
239
179
169
131
544
1427
1126
231
423
5246
12522

ABS
%(dng)
0%
53%
100%
12%
8%
36%
9%
6%
1%
31%
31%
53%
54%
37%
28%
29%
57%
63%
26%
43%
65%
34%

CDO
n(dng)
2
1
3
43
55
53
194
893
699
316
210
277
1057
8086

(a) Rating actions as of 9/22/2008.

33

CDO
%(dng)
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
2%
0%
0%
1%
0%
6%
10%
17%
11%
41%
48%
28%
18%
24%
28%
13%
22%

CMBS
n(dng)
2
2
11
26
34
42
3
3
6
20
20
174
200
229
153
119
85
257

CMBS
%(dng)
0%
0%
0%
2%
1%
13%
0%
14%
23%
24%
6%
1%
2%
4%
4%
9%
8%
13%
18%
12%
1%
1%

RMBS
n(dng)
2
72
136
41
129
150
91
76
15
35
37
10
5
24
21
80
44
1388
13492

RMBS
%(dng)
0%
13%
0%
85%
88%
47%
87%
78%
61%
43%
31%
8%
11%
2%
0%
0%
1%
1%
9%
4%
17%
37%

Table 5:
Asset Types with Most Downgrades

Year:
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008

Types with most downgrades (1st)
total(dng)
Asset type
n(dng)
%(dng)
85
MBS - 1st Mortgage
70
82%
155
MBS - 1st Mortgage
133
86%
87
MBS - 1st Mortgage
31
36%
149
MBS - 1st Mortgage
130
87%
192
MBS - 1st Mortgage
143
74%
148
MBS - 1st Mortgage
80
54%
175
MBS - 1st Mortgage
70
40%
49
MBS - Resecuritized
12
24%
447
HEL - Other
98
22%
330
HEL - Other
94
28%
463
PF - FS IRBs
130
28%
476
High-Yield CBO
97
20%
1847
High-Yield CBO
566
31%
2515
ABS
677
27%
1798
ABS
425
24%
874
Other - Structured
146
17%
986
HEL
290
29%
8109
HEL
4405
54%
36880
MBS - 1st Mortgage
13015
35%

(a) Rating actions as of 9/22/2008.

34

Types with most downgrades (2nd)
Asset type
n(dng)
%(dng)
ABS
3
4%
ABS
4
3%
CMBS
11
13%
ABS
3
2%
CMBS
16
8%
CMBS
23
16%
HEL - Other
55
31%
Other - Repackaged
9
18%
ABS
80
18%
ABS
50
15%
ABS
100
22%
CDO - Balance Sheet
57
12%
ABS
198
11%
ABS
327
13%
ABS
367
20%
CMBS
126
14%
CDO - Synthetic
125
13%
MBS - 1st Mortgage
1342
17%
HEL
9459
26%

Table 6:
Fallen Angels

Number of
tranches
179,760

Number of
deals
33,978

Panel A: Fallen Angles 1983-2008
Fallen
Fallen
tranches
deals
19,421
3,879

Panel B: Fallen Angels by Credit Ratings
Initial Rating
Number
Percent
AAA
Aa1
Aa2
Aa3
A1
A2
A3
Baa1
Baa2
Baa3
Ba1
Ba2
Ba3
Total

3,707
992
1,809
1,221
1,058
2,036
1,421
1,403
2,421
1,735
805
738
75
19,421

19%
5%
9%
6%
5%
10%
7%
7%
12%
9%
4%
4%
0%
100%

Panel D: Fallen Angels by Deal Type
Deal
Number
Percent
ABS
RMBS
CDO
Other
CMBS
PF
Total

8,752
6,218
4,111
249
49
42
19,421

Panel C: Fallen Angels by Vintage
Vintage
Number

45%
32%
21%
1%
0%
0%
100%

1983-1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008

171
58
113
153
140
170
318
304
405
842
3,127
5,404
8,216
19,421

Percent
1%
0%
1%
1%
1%
1%
2%
2%
2%
4%
16%
28%
42%
100%

Panel E: Asset Types with Most Fallen Angels
Asset Type
Number
Percent
HEL - Closed-End - Not High LTV
MBS - First Mortgage
ABS CDO - Cash Flow
ABS CDO - Synthetic
HEL - Closed-End - High LTV
ABS CDO - Other

35

6,662
6,037
1,729
1,318
813
509

34%
31%
9%
7%
4%
3%

Table 7:
ABS CDO Collateral structure

Collateral amount (million)
Number of collateral securities

Mean

25th
Percentile

Median

75th
Percentile

Standard
Deviation

Min

Max

$1,006.7

$492.8

$849.7

$1,283.3

$916.9

$100.0

$11,132.2

149.7

103

137

182

73.1

26

990

Collateral weighted-average credit rating
S&P

A

BBB+

A-

AA

N/A

BBB-

AAA

Moody’s

A2

Baa2

A3

Aa2

N/A

Baa3

Aaa

CDO

18.8%

3.2%

9.3%

22.6%

25.9%

0.0%

100.0%

Home Equity ABS

54.7%

36.3%

59.9%

83.3%

31.8%

0.0%

100.0%

RMBS

15.0%

0.0%

9.0%

21.5%

19.8%

0.0%

100.0%

CMBS

4.6%

0.0%

0.0%

3.8%

13.1%

0.0%

100.0%

Prime

8.2%

0.0%

4.5%

11.2%

12.2%

0.0%

91.8%

Midprime

29.7%

13.2%

29.1%

45.0%

20.2%

0.0%

77.5%

Alt-A

5.2%

0.0%

2.0%

7.1%

8.0%

0.0%

72.6%

Subprime

24.2%

13.1%

24.8%

34.5%

16.3%

0.0%

100.0%

2005H1

15.3%

2.4%

8.5%

22.4%

17.9%

0.0%

96.1%

2005H2

21.0%

4.9%

16.9%

31.8%

18.4%

0.0%

96.7%

2006H1

23.4%

4.8%

21.8%

37.3%

19.7%

0.0%

100.0%

2006H2

15.9%

1.3%

8.4%

26.4%

18.0%

0.0%

90.5%

2007H1

7.3%

0.0%

2.4%

7.9%

12.4%

0.0%

93.4%

2007H2

0.9%

0.0%

0.0%

0.6%

1.9%

0.0%

13.8%

Collateral share by asset type:

Collateral share by mortgage type:

Collateral vintage

36

Table 8:
Collateral Vintage by Credit Rating

Collateral weighted average
S&P rating

Corresponding ABX price
(as of September 25, 2008)

ABS CDO Grade
High Grade Mezzanine Grade
A
BBB

High - Mezzanine
diﬀerence
(t-test)

A

BBB

Collateral vintage
2005H1

15.7%
[7.9%]

16.0%
[9.9%]

-0.003
(-0.27)

N/A
N/A

N/A
N/A

2005H2

21.0%
[16.0%]

22.7%
[22.1%]

-0.017
(-0.89)

N/A
N/A

N/A
N/A

2006H1

21.6%
[16.8%]

28.6%
[29.1%]

-0.070 ***
(-3.99)

22.42

9.44

2006H2

16.5%
[7.5%]

16.2%
[13.2%]

0.004
(0.25)

8.54

5.35

2007H1

8.4%
[3.1%]

5.9%
[2.1%]

0.025 **
(2.49)

7.42

5.33

2007H2

1.1%
[0.0%]

0.6%
[0.0%]

0.005 ***
(3.70)

8.50

5.85

299

205

–

–

Number of CDOs

37

Table 9:
ABS CDOs and Write-Downs

Panel A: Crisis-related Write-Downs for Selected Financial Institutions ($ millions)
latest
announcement

ABS CDOs

Corporate
credit

RMBS

Other

Total

Insurers/Asset managers
ACA Capital
AIG
Ambac
MBIA
Prudential

11/8/2007
11/10/2008
11/5/2008
5/12/2008
7/30/2008

1,700
33,190
11,136
3,500
-

360
1,600
-

1,046
3,410

33,753
219
1,800
-

1,700
66,943
12,761
6,900
3,410

North American Banks
Bank of America
Bear Streans
Citigroup
Goldman Sachs
JP Morgan Chase
Lehman Brothers
Merrill Lynch
Morgan Stanley

1/16/2009
1/29/2008
10/16/2008
9/16/2008
1/15/2009
6/16/2008
10/16/2008
12/17/2008

9,089
2,300
34,106
1,300
200
26,100
7,800

932
4,053
4,100
5,467
1,300
2,845
3,810

1,319
1,700
5,305
4,100
12,998
3,781

2,834
15,904
1,400
3,400
13,125
1,992

12,855
2,300
55,382
7,200
12,072
9,000
55,068
17,383

European Banks
Credit Suisse
Deutsche Bank
Fortis Bank
ING
Royal Bank of Scotland
UBS

10/23/2008
10/30/2008
8/4/2008
11/12/2008
11/4/2008
8/12/2008

3,427
2,092
4,359
565
3,609
21,870

3,057
5,820
3,660
1,849
348

530
3,386
144
8,028
2,566
1,716

2,523
3,677
25
4,122
13,871

9,357
14,974
8,163
8,617
12,146
37,805

11
584
-

510.0
3,640
7,650
669.5
561.7

RMBS

Other

Total

10,386
42,272
26,423
5,728
84,810

38,3471
59,011
62,634
3,743
163,735

116,126
209,305
171,100
23,553
520,084

Asian and Emerging Market Banks
Aozora Bank
5/15/08
510.0
Mitsubishi UFJ
8/13/08
359.5
2,348
921
Mizuho
11/13/08
3,898
629
2,539
National Australia Bank
10/21/08
669.5
Sumitomo Mitsui
11/19/07
561.7
Panel B: Aggregate Crisis-related Write-Downs ($ millions)
ABS CDOs
Insurers/Asset managers
North American Banks
European Banks
Asia/Emerging markets Banks
Total

61,074
84,319
63,464
9,358
218,216

38

Corporate
credit
6,320
23,702
18,579
4,724
53,324

Table 10:
Number of Raters

Panel A: Number of raters over time
Number of raters
1

0
pre 2004
2004
2005
2006
2007
entire period

603
(33.11%)
374
(9.37%)
547
(5.93%)
573
(5.30%)
171
(4.76%)
2,888
(9.47%)

133
(7.30%)
439
(11.00%)
778
(8.43%)
392
(3.63%)
94
(2.62%)
1,857
(6.09%)

2

3

550
(30.20%)
1,993
(49.92%)
5,363
(58.14%)
7,060
(65.30%)
2,479
(69.07%)
17,721
(58.10%)

535
(29.38%)
1,186
(29.71%)
2,537
(27.50%)
2,786
(27.77%)
845
(23.54%)
8,033
(26.34%)

Panel B: Number of raters by security type

CMBS
RMBS
Home Equity
CDO

Number of raters
1
2
16
1,116
(1.14%)
(79.77%)
1,371
6,768
(14.18%)
(70.01%)
406
6,997
(2.96%)
(50.95%)
35
2,909
(0.93%)
(77.41%)

0
10
(0.71%)
463
(4.79%)
346
(2.52%)
91
(2.42%)

39

3
257
(18.37%)
1,065
(11.02%)
5,983
(43.57%)
723
(19.24%)

Table 11:
Most common raters

Panel A: Securities rated by only one of the agencies

pre 2004
2004
2005
2006
2007
entire period

Fitch

Moody’s

S&P

Total

20
(15.04%)
66
(15.03%)
97
(12.47%)
162
(41.33%)
29
(30.85%)
374
(20.37%)

21
(15.79%)
32
(7.29%)
46
(5.91%)
56
(14.29%)
27
(28.72%)
182
(9.91%)

92
(69.17%)
341
(77.68%)
635
(81.62%)
174
(44.39%)
38
(40.43%)
1,280
(69.72%)

133
(100.0%)
439
(100.0%)
778
(100.0%)
392
(100.0%)
94
(100.0%)
1,836
(100.00%)

Panel B: Securities rated by two agencies

pre 2004
2004
2005
2006
2007
entire period

S&P+Moody’s

S&P+Fitch

Moody’s+Fitch

Total

402
(73.09%)
1,695
(85.05%)
4,413
(82.29%)
6,433
(92.12%)
2,323
(93.71%)
15,266
(87.51%)

86
(15.64%)
225
(11.29%)
566
(10.55%)
313
(4.43%)
75
(3.03%)
1,265
(7.25%)

62
(11.27%)
73
(3.66%)
384
(7.16%)
314
(4.45%)
80
(3.23%)
913
(5.23%)

550
(100.0%)
1,993
(100.0%)
5,363
(100.0%)
7,060
(100.0%)
2,479
(100.0%)
17,445
(100.00%)

40

Table 12:
Rating Transitions and Number of Raters

number of downgrades
(downgrade %)
number of upgrades
(upgrade %)
number unchanged
(unchanged %)
Total

1
238
(12.81%)
85
(4.57%)
1,535
(82.62%)
1,858
(100.00%)

2
2,912
(16.24%)
561
(3.13%)
14,454
(80.63%)
17,927
(100.00%)

41

3
1,788
(21.84%)
369
(4.51%)
6,030
(73.65%)
8,187
(100.00%)

Total
4,938
(17.65%)
1,015
(3.63%)
22,019
(78.72%)
27,972
(100.00%)

Table 13:
Rating Shopping: Probit regression models for probability of a downgrade
Dependent
Variable=

Pr(down)

Pr(down)

Number of raters
One rater
Two rater

0.061 b
(0.030)
-0.005
(0.010)

Three raters

Pr(down)

Pr(down)

0.045 a
(0.004)

0.086 a
(0.007)

0.075 b
(0.043)

only Moody’s
only Fitch

-2.716 a
(0.793)
-0.909 a
(0.201)

0.169 a
(0.049)
0.084 b
(0.049)
0.093
(0.073)

0.322 a
(0.034)
0.223 a
(0.070)
0.240 a
(0.056)
0.061 a
(0.016)
0.046 c
(0.029)

Yes
Yes
probit
28,238
0.12

Yes
Yes
probit
28,238
0.13

Moody’s and Fitch

Yes
Yes
probit
28,238
0.12

rating
change

-1.808 a
(0.727)

0.909 a
(0.201)

S&P and Moody’s

Yes
Yes
probit
28,238
0.12

rating
change

0.132
(0.503)

0.027 a
(0.009)

only S&P

Fixed-Eﬀects
Vintage
Security-type
Estimation
Observations
Pseudo/Adjusted R2

rating
change

42

-2.579 a
(0.300)
-1.937 c
(1.011)
-2.043 a
(0.861)
-0.828
(0.534)
-0.692 a
(0.151)
Yes
Yes
OLS
4,904
0.15

Yes
Yes
OLS
4,904
0.15

Yes
Yes
OLS
4,904
0.15

Table 14:
Rating Shopping and AAA Securities
Dependent
Variable=

Pr(down)

Pr(down)

Number of raters
One rater
Two rater

0.138 b
(0.061)
0.014 a
(0.003)

Three raters

Pr(down)

Pr(down)

-0.016 a
(0.004)

-0.048 a
(0.007)

0.050
(0.085)
0.007
(0.046)
0.005
(0.004)

-0.018
(0.042)
-0.019 c
(0.061)
0.007
(0.008)
-0.049 a
(0.006)
-0.018 a
(0.0003)

Yes
Yes
probit
4,654
0.21

Yes
Yes
probit
4,654
0.23

0.077
(0.068)

-0.014 a
(0.003)

only S&P
only Moody’s
only Fitch
S&P and Moody’s
Moody’s and Fitch
Fixed-Eﬀects
Vintage
Security-type
Estimation
Observations
Pseudo R2

Yes
Yes
probit
4,654
0.21

Yes
Yes
probit
4,654
0.21

43

Table 15:
Credit Rating Dispersion

Mean

25th
Percentile

Median

75th
Percentile

Standard
Deviation

Min

Max

# of tranches
where diﬀ=0

# of
tranches

S&P - Fitch

-0.02

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.601

-5.0

5.0

7,671

9,507

S&P - Moody’s

-0.26

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.881

-10.0

7.0

16,806

23,839

Moody’s - Fitch

0.31

0.0

0.0

1.0

0.665

-4.0

10.0

6,478

9,150

Table 16:
Ratings Correlation

S&P
1.0

Moody’s

Moody’s

0.983
(0.000)

1.0

Fitch

0.962
(0.000)

0.979
(0.000)

S&P

44

Fitch

1.0

Figure 1: CDO and Mortgage‐related securi7es Issuance 2004‐2008
2,500,000

600,000

500,000
2,000,000

400,000
1,500,000
300,000
1,000,000
Mortgage Related Securi:es (le= scale)

200,000

CDO (right scale)

500,000
100,000

0

0
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Figure 2a
Number of Downgrades vs. Upgrades of Structured Finance Products
40,000

35,000

30,000

25,000

20,000

15,000

10,000

5,000

‐

DNG n

UPG n

Figure 2b
Number of Downgrades vs. Upgrades of Corporate Bonds
6,000

5,000

4,000

3,000

2,000

1,000

‐

DNG n

UPG n

40000

Figure 3a
Number of Structured‐Finance Downgrades vs. Average Downgrade
0
level

35000
‐1
30000
‐2

Axis Title

25000

20000

‐3
DNG
Avg. change

15000
‐4
10000
‐5
5000

0

‐6

Figure 3b
Number of Corporate Bonds Downgrades vs. Average Downgrade level
6,000

5,000

0.0

‐0.5

‐1.0

Axis Title

4,000
‐1.5
3,000
DNG n
‐2.0
2,000
‐2.5

1,000

‐

‐3.0

‐3.5

avg chg**

60,000

Figure 4a
Total number of downgrades and number of AAA‐strcutured ﬁnance
securi9es downgrades

50,000

40,000

All dngs
AAA dngs
30,000

20,000

10,000

‐

6,000

Figure 4b
Total number of downgrades and number of AAA‐corporate bonds
downgrades

5,000

4,000

All dng
AAA dng
3,000

2,000

1,000

‐

Figure 5a: ABX1 (2006H1 Vintage) Prices by Rating
100
90
80
70
ABX1 AAA

60

ABX1 AA

50

ABX1 A

40

ABX1 BBB

30

ABX1 BBB-

20
10
0

Figure 5b: ABX2 (2006H2 Vintage) Prices by Rating
100
90
80
70
60
50

ABX2 AAA

40

ABX2 AA

30

ABX2 A

20
10
0

ABX2 BBB
ABX2 BBB-

Figure 5c: ABX3 (2007H1 Vintage) Prices by Rating
100
90
80
70
60

ABX2 AAA

50

ABX2 AA

40

ABX2 A

30
20

ABX2 BBB
ABX2 BBB-

10
0

Figure 5d: ABX4 (2007H2 Vintage) Prices by Rating
ABX4 AAA

100

ABX4 AA

90

ABX4 A

80

ABX4 BBB

70

ABX4 BBB-

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

7/20/11

9/20/11

11/20/11

1/20/12

3/20/12

5/20/12

7/20/12

9/20/12

Figure 6a: CBO Issuance
400

30000
Par value ($ mil)
Tranches (n)

350

25000
300

250

200

15000

150
10000
100
5000
50

0

0
1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008

Tranches (n)

Par value ($ Miilion)

20000

Figure 6b: ABS - Manufactured Housing
12,000

300

10,000

250

8,000

200

6,000

150

4,000

100

2,000

50

-

0
1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008

Tranches (n)

Par value ($ Miilion)

Par value ($ mil)
Tranches (n)

