NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NEVER WASTE A GOOD CRISIS:
AN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE ON COMPARATIVE CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Randall Morck
Bernard Yeung
Working Paper 15042
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15042

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2009

We are grateful for helpful suggestions from Franklin Allen, Mara Faccio, Masao Nakamura, Enrico
Perotti, Katharina Pistor, and Paulo Volpin. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Randall Morck and Bernard Yeung. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Never Waste a Good Crisis: An Historical Perspective on Comparative Corporate Governance
Randall Morck and Bernard Yeung
NBER Working Paper No. 15042
June 2009
JEL No. G01,G34,N2,P1
ABSTRACT
Different economies at different times use different institutional arrangements to constrain the people
entrusted with allocating the economy’s capital and other resources. Comparative financial histories
show these corporate governance regimes to be largely stable through time, but capable of occasional
dramatic change in response to a severe crisis. Legal origin, language, culture, religion, accidents of
history (path dependence), and other factors affect these changes because they affect how people and
societies solve problems.

Randall Morck
Faculty of Business
University of Alberta
Edmonton, CANADA T6G 2R6
and NBER
randall.morck@ualberta.ca
Bernard Yeung
National University of Singapore
Business School
Singapore 117592
byeung@nus.edu.sg

1.

Varieties of Corporate Governance

Businesses allocate an economy’s resources. How efficiently they do this depends on their
governance. Corporate governance differs fundamentally across countries. In Britain and most
American states, officers and directors owe a qualified fiduciary duty to shareholders or other
investors (Easterbrook and Fischel 1991 c. 6; Cheffins 2009), though dissenters question its
efficacy (Bebchuk 2007) and wisdom (Stout 2007). Their Germany peers must balance the
interests of stakeholders – shareholders, creditors, employees, the public, the government, and
others (Fohlin 2005). Canadian directors’ duty is to the legal person of the corporation, and
explicitly not to shareholders or any other stakeholders (Lee 2005). Belgian boards’ duty can be
to a business group that includes their firm (Johnson & et al. 2000). Superficialities like board
committees, director independence, and the like unfortunately divert attention from these
more profound differences.
The “varieties of capitalism” literature links such differences to underlying distributions
of economic power (Hall & Soskice 2001). Most large American and British listed firms are
owned by multitudinous small shareholders seeking optimal returns on their investments, and
thus optimal resource allocation (Jensen & Meckling 1976).
Corporate governance reforms there thus rightly stress empowering shareholders
relative to groups with other interests, such as self‐interested CEOs. Elsewhere, many large
listed firms have controlling shareholders, whose private interests can distort resource
allocation (Dyck & Zingales 2004; Rajan & Zingales 2004), and courts struggle to define
“shareholders’ interests”. Elsewhere, listed companies also often belong to business groups,
whose member firms share a common controlling shareholder – usually a wealthy family, and
Business Group Law governs conflicts between a firm’s interests and its group’s interests
(Bebchuk et al. 2000). In America, where true business groups are vanishingly rare (Villalonga &
Amit 2008), such issues seldom arise.
Other differences reflect labor laws. In many countries, works councils have real power
(Roe 2003). In Germany, labor representatives sit alongside shareholders’ on large firms’
supervisory boards (Roe & Blair 1999). Labor’s voice cannot be ignored in these countries.
Yet other differences reflect financial architecture. Banks long dominated German
capital allocation, while British firms raised capital on stock markets (Levine & Zervos 1998).
Clearly, a German board must weigh creditors’ interests more heavily.
These differences are fundamental. Capitalism, for many Americans, means rival firms
competing for consumers’ business and investors’ savings. For others, capitalism means handing
the economy to a few oligarchic families. To Americans, the others sound paranoid; to others,
Americans sound stunningly naïve. In fact, each should take the other seriously.
Whether capitalism is an innovative dynamo or an oppressive feudalism depends,
remarkably, on differences in corporate governance. Section two details these, and how they
arose from different responses to crises. Section three concludes, describing how legal,
historical, and cultural factors shape countries’ responses to crises; and how differences thus
formed persist.

2.

Variegating Capitalism

Corporations are governed remarkably differently across countries (Barca & Becht 2001; Hall &
Soskice 2001; Denis & McConnell 2003). Brief historical accounts of how these differences arose
follow. Space constraints necessitate oversimplifications and reliance on illustrative bellwether
economies. Also, many countries’ institutions are in flux, and our focus is systems in place for

1

long stretches, not countries’ most recent reforms or proposals. Apologies are offered in
advance to specialists. Our hope is to illustrate broad patterns in the evolution of institutions.
We begin with Britain, which illuminates the very different paths of America, Canada,
India, and other countries with “Anglo‐Saxon” institutions. Italy illuminates another set of
countries; while Germany, Scandinavia, and Japan have uniquely interesting lessons1.

2.1

Britain

“The typical British listed corporation has widely dispersed ownership and is run by professional
managers who collectively own too few shares to control the outcome of shareholder votes”
(Cheffins 2009, p. 1).2 But, as Adam Smith (1776, bk. V, c. 1) writes “[shareholders] seldom
pretend to understand anything of the business … but receive contentedly such half‐yearly or
yearly dividend as the directors think proper to make to them.” An agency problem results from
their conflicting objectives: value‐maximizing shareholders delegate corporate governance to
agents – utility‐maximizing managers.
Britain’s corporate governance can be summarized thus: While the diffusely‐owned
firms Smith describes persisted throughout, most listed firms had controlling shareholders –
usually wealthy families – until roughly the 1970s, whereafter diffuse ownership predominates
(Cheffins 2009). Business groups of listed firms, mentioned in accounts of 19th century business
(Jones 2000, c. 6), gain prominence in the 1960s and all but disappear after the 1970s (Franks et
al. 2005). Many groups exhibit a pyramidal structure: an apex firm holding equity control bocks
in a first tier of listed firms, each holding control blocks in a set of second‐tier listed firms, each
holding control blocks in a set of third tier firms, and so on (Franks et al. 2005).
Mid‐20th century Britain survived successive crises – the Great Depression, two world
wars, and the postwar disintegration of its Empire – with its traditional institutions badly shaken
and successive Labour governments bent on remaking the country. Three sequential Labour
reforms fixed the path of British capitalism.
First, shortly after World War II, new disclosure rules radically enhanced transparency,
rendering governance problems more obvious. This invited raiders to take ill‐governed firms
over, replace their management, refloat the better‐run firms on the stock market at higher
prices, and pocket the profit (Franks et al. 2005). Britain has no antitakeover laws and forbids
classified boards and poison pills (Cheffins 2009). The only takeover defense available to a
widely held listed firm is a large equity block in friendly hands, and pyramidal groups apparently
stepped forward to provide this service (Franks et al. 2005).
Second, successive Labour governments, using tax incentives and socialist rhetoric, built
workers’ pension funds into major corporate shareholders. Figure 1 tracks their extraordinary
rise. Pension fund managers objected to pyramiding, which their correctly saw sheltering
corporate executives behind complicated shareholding structures and depressing the values of
workers’ pension funds by precluding value‐increasing takeovers.
Third, and in response to intense lobbying by pension funds, the London Stock Exchange
established its 1968 Takeover Rule, mandating that any bid for over 30% of a listed company be
for 100% (Franks et al. 2005). This made pyramiding untenable as a takeover defense, for target
managers could only stop a raider by inviting a higher going‐private bid. Consequently, firms
could either have no impregnable blockholder or delist.
1

Space limitations preclude discussing China, Russia, and other transition economies; many of which have substantial
procommunist economic histories. On China’s first attempt at capitalist institution building, and its failure in the
hands of corrupt bureaucrats, see Goetzmann and Köll (2005).
2
This section draws heavily from Franks et al. (2005) and Cheffins (2009).

2

Thus arose two key features of British corporate governance ‐ a perennial takeover threat and
powerful institutional investors.
Ill‐governed firms’ sagging share prices make them bargain takeover targets; and ill‐
governed acquirers become bargain targets too. In theory, this market for corporate control
accumulates the economy’s resources under the stewardship of the most efficient managers.
Figure 1. Shareholdings of individuals and institutions
Fractions of British stock market capitalization owned by individuals, pension funds, and insurance companies.
The total of the three declines over time primarily because of rising foreign ownership.
70
Individuals
60
Pension funds
Insurance companies
50
40
30
20
10
0
1955

1960

1 965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Source: UK National Statistics DEYG SRS, DEYH SRS and DEYI SRS from www.statistics.gov.uk.

The Takeover Rule thus undermines pyramids in two ways. First, raiders, or controlling
shareholders preempting raiders, trigger mandatory 100% bids. Second, raiders, issuing shares
to finance takeovers, dilute their control blocks. Of course, all this hinges on takeover activity:
Many European countries enacted similar Mandatory Bid rules that languish as dead letters
absent active stock markets raiders can use to raise capital.
Pension funds also intervene in specific firms they deem misgoverned. Black and Coffee
(1994) document how the most over‐represented fund – whose stake is largest relative to its
portfolio – is expected to press management to change course, and how others are expected to
support the leader. Though none commands a control block, their collected stakes can oust an
unresponsive board. Black and Coffee report this “behind the scenes” pressure to be effective,
at least in some cases.3
Powerful institutional investors can thus set meaningful standards – a practice called
self‐regulation. Codes of best practice, beginning with the 1986 Cadbury Code, recommend
independent directors, board committees, and the like. Compliance, though voluntary, avoids
upsetting powerful institutional investors, and is the path of least resistance for most firms.

2.2

America

Large American firms have also been far more diffusely owned than elsewhere – at least
since the late 1930 (Holderness et al. 1999). Becht and DeLong (2005) look further back,
estimating Standard Oil’s shares to have been widely distributed a century ago.
Controlling shareholders were a concern nonetheless. By the late 19th century, “robber
baron” tycoons ran huge corporate empires through “trusts”, often set up by the Morgan Bank
(Josephson 1934). The tycoons used these to launch takeovers, paying for targets’ shares with
3

For a less flattering perspective on British corporate governance, see Franks et al. (2001).

3

trust units (Markham 2002). By the 1890s, the Rockefeller family’s Standard Oil Trust so
dominated oil production, refining, and distribution that it was considered a monopoly (Laughlin
2004). Other major companies of the era – Edison General Electric, US Steel, and Morgan’s
railroad empire – were also built with takeovers (Moody 1904). Trusts’ unit holders, like modern
preferred shareholders, had no votes. They bore downside risk and reaped upside benefits, but
the trusts’ directors – the robber barons, their relatives, and Morgan’s men – exercised control.
De Long (1991) argues that Morgan’s men exercised a monitoring and control role that
protected public investors. Firms with a Morgan man on the board had elevated valuations –
perhaps they acted like postwar British pension funds. Certainly, a reputation for treating
investors well was critical to the bank’s continued business of organizing trusts,, and the
presence of Morgan men on boards everywhere suggests an interventionist governance
philosophy (Ramirez 1995). Becht and De Long (2005) further argue that, despite few statutory
rights specific to shareholders, American courts penalized fraudsters sufficiently that, by the late
19th century, household saving flowed into stocks. Of course, monopolistic trusts’ robber
barons and financiers might just have shared their rents with trust unit holders.
By the late 19th century, the robber barons’ vast wealth was fuelling popular support
for a new Progressive Movement. The 1990 Sherman Antitrust Act precluded price fixing, but
trusts with 65% (U.S. Steel Trust) to 90% (American Tobacco Trust) market shares remained
untouched until 1904 (Shleifer & Vishny 1990). That year, in a major Progressive victory, the
Supreme Court reinterpreted the act to forbid building a monopoly with takeovers, a reading
Congress affirmed in the 1914 Clayton Antitrust Act. Building large corporate empires via trusts
now risked attracting an antitrust investigation – monopoly or not.
By the 1920s American tycoons were building pyramidal business groups instead (Berle
& Means 1932; Bonbright & Means 1932). The 1920s takeover wave built huge pyramidal
groups – some containing hundreds of distinct companies organized into a dozen or more tiers.
The robber barons were back in business.
America’s formative crisis was the Great Depression, when a 90% stock market drop
wiped out middle class savings and a 25% unemployment rate reduced millions to penury. Amid
this economic devastation, Franklin Delano Roosevelt led Progressives back into power; and
Progressive civil servants rallied.4
The Internal Revenue Service saw pyramidal groups as tax cheats. In a 1935 Senate
Finance Committee hearing, Robert Jackson, the Assistant General Counsel to the Treasury
Department, described a pyramidal group with “approximately 270” companies, holding
companies, sub‐holding companies, etc.5 The companies all reported “no tax due in any of the
years 1929 through 1933” despite the large profits disclosed in their annual reports each year.
Jackson describes the adventures of the sixteen full time IRS auditors and 108 field agents
chasing taxable income from firm to firm, always several steps behind. The testimony suggests
group firms did business with each other at artificial transfer prices to shift income away from
audited firms.6
Shareholder democracy advocates attacked pyramidal groups for inducing an extreme
separation of ownership from control. Thus, Berle and Means (1932, p. 69) write “In the effort
to maintain control of a corporation without ownership of a majority of its stock, various legal
devices have been developed. Of these, the most important among the very large companies is
4

The following draws heavily from Morck (2005).
Senate Finance Committee Hearings, pp. 223‐224.
6
Such transfers are called self‐dealing in Business Group Law, and tunneling in the finance literature (Johnson & et al.
2000). Transfer pricing by multinationals is similar, but hides income from tax authorities. Tunneling hides income
from public shareholders, tax authorities, or both.
5

4

“pyramiding.” This involves the owning of a majority of the stock of one corporation, which in
turn holds a majority of the stock of another – a process which can be repeated a number of
times. An interest equal to slightly more than a quarter or an eighth or a sixteenth or an even
smaller proportion of the ultimate property to be controlled is by this method legally
entrenched. By issuing bonds or nonvoting preferred stock of the intermediate companies the
process can be accelerated. … The owner of a majority of the stock of the company at the apex
of the pyramid can have almost as complete control of the entire property as a sole owner even
though his ownership interest is less than one percent of the whole.”
Antitrust advocates saw pyramidal groups, through the good offices of a common
controlling shareholder, organizing collusion between seemingly distinct companies. Addressing
the American Economic Association, President Roosevelt (1942) writes “close financial control,
through interlocking spheres of influence over channels of investment, and through the use of
financial devices like holding companies and strategic minority interests, creates close control of
the business policies of enterprises which masquerade as independent units. … Private
enterprise is ceasing to be free enterprise and is becoming a cluster of private collectivisms;
masking itself as a system of free enterprise after the American model, it is in fact becoming a
concealed cartel system after the European model.”
Underlying all this was a renewal of the Progressive populism that led to the Sherman
and Clayton acts. Roosevelt’s New Dealers recalled the previous Progressive president,
Woodrow Wilson, admonishing that “no country can afford to have its prosperity originated by
a small controlling class. The treasury of America does not lie in the brains of the small body of
men now in control of the great enterprises … It depends upon the inventions of unknown men,
upon the originations of unknown men, upon the ambitions of unknown men. Every country is
renewed out of the ranks of the unknown, not out of the ranks of the already famous and
powerful in control.”7
Rather than mounting a direct attack, like the antitrust acts of previous decades, the
New Dealers attacked pyramiding via a series of mid 1930s income tax reforms. These subjected
intercorporate dividends to double taxation – in both the payers’ and recipients’ income taxes.
Although the rate was ultimately only fifteen percent of the regular rate, this sufficed to
disadvantage large multi‐tiered pyramids relative to freestanding firms. Consolidated group
filing was abolished, and capital gains holidays encouraged the absorption or divestment of
controlled listed subsidiaries.
On top of these changes, the Public Utilities Holding Companies Act explicitly banned
large pyramidal groups from controlling public utilities companies – on the grounds that utility
firms’ cost‐plus pricing and regulated returns made them cash cows to unfairly subsidize group
firms in competitive industries. The 1940 Investment Company Act also weighed in, subjecting
listed firms whose assets are primarily shares in other firms to additional regulations. The
explicit goal of these and other policies was to break up large US business groups. The Securities
and Exchange Commission, established about this time, made firms more transparent to public
investors, likely reducing insiders’ scope for self‐dealing (Burkart et al. 2003) and established
most of the shareholder rights La Porta et al. (1998) enumerate (Lamoreaux & Rosenthal 2006).
Roosevelt’s attack succeeded, for business groups all but vanished. Late 1930s press
accounts describe dozens of groups reorganizing themselves into unitary corporations (Morck
2005), and late‐1930s data reveal widely diffused shareholdings (Holderness et al. 1999), which
persists (Villalonga & Amit 2008).
Intercorporate dividends remain subject to double taxation. Dividends are currently
7

Quoted in Brandeis (1913, p.223).

5

taxed at 35% in the initial payer’s corporate income tax and at 7% in the corporate income taxes
of successive recipients if the recipient’s stake is less than 80%. Large stakes eliminate the tax.
Virtually all other countries exempt intercorporate dividends – either entirely or if the recipient
has a minimal block, such as 20%, in the payer.8
Figure 2 documents the decline of control blocks as a fraction of shares outstanding in
the increasingly widely held US economy. The recent upsurge in insider stakes likely reflects
executive stock options.

Figure 2. Declining Insider Control Blocks in US Firms
Percentiles are for mean combined holdings of the three highest paid insiders. Sample is the 50
largest listed firms, ranked by market capitalization, in 1940, 1960, and 1990, with a mean 5‐year
window sample size of of 76 firms.
45%
25th percentile
40%
50th percentile
35%
75th percentile
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%

00‐05

90‐99

80‐89

70‐79

60‐69

50‐59

41‐49

36‐40

0%

Source: Frydman and Saks (2007).

Until the late 1980s, America’s market for corporate control resembled Britain’s: raiders
acquired ill‐run firms sufficiently often to constitute a pressure for good governance (Jensen &
Ruback 1983). Underperforming targets’ ex‐CEOs seldom attained top jobs again (Agrawal &
Walkling 1994), most (though not all) mergers created value (Morck et al. 1990), and merged
firms’ operating performance improved (Healey, Palepu, and Ruback, 1992; Andrade, Mitchell,
and Stafford, 2001).
Subsequently, takeover defenses proliferated: poison pills (Davis 1991), classified boards
(Bebchuk & Cohen 2005; Faleye 2007), and state anti‐takeover laws (Bebchuk & Cohen 2003).
Using these is largely a CEO’s choice, and performance sags in shielded firms (Gompers et al.
2003; Lucian et al. 2009). Now, most mergers are ‘friendly”, with target CEOs who lower
takeover defenses receiving golden parachutes (Mikkelson & Partch 1997; Hartzell 2004) and
most mergers destroying value (Moeller et al. 2005).
8

One exception is South Korea, which has large business groups, yet levies a small tax on intercorporate dividends.
Italy briefly levied such a tax, and then abolished it with no apparent effect on pyramiding (Aganin & Volpin 2005).
French and Belgian attempts to levy such taxes ended with the European Commission’s Parent‐Subsidiary Directive,
which forbids the taxation of intercorporate dividends within the European Union. For details, see Morck (2005).

6

Criticism of these developments (MacAvoy & Millstein 2003) and several prominent
governance scandals precipitated the widely panned Sarbanes‐Oxley Act, which imposed
internal accounting and reporting standards and restated CEOs’ responsibility for the books
(Romano 2005). This failed to prevent a spate of major bank failures a decade later. While
banking crises are more than governance failures, something is amiss when leading banks lose
fortunes in Ponzi schemes.9
As takeover pressure wanes, substitutes arise. Some institutional investors now denounce
underperforming management, perhaps spurring improvement (Gompers & Metrick 2001).
However, corporate pension trustees are usually appointed by sponsoring firms’ CEOs, and
public sector pension trustees are usually political appointees. Both systems induce conflicts of
interest that blunt pension funds’ efficacy as governance champions (Romano 1995). In contrast,
British pension trustees typically have clear duties to beneficiaries, whose retirement incomes
are at risk (Black & Coffee 1994). Consequently, pension funds’ role in American corporate
governance is murkier.

2.3

Other Common Law Countries

America and Britain are now economies of freestanding firms, not business groups; and most
large firms in both lack controlling shareholders. America and Britain are sometimes taken as
representing a broader category of countries with legal systems based on British Common Law,
but this is incorrect. While diffuse ownership is slightly more familiar in other Common Law
countries, control blocks and pyramiding both persist too (La Porta et al. 1999). We therefore
examine other Common Law countries before looking farther afield.
Canadian Corporate Governance
Canada has a Common Law legal system for the most part. The country was a French colony
from 1608 to 1759, and a variant of French Civil Law largely persists in Québec, though not for
Corporations Law. The mixed heritage also affects politics: compared to America and Britain,
Canada’s government is more interventionist (Porter 1965), and Canadians may tolerate more
corruption in government and business (Francis 1988).10
Family controlled pyramidal groups comprise about forty percent of the assets of
domestically controlled private sector firms among the top 100 in the mid 1990s – about the
same fraction as a century earlier (Morck et al. 2005). Although different business families enter
and exit, about ten typically control most or all of the pyramidal group firms at any point in time.
Canada’s big business sector escaped the transformations that remade many British and
American big businesses into diffusely owned professionally managed freestanding firms. Figure
3 shows something more interesting: pyramidal groups wane steadily until the 1970s, and then
resurge dramatically.
Although its Great Depression was as severe as in America, Canada had no New Dealers
like Berle and Means. It launched no attack on business groups; but energetically fought
deflation with state‐enforced “price stabilization” cartels (Bliss 1987). Business groups were
partners, not foes. Intercorporate dividends remain tax exempt if the parent holds 20% or more
of the subsidiary, and public utilities remain prominent in large pyramidal groups. Large
shareholders could hold any stake they like without triggering a mandatory bid for 100%.
9

Bernard Madoff’s $50 billion Ponzi scheme, exposed in 2008, listed among its major “investors” J.P. Morgan Chase,
Bank of America, and Citigroup. See “Madoff Client List Is Disclosed in Filing” Wall Street Journal (electronic edition)
Feb. 5th 2009.
10
This section draws heavily from Morck et al. (2005).

7

Figure 3. Evolution of Control
The importance of different categories of controlling shareholders in the top 100 firms from 1902 to 1998,
weighted by total assets and by number of firms. State‐owned enterprises, multinational subsidiaries, and firms
whose control is unclear are excluded. Data from 1965 on are from Statistics Canada, and include complete
pyramiding information. Group membership in earlier years is inferred from director interlocks and corporate
or business family histories. Consequently, earlier data may be incomplete.
Panel A. Asset Weighted
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
02

10

20

30

40

50

60

65

69

75

80

85

90

94

98

20

30

40

50

60

65

69

75

80

85

90

94

98

Panel B. Equally Weighted
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
02

10

Freestanding and W idely Held

W idely Held Pyramid

Freestanding Family Firm

Family Controlled Pyramid

Source: Morck et a l . (2005).

What then explains the erosion of pyramiding in century’s first half? Shareholder rights
did not, for few or none of those La Porta et al. (1998) enumerate were enacted until the 1960s.
It is tempting to argue that the rise of middle class shareholders led to these rights, but scams
based in Canada that targeted US investors were the proximate cause. American pressure led
Ontario to empower a provincial securities commission and establish disclosure rules
(Armstrong 2001).11
11

The other provinces have relatively powerless securities commissions, and the federal government remains aloof,
despite unambiguous constitutional jurisdiction. Financial markets and institutions gravitated to Ontario, whose
Securities Law now has a status similar to Delaware Corporations Law. Federal securities law is under consideration.

8

Some business families sold out into the 1920s boom, others lost their empires in the
Depression; but a substantial inheritance tax was also a major factor (Morck et al. 2005). Heirs
sold much or all of their fathers’ business groups to pay this tax, and patriarchs bequeathed
wealth to charities to preempt it. Although we lack definitive evidence, equity issues to finance
takeovers likely also eroded control blocks.
Certainly, merger waves swept the country in the gilded age and the 1920s (Bliss 1987;
Walid & Paul 2006)). Common Law principles and precedents gave shareholders substantial
rights during takeovers. As in Britain, their right to replace directors precludes staggered boards;
and the principle of equal treatment across shareholders emasculates poison pills. Takeover
threats may well discipline professional managers running widely held firms, for target CEOs are
clearly at risk in takeovers (George & Bin 2007).
The resurgence of pyramidal groups after the late 1960s is more intriguing. The 1940s
and 1950s saw neither radical Labour governments, nor powerful pension funds, nor a takeover
law like Britain’s disrupting business groups. Acquirers remain free to bid for as much of a
target’s stock as they want.
But the 1960s brought an existential crisis. Québec’s révolution tranquille brought
francophone intellectuals national prominence, and real political power; the front de libération
du Québec took to bombing, kidnapping and murder; and Québécois support for “sovereignty”
(though not independence) grew. Prime Minister Pierre Eliot Trudeau, a Civil Code law
professor, responded with aggrandized Canadian nationalism, official bilingualism and
biculturalism, and overt emulation of continental European corporatism (Nemni et al. 2006)
with huge federally funded social programs, high taxes, and extensive business subsidies
(Swatsky 1987). This had several seemingly unintended consequences for corporate governance.
Nationalist rhetoric focused negative media attention on foreign acquisitions, and
ultimately begat federal anti‐foreign takeover laws (especially for media firms) and tax
advantages for locking in Canadian control. Large pyramidal groups controlled by Canadian
families could thus bid more for control blocks, perhaps inducing an expansion of pyramiding.
In 1972, Prime Minister Trudeau repealed the federal inheritance tax. Although revised
rules trigger capital gains upon death, trusts can shield large estates for up to two generations.
This eviscerated a key pressure on pyramidal groups in previous decades – inheritance taxes.
Although we lack explicit confirmation, this reform was plausibly designed to solidify business
families’ control blocks.
After 1975, all acquirers (foreign or domestic) buying over 20% had to extend the offer
to all shareholders, and prorate the purchase across the block seller and all interested public
shareholders (though numerous exemptions exist). This lets astute small shareholders
participate in control block sales; but also leaves block sellers with leftover public shares, cuts
their proceeds from selling out, and thus impedes control changes.
This era’s massive state intervention made political connections indispensible business
assets (Swatsky 1987), and the business groups’ controlling families were very well‐connected
(Morck et al. 2000a). Business families’ political connections, their groups’ relative opacity, and
economies of scale in lobbying may disadvantage freestanding diffusely owned firms in such an
economy (Högfeldt 2005).
Finally, courts, exchanges, and legislatures are increasingly ambivalent about
shareholder rights. Canada has convicted no‐one for insider trading (Bhattacharya & Daouk
2002). Insider trading is probably not unknown, for takeover targets exhibit a large price run‐up
prior to the announcement day, and little or no change on that day itself (Eckbo 1986; Bris
2005). Shareholder derivative lawsuits are possible, but suing hired CEOs misses the point if the
problem is a pyramidal business group’s controlling shareholder (Griggs & Lowry 1994). An

9

oppression remedy (Anisman 1987; Kerry Shannon 2002), developed as case law and later
encoded, lets public shareholders reach up a chain of control to sue a group’s controlling
shareholder. But, a recent Supreme Court ruling redirects directors’ fiduciary duties to the legal
person of the corporation, explicitly obviates duties to shareholders and stakeholders, and
diffuses the oppression remedy by opening it to all stakeholders.12 Exchanges and regulators
value their relationships with listed firms: disclosure is “comply or explain”, and annual reports
are thickets of footnotes arguably obscuring more than they reveal (Allen et al. 2007; Hockin et
al. 2009). Ontario’s remains the only somewhat active securities commission (Armstrong 2001).
America’s proximity is of ambiguous value. Its courts prosecute an occasional Canadian
tycoon (Paris et al. 2004), but Canadian firms predominate among cross‐listings in America
(Doidge et al. 2004), and entrepreneurs often do initial public offerings there exclusively, since
valuations are typically higher there than on any Canadian exchange (King & Segal 2008).

Indian Corporate Governance
India, even more than Canada, entrusts its great business to wealthy families.13 The Tata family,
of priestly Parsi origin, runs India’s greatest pyramidal group. Close to the colonial government,
they grew wealthy behind the Imperial tariff. That proximity became a liability after
independence in 1947. The Tata group not only survives, but retains top rank.
Jawarharlal Nehru’s Congress party took charge, and the Tatas were eclipsed by the
Birla family – of Marwari descent. The Birla’s financed both Mohandas Gandhi and the Congress
Party generously – provoking the poet Sarojini Naidu’s alleged quip “it took all Birla’s millions to
enable Gandhi to live in poverty” (Khanna & Palepu 2005). The Birla adroitly built a vast new
pyramidal business group that, by 1969, was India’s second largest.
The histories of both business groups suggest government ties underlay their early
success. However, business groups might also possess genuine economic advantages in
emerging markets (Ghemawat & Khanna 1998). Either possibility aligns with evidence Indian
group firms outperform (Khanna & Palepu 2000c).
Nehru led India into socialism, though private business continues beneath a regulatory
maze of regulation – the License Raj. Nehru’s motive, partly at least, was large business groups’
evident monopoly power. His daughter, Indira Gandhi, built the License Raj higher and denser.
Ironically, neither apparently grasped how regulation becomes an entry barrier (Djankov
et al. 2000), for the large business groups soon ran virtual “embassies” in New Delhi, staffed
with former officials familiar with every nuance of the bureaucracy. Smaller businesses, and
potential upstart businesses, without such resources, were at the mercy of growing legions of
increasingly corrupt and inept bureaucrats (Das 2000). The License Raj almost certainly
concentrated growth opportunities, capital, and labor within the business groups.
In a seeming entente with Congress, the Bombay Plan; Tata, Birla and business family
patriarchs “called on government support for industrialization, including a direct role for the
government in the production of capital goods, foreshadowing post‐independence Indian
planning, typically considered an outgrowth of socialist ideas drawn either from the Soviet
Union or the so‐called Fabian socialists” (Mody 2005). Perhaps the families realized the
advantage extensive state intervention accorded them, even if Congress officials did (or
pretended) not. Others argue the families foresaw Congress policies and sought to make the
best of a bad situation (Khanna & Palepu 2005).

12
13

Ibid.
This section draws heavily from Khanna and Palepu (2005).

10

By the mid‐1980s, the License Raj yoke grew unbearable, and a slow deregulation
began, accelerating after a 1990s financial crisis. Throughout, Khanna and Palepu (2005) show
the Tata and Birla groups remaining dominant, while smaller pyramidal groups rose and fell.
Thus, while business groups as an organizational form persisted, many individual ones,
especially smaller ones, did not.
Much work on Indian business groups, especially the Tatas, argues they aid growth by
bridging institutional voids due dysfunctional markets and corrupt courts (Khanna & Palepu
2000a, b, c). However, other work detects extensive wealth transfers from listed group firms to
controlling families (Bertrand et al. 2002). The groups’ net contribution to growth is unclear.
Others
Other Common law economies tend to resemble Canada, pre‐1920s America, or India, not
America and Britain. Australia (Gillooly 1993; Kluver 2000), Israel (Daniel 1999, 2002; Kosenko &
Yafeh 2009), Hong Kong (Cheung et al. 2006; Claessens et al. 2006), Pakistan (Ikram et al. 2005),
Singapore (Tsui‐Auch & Toru 2009), and South Africa (Goldstein 2009) retain pyramidal business
groups. The Anglo‐American freestanding, professionally managed, widely held firm has yet to
become prevalent conquer in most Common Law countries.
Generalizing from these accounts, we postulate that Common Law countries in the early
th
20 century shared a common governance regime of powerful tycoons or business families
governing large, mostly pyramidal, business groups; which differentiated as different countries
responded differently to major crises.

2.4

Latin Model

A century ago, countries with legal systems derived from France’s Napoleonic Code boasted
financial systems as dynamic as America’s or Britain’s (Rajan & Zingales 2003); and France, in
many ways, had more sophisticated business laws than America (Lamoreaux 2005).
Interwar hyperinflations and the Great Depression uniquely devastated the European
middle class (Perotti & von Thadden 2006). The 1917 Bolshevik Revolution transformed the
Russian Empire into the Soviet Union, committed to exporting socialism to faltering European
democracies. Different parts of Europe responded differently to these crises.
Italy’s institutions softened first, and Benito Mussolini reshaped them into a model
imitated throughout Southern Europe, Latin America, and even the Muslim world. Mussolini’s
Fasci Italiani di Combattimento (Italian Combat Band) rejected class for national solidarity, and
adopted Corporatism as economic policy.14
Proposed by 19th century literary critic Adam Müller (1807), championed by Pope Leo
VIII, and made official Catholic social doctrine under Pius XI, Corporatism envisioned industrial
organization inspired by medieval guilds.15 Economies were to be divided vertically into
Corporations – one for each major industry – rather than horizontally into classes. Each
corporation had state‐enforced cartel rights, with pious Catholics fixing wages and prices.
Workers deserved “fair” wages and owners deserved absolute loyalty.
This doctrine seemed to Rome a safe passage between the “twin evils of liberalism and
socialism”, and the clergy had already induced broad popular support for it (Fanfani 1935. All
Mussolini did was to put loyal Fascists, rather than pious Catholics, in charge of the
Corporations.
14

Fasci, bundled sticks, represented “strength through unity” in ancient Rome.
First articulated in Leo’s 189X Encyclical Novum Revarum, Corporatism became Vatican doctrine in Pius’ 1931
Quadragesimo Anno.

15

11

Italy
Italy industrialized rapidly from 1895 to 1907.16 Banks served as holding companies for groups of
industrial firms, often organized as pyramids, but augmented by extensive cross holdings and
supervoting shares. The Panic of 1907 ended this boom, and “a general market perception that
universal banks and managers like Agnelli used the investment boom to pump and dump their
shares” (Aganin & Volpin 2005) cut public shareholders’ valuations thereafter, as did corporate
and personal dividend tax hikes (Aleotti 1990).
Two waves of bank failures – one culminating in 1924 and another in the Great
Depression, presented opportunities for Mussolini. The Fascist State bailed out failing banks,
accumulating hugely depreciated industrial shares in state‐controlled “autonomous” investment
firms – Societa` Finanziaria Industriale Italiana (Sofindit), Istituto Mobiliare Italiano (IMI), and
Istituto per la Ricostruzione Industriale (IRI). These became apex SOEs of new pyramidal groups
containing key industrial firms that survived until the 1990s. Figure 3 graphs the largest, IRI, as
of 1987.
This neatly preserved a fiction of private ownership, for the firms remained listed
limited companies. But chains of control ultimately led to SOEs, cementing Party control over
the economy. Since these groups contained the country’s major banks, other firms entered the
Corporatist circle – some enthusiastically, others for fear of losing access to capital. Where this
failed, militia and state violence succeeded.
Central economic control was necessary to lock in Fascist political control and
coordinate investment and wage and price fixing across Corporations. Perhaps because Party
control relied on shareholdings, shareholder rights developed (Aganin & Volpin, 2005, p. 332).
Fascist reforms improved shareholder protection, forbade banks from owning nonfinancials’
shares, enhanced disclosure, and simplified pyramidal groups by stripping certain crossholdings
of voting rights.
Figure 3. Istituto per la Ricostruzione Industriale (IRI) in 1987
The IRI, a state controlled pyramidal business group consstructed by Mussolini, remained a fixture
of the Italian ecoomy until the 1990s, when it was broken up and its component firms were privatized.
Republic of Italy
100%

Istituto per la Ricostruzione Industriale
(IRI)
59.4%

61.9%

Finmeccanica
(Monte Amiata)
(SIFA)

Comit

64.4%

77.4%

80.6%

SME
(Soc Meridionale Elettricita)

Telecom Italia
(STET)

Banci
Roma

100%

Alitalia

86%
69.6%

Banco
Chiavari

20.1%

Mediobanco

13.6% 71.8%

Alenia

100%
50.7%

86%

Finsider

Italcaba
l

Alimont
(Alivar)

26.3% 26.3% 26.3%

1% 49%

Credito Fondiario
Industriale

50.02%

Sirti

Cementir
2.7% 62.5% 1.7% 2.3%

1.2%

Telecom Italia (S.I.P)

24.9%

Ansaldo Transporti
Source: We are grateful to Paulo Volpin for providing the data used in assembling this diagram.

16

88.2%

Autostrade

This section draws heavily on Franks et al. (2005).

12

81.4%

Dalmine

67.10%

Unicredito
Italiano
(Credit)

These rules affected all limited liability firms, listed or private, and remained on the
books until 1974. In practice, postwar exchanges and firms set their own standards, and a
lowest common denominator prevailed. Edison, Pirelli, and Snia Viscosa did not even disclose
sales. This changed in 1974 with the creation of an SEC analog, the Commissione Nazionale per
le Società e la Borsa (CONSOB), to supervise augmented disclosure requirements for listed firms
and reforms mandating the disclosure of stakes above two percent, legalizing nonvoting shares,
and (a year later) mandating external audits. This mixed bag prevailed until 1990s reforms
brought European Union harmonization, consolidated business group balance sheets, and
detailed ownership structure disclosure.
In 1991, Italy adopted an anti‐combines law, and in 1998 forbid managers from
opposing takeovers without shareholder approval. In 1998, roughly three fourths of the large
corporate sector had controlling shareholders – business families or state organs – so managers
disobeying shareholders was not a major problem.
Also during the 1990s, a mass privatization dismantled the state controlled groups
Mussolini established (and postwar politicians augmented). Italy came full circle. With only the
Agnelli group persisting, new groups recreate the model of a century ago.

Corporatist Corporate Governance
The Italian model attracted worldwide interest as a genuine “third way” – evading the harsh
creative destruction of liberal capitalism and the class conflict of socialism; and leaving
traditional national elites secure. Catholic Corporatism was soon adopted by Austria’s theocratic
dictator, Engelbert Dollfuß; Spain’s Falangist dictator, Francisco Franco; and Portugal’s Estado
Novo dictator, António de Oliveira Salazar. All attracted Catholic support by stressing their
obedience to Corporatist papal teachings, and secular support by stressing their respect for
Italian Corporatism. One by one, interwar dictatorships adopted Corporatism in Estonia, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, and the Balkans. Ataturk’s Turkey drew inspiration from the Corporatist
model, and Arab Nationalist movements even adopted the Falangist name in the Levant.
Marshal Petain brought a staunch Catholic Corporatism to Vichy France; and country by country,
Latin America exchanged democracy for Corporatist dictatorships on the Falangist model.
The common theme across these otherwise quite different countries was a vertical
organization of the economy into officially designated Corporations, or vertical production chain
cartels (Sorel 1908; Duguit 1923; Mussolini 1936). Great store was put upon the high ethical or
spiritual qualifications of the wise men appointed by the State, though often with input from
owners and official labor representatives, to administer these Corporations. These stewards of a
Corporation were charged with safeguarding the spiritual and temporal wellbeing of the owners
and workers of all firms in its chain of industries. To do this, they were empowered to set all
prices and wages relevant to those firms at “just” levels, control entry, and call upon the police
powers of the State to punish competition. Entry and competition were thus effectively both not
just outlawed, but rendered immoral, for these threatened the temporal and spiritual welfare of
workers and owners alike. Nation‐building directed by the benevolent dictator was, of course,
the ultimate unifying goal of the Corporatist State, and the dictator determined how the
Corporations worked together towards national prosperity and greatness.
Financial markets, especially, were roundly condemned – by both religious and secular
fascist rulers, as nests of unethical speculation. Moreover, financial markets were now
unpleasant relics. With entry essentially controlled by the incumbents in each Corporation,
there was need for neither initial public offerings nor share issues by established firms. The
Corporations’ control of entry prevented entry, precluding a need for initial public equity

13

offerings, fixed wages and prices made retained earnings a reliable source of profit for
incumbents.
Under these conditions, the directors and officers of individual business corporations
and member firms in pyramidal corporate groups became subservient to the Corporations to
which their firms belonged. The share price was genuinely unimportant, as were developing
new technologies, entering new markets, or designing new competitive strategies. Directors and
officers were cogs in the workings of a Corporation.
After World War II, Corporatism persisted in Iberia (Zaratiegui 2004; Acena and Comin
1995), Latin America (Morse 1964; Veliz 1979; Wiarda 1974), Turkey (Parla and Davison 2004),
and the Arab world (Jaber 1966) . In Western Europe, the doctrine’s totalitarian roots were
forgotten, and Corporatist institutions found their way into both Social Democratic and Christian
Democratic agendas. Freestanding, professionally managed, or widely held firms remain the
rarest of curiosities in these countries. Thus, old‐moneyed family controlled pyramidal groups
dominate big business in most onetime Corporatist economies: continental Europe (Barca &
Becht 2001; Faccio & Lang 2002), Argentina (Fracchia et al. 2009), Brazil (Da Silveira et al. 2007;
Rogers et al. 2007), Chile (Khanna & Palepu 2000), Mexico (Hoshino 2009), Taiwan (Chung &
Mahmood 2009), Thailand (Bertrand et al. 2008; Suehiro & Wailerdsak 2009), and Turkey
(Hakan & Yurtoglu 2006; Melsa & Yurtoglu 2006; Colpan 2009); augmented by occasional SOEs
and, very rarely, widely held firms – usually recently privatized SOEs.
With some exceptions, Corporatism ran deepest in Catholic countries, whose legal
systems also usually derive from the Napoleonic Code. We posit a Corporatist legacy of
hierarchically organized economic activity, pervasive cartelization, and an ethical opprobrium
for markets underlying findings linking French legal origins to family controlled pyramidal groups
(La Porta et al. 1999), weak investor protection (La Porta 2000; Djankov et al. 2008), small
lethargic stock markets (La Porta & et al. 1997), low market valuations (La Porta & et al. 2002),
barriers to entry (Djankov et al. 2000), and pervasive distrust for market solutions (La Porta et al.
2008)

France
The French experience illustrates the strains afflicting Corporatist corporate governance over
the longer run. Postwar France remained essentially Corporatist through its three decade
postwar reconstruction boom, les trente glorieuses (Fourastié 1979). Although the state
nationalized numerous firms, especially public utilities, most firms remained privately owned.
However, bureaucrats orchestrated labyrinthine taxes and subsidies that largely determined the
capital investment budgets of every large firm. Cartels remained legal, though competition was
permitted. Industry associations representing owners and workers still set prices and wages in
accordance with national policies conveyed by government representatives.
In retrospect, Corporatism may suit postwar reconstruction. Innovation is not a priority,
and existing companies know how to rebuild their physical capital. The security Corporatism
provides workers may be genuinely valued after the trauma of war and interwar crises.
However, the system proved less adept at maintaining French prosperity after reconstruction,
when further growth required innovation.
Most French officers and directors were former officials, usually from the government
bureaucracy regulating the firm’s industry. Most officials, and hence most corporate officers,
attended five elite schools – les grandes écoles. Their graduates, mostly from upper middle class
backgrounds, formed a tight network governing the State and large businesses – public and
private sector, listed and unlisted. Sociological research confirms that corporate governance

14

remains entrusted to this small and tight elite (Kramarz & Thesmar 2007). This enshrined elitism
attracts growing criticism.
A listed firm is run by its Président Directeur Général (PDG), who is seldom challenged by
the directors, whom he appoints and shareholders merely confirm. The PDG effectively appoints
his own successor. The directors have leverage over older PDGs, for boards can waive
mandatory PDG retirement at 65. Shareholders interference in governance is not expected.
The PDG typically chairs the board, and independent directors are unnecessary, though
recent guidelines recommend them. Independent directors come from the same tight network,
making genuine independence problematic. Committees are not mandatory, though new
guidelines recommend audit, nominating, and compensation committees with independent
members. Directors have no specific legal duty to shareholders.
Firms have works councils, or comités d'entreprise. These contain labor representatives
and may veto policies affecting workers. Often, such policies are negotiated at the industry level
and then approved by firms or plants. Rigid labor laws enshrine basic job protection, benefits
and social programs; but many entitlements remain Corporatist legacies – varying across
industries, inapplicable to entrants, and not portable across jobs. This provokes charges that
France is an economy of entitled insiders – managers and workers – and powerless outsiders –
immigrants and the young.
As in other Corporatist legacy countries, price fixing has long been accepted. Resulting
rents flow to privileged stakeholders – employed workers, controlling shareholders, and perhaps
the State – at the expense of others – consumers and perhaps shareholders (Roe 2003). Large
controlling shareholders may persist because these rents augment other private benefits of
control. European Union anti‐combines reforms threaten these rents, and thus may erode
concentrated corporate control.
Another issue is the sustainability of France’s intensive taxes and subsidies, and state‐
selected winners. Markets solutions remain politically unpopular to a degree foreigners have
difficulty comprehending. Murphy (2005) explains this as path dependence: most countries
suffer periodic financial crises, but the 1720s Mississippi Bubble, a post‐Revolution financial
collapse, bouts of hyperinflation, and high profile banking scandals left France uniquely
traumatized. Kindleberger (1984, p.99) writes that such events “embedded paranoia about
paper money and banks more deeply in the French subconscious.” Murphy (2005) describes
periodic crises leaving French savers quite literally burying coins in their gardens as Britain
developed banks and stock markets. Kindleberger (1984, p. 113) concludes “France lagged
behind Britain in financial institutions and experience by a hundred years or so”. French
businesses grew with retained earnings, and business families retained control generation after
generation. These attitudes remain conducive to Corporatism.
French Civil Codes preserve ownership concentration by making it virtually impossible
not to bequeath a family business to one’s son. French tycoons with families could not leave
their fortunes to charities, in marked contrast to other Civil Code economies, such as like
Denmark (Thomsen & Rose 2004), which encourage this. Landes (1949) argues that France fell
behind Victorian Britain because family control kept large French corporations conservative and
reliant on government connections.
How financial trauma affects financial development is insufficiently explored.
Psychologists have only the vaguest understanding of why similar traumas can shatter one
individual, yet barely affect another. Given the Depression Era provenance of the institutions
that shape corporate governance now, and the current financial crisis, economists need a
deeper understanding of how economic trauma shapes institutional development.

15

2.4

German Corporate Governance

Germany differs from most of the rest of continental Europe in two fundamental ways.
Germany’s Civil Code differs fundamentally those of French derivation; and Germany accords
workers and banks genuine corporate governance influence – at least potentially.17
Germany’s Civil Code is justifiably called a distinct “legal origin” in the Law and Finance
literature (La Porta et al. 1998), despite its borrowings from the Code of Justinian and
Napoleonic Code. Germany was a region, not a country, until Bismarck united its numerous
principalities in 1871. Each microstate had a legal system – some mixture of Roman Imperial
law, Canon Law, French Civil Codes, and Germanic traditions. A unified Civil Code, the
Burgerliches Gesetzbuch (BGB), would unify the nation by harmonizing local legal systems.
This contrasts starkly with the Napoleonic Code, based on what Seagle (1946, c. 18) calls
French jurists’ “strange delusion” that the Law was “not only discoverable but immutable, it
could be reduced to a permanent body of rules, known and accessible to all and sundry, and
would never be in need of change.” Indeed, §4 criminalized denying this: “The judge who shall
refuse to render decision under pretext of the silence, obscurity, or insufficiency of the law is to
be prosecuted as guilty of denial of justice."
The BGB has no such delusion. Though long, precise, and ‘scientific”; it mentions
“requirements of good faith, giving consideration to common usage” (§157 for contracts; §242
for debts) and instructs “that in construing legal texts the true underlying intention and not the
literal meaning of the words should prevail” (§133). These sections echo British Common Law
principals that shield a defendant who, for example, acted like a “reasonable man” and
Common Law juries that weigh the spirit of a law, not its letter.
The second great difference between Germany and most other countries is Germany’s
tradition of stakeholder rights in corporate governance, design by Bismarck to preempt
democracy (Bismarck 1898; Meerhaeghe 2006). The 1870 Company Law gave each large listed
company two boards – a supervisory board, or Aufsichtsrat, of shareholder representatives
charged with setting broad strategic goals and a management board, or Vorstand, of top
corporate officers charged with implementing those goals. The 1884 Company Law forbade
anyone sitting on both boards, and assigned supervisory board members a “duty to become
informed”. In the two decades before World War I, managerial turnover was sensitive to firm
performance, suggesting some form of disciplinary governance mechanism. Firms listed in Berlin
were reputed more widely held, and also appear to have ousted underperforming top managers
more readily. In short, Germany looked like other countries.
Banks also played a more direct role in capitalizing industrial firms than in Britain, for
Germany was catching up. Industrialization was by then a well beaten path. Capital needs and
earnings were foreseeable, making bank financing more viable (Kleeberg 1988). Nonetheless,
the Second Reich (1871 – 1918) was a liberal era: families and banks operated a dual system of
corporate oversight in an essentially competitive economy (Fohlin, 2005).
Under the Weimar Republic, control blocks apparently eroded, and controlling families
adopted a variety of takeover defenses, notably dual class shares and voting caps on non‐family
shareholders. Pyramiding was likely also used, but is hard to detect because large shareholders
could remain anonymous. Fohlin (2005) shows business families more important through these
decades, and banks less, than generally realized.
In contrast, labor’s importance is undisputed. Bismarck built the world’s first social
safety net in the late 19th century, thinking enhanced workers’ economic security would blunt
17

This section draws heavily from Fohlin (2005). We thank Katharina Pistor for information about the German Civil
Code and its operation. All errors are the authors’.

16

their demands for democracy and social mobility, which he considered profoundly dangerous
(Ashley 1912).
Germany endured a triple crisis in the first decades of the 20th century: Its defeat in
1918 discredited traditional institutions, opening doors for pro‐Soviet agitators. A subsequent
hyperinflation destroyed savings, leaving the middle class entirely dependent on wage and job
security (Perotti & von Thadden 2006). The Great Depression undermined both.
The Weimar Republic’s Arbeitsgemeinschaft, or “workers’ corporation” system gave
Socialist labor unions real influence over wage and price setting fixing. But the prolonged
economic disaster triggered civil disorder. With private militias in the streets, a minority
government fell and Adolf Hitler’s National Socialist German Workers’ Party (Nazis) took power.
Seeking support from nationalists and industrialists, Hitler preserved private ownership,
using the banks to cement Party control over industry. Germany’s 1897 Company Law
undermined stock exchanges, driving equity trading inside large banks, which held small
investors’ shares in trust. To ensure quorums at shareholder meetings, the banks obtained
proxy voting rights over many of these shares. Hitler put Nazis in charge of the banks, banned
voting by mail, and assigned default proxy rights to the banks. Previously passive public
shareholdings became Nazi voting blocks.
The Party now appointed most large firms boards, but directors’ duty remained to
shareholders. To sever this, the Nazi’s took the vertical organization of Corporatism to a unique
extreme. The 1937 Shareholder Law freed officers and directors of a duty to shareholders,
substituting one to stakeholders – especially the Reich. Under the new Führerprinzip or leader
principle – workers obeyed managers, who obeyed Party officials, who obeyed the Führer.
The wartime government established much of what still makes German corporate
governance distinct. After 1945, the banks became banks again; but diffuse stakeholder rights
and proxy voting by banks persist.

Source: Baums (1998).

17

Figure 4 illustrates ‐ the big banks own no shares in Siemens, a large industrial firm,
though their insurance subsidiaries own a combined 9.87%. However, the banks vote a further
85.81% of Siemens’ stock as small shareholders’ trustees, bringing their combined total voting
power to 95.48%. The figure shows top bankers’ immense potential corporate governance
influence over many large firms, and de facto sovereignty since they collectively vote majorities
of their own shares.
Postwar codetermination again gave labor leaders real input, letting them select half the
supervisory boards of large firms – though (Roe 2003) argues this simply shifted decisions out of
the supervisory boards. Reforms in 1965 abolished the Führerprinzip, but retained a generalized
duty to all stakeholders and also required that banks have written permission to vote proxies
and inform shareholders of how they voted – however this was readily countered by having
investors sign away voting rights in the banks standard forms. Further reforms in 1998 abolished
voting caps, and affected firms’ stock prices rose sharply.
Pyramiding expanded after the war, possibly to strangle a nascent market for corporate
control. Households, owning 48.6% of all shares in 1950, held only 17% by 1996 – even as
intercorporate equity holdings rose from 18% of all shares in 1950 to 41% in 1996. German
corporations thus belong to large business groups, but those built around big banks differ from
pyramidal groups in other countries in that the banks wield control by voting shares actually
owned by small investors.
Modern German family controlled pyramidal groups, of course, resemble similar
structures elsewhere. Germany’s Mittelstand – its small and medium sized firms – tend to be
multigenerational family firms, in which bank control is less evident. Smaller firms can also avoid
the codetermination requirements mandated for large firms. However, even modestly large
firms must have a works council, or Betriebsrat, or several if the firm operates in multiple
locations. These have great power, for they vet decisions that affect labor – including hiring and
firing.
Recent events may be changing this system. Very high capital gains taxes previously
deterred control block sales, but tax reforms have changed this. Banks can now sell shares they
own directly, but these reforms leave their proxy voting powers untouched. A more jarring
change was Germany’s first hostile takeover – by Vodafone, a UK firm, of Mannesmann.
Originally, the widely held Mannesmann’s managers ignored Vodafone’s hostile tender offer
because the bankers assured them they would vote with management. Vodafone launched a
major advertising campaign, explaining to German shareholders how much money their banks’
decisions were costing them. Public outrage forced the government to force the banks to flip‐
flop, and the shareholders approved the takeover. The banks must now erect Chinese Walls
around proxy voting decisions, and some argue the banks might best shed this responsibility.
Fohlin (2005) summarizes the above history as “a string of disastrous political
institutions and movements in the aftermath of World War I, culminating in the Nazi regime,
[that] dismantled the rich, highly functioning, hybrid financial system of the Second Reich. The
post‐war political and legal climate, one that continues to suppress the liberal tradition of the
pre‐World War I era, seemingly prevents the old dual system from reemerging.”

2.5

Scandinavian Corporate Governance

Swedes are justly proud of their egalitarian income distribution, yet the country has perhaps the
least egalitarian system of corporate governance among industrialized countries.18 One large

18

This section draws heavily from Högfeldt (2005).

18

pyramidal group, controlled by the Wallenberg family, accounts for about half of total market
capitalization, and a few others account for most of the rest.
Högfeldt (2005) describes how this contradiction arose during the Great Depression: The
Wallenberg bank accepted equity for nonperforming loans; and reorganized these into a huge
pyramidal group under an apex closed‐end fund. Sweden’s political reaction to the Depression
was social democracy: generous social programs and business subsidies in return for high taxes
and extensive regulation.
Although the families initially opposed social democracy, Högfeldt argues that they soon
reached an accord. The families came to appreciate regulation and high taxes as barriers to
entry; and Social Democrats found dealing with “business” by phoning a few patriarchs
convenient. Ultimately, he discerns a sort of symbiosis: the families business groups helped
implement social policy in return for subsidies, tax breaks, and regulatory favor.
The other Scandinavian economies similarly entrust much of their large business sectors
to remarkably few families and tycoons. Charitable foundations are also important controlling
shareholders in Denmark (Thomsen & Rose 2004), and Norway has two large sovereign wealth
funds. One, Statens pensjonsfond – Utland, invests abroad only; while the smaller Statens
pensjonsfond – Norge holds large blocks of major Norwegian firms.
The Scandinavian social democracies are arguably corporatist, in that domestic
competition was long thought unimportant. However, early openness to world trade likely
provided market checks on rent‐seeking. Also, as in postwar Germany, labor leaders were
insiders crafting policy; not outsiders demanding concessions. Transparency is paramount, and
limited liability imposes meaningful disclosure requirements, even on unlisted firms.
Finally, the Scandinavian countries share a unique legal system: though they lack a
comprehensive Civil Code along the French or German models, they have negotiated common
codifications of specific bodies of law. Reminiscent of Common Law countries, judges assisted by
panels of citizen judges apply common sense and fill in gaps in the codes. Respect for the Rule of
Law is thoroughgoing, and corruption is apparently rare.
These factors limit pecuniary private benefits of control (Holmen & Knopf 2004), so the
persistence of family pyramidal groups likely reflects nonpecuniary benefits to the families.

2.6

How Japan Became Unique

Japan’s legal system derives from Germany’s, but its corporate governance has a unique and
remarkable history. The country has, at one time or another, tried virtually every system
described above.19 Before 1868, a profoundly traditional and isolationist society made
merchants the bottom caste in a rigidly hereditary system – beneath priests, warriors, peasants,
and craftsmen. Nonetheless, merchant families, the Mistui and Sumitomo especially, prospered.
After Admiral Perry’s gunboats opened Japan to Victorian globalization, a clique of
infuriated samurai seized power. This Meiji Restoration, named for a figurehead emperor,
sought to expel the foreigners; but soon realized this required learning foreign ways. The junta
sent young Japanese abroad to study foreign technologies, businesses, and governments; and to
report home.
Thus informed, they rebuilt Japan, combining what they saw as global best practice in
legal, economic, and social institutions. They founded state‐owned enterprises to bring modern
industry to Japan, and inevitable governance problems soon induced fiscal and monetary crises.

19

This section draws heavily on Morck & Nakamura (2005).

19

To rescue itself, the government conducted a mass privatization, ultimately transferring major
SOEs to leading business families, like the Mitsui and Sumitomo.
From the late 19th century though to the 1930s, these families used huge public equity
issues to build these nascent corporate groups into vast pyramidal groups called zaibatsu,
similar to those found elsewhere at that time.20 Most had closely held family firms at their
apexes, though Nissan’s capstone was widely held. These huge business groups transformed
Japan into an industrial economy on par with much of Europe by 1920.
Most pyramidal groups contained a bank, but only the small Yasuda zaibatsu was built
around one. The Mitsui pyramid began with silk manufacturing, and the Sumitomo with copper
mining. Though Japan’s resource wealth was largely exhausted by the 1950s, cash cow mines
financed control blocks as groups entered successive new industries (Morck and Nakamura,
2008). Group banks were either arm’s‐length operations, like Mitsui Bank, or subordinated to
the needs of the group, like the Suzuki zaibatsu’s Taiwan Bank. The former strategy proved
superior, for the Suzuki, like others with distressed captive banks, ultimately collapsed.
The 1923 Great Kantō Earthquake destroyed much of Japan’s modern economy,
undermining once powerful liberal voices and plausibly paving the way for a 1930s military
takeover (Hammer 2006) that brought Corporatism to Japan. The military freed directors of
their duty to shareholders – meaning the business families – and regulated dividends. Military
directors on all major firms’ boards set wages and prices, and enforced output quotas.
Ownership remained private de jure, but the economy the American army found in 1945
resembled 1990s post‐socialist economies. General MacArthur’s military government included
Roosevelt New Dealers, fresh from dismantling American pyramids in the 1930s. Family and
intercorporate equity blocks were seized and either sold to public shareholders or assigned to
employees, who then sold them. The families’ compensation was bonds, rendered worthless by
inflation; and they essentially bowed out. By 1952, the occupation’s end, most large
corporations were freestanding and widely held – like America’s.
Other aspects of Anglo‐Saxon corporate governance – like hostile bids and greenmail –
followed (Sheard, 1991, 1994). As elsewhere, these were relatively rare, but drew
disproportionate publicity. A favored defense – the keiretsu – soon arose. American target firms
sometimes block hostile raids by placing an equity block with a friendly white squire; or by
inviting a rival bid from a friendly white knight. The keiretsu defense is a variant of these,
wherein a group of firms place small blocks of stock with each other. Though each holds a tiny
stake in every other firm, their stakes collectively sum to control blocks.21 Every firm in the
keiretsu is thus controlled collectively by the others – a uniquely Japanese governance structure.
Keiretsu arose in two waves – in the 1950s and then the 1960s. Japan’s experiment with
Anglo‐American shareholder democracy was thus brief, and the keiretsu system remains in place
today, augmented by a few new family pyramids, rechristened vertical keiretsu. Perhaps
because large banks organized the keiretsu, many students of postwar Japan assign them a
strong governance role (Kaplan & Minton 1994), despite their equity stakes in nonfinancial firms
being capped at five to ten percent, as in America; and their having no German‐style proxy
voting power.
Although most zaibatsu and keiretsu were unambiguously designed to secure control,
zaibatsu are also plausibly rational responses to institutional infirmities. The zaibatsu appear to
have coordinated their entry and expansion in various industries in ways consistent with
20

Zaibatsu, or 財閥, means “business clique”.
Individual stakes are often so tiny they need not be disclosed. However, the total of all corporate stakes is always
disclosed.

21

20

capturing cross‐industry spillovers from a Big Push industrialization (Morck & Nakamura 2007).
Certainly, zaibatsu member firms were star performers, and family controlled pyramids may
well be a good corporate governance choice for “catch‐up” industrialization. The keiretsu led
postwar reconstruction, suggesting that business groups and, perhaps, bank influence, work
well for that task. However, zaibatsu and keiretsu were also astute political rent‐seekers. For
example, corporate bonds were illegal for much of the postwar period, apparently in response
to bank and keiretsu lobbying. Though problematic as public policy, this surely erected barriers
to entry favoring banks and incumbents.
As the postwar reconstruction boom ended, stock market and real estate bubbles
expanded into a late 1980s financial crisis. By now, banks played no detectable role in improving
governance, and keiretsu firms’ performance lagged (Morck & Nakamura 1999). With takeovers
a historical footnote, insider entrenchment was widespread (Morck et al. 2000). Weak
governance misallocating capital is a prime suspect for the “lost decade” – zero‐growth through
the 1990s.
The main banks associated with the keiretsu did not survive the crisis, and
intercorporate equity stakes are unwinding. Hostile bids are back, with poison pills displacing
keiretsu as the preferred defense. If this trend persists, large firms’ governance would revert to
the postwar Anglo‐American model.
However, this is unlikely. Throughout the postwar period, family firms, small family
pyramidal groups, and a few large family‐controlled vertical keiretsu prospered. Japanese
business families are unique in occasionally adopting highly educated tested adults as “new”
heirs if their biological progeny appear inadequate. Japanese are typically surprised that family
firms elsewhere fail to do this. Perhaps because of this unique succession system, Japanese
family firms perform exceptionally well.

3

Conclusions: Patterns amid Variation

Governance problems are as old as capitalism: investors who entrust their savings to specialized
entrepreneurs must somehow constrain the entrepreneurs’ self‐interest. Abstracting from
obvious national differences, we postulate a standard model of corporate governance fitting
most newly industrializing economies and the histories of most, perhaps all, developed
economies.
This model has a few wealthy business families, tycoons – for brevity, we use the
American term “robber barons” – each controlling a huge group of separately listed firms,
usually via pyramiding, that spans. Because robber barons wield enormous economic and politic
clout, and sometimes act above law, the model is also called crony capitalism. Controlling
shareholders call the shots and others are bystanders.
This model’s ubiquity suggests an economic raison d’être – at least early in economic
development. Robber barons with reputations for treating investors fairly might attract savings
on advantageous terms, letting them build business empires. Large business groups may
substitute for dysfunctional markets and institutions. Their controlling shareholders might
provide essential economic coordination weak governments cannot. Or, they might capture the
state, and twist government policy to their service.
The differences between developed economies’ corporate governance systems, which
help distinguish the so‐called varieties of capitalism (Hall & Soskice 2001), arose during severe
economic and political crises. Crises rendered institutions temporarily malleable; perhaps by
weakening previously invulnerable interest groups (Olson 1984b, a, 2000). The robber barons

21

succumbed to new models that, partly by design and partly as unintended consequences, sent
countries down different paths.
We postulate that robust empirical correlations between economic institutions and
factors like legal origin, dominant religion, early land distribution, and the like reflect common
forces shaping the response to crises in different countries, and perhaps common unintended
consequences of those reforms.
With qualifications, countries with Common Law legal sustain large stock markets and
professionally managed freestanding widely held firms. The longer lists of shareholder rights La
Porta et al. (1997) enumerate in these economies are historically recent (Franks et al. 2005;
Lamoreaux & Rosenthal 2006), and thus unlikely to explain such longstanding differences. But
other characteristics of the different legal systems might.
Legal origins capture the distinctly different ways society solve problems. First, to vastly
oversimplify, English courts exist to rein in the powerful; French courts to apply State power
dispassionately (Watson, 1981; Pistor et al. 1999). English law gelled after Royalists lost the Civil
War, and an independent judiciary – the Courts of Common Law – developed in opposition to
Royal power (Hayek 1960; Glaeser & Shleifer 2002). France’s Wars of Religion and its
Revolutionary Tribunals’ enthusiasm for the guillotine left Napoleon distrusting decentralized
power and judicial discretion; and the Napoleonic Code reflects this.
Second, Merryman (1966, p. 586) sees Civil Codes enshrining doctrine over judgment.
French codes, especially, seek to eliminate all judicial discretion by fully anticipating all possible
disputes and their resolutions. This arguably favors wealthy insiders, who can afford legal
guidance. Common Law courts apply general “principles” – reasonable man or prudent man
standards. Insiders found unreasonable or imprudent by a jury risk jail, even if they meticulously
avoid breaching the letter of the law.
Third, Civil Code magistrates are political appointees, and thus subject to political
pressure (Hayek, 1960; Mahoney 2001; and La Porta et al. 2004). Coffee (2001) argues that
more independent Common Law courts better support self‐regulation – whereby insiders
precommit to high standards and privately enforced penalties for breaching those standards.
Civil codes, in contrast, better support crony capitalism.
Still, these differences can be overblown. American law matches any Civil Code in
lengthy impenetrability; Germany’s opening for judicial discretion is increasingly emulated, if
little used (Weiss, 2000; Enriques, 2002); and politics taints American judicial appointments.
Some thus regard legal origin as a historical footnote (Markesinis, 2000; see also Posner 1996).
Others concede persistent differences (Weiss, 2000), and support in empirical evidence that
legal origins capture something relevant to current corporate governance (La Porta et al. 2008).
Our historical vignettes point to Common Law principals in Britain and Canada
preventing takeover barriers like staggered boards and effective poison pills. This encourages
the market for corporate control that also characterizes Common Law countries. America’s
courts also shaped its corporate governance regime. Roosevelt’s First New Deal, a corporatist
cartelization imitating Mussolini’s reforms, was ruled unconstitutional by the Supreme Court.
This forced him to launch a Progressive Second New Deal that broke up the pyramidal groups
and enhanced shareholder protection (Black 2003).
However, these principles are honored to different degrees in different countries at
different times, and patterns of corporate governance change accordingly. Canada, despite a
Common Law heritage, fought 1930s deflation with cartelization (Bliss 1987) as French Canadian
scholars and clerics touted Corporatism (Nemni et al. 2006). In 1970s, Canada’s national unity
crisis induced nationalist policies: heavy state interventionism, foreign takeover restrictions, and
subsidies to Canadian controlled firms – unintentionally resurrecting the robber baron model. In

22

independent India, the Rule of Law eroded and the Anglo‐American firm never emerged. In
contemporary America, takeover defenses are weakening these principles, and corporate
ownership is concentrating. In Britain, they remain strong and ownership remains diffuse. But
this occasional backsliding proves the rule: takeovers are rare and old‐moneyed families’
pyramidal groups contain most large corporations in most Civil Code countries.
Still, legal origins might fortuitously proxy for something else. Weber (1930) links
Protestantism to entrepreneurial ideals. Certainly, the interwar Vatican touted Corporatist
teachings that downplayed competition, sidelined small shareholders, and organized economies
into Corporations – business‐run collectives charged with setting “fair” prices and wages, and
with regulating entry. Perhaps the correlation found between Roman Catholicism and financial
asthenia (La Porta et al. 1997; Stulz & Williamson 2003) is a Corporatist residue. Cultural
precursors of Asian corporate governance merit study (Huntington & Harrison 2000).
Another latent factor may be language, or language of elite education. English is the
language of higher education, government, and business in Common Law countries and
northern Europe. Education in the language of Adam Smith may create more market‐friendly
ideals than education in the languages of Jacques Derrida or Raoul Prebisch.
Yet another is political economy. Former French, Portuguese, and Spanish colonies – all
with legal systems derived from the Napoleonic Code – were all initially slave plantations or
mines, and remain organized to preserve elites; while many yeoman farmers settled British
colonies, and demanded property rights and the rule of law. Perhaps crises, like the Great
Depression, expose these roots – diminishing other interest groups relative to deeply
entrenched elites in the former and stirring up populism in the latter. Thus we observe old
moneyed family controlled business groups throughout Latin America and widely held firms in
America.
Still another factor is globalization. Rajan and Zingales (2003) document a remarkable
mid‐20th century financial atavism in many Civil Code economies. They argue a first cadre of
successful business families undermined their countries’ financial systems and corporate
governance to deny potential competitors easy capital. This reversal is attenuated in more open
economies, where foreign entrants and foreign capital are present. A growing body of evidence
links openness to financial development (Rajan and Zingales, 1998; Bekaert et al. 2005; Henry,
2007). Some argue that cross listings lets firms “rent” better corporate governance rules (Coffee,
1999; Doidge et al. 2004); though Siegel (2005) contests this. Triumphalism about the world
converging to American corporate governance was never convincing (Khanna et al. 2006), but
further work on globalization, broadly interpreted, and the evolution corporate governance
would be useful.
Neither our historical survey nor the empirical literature reveals any corporate
governance regime clearly superior. Rather, some seem better attuned to certain tasks. For
example, robber baron capitalism accompanies most (all?) rapid industrializations. Corporatism
brought France a rapid postwar recovery, as did the unique systems of Japan and Germany.
American capitalism led the recent IT revolution. This perhaps explains why German, Japanese,
and then American institutions successively became the “flavor of the month” and then
revealed weaknesses. Politics, technology, and tastes change, and reveal each system’s
strengths and weaknesses in turn. We see no clear trend towards convergence or divergence.
Academic studies of corporate governance tend to originate from American and British
business schools, and many take Anglo‐American ambient institutions for granted. Even the
term corporate governance implies the corporate to be a meaningful unit of governance – an
entirely unwarranted assumption in countries dominated, say, by family controlled pyramidal
corporate groups. Copying American or British reforms limiting directors ties to the corporations

23

they govern may be unhelpful if they are beholden to other firms controlled by the same family.
In such countries, directors, and even CEOs, may be little more than “hired help” to a powerful
business family; and their pay, incentives, and duties may be second order effects at best.
Corporate governance transcends corporations. It is about how the economy’s capital
and resources are allocated; and about information asymmetries, moral hazards, and other
market or government failures affecting people who specialize in these allocation decisions –
whether Indian business family members, German bankers, or British professional CEOs.
Comparative corporate governance should be about how different institutions reshape these
problems, and thus affect the economy’s efficiency, flexibility, innovative capacity, and
contribution to social welfare.
National institutions empirically swamp firm‐level effects, like board structure, (Doidge
et al. 2007); especially in developed economies (Durnev and Kim, 2005). This is unsurprising, for
“institutions” are about the distribution of economic power (Olson, 2000); and what is economic
power but controlling capital and resource allocation?
The major differences in corporate governance institutions across countries arose when
major crises, especially the Great Depression, briefly liquefied institutions (Olson, 1884ab). Legal
systems, cultures, languages, and institutional path dependencies affect countries responses to
crises because they affect how people solve problems. Clearly, no one factor is singularly critical,
for wide variation exists across categories of countries; and competition between national
economies surely culls deeply dysfunctional institutions, at least in open economies. This path
dependence may itself be a survival trait, for studies of legal transplants show high failure rates,
and argue that national institutions are highly interdependent webs; with institutional
innovations only “taking” if they fit into this interdependency. Thus, America’s attempt to
impose its vision of shareholder democracy on postwar Japan quickly developed into a system
more aligned with Japan’s prior path and quite different from America’s model. Likewise,
America’s attempt to reform its own system via the Sarbanes Oxley Act, like Germany’s Neuer
Markt, confronts immense institutional momentum. Real reforms, it would seem, await the next
Great Depression.

24

References
Aganin, Alexander; Volpin, Paolo. 2005. The History of Corporate Ownership in Italy. In Randall Morck, ed.
A History of Corporate Governance around the World. University of Chicago Press, 325‐61.
Agrawal, Anup; Walkling, Ralph. 1994. Executive Careers and Compensation Surrounding Takeover Bids.
Journal of Finance 49 985
Allen, Thomas; Bayley, Brian; Black, Donald; Coffee, John;, Denham, Jill; Elharrar, Pascale; Hartt, Stanley;
Kierans, Thomas; Menard, Jacques; Moorehead, Colleen; Pritchard, Robert. 2007. Canada Steps
up ‐ Final Report of the Task Force to Modernize Securities Legislation in Canada. Investment
Dealers Association of Canada.
Anisman, Philip. 1987. Majority‐Minority Relations in Canadian Corporation Law: An Overview. Canadian
Business Law Journal 12 473
Ararat, Melsa; Yurtoglu, Burcin. 2006. Corporate Governance in Turkey: An Introduction to the Special
Issue1. Corporate Governance: An International Review 14, 201
Armstrong, Christopher. 2001. Moose Pastures and Mergers. University of Toronto Press.
Ashley, Anne. 1912. The Social Policy of Bismarck. Longmans, Green and Co., London.
Barca, Fabrizio; Becht, Marco. 2001. The Control of Corporate Europe. Oxford University Press.
Bebchuk, Lucian. Alma, Cohen, Allen, Ferrell. 2009. What Matters in Corporate Governance? The Review
of Financial Studies 22, 783
Bebchuk, Lucian. 2007. The Myth of the Shareholder Franchise. Virginia Law Review 93, 675
Bebchuk, Lucian; Cohen, Alma. 2003. Firms' Decisions Where to Incorporate. Journal of Law and
Economics 46 2 383‐425
Bebchuk, Lucian; Cohen, Alma. 2005. The Costs of Entrenched Boards. Journal of Financial Economics
78(2) 409‐33
Bebchuk, Lucian; Kraakman, Reinier; Triantis, George. 2000. Stock Pyramids, Cross‐Ownership, and Dual
Class Equity: The Mechanisms and Agency Costs of Separating Control from Cash‐Flow Rights. In
Randall Morck, ed. Concentrated Corporate Ownership. University of Chicago Press, 295‐315.
Becht, Marco; Delong, Bradford. 2005. Why Has There Been So Little Block Holding in America? In Rnadall
Morck, ed. A History of Corporate Governance around the World. University of Chicago Press,
613‐660.
Bekaert, Geert; Harvey, Campbell; Lundblad, Cris. 2005. Does Financial Liberalization Spur Growth. Journal
of Financial Economics 77 3‐56.
Berle, Adolf; Means, Gardiner. 1932. The Modern Corporation and Private Property. Commerce Clearing
House, New York.
Bertrand, Marianne; Johnson, Simon; Samphantharak, Krislert;, Schoar, Antoinette. 2008. Mixing Family
with Business: A Study of Thai Business Groups and the Families Behind Them. Journal of
Financial Economics 88 466
Bertrand, Marianne; Mehto, Paras; Mullainathan, Sendhil. 2002. Ferreting out Tunneling. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 117(1) 121‐48
Bismarck, Otto. 1898. Bismarck, the Man and the Statesman, Being the Reflections and Reminiscences of
Otto Prince Von Bismarck. Written and Dictated by Himself after His Retirement from Office.
Smith, Elder, London.
Black, Bernard; Coffee, John. 1994. Hail Britannia? Institutional Investor Behavior under Limited
Regulation. Michigan Law Review 92,1997
Black, Conrad. 2003. Franklin Delano Roosevelt: Champion of Freedom. Weidenfeld Nicolson, London.
Bliss, Michael. 1987. Northern Enterprise: Five Centuries of Canadian Business. McClelland Stewart,
Toronto.
Bonbright, James; Means, Gardiner. 1932. The Holding Company: Its Public Significance and Its Regulation.
McGraw‐Hill, New York.
Burkart, Mike; Panunzi, Fausto; Shleifer, Andrei. 2003. Family Firms. Journal of Finance 58 5 2167‐2201
Cheffins, Brian. 2009. Corporate Ownership and Control: British Business Transformed. Oxford University
Press.

25

Cheung, Yan‐Leung; Rau, Raghavendra; Stouraitis, Aris. 2006. Tunneling, Propping, and Expropriation:
Evidence from Connected Party Transactions in Hong Kong. Journal of Financial Economics 82 2
343‐86
Chung, Chi‐Nien; Mahmood, Ishtiaq. 2009. Taiwanese Business Groups in the Past Three Decades. In: Asli
Colpan & Hikino Takashi ,eds. Oxford Handbook of Business Groups. Oxford University Press.
Claessens, Stijn; Fan, Joseph; Lang, Larry. 2006. The Benefits and Costs of Group Affiliation: Evidence from
East Asia. Emerging Markets Review 7(1) 1‐26.
Coffee, John, 1999. The future as history: the prospects for global convergence in corporate governance
and its implications. Northwestern University Law Review 93 641–708.
Colpan, Asli. 2009. Business Groups in Turkey. In Asli Colpan & Hikino Takashi, eds. Oxford Handbook of
Business Groups. Oxford University Press.
Da Silveira, Alexandre; Leal, Ricardo; Carvalhal Da Silva, Andre; Barros, Lucas Ayres B.De C. 2007. Evolution
and Determinants of Firm‐Level Corporate Governance Quality in Brazil. Universidade Federal do
Rio de Janeiro COPPEAD working paper.
Daniel, Maman. 1999. Interlocking Ties within Business Groups in Israel – a Longitudinal Anaylsis, 1974‐
1987. Organization Studies 20, 323
Daniel, Maman. 2002. The Emergence of Business Groups: Israel and South Korea Compared.
Organization Studies 23, 737
Das, Gurcharan. 2000. India Unbound. New York Viking, New Delhi ;.
Davis, Gerald. 1991. Agents without Principles? The Spread of the Poison Pill through the Intercorporate
Network. Administrative Science Quarterly 36, 583
Delong, J. Bradford. 1991. Did J. P. Morgan's Men Add Value? In Peter Temin, ed. Inside the Business
Enterprise: Historical Perspectives on the Use of Information. University of Chicago Press, 205‐36.
Denis, Diane; Mcconnell, John. 2003. International Corporate Governance. Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 38 1, 1‐36
Djankov, Simeon; La Porta, Rafael; Lopez‐De‐Silanes, Florencio; Shleifer, Andrei. 2000. The Regulation of
Entry. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 1
Djankov, Simeon; La Porta, Rafael; Lopez‐De‐Silanes, Florencio; Shleifer, Andrei. 2008. The Law and
Economics of Self‐Dealing. Journal of Financial Economics 88 430
Doidge, Craig; Karolyi, Andrew; Stulz, Rene. 2004. Why Are Foreign Firms Listed in the U.S. Worth More?
Journal of Financial Economics 71(2) 205‐38
Doidge, Craig; Karolyi, Andrew; Stulz, Rene. 2007. Why do countries matter so much for corporate
governance? Journal of Financial Economics 86 1‐39.
Durnev, Art; Kim, E. Han. 2005. To Steal or Not to Steal: Firm Attributes, Legal Environment, and
Valuation. Journal of Finance 60(3) 1461‐93.
Dyck, Alexander, Zingales, Luigi. 2004. Private Benefits of Control: An International Comparison. Journal of
Finance 59 2, 537‐600.
Easterbrook, Frank; Fischel, Daniel. 1991. The Economic Structure of Corporate Law. Harvard University
Press.
Faccio, Mara; Lang, Larry. 2002. The Ultimate Ownership of Western European Corporations. Journal of
Financial Economics 65(3) 365‐95.
Faleye, Olubunmi. 2007. Classified Boards, Firm Value, and Managerial Entrenchment. Journal of Financial
Economics 83(2) 501‐29
Fohlin, Caroline. 2005. The History of Corporate Ownership and Control in Germany. In Randall Morck ed.
A History of Corporate Governance around the World. University of Chicago Press, pp. 223‐277.
Fourastié, Jean. 1979. Les Trente Glorieuses: ou, La Révolution Invisible de 1946 à 1975. Fayard, Paris.
Fracchia, Eduardo; Mesquita, Luiz, Quiroga, Juan. 2009. Business Groups in Argentina. In Asli Colpan &
Hikino Takashi eds. Oxford Handbook of Business Groups.
Francis, Diane. 1988. Contrepreneurs. Macmillan of Canada, Toronto.
Franks, Julian, Colin Mayer and Luc Renneboog. 2001. Who Disciplines Management in Poorly Performing
Companies? Journal of Financial Intermediation 10(3‐4) 209‐248.

26

Franks, Julian; Mayer, Colin; Rossi, Stefano. 2005. Spending Less Time with the Family: The Decline of
Family Ownership in the United Kingdom. In Randall Morck, ed. A History of Corporate
Governance around the World. University of Chicago Press, 581‐607.
Frydman, Carola; Saks, Raven. 2007. Executive Compensation: A New View from a Long‐Term Perspective,
1936‐2005. Federal Reserve Board Finance & Economics Discussion Series: 2007‐35
Ghemawat, Pankaj; Khanna, Tarun. 1998. The Nature of Diversified Business Groups: A Research Design
and Two Case Studies. Journal of Industrial Economics 46 1, 35‐61
Gillooly, Michael. 1993. The Law Relating to Corporate Groups. Federation Press, Sydney.
Glaeser, Edward; Shleifer, Andrei. 2002. Legal Origins. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 4, 1193‐1229
Goetzmann, William; Köll, Elisabeth. 2005. The History of Corporate Ownership in China: State Patronage,
Company Legislation, and the Issue of Control. In Randall Morck ed. A History of Corporate
Governance around the World. University of Chicago Press.
Goldstein, Andrea 2009. Business Groups in South Africa since 1871: From the Randlords to the Black
Oligarchs? In: Colpan Aslı & Hikino Takashi eds. Oxford Handbook of Business Groups.
Gompers, Paul; Ishii, Joy; Metrick, Andrew. 2003. Corporate Governance and Equity Prices. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 118(1) 107‐55
Gompers, Paul;, Metrick, Andrew. 2001. Institutional Investors and Equity Prices. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 116(1) 229‐59
Griggs, Lynden; Lowry, John. 1994. Minority Shareholder Remedies: A Comparative View. Journal of
Business Law, 463
Hakan, Orbay; Yurtoglu, Burcin. 2006. The Impact of Corporate Governance Structures on the Corporate
Investment Performance in Turkey. Corporate Governance: An International Review 14, 349
Hall, Peter; Soskice, David. 2001. Varieties of Capitalism: The Institutional Foundations of Comparative
Advantage. Oxford University Press.
Hammer, Joshua. 2006. Yokohama Burning: The Deadly 1923 Earthquake and Fire That Helped Forge the
Path to World War II. Free Press.
Hartzell, Jay. 2004. What's in It for Me? CEOs Whose Firms Are Acquired. Review of Financial Studies 17,
37
Hayek, Friedrich. 1960. The Constitution of Liberty. University of Chicago Press.
Henry, Peter Blair. 2007. Capital Account Liberalization: Theory, Evidence and Speculation. Journal of
Economic Literature 45 887‐935.
Hockin, Thomas; Bruce, Ian; Desautels, Denis; Kvisle, Hal; Russell, Dawn; Salman, Terry; Zordel, Heather.
2009 Creating an Advantage in Global Capital Markets: Final Report and Recommendations of the
Expert Panel on Securities Regulation. Finance Canada.
Högfeldt, Peter 2005. The History and Politics of Corporate Ownership in Sweden. In: Morck Randall ed. A
History of Corporate Governance around the World: Family Business Groups to Professional
Managers. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, p. 62.
Holderness, Clifford G., Kroszner, Randall S., Sheehan, Dennis P. 1999. Were the Good Old Days That
Good? Changes in Managerial Stock Ownership since the Great Depression. Journal of Finance
54(2) 435‐69
Holmen, Martin, Knopf, John D. 2004. Minority Shareholder Protections and the Private Benefits of
Control for Swedish Mergers. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 39, 167
Hoshino, Taeko. 2009. Business Groups in Mexico. In Asli Colpan & Hikino Takashi eds. Oxford Handbook
of Business Groups.
Huntington, Samuel; Harrison, Lawrence. 2000. Culture Matters: How Values Shape Human Progress.
Basic Books, New York.
Ian, B. Lee. 2005. Peoples Department Stores V. Wise and the "Best Interests of the Corporation'.
Canadian Business Law Journal 41, 212
Ikram, Atif; Naqvi, Syed; Ali Asjad. 2005. Family Business Groups and Tunneling Framework: Application
and Evidence from Pakistan. Lahore University of Management Sciences, Lahore.
Jensen, Michael; Meckling, William. 1976. Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and
Ownership Structure. Journal of Financial Economics 3 4, 305‐60

27

Jensen, Michael; Ruback, Richard. 1983. The Market for Corporate Control: The Scientific Evidence.
Journal of Financial Economics 11, 5
Johnson, Simon, Et Al. 2000. Tunneling. American Economic Review 90 2, 22‐27
Jones, Geoffrey. 2000. Merchants to Multinationals: British Trading Companies in the Nineteenth and
Twentieth Centuries. Oxford University Press.
Josephson, Matthew. 1934. The Robber Barons; the Great American Capitalists, 1861‐1901. Harcourt,
New York.
Kaplan, Steven N., Minton, Bernadette A. 1994. Appointments of Outsiders to Japanese Boards:
Determinants and Implications for Managers. Journal of Financial Economics 36(2) 225‐58
Kerry Shannon, Burke. 2002. Regulating Corporate Governance through the Market: Comparing the
Approaches of the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom. Journal of Corporation Law
27, 341
Khanna, Tarun, Palepu, Krishna G. 2005. The Evolution of Concentrated Ownership in India: Broad
Patterns and a History of the Indian Software Industry. In Randall Morck, ed. A History of
Corporate Governance around the World. University of Chicago Press, 283‐320.
Khanna, Tarun, Palepu, Krishna. 2000a. Emerging Market Business Groups, Foreign Intermediaries, and
Corporate Governance. In Randall Morck, ed. Concentrated Corporate Ownership. University of
Chicago Press,265‐92.
Khanna, Tarun, Palepu, Krishna. 2000b. The Future of Business Groups in Emerging Markets: Long‐Run
Evidence from Chile. Academy of Management Journal 43, 268
Khanna, Tarun, Palepu, Krishna. 2000c. Is Group Affiliation Profitable in Emerging Markets? An Analysis of
Diversified Indian Business Groups. Journal of Finance 55(2) 867‐91
Khanna, Tarun; Kogan, Joe; Palepu, Krishna. 2006. Globalization and Similarities in Corporate Governance:
A Cross‐Country Analysis. Review of Economics and Statistics 88(1) 69‐90.
King, Michael; Segal, Dan, 2008. 2008. Market Segmentation and Equity Valuation: Comparing Canada and
the United State. Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money 18, 245‐258
Kleeberg, John. 1988. The Disconto‐Gesellschaft and German Industrialization. Doctoral thesis. Oxford.
Kluver, John 2000. European and Australian Proposals for Corporate Group Law: A Comparative Analysis
European Business Organization Law Review 1, 287‐315
Kosenko, Konstantin , Yafeh, Yishay. 2009. Business Groups in Israel. In: Colpan Aslı & Hikino Takashi eds.
Oxford Handbook of Business Groups. Oxford University Press.
Kramarz, Francis , Thesmar, David. 2007. Social Networks in the Boardroom. HEC, Paris
La Porta, Rafael; Lopez‐De‐Silanes, Florenci Shleifer, Andrei; Vishny, Robert. 1998. Law and Finance.
Journal of Political Economy 106, 43
La Porta, Rafael; Lopez‐De‐Silanes, Florenci Shleifer, Andrei; Vishny, Robert. 2000. Investor Protection and
Corporate Governance. Journal of Financial Economics 58 1‐2, 3‐27
La Porta, Rafael; Lopez‐De‐Silanes, Florenci Shleifer, Andrei; Vishny, Robert. 1997. Legal Determinants of
External Finance. Journal of Finance 52 3, 1131‐50
La Porta, Rafael; Lopez‐De‐Silanes, Florenci Shleifer, Andrei; Vishny, Robert. 2002. Investor Protection and
Corporate Valuation. Journal of Finance 57 3, 1147‐70
La Porta, Rafael; Lopez‐De‐Silanes, Florenci Shleifer, Andrei; Vishny, Robert. 1997. Trust in Large
Organizations. American Economic Review 87, 333
La Porta, Rafael; Lopez‐De‐Silanes, Florencio; Shleifer, Andrei. 1999. Corporate Ownership around the
World. Journal of Finance 54 2, 471‐517
La Porta, Rafael; Lopez‐De‐Silanes, Florencio; Shleifer, Andrei. 2008. The Economic Consequences of Legal
Origins. Journal of Economic Literature 46(2) 285‐332
Lamoreaux, Naomi; 2005. Legal Regime and Contractual Flexibility: A Comparison of Business's
Organizational Choices in France and the United States During the Era of Industrialization.
American Law and Economics Review 7, 28
Lamoreaux, Naomi; Rosenthal, Jean‐Laurent. 2006. Corporate Governance and the Plight of Minority
Shareholders in the United States before the in the United States before the Great depression. In
Edward Glaeser & Claudia Goldin eds. Corruption and Reform: Lessons from America's Economic
History. University of Chicago Press, 125‐152.

28

Landes, David S. 1949. French Entrepreneurship and Industrial Growth in the Nineteenth Century. The
Journal of Economic History 9, 45‐61
Laughlin, Rosemary. 2004. John D. Rockefeller : Oil Baron and Philanthropist. Morgan Reynolds Pub.,
Greensboro, N.C.
Levine, Ross, Zervos, Sara. 1998. Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth. American Economic Review
88, 537‐558
Macavoy, Paul W., Millstein, Ira M. 2003. The Recurrent Crisis in Corporate Governance. Palgrave
Macmillan, New York.
Markham, Jerry W. 2002. A Financial History of the United States. ME Sharpe, Armonk, NY.
Meerhaeghe, Marcel Van. 2006. Bismarck and the Social Question. Journal of Economic Studies 33, 284
Merryman, John. 1966. The Civil Law Tradition; an Introduction to the Legal Systems of Western Europe
and Latin America. Stanford University Press, Stanford.
Mikkelson, Wayne; Partch, Megan. 1997. The Decline of Takeovers and Disciplinary Managerial Turnover.
Journal of Financial Economics 44(2)205‐28
Mody, Ashoka. 2005. The Evolution of Concentrated Ownership in India: Broad Patterns and a History of
the Indian Software Industry: Comment. In Randall Morck, ed. A History of Corporate
Governance around the World. University of Chicago Press, 320‐324.
Moeller, Sara; Schlingemann, Frederik; Stulz, Rene. 2005. Wealth Destruction on a Massive Scale? A Study
of Acquiring‐Firm Returns in the Recent Merger Wave. Journal of Finance 60(2)757‐82
Moody, John. 1904. The Truth about the Trusts. Moody’s: New York.
Morck, Randall. 2005. How to Eliminate Pyramidal Business Groups: The Double Taxation of
Intercorporate Dividends and Other Incisive Uses of Tax Policy. Tax Policy and the Economy 19
135‐79.
Morck, Randall; Nakamura, Masao. 1999. Banks and Corporate Control in Japan. Journal of Finance 54(1)
319‐39
Morck, Randall; Nakamura, Masao. 2005. A Frog in a Well Knows Nothing of the Ocean: A History of
Corporate Ownership in Japan. In Randall Morck, ed. A History of Corporate Governance around
the World. University of Chicago Press, 367‐459.
Morck, Randall; Nakamura, Masao. 2007. Business Groups and the Big Push: Meiji Japan's Mass
Privatization and Subsequent Growth. Enterprise and Society 8(3) 543‐601
Morck, Randall; Percy, Michael; Tian, Gloria; Yeung, Bernard. 2005. The Rise and Fall of the Widely Held
Firm: A History of Corporate Ownership in Canada. In Randall Morck, ed. A History of Corporate
Governance around the World. University of Chicago Press, 65‐140.
Morck, Randall; Shleifer, Andrei; Vishny, Robert. 1990. Do Managerial Objectives Drive Bad Acquisitions?
Journal of Finance 45 1, 31‐48
Morck, Randall; Stangeland, David; Yeung, Bernard. 2000a. Inherited Wealth, Corporate Control, and
Economic Growth: The Canadian Disease? In Randall Morck, ed. Concentrated Corporate
Ownership. University of Chicago Press, 319‐69.
Morck, Randalll Nakamura, Masao; Shivdasani, Anil. 2000b. Banks, Ownership Structure, and Firm Value in
Japan. Journal of Business 73(4)539‐67.
Müller, Adam. 1809. Die Elemente der Staatskunst. Berlin.
Murphy, Antoin E. 2005. Corporate Ownership in France: The Importance of History. In: Morck Randall K.
ed. A History of Corporate Governance around the World. University of Chicago Press, 185‐219.
Nemni, Max; Nemni, Monique; Johnson, William. 2006. Young Trudeau: Son of Quebec, Father of Canada,
1919‐1944. McClelland & Stewart, Toronto.
Olson, Mancur. 1984a. Microeconomic Incentives and Macroeconomic Decline. Weltwirtschaftliches
Archiv 120(4) 631‐45
Olson, Mancur. 1984b. Why Nations Rise and Fall. Challenge 27(1) 15‐23
Olson, Mancur. 2000. Power and Prosperity: Outgrowing Communist and Capitalist Dictatorships. Basic
Books, New York.
Paris, Gordon; Savage, Graham; Seitz, Raymond. 2004. Report of Investigation by the Special Committee
of the Board of Directors of Hollinger International Inc.SEC submission by the Law Offices of
Richard C. Breeden.

29

Perotti, Enrico; Von Thadden, Ernst‐Ludwig. 2006. The Political Economy of Corporate Control and Labor
Rents. Journal of Political Economy 114(1) 145‐74
Porter, John. 1965. The Vertical Mosaic: An Analysis of Social Class and Power in Canada. University of
Toronto Press.
Rajan, Raghuram; Zingales, Luigi. 1998. Financial Dependence and Growth. American Economic Review 88
559‐86.
Rajan, Raghuram; Zingales, Luigi. 2003. The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial Development in the
Twentieth Century. Journal of Financial Economics 69(1) 5‐50
Rajan, Raghuram; Zingales, Luigi. 2004. Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists: Unleashing the Power of
Financial Markets to Create Wealth and Spread Opportunity. Princeton University Press.
Ramirez, Carlos. 1995. Did J. P. Morgan's Men Add Liquidity? Corporate Investment, Cash Flow, and
Financial Structure at the Turn of the Twentieth Century. Journal of Finance 50(2) 661‐78
Roe, Mark. 2003. Political Determinants of Corporate Governance. Oxford University Press.
Roe, Mark; Blair, Margaret. 1999. Codetermination and German Securities Markets. In: Employees and
Corporate Governance. Brookings Institution, Washington, 194‐205.
Rogers, Pablo; Dami, Anamélia; Ribeiro, Kárem; Ferreira De Sousa, Almir. 2007. Corporate Governance
and Ownership Structure in Brazil: Causes and Consequences. SSRN.
Romano, Roberta. 1995. The Politics of Public Pension Funds. Public Interest, 42
Romano, Roberta. 2005. The Sarbanes‐Oxley Act and the Making of Quack Corporate Governance. Yale
Law Journal 114(7)1521‐1611
Roosevelt, Franklin. 1942. Message from the President of the United States Transmitting
Recommendations Relative to the Strengthening and Enforcement of Anti‐Trust Laws. American
Economic Review 32 119‐28.
Seagle, William. 1946. The History of Law. Tudor: New York.
Sheard, Paul. 1991. The economics of interlocking shareholding in Japan. Richerche Economiche 45 421‐
48.
Sheard, Paul. 1994. Interlocking Shareholdings and Corporate Governance. In Masahiko Aoki and Ronald
Dore, eds. The Japanese Firm: Sources of Competitive Strength. Oxford University Press.
Shleifer, Andrei; Vishny, Robert. 1990. The Takeover Wave of the 1980s. Science 249, 745
Siegel, Jordan. 2005. Can Foreign Firms Bond Themselves Effectively by Renting U.S. Securities Laws?
Journal of Financial Economics 75(2) 319‐59.
Smith, Adam. 1776. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. Strahan and Cadell:
London.
Stout, Lynn. 2007. The Mythical Benefits of Shareholder Control. Virginia Law Review 93, 789
Stulz, Rene; Williamson, Rohan. 2003. Culture, Openness, and Finance. Journal of Financial Economics
70(3) 313‐49
Suehiro, Akira; Wailerdsak, Natenapha. 2009. Business Groups in Thailand. In: Colpan Aslı & Hikino
Takashi eds. Oxford Handbook of Business Groups. Oxford University Press.
Swatsky, John. 1987. The Insiders: Government, Business, and the Lobbyists. McClelland & Stewart.
Tannous, George; Cheng, Bin. 2007. Canadian Takeover Announcements and the Job Security of Top
Managers. Canadian Journal of Administrative Sciences 24, 250
Thomsen, Steen; Rose, Caspar. 2004. Foundation Ownership and Financial Performance: Do Companies
Need Owners? European Journal of Law and Economics 18, 343
Tsui‐Auch, Lai Si; Toru, Yoshikawa. 2009. Business Groups in Singapore. In Asli Colpan & Hikino Takashi
eds. Oxford Handbook of Business Groups.
Villalonga, Belen; Amit, Raphael. 2008. How Are U.S. Family Firms Controlled? Review of Financial Studies
(forthcoming)
Walid, Ben‐Amar; Paul, Andre. 2006. Separation of Ownership from Control and Acquiring Firm
Performance: The Case of Family Ownership in Canada. Journal of Business Finance & Accounting
33, 517
Weber, Max. 1930. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. Allen & Unwin, London.

30

