                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   AMPLIFICATION MECHANISMS IN LIQUIDITY CRISES

                                        Arvind Krishnamurthy

                                         Working Paper 15040
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15040


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2009




I thank Tobias Adrian, Olivier Blanchard, Markus Brunnermeier, Ricardo Caballero, Andrea Eisfeldt,
Zhiguo He, Charles Kahn, the referee, and participants at the WEL-MIT conference and the Chicago
Fed's Bank Structure Conference for their comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Arvind Krishnamurthy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Amplification Mechanisms in Liquidity Crises
Arvind Krishnamurthy
NBER Working Paper No. 15040
June 2009
JEL No. G01,G18,G2

                                            ABSTRACT

I describe two amplifications mechanisms that operate during liquidity crises and discuss the scope
for central bank policies during crises as well as preventive policies in advance of crises. The first
mechanism works through asset prices and balance sheets. A negative shock to the balance sheets
of asset-holders causes them to liquidate assets, lowering prices, further deteriorating balance sheets,
culminating in a crisis. The second mechanism involves investors' Knightian uncertainty. Unusual
shocks to untested financial innovations lead agents to become uncertain about their investments causing
them to disengage from markets and increase their demand for liquidity. This behavior leads to a loss
of liquidity and a crisis.


Arvind Krishnamurthy
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
a-krishnamurthy@northwestern.edu
1      Introduction

We have seen (are seeing) a financial crisis in which relatively small losses on subprime assets have triggered

a process leading to large reductions in wealth and output. The direct losses due to household default on

subprime mortgages are estimated to be at most $500 bn, yet the effects of the subprime shock have been

far reaching (see, e.g., Brunnermeier, 2008, Gorton, 2008, or Blanchard, 2009, on the current crisis). Ob-

servers are blaming leverage, maturity mismatch, tight credit conditions, limited capital, opacity, complexity,

uncertainty, and suggesting various policy actions.

     This paper offers a simple framework to clarify the financial amplification mechanisms that are at work

during the crisis and explore the potential role of policy. By financial amplification mechanisms, I mean the

mechanisms involving the financial sector that can lead a small shock to have a large effect. Broadly speaking,

the factors that many observers point to can be classified into balance sheet amplifiers (e.g., leverage, tight

credit conditions, limited capital) and information amplifiers (e.g., opacity, complexity, uncertainty). I

present a simple model to discuss these two mechanisms.

     The paper can be thought of as a literature survey around a model. The balance sheet amplification

mechanism is the subject of an extensive literature and is often the first reference during financial crises. For

example, in the 1998 hedge fund crisis, the Russian default triggered a chain of losses that culminated in

the bailout of Long Term Capital Management. There was contagion, as the Russian default led to effects

in seemingly unrelated markets such as the mortgage-backed securities market.1 The 1998 event has served

as motivation for a literature that describe the following mechanism: a negative asset price shock causes

balance sheet constraints on asset-holders to tighten, causing assets to be liquidated, lowering asset prices

further, and so on. There are different versions of this mechanism, involving leverage, margin requirements,

limited capital, and shedding light on asset fire sales, asset market volatility, contagion, etc. I discuss some

of the variants of the balance sheet mechanism that appear in the literature.

     I next review an information amplification mechanism that works through agents’ uncertainty. Many

liquidity crises surround financial innovations that were rapidly adopted by market participants. In the

subprime crisis, the CDOs and associated credit derivatives that are at the center of the crisis, represent

financial assets that have grown from less than $1 tn in 2000 to over $5 tn today. New innovations necessarily

mean that market participants have a short time within which they formulate valuation, risk management,

and hedging models. A liquidity crisis occurs when the new financial assets behave in unexpected ways.
    1 For   further details on the 1998 crisis, see Scholes (2000).



                                                                      2
Lacking a historical record to refer to, market participants are faced with risks they don’t understand, and

treat these risks as Knightian (Knight, 1925). Investors’ response in this case is to disengage from risks and

seek liquid investments, which can lead to a liquidity crisis dynamic. The main paper that I draw from in

discussing this mechanism is Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2008).

     Thus, one objective of this paper is to clarify these two amplification mechanisms and discuss their

relevance during the present, and past, crises. The second objective of the paper is to clarify the role for

policy during a financial crisis. In both models, there is a scope for ex-post policies, such as liquidity provision

through a lender of last resort. The same forces that underly the negative-shock amplification mechanism

also lead to a beneficial amplification of central bank liquidity provision. There is also scope for ex-ante

policies, particularly in the balance sheet amplification mechanism. The private sector generally will not

internalize the full costs of a crisis. This opens the door to investigating preventive policies in the form of

liquidity requirements and capital requirements on the financial sector. I discuss the scope for these policies

in both amplification mechanisms.

     This paper is organized as follows. The two amplification mechanisms mentioned above are described in

Sections 2 and 3. In Section 4, I discuss the senses in which the model outcomes reflect the “lack of liquidity”

that many observers refer to in a crisis. In doing so, I also discuss how liquidity is measured in the empirical

literature. Section 5 concludes.



2      Amplification through Balance Sheets and Asset Prices

Most investors in the sophisticated financial markets affected by liquidity crises – i.e. the mortgage and

credit markets in the current subprime crisis, or the sovereign debt and derivative markets of the 1998

crisis – are financial intermediaries who are managing the funds of an ultimate household. Examples of

these investors are hedge funds or banks, as well as pension funds and mutual funds. Theory then suggests

that there may be agency conflicts between the household-investor and the intermediary that can affect the

intermediary’s investment decisions. As in corporate finance, where a similar manager-shareholder conflict

arises, the intermediary’s investment will depend on external financing conditions and the condition of its

balance sheet.2
    2 Shleifer and   Vishny (1997) identify this agency conflict and describe it as a “limit to arbitrage.” That is, in textbook finance,

it is common to argue that if asset prices deviate from fundamentals, an arbitrageur will step in to profit from the deviation.

As a result, the argument goes, prices will remain close to fundamentals. Shleifer and Vishny make the important point that




                                                                     3
    Hedge funds raise equity from a clientele that is a combination of the managers of the hedge fund and

wealthy households/institutional investors. They raise debt, mostly in the form of repo financing, from other

investors.3 Thus a hedge fund manages the funds contributed via both debt and equity contracts of some

ultimate household. If hedge funds have lost money, or if they are holding particularly illiquid assets during

a period of market illiquidity, investors may be unwilling to invest in either the equity or debt of the hedge

fund. In this case, the hedge fund may have to reoptimize its portfolio, selling some assets and holding more

liquid assets.

    Mutual funds raise moneys predominantly through equity contributions of households. A well documented

regularity is that the investors in mutual funds withdraw their funds following poor performance. Again,

there is a relationship between the investment decisions of the mutual fund and its balance sheet (or change

thereof).

    If asset prices depend on the health of investors’ balance sheets, then a feedback mechanism emerges

whereby a negative shock in the financial market worsens balance sheets, reducing asset prices, feeding back

into balance sheets, and so on. I model this feedback and dependence on balance sheets.


2.1     Balance Sheet Constraint

The model has a unit measure of investors. I will label these investors as hedge funds. But one can equally

think of them as banks or institutional investors. I study a model in which the investment decisions of these

hedge funds are a function of the health of their balance sheets.

    The hedge funds purchase an asset at date s at price Ps . They may need, for exogenous and endogenous

reasons, to liquidate the asset at a later date t at price Pt . In this section, I focus on the equilibrium price

determination at date t.

    At date s, the hedge fund raises debt from households of ds and equity of Ps − ds , so that the total funds

raised are exactly enough to buy one unit of the asset. At date t, there are two states that may realize. In

state ω = B, one-half of the hedge funds (randomly chosen) have to liquidate their asset holdings and exit

the market. The liquidation need is exogenous to the model. However, as outlined below, the exogenous
the textbook arbitrageur is someone like a hedge-fund manager who is investing the moneys of a household. Agency conflicts

will place limits on to what extent the arbitrageur can exploit profit opportunities. The Shleifer and Vishny observation has

spawned a large empirical and theoretical literature on the limits to arbitrage.
   3 A repo, or repurchase agreement, is a short-term debt contract that is collateralized by a financial asset. For many hedge


funds, the predominant financing tool is a one day repo agreement, that is renewed every day.




                                                              4
liquidation may trigger endogenous liquidation by even those with no exogenous shock. In state ω = G,

there are no exogenous liquidation shocks. In the subprime context, we may imagine that the liquidity shock

is a loss in the hedge fund’s subprime investments that necessitates rebalancing its portfolio and forcing a

sale of the asset at price Pt .4

       Define the equity capital of the hedge fund at date t as,


                                                         wt = Pt − d s .


This equity capital can also be thought of as the balance sheet liquidity of the hedge fund. That is, since

the hedge fund could sell the asset at date t at price Pt and repay ds of debt, the difference Pt − ds reflects

the liquid resources available to the fund.

       For now, I fix the debt level of ds exogenously and moreover assume for simplicity that the debt carries

no interest. I also assume that the debt level is lower than the lowest possible price at date t, so that the

debt can always be fully repaid. That is denote P as the lowest value attained by Pt . Then, ds < P .5

       Suppose that the date t holdings of the fund are subject to a margin constraint. Define θt as holdings of
   4   The only shock in the model is the exogenous liquidation need. The crisis literature often uses this modeling device and

examines how particular features of the economy may lead such a shock to cause a crisis. Diamond and Dybvig (1983), for

example, study how the exogenous liquidity needs of households who are the depositors in a bank can lead to a banking crisis.

There is a deeper question of where these household liquidity needs come from. Eisfeldt (2007) writes a model of a household

whose income process may be different than its desired consumption process. The discrepancy gives rise to a demand for

liquid assets. However, Eisfeldt shows that a realistic calibration of the model does very poorly in generating the magnitude

of liquidity premia on assets that are observed in practice. Faced with a liquid, low return asset, and an illiquid, high return

asset, households time their purchases of illiquid assets to take full advantage of the high return asset without incurring any

of its illiquidity costs. In short, in equilibrium, households’ liquidity needs vanish and there is no demand for the low-return

liquid asset. The result is echoed in other papers in the literature (e.g., Heaton and Lucas, 1996) and suggests that we need

a theory of liquidity demand that does not center on households’ consumption needs. Here are some approaches that seem

promising. Vayanos (2004) presents a model of delegated fund management in which households withdraw funds from a mutual

fund following poor performance. As a result, the mutual fund manager alters his portfolio to favor liquid over illiquid assets, as

household withdrawal states appear more likely. In this approach, there are no “true” liquidity needs in the economy. However,

the inflexibilities that arise in contractual relationships between households and intermediaries create an endogenous source of

liquidity demand. Holmstrom and Tirole (1998) and Eisfeldt and Rampini (2007) study corporate liquidity demand. In their

models, firms face external financing constraints that prevent them from undertaking all good investment opportunities. This

possibility leads them to insure, ex-ante, against those states in which the constraints are most tightly binding. The insurance

can be represented as a demand for liquid assets, which the firm can then use in the needed state.
   5 The debt contract of the model resembles fully secured repo financing.




                                                                5
the fund at date t (after any liquidations). The constraint is that,


                                                             mθt ≤ wt .                                        (1)


The fund must have equity capital commensurate to the size of its asset market position. We may think of

m as a margin requirement per unit of asset holding, so that to hold θt units of the asset, the fund must put

up total margin of mθt .

    Note that since wt is decreasing in Pt , the balance sheet constraint tightens as market prices falls. In

this sense, the constraint reflects an important feature of crises: market conditions and financing conditions

worsen at the same time. The interpretation of m as a margin is close to Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2008)

who develop the margin interpretation of this constraint in depth, discussing the institutional rationales for

a such a margin constraint.

    If we step back from the margins interpretation of constraint (1), it is worth noting that there are other

balance sheet constraints that appear in the literature which are close to (1) and importantly preserve the

relation between the constraint and market prices.

    Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) develop a model in which lenders limit the debtor’s investments based on

pledged collateral. Suppose that the assets of θt can be pledged as collateral to a lender who forwards up to

γθt Pt against these assets (where γ < 1). Then, to purchase θt units of asset, the budget constraint for the

hedge fund is,

                                                        θt Pt ≤ γθt Pt + wt

or, rewriting,

                                                         (1 − γ)Pt θt ≤ wt .                                   (2)

This constraint, if we define m = (1 − γ)Pt , is identical to the constraint (1). There is a price dependence

on m which makes it different. However, in spirit, this constraint also preserves the effect that a reduction

in wt causes θt to fall.6

    He and Krishnamurthy (2008a) develop a model in which an incentive conflict affects the participation of

outside investors in a fund. In their model, a hedge fund manager as part of an optimal contract is required

to put up some of his own wealth into the fund. Denote the manager’s wealth as wt . He and Krishnamurthy
   6 To   see this, substitute wt = Pt − ds into equation (2), to find that,

                                                                           ds
                                                         (1 − γ)θt ≤ 1 −      .
                                                                           Pt

As Pt falls, the right hand side of this equation falls, tightening the constraint and thereby reducing θt .


                                                                  6
derive a contract whereby outside investors are willing to coinvest in the fund, at most, a multiple M times

the manager’s investment in the fund. The coinvestment constraint implies that the total funds that are

under management by the hedge fund must be less than wt +Mwt . With these funds, the manager purchases

θt units of assets. Then the fund’s budget constraint is,


                                                Pt θt ≤ wt (1 + M)


or,
                                                  1
                                                     Pt θt ≤ wt                                                 (3)
                                                 1+M
This constraint is identical to (2), and again preserves the key interaction between wt and the asset position

θt . The fact that there are many contexts in which a constraint similar to (1) arises indicates that the

balance sheet mechanism may be pervasive.


2.2      Price at Date t and Crisis

Let us analyze the margin constraint in (1) further. Define,


                                                     lt = 1 − θt                                                (4)


as the amount of asset liquidated by a hedge fund at date t that does not receive a shock. As noted earlier,

a fund that receives a shock liquidates one unit of the asset. If constraint (1) does not bind then lt = 0,

while if the constraint binds, substitute to find:

                                                        1
                                             lt = 1 +     (ds − Ptω ) .                                         (5)
                                                        m

Liquidations increase as the price falls and leverage (ds ) rises, capturing the balance sheet effect I have alluded

to. The required margin m has two effects on liquidation. First, since ds is always less than P1ω , increasing

m increases liquidations. This is also apparent by inspecting the capital constraint (1) where raising m

tightens the constraint. Second, from (5) we see that raising m decreases the sensitivity of liquidations to

price conditional on the constraint binding. This is also intuitive from (1): if the constraint is binding, a fall

in wt tightens the constraint less when m is large.

      In state ω = G, total liquidations across the hedge funds are,


                                                      LG
                                                       t = lt




                                                          7
(which may be zero if lt = 0). In state ω = B, total liquidations are,

                                                                 1
                                                         LB
                                                          t =      (lt + 1).
                                                                 2

   I assume that there are other potential buyers (“deep pockets”) who can absorb these liquidations. Denote

Pt (L) as the demand function from these buyers. If Lt = 0, the price is Pt (L = 0) = P̄ , where P̄ may be

thought of as the long-term or fundamental value for the asset. If Lt > 0, the price falls below P̄ , indicating

that there are a limited number of such buyers (or they themselves have limited funds).7




                                       Pt


                                       P


                                                                E1


                                                                           E2
                                                                                     Lt = 1 – (Pt - ds)/2m

                                       P                                                                E3

                                                                                                        Lt



                                               Figure 1: Liquidation Equilibria

                 The figure represents the equilibrium determination of PtB , the price in the bad state. Price is

                 on the Y -axis and quantity liquidated on the X-axis. The negatively sloped curve indicates a

                 demand function from the deep-pocket investors. The vertical-then-negatively sloped line is the

                 hedge fund liquidation function, pictured for a low value of ds and a high value of ds .




   Figure 1 illustrates an example of the equilibrium price determination for the B state. The price is on

the Y -axis, while the quantity liquidated is on the X-axis. The demand function from deep-pocket investors
  7 The   price function also satisfies, Pt (L) > P > 0, indicating a positive lowest possible price.


                                                                  8
is represented by the dashed curve. The aggregate liquidation function, LB
                                                                         t is pictured as the vertical-then-

sloped line. The vertical segment reflects the case of exogenous liquidation where one-half of the funds have

to liquidate. If price falls low enough so that lt > 0, then there is also endogenous liquidation, which increases

as the price falls.

   If ds is low, then the only equilibrium is at point E1. The exogenous liquidation shock causes the price

to fall. If ds is large enough, then it is possible for the equilibrium to involve endogenous liquidation – this

is the sloped segment of the liquidation function. In the region in which there is endogenous liquidation, the

increased ds increases liquidation for every given price. Hence the liquidation function shifts upwards, when

ds is larger.

   The figure presents three possible equilibria for the high ds case. The exogenous liquidation equilibrium of

E1 still exists. Equilibrium E2 is a moderate liquidation equilibrium where the price falls and the hedge funds

liquidate some of their holdings. Equilibrium E3 is the severe liquidation equilibrium: low prices and large

liquidations. In both E2 and E3 if agents expect prices to be low, they liquidate positions and push prices

down. Note that of the two liquidation equilibria, E2 is an unstable equilibrium (i.e. any perturbation of

prices or quantities moves the equilibrium to either E1 or E3), while E3 is the stable liquidation equilibrium.

   The “crisis” in the model is represented as equilibrium E2 or E3. In these equilibria, the exogenous

liquidation needs interact with a weak balance sheet (i.e. high pre-existing debt) and lead to endogenous

liquidation and low value of PtB . It should be obvious that in state G, the price is P̄ since lt = 0. It is true

in the model that PtB falls below P̄ even in equilibrium E1, but I will not think of this as a crisis equilibrium

since it is purely due to the exogenous liquidation shock.


2.3    Amplification of Shocks in State B

The model also illustrates an amplification mechanism in the B state. Figure 2 redraws the equilibrium for

an alternative possible liquidation function, where the function is sloped in a manner that there is a single

equilibrium. The rise in ds moves equilibrium from E0 to E1. The comparison between E0 and E1 reveals

that there may be a large change in price and quantity. In this sense, a potentially small change in ds can

lead to an amplified effect on prices and quantities. More generally, around the equilibrium E1, any shock

(i.e. exogenous liquidation) that perturbs either curve has large effects on the equilibrium price and quantity

since both curves are negatively sloped. This latter point underscores how the balance sheet constraint can

lead to an amplification mechanism.


                                                        9
                                   Pt


                                   P



                                                      E0                   Lt = 1 – (Pt - ds)/2m


                                                                                       E1
                                   P
                                                                                                 Lt



                                               Figure 2: Amplification

              The figure represents the equilibrium determination of PtB , the price in the bad state. Price is

              on the Y -axis and quantity liquidated on the X-axis. The negatively sloped curve indicates a

              demand function from the deep-pocket investors. The vertical-then-negatively sloped line is the

              hedge fund liquidation function, pictured for a low value of ds and a high value of ds .




   Finally note that in comparing Figures 1 and 2, the liquidation functions have a different slope. A

given change in price leads to larger change in liquidation in Figure 1 compared to Figure 2. The stronger

liquidation effect leads to multiple equilibria. In this sense, the multiplicity in Figure 1 is just the extreme

case of a large multiplier, and the more generic result of the model is shock amplification.


2.4    Related Amplification Mechanisms

The feedback loop between the asset market and balance sheets illustrated by the model has been explored

in different contexts within the literature.

   As noted earlier, the m of the model can be related to Kiyotaki and Moore’s (1997) analysis of credit cy-


                                                            10
cles. In that paper, a borrower debt-finances an asset purchase, providing an equity downpayment measured
                                                                         1
by m. Thus, the borrower carries leverage proportional to                m   (m is to be thought of as a small number).

A fundamental shock causes asset cash-flows to fall, causing the borrower’s equity to fall more, given high

leverage. The borrower’s investment capacity going forward falls, which leads more of the asset to be owned

by a second-best user. The value of the asset to the second-best user is less than that of the constrained

borrower, causing asset values to fall, reinforcing the spiral. The Kiyotaki and Moore analysis shows how

leverage can lead to a large balance sheet amplifier.

   In Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2008), m is a margin requirement that depends on expected market

price volatility, which, in equilibrium is a function of the actions of the constrained agents. They derive a

crisis equilibrium in which volatility rises, causing m to rise, triggering asset sales and further increases in

volatility. Thus their model shows how margins and volatility are related through what they label to be a

“margin spiral.” Vayanos (2004) presents a related analysis where the investors in a hedge fund withdraw

money if volatility rises. Vayanos’ model is fully dynamic which helps to understand the behavior of a risk

premium on volatility innovations.

   In He and Krishnamurthy (2008ab), m parameterizes an equity capital constraint. It measures how much

equity outside investors are willing to provide to a hedge fund given the hedge fund manager’s own equity

investment in the fund. The hedge fund is assumed to invest in a risky asset that requires the investment

expertise of the hedge fund manager. Moreover, there are only a limited number of hedge fund managers in

the economy. Losses in the hedge fund trigger equity outflows that reduce the amount of capital the manager

controls, causing the hedge fund to sell some assets. When such losses occur across the entire hedge fund

sector, the potential buyers (i.e. other hedge funds) themselves are constrained. They have to buy assets

using less capital. To induce them to do so, asset prices fall and risk premia rise. The He and Krishnamurthy

analysis shows how risk capital and risk premia are related through a balance sheet amplifier.

   There is also work in a multiple asset setting in which the feedback loop can be used to explain contagion

effects. Kyle and Xiong (2001) is representative of this work. The models in this branch of the literature

present the result that a shock in one market tightens balance sheet constraints and causes liquidations and

falling asset prices in another market.8

   Somewhat further from my model, but capturing a similar feedback is the work of Garleanu and Pedersen
  8 In   all of the papers I have mentioned, it is because assets are “marked to market” that there is a feedback loop. Plantin,

Sapra, and Shin (2008) build on this observation in analyzing the costs and benefits of “mark to market” accounting rules.




                                                               11
(2007). They develop a model in which a trader faces a constraint on how large an asset position it can take

that depends on how quickly the trader can expect to sell the asset. Asset trade is modeling in a search

framework. Thus, loosely speaking, m depends on the expected search time for a trader. They show that

it is possible that a tighter m constraint reduces search times in the market, and feeds back into a further

tightening of the m constraint.

   Finally, the literature on banking starting with Diamond and Dybvig (1983) describes how maturity

mismatch can underly an amplification mechanism. For example, Allen and Gale (2005) and Diamond and

Rajan (2005) present models in which a bank is funded by short-term demandable deposits and holds long-

term assets whose price is determined in a market equilibrium. There is a feedback loop between bank runs,

asset liquidation, and lower asset prices.


2.5       Crisis Policy

The multiple liquidation equilibria as pictured in Figure 1 is a coordination failure and can motivate central

bank intervention. There are a number of ways to implement policies to rule out the liquidation equilibria

E2 and E3. Here I discuss three possibilities that have some context in the current crisis.


  1. Asset Purchase: The Federal Reserve has been active in purchasing mortgage-backed securities in 2008

      and 2009, citing unusually depressed market prices.9 Many observers have argued for a more formal

      central bank role as a “market-maker of last resort” in secondary markets (Buiter and Sibert, 2007).

      Caballero and Kurat (2009) recommend that central bank policy should take the form of downside

      insurance. If prices fall below some level, the central bank commits to purchasing assets at that price

      (or insures asset-holders against losses in such a price decline).

      We can see the effect of such a policy within the model. Suppose that the central bank commits to

      purchasing liquidated assets at a price P ∗ just above P E2 . Then, the effective demand function, now

      from both deep-pocket investors and the central bank, has a floor at P ∗, thereby ruling out the E2

      and E3 crisis equilibria.

  2. Discount Window Lending: The Federal Reserve has offered to finance the asset holdings of commercial

      and investment banks at margin requirements far lower than is offered in private-sector transactions.

      The clearest case of this is lending against subprime mortgage-backed securities, where the Discount
  9 See   http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20081125b.htm.




                                                           12
  Window lends at 0.90 to the dollar, while the private market has essentially shut down. Consider again

  the constraint (1). The constraint requires that a hedge fund put up a margin of mθt in order to hold

  θt units of the asset. We can readily interpret this constraint to mean (as I have when discussing the

  model in terms of Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997) that lenders are willing to provide (1 − m) of financing

  collateralized by one unit of the asset if the hedge fund puts up m of its own resources. Thus, in my

  discount window example, the 0.90 translates into an m of 0.10.

  Suppose that the central bank commits through the discount window to offer financing at a margin

  requirement m∗ < m if the price falls below P ∗. Then, in the region where Pt < P ∗ (for P ∗ just above

  P E2 ), endogenous liquidation is positive if,

                                                       1
                                          lt = 1 −       (Pt − ds ) > 0.
                                                      m∗

  In terms of Pt , the price must be low enough that,


                                                   Pt − ds < m∗


  in order to fall into the region of endogenous liquidation and crisis. By lowering m∗ , the policy lowers

  the price below which endogenous liquidation is triggered. Indeed if m∗ = P ∗ −ds , the central bank can

  rule out the crisis equilibria. The policy has the effect of shifting the liquidation function downwards

  in Figure 1.

3. Equity Injection: The Treasury has been active in injecting equity into the financial sector. Suppose

  that the government invests e more capital into hedge funds if Pt < P ∗. The benefit of such policy is

  that it directly relaxes the constraint (1) by raising wt . In the region where such injections take place,

  endogenous liquidation is,
                                                      1
                                           lt = 1 −     (Pt + e − ds ).
                                                      m
  It is apparent that increasing e works exactly like decreasing ds . As in Figure 1, a decrease in ds shifts

  downwards the liquidation function and thereby rules out the crisis equilibria.

  In a more dynamic formulation, one can also consider a debt-for-equity swap. That is imagine a date

  just prior to date t, where the government forces some of the debt-holders to accept equity claims in

  place of their debt claims. This policy reduces ds , so that at date t, the liquidation crisis may be

  avoided. The next section develops a closely related point by considering debt choices at date s.



                                                      13
2.6      Ex-ante Policy

The balance-sheet model opens the door to studying ex-ante policy. That is, the possibility of multiple

equilibria at date t in the model indicates that there is an externality among agents. If we focus on date

s < t, then the ex-ante debt choice affects the strength of the date t externality. As I will show, this

logic implies that generally the date s debt choice of the hedge fund is inefficient. The result is one of the

intellectual underpinnings of prudential capital or liquidity requirements, or more generally, regulation of

the balance sheet liquidity of the financial sector.

   The externality is present in both the multiple equilibria and amplification cases presented. To simplify

exposition, I focus on the amplification case presented in Figure 2, equilibrium E1. With probability 1 − Φ

the G state realizes and the price is P̄ , while with probability Φ the B state realizes and the equilibrium is

at E1.

   I carry out the following experiment. Suppose that a hedge fund increases the date s debt financing of ds

by a small amount and reduces the equity contribution by the same small amount so that the date s asset

position is unchanged. I compute the ex-ante valuation of this change for a single fund and contrast this

number with the same computation when the entire hedge fund class increases ds . As one would conjecture,

both of these valuations are negative since increasing ds increases endogenous liquidations. The interesting

result is that generally the private cost of debt is smaller than the social cost, suggesting that agents may

over-leverage in equilibrium. Note that my experiment is silent on the benefit of debt over equity financing.

Rather than getting into a model of corporate financing to derive this advantage, I will imagine fixing this

benefit and holding it constant across the two computations.

   Consider first the single agent computation. A hedge fund’s expected value from asset holding, given ds

and Ptω , is:

                                   V P = (1 − Φ)P̄ + Φ (1 − Lt )P̄ + Lt PtB
                                                                              


The first term in this expression reflects the payoff in the G state in which case the asset is held to realize

the fundamental value of P̄ . The second term is the payoff when there are Lt assets liquidated in the E1

equilibrium.

   Differentiating this expression, I find:

                                         ∂V P                       ∂Lt
                                                 =     −Φ(P̄ − PtB )
                                         ∂ds                        ∂ds
                                                                B 1
                                                 =     −Φ(P̄ − Pt )    ,                                   (6)
                                                                    2m

                                                        14
where the second line follows from expression (5). The cost of higher leverage is that the asset may be

liquidated early at price PtB rather than held to maturity to yield a payoff of P̄ .

   For the entire hedge fund class, the computation needs to account for the fact that PtB is affected by the

choice of ds :

                                 V S = (1 − Φ)P̄ + Φ (1 − Lt )P̄ + Lt PtB (Lt ) .
                                                                               


Thus,

                                  ∂V S                           1      ∂P B ∂Lt
                                         =      −Φ(P̄ − PtB )      + ΦLt t       .                          (7)
                                  ∂ds                           2m      ∂Lt ∂ds

From Figure 2, we see that increasing ds shifts the liquidation function upwards and lowers PtB (i.e. increases

liquidations). Hence,
                                                   ∂V S   ∂V P
                                                        >      ,
                                                   ∂ds    ∂ds
where these derivatives are negative.

   Intuitively, the social cost of debt is higher than the private cost of debt because a single hedge fund does

not take into account that its increasing ds makes the fund have to liquidate more asset at date t, pushing

prices lower at date t, which in turn results in greater liquidations by other hedge funds. Since the market

price is endogenous at date t to the trades of the hedge funds, the trading externality that is present at date

t translates into a financing externality at date s.

   Thus a central bank policy that restricts date s leverage, or imposes a minimum equity capital require-

ment, can improve welfare. These are common regulations for commercial banks, and some of the recent

policy discussion regards extending these regulations to other parts of the financial sector including hedge

funds and investment banks.

   In more general settings, the externality leads to “underinsurance” against the crisis equilibrium – the

leverage externality of the current model is just one instance of underinsurance. Consider for instance a

model in which there are many states at date t, in which in only some of the states is equilibrium at E1; in

other states the equilibrium is either at P̄ or at the vertical segment of the liquidation function. In such a

model, the optimal policy will call for agents to have more liquid balance sheets (i.e more w, less d) in only

the crisis states. Thus more generally the policy I have outlined concerns the risk management of balance

sheet liquidity. The externality leads agents to make ex-ante asset and liability choices that leaves them with

a less liquid balance sheet in crisis states.




                                                         15
    Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2003) study the underinsurance externality in the context of emerging

market crises and discuss firms’ financing choices over domestic and foreign currency debt arguing that

firms will undervalue the insurance benefit of denominating debt in domestic currency. Gromb and Vayanos

(2002) study a similar externality in a dynamic model of collateral constrained arbitrage and show that the

arbitrageurs trade too early in trying to profit from the arbitrage opportunity. Allen and Gale (2004) discuss

the source of the inefficiency in banking/financial markets models. The inefficiency of equilibrium in these

papers is an example of a more primitive result derived by Geanokoplos and Polemarchakis (1986) on the

generic inefficiency of equilibrium in incomplete markets.

    Finally, strictly speaking if I define welfare in the current model as the sum of hedge fund/household

and deep-pocket investor utility, then since liquidations just leads to transfers, the date s debt choice does

not affect welfare. It is straightforward to consider setting where quantities (i.e. real investment) adjusts

and describe ex-ante policies that are Pareto improving. See Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2003, 2004) or

Lorenzoni (2008) for a full treatment of ex-ante policies.



3     Amplification through Uncertainty

In early 2007, banks were well capitalized and flush with cash. Similar statements of health could be made

about most of the key pieces of the financial sector. In terms of the model just discussed, w − d was high.

From the vantage of the balance sheet liquidation mechanism, these benign initial conditions make it hard

to understand the extent of the recent crisis.

    I argue in this section that an important amplification mechanism in the recent crisis has to do with

lack of knowledge and uncertainty. Investors had rapidly adopted a financial innovation – the credit market

structures – with which they had a limited history. When AAA subprime tranches suffered losses, investors

realized that they had not understood the securitized credit structures they had purchased. Investors were

not surprised that high-risk homeowners defaulted on some loans; rather, they were surprised that such

defaults had a material effect on the values of the most senior of the tranches backed by pools of subprime

mortgages. Moreover, given that a myriad other credit products - not just mortgage – had been structured

in much the same way as subprime investments, investors’ model-uncertainty was across the entire credit

market.

    Thus, the small cash-flow shock of subprime defaults resulted in a large shock to investors’ uncertainty.



                                                      16
Moreover there was contagion across the entire credit market due to investors’ model uncertainty. The

response of investors to their uncertainty was to disengage. Investors went back to the drawing board to

formulate new models. In the meantime, given that they did not have a clear understanding of events, they

took decisions to protect themselves against worst-case scenarios on the risks that they did not understand.

The result of all of this disengagement was a loss of liquidity, with many attendant effects.

   Investors’ dramatic disengagement and emphasis on protecting against a worst-case event is hard to

capture within a standard model of decision making. In the standard model, agents consider all possible

models — for example, models in which AAA tranches are not risky and those in which they are risky

— placing probabilities on each of the possible models, and then making decisions that average over the

models in a Bayesian fashion. The shock (i.e. AAA defaults) leads agents to adjust their model-probabilities,

increasing their weight on the model in which AAA tranches are risky. Of course such a reassessment leads

to lower prices on the AAA tranches. But, it does not lead to disengagement nor the worst-case decision

rules that have been witnessed recently.10

   The main difficult with the standard model in capturing these events is that under the Savage axioms for

decision-making, model uncertainty and risk regarding cash-flows are treated the same way. Indeed, leaving

aside the subprime example that I have given, there is a long tradition in Economics dating back to Knight

(1921) that recognizes that risk and uncertainty provoke different behavioral responses. The point is most

clearly made in the Ellsberg (1961) paradox. Giving people choices between gambles where some gambles

had clearly specified odds, while others did not, Ellsberg found that people consistently avoided the gambles

with unknown odds. In fact, Ellsberg found that one could combine the known and unknown gambles in

ways that showed that people violated the Savage axioms.

   Beginning with Gilboa and Schmeidler (1988), there have been a number of papers aimed at developing

a theory of decision-making that distinguishes between risk and uncertainty and is consistent with the

behavior noted by Ellsberg. Consider a decision problem where a state ω ∈ Ω will be realized tomorrow.

The probability distribution over the states is denoted by π. An agent makes a decision d ∈ D today that

results in utility u(c(ω, d)) in state ω. The standard Expected Utility representation of this decision problem
 10 Routledge   and Zin (2005) argue similarly that the trading-halts (near zero trading volume) and disengagement we observe

during financial crises are an important reason to think that these events are about Knightian uncertainty. Routledge and Zin

develop a model in which uncertainty leads to a trading hald and widening of bid-ask spreads.




                                                             17
is that the agent solves,

                                             max Eπ [u(c(ω, d))].
                                              d∈D

Suppose however that agents are uncertain over the probability distribution π. In particular, suppose that

this uncertainty is that agents only know that π ∈ Π. Then, Gilboa and Schmeidler’s Maximin Expected

Utility representation of Knightian uncertainty aversion is,


                                           max min Eπ [u(c(ω, d))].
                                           d∈D π∈Π


The “min” operator is the key here: agents use a worst-case for the uncertain probabilities π when making

their decision.

   In the subprime example, one may consider that agents had a model π ∈ Π0 in mind at the beginning

of 2007. The default events led them to become uncertain, so that they considered a larger class of models

Π1 (e.g., Π0 ⊂ Π1 ). Although the Gilboa and Schmeidler (1989) theory is not dynamic and therefore does

not explain how agents’ priors are updated, there has been subsequent work in the decision theory literature

that does (see Hanany and Klibanoff, 2007, for discussion of this research).

   This section presents extensions of the model to incorporate Knightian uncertainty, in ways guided by

the recent credit crisis, and shows that the model can well capture recent events. I then turn to a discussion

of some other historical crises in light of the uncertainty model, arguing that the subprime case illustrates a

more general pattern present in other financial crises. Finally, I discuss policy in the uncertainty model and

compare it to policy in the balance sheet liquidation model.


3.1    Crisis at Date s

The uncertainty channel that I explore is a dynamic one: it works through the effects on current decisions

of anticipating future liquidity problems. For the purpose of modeling, I shift the focus of the model from

date t back to date s. Agents at date s are uncertain over outcomes at date t and this may lead to liquidity

problems at date s. That is, date s is no longer a benign initial condition of the previous section’s analysis,

but is the “crisis” date itself. I am centrally interested in agent decisions and the asset price at date s.

   I set ds to zero and remove the leverage channel of the previous section. I instead analyze a new concern

that stems from anticipating liquidity supply problems at date t. Suppose that a “liquidity provider” stands-

by to purchase the asset if investors wish to liquidate at date t. After describing the model, I provide some

examples of such a liquidity provider.


                                                       18
    The liquidity provider has resources of L — cash, or some other liquid medium — to back up the

commitment. My key assumption is that the supply of liquidity is limited. If liquidations are sufficiently

small, the liquidity provider buys at price P̄ . However, if liquidations are large enough, the price falls so

that,
                                                                   Lt
                                                           Pt =       ;
                                                                   L
that is, the L resources are divided evenly to all liquidators.11

    I consider a richer specification of the date t liquidity shocks. There are two classes of hedge funds, A

and B, each in unit mass. Each of these classes may receive an exogenous liquidation shock at date t with

probability φ. Thus, the states at date t are ω ∈ {N o, A, B, AB}, with probabilities {(1 − φ)2 , φ(1 − φ), φ(1 −

φ), φ2 }.

    I assume that L satisfies:

                                                        P̄ < L < 2P̄ .

Thus, in the cases of no or one shock, the intermediary has sufficient L to redeem shares at a price of P̄ ,

while in the case of both shocks, the intermediary redeems shares at the price,

                                                                          L
                                                        PtAB (L) =          .
                                                                          2

Then the price of the asset at date s is Ps = E[Pt ], or,


                                                  Ps = P̄ − (P̄ − L/2)φ2 .                                                  (8)


We can think of (P̄ − L/2)φ2 as the liquidity discount on the asset. The anticipated liquidation shocks leads

to a crisis discount at date s itself. Clearly this discount is decreasing in L.

    Here are some examples of liquidity providers with limited liquidity in the current context. Commercial

banks provide backup commitments to asset-backed facilities; i.e. if investors do not roll over their com-

mercial paper loans to the facility, the commercial bank provides the loan. This type of liquidity provision

arrangement arises both in the asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) market as well as in sponsored in-

vestment vehicles (SIVs) (see Acharya and Schnabl (2009) and Gorton (2008) on commercial banks and their
  11 This   formulation, in terms of a liquidity provider, provides one way to think about the Pt (L) function of the previous

section. That is, the price is the result from selling Lt shares to an investor with total resources of L. Also note that this

formulation differs from the sequential service constraint of Diamond and Dybvig (1983). In that paper, the first liquidators to

arrive at the bank receive more money than later liquidators – in my formulation, all liquidators are treated equally.




                                                              19
SIVs). It follows, as in the model, that if investors forecast that a sponsoring commercial bank will suffer

losses causing L to fall, Ps will fall, corresponding to the rise in spreads on ABCP.

   Consider another example. Hedge funds contract credit lines from commercial banks to provide them

with emergency liquidity. Suppose that the liquidity provider is a commercial bank with limited L. Hedge

funds A and B purchase credit lines to protect against their liquidity shocks. If both hedge funds receive

liquidity shocks, they exhaust the commercial bank’s liquidity, which may cause them to liquidate the asset

in order to offset the liquidity shock. The anticipation of this scenario causes Ps to be low.


3.2    Counterparty Risk

The shock probabilities for each class of investors, A and B, is φ. I have thus far discussed the shocks as if

they are known to be independent, but suppose that the shocks have correlation of ρ, possibly different than

zero. Moreover, suppose that agents are uncertain over the value of ρ, knowing only that ρ ∈ [−1, +1].

   The problem of an investor at date s is to decide how much to pay for the asset, given the agent’s

probability of liquidation and the promised price-support. Uncertainty enters into this decision because the

agent knows that the liquidity provider has limited resources, and if shocks to both A and B occur at the

same time, it will not be able to provide full price support.

   This way of introducing uncertainty captures “counterparty risk.” Will the liquidity provider be able

to deliver on its commitment when needed, or will other shocks deplete its liquidity so that it (partially)

defaults? In the current context, the concern may be will the commercial bank suffer losses on its subprime

investments, causing L to fall. Alternatively, the concern may be that hedge fund A worries that hedge fund

B will suffer losses and need liquidity, depleting the liquidity of a commercial bank that has provided a credit

line to both hedge funds. Note that even if A can accurately assess his own shock probability to be φ, the

modeling is that he may be uncertain about the shock distribution for B. This is another way of thinking

about counterparty risk – i.e., A’s concern is will risks to other agents end up affecting him?

   It is obvious that in the simple setup the “worst-case” for the agents is if ρ = +1. The maximin decision

rule is to purchase the asset assuming that the counterparty risk is the highest. The date s price is then


                                            Ps = P̄ − (P̄ − L/2)φ.                                           (9)


Comparing this expression to that in equation (8), we see that uncertainty magnifies the importance of the

liquidation event from order φ2 to order φ.


                                                      20
3.3        Individual Exposure to Aggregate Risk

In the recent crisis, banks have been unsure of the extent of their own exposure to subprime and related

credit risks. The problem stems from the complexity of these instruments. Different parts of banks have

different risk exposures. Taking stock of all of this to provide an overall risk picture for a bank has taken

time and proven difficult. The problem has been compounded because in many cases the markets for the

relevant assets have become illiquid, making it difficult to measure market values.

    On the other hand, it has been easier to estimate the aggregate losses stemming from subprime defaults.

That is, beginning with the subprime borrowers, one can estimate default probabilities and recovery rates on

default, and provide an upper bound on the subprime losses. Brunnermeier (2008) reports an over-estimate

here of $500 bn. The uncertainty over the credit market structures is what has made it difficult to measure

individual exposures to the aggregate risk.

    Consider the following variation of the model. Suppose that at date t there are only two states, shock

or no-shock (with probabilities φ and 1 − φ). In the shock state, only one of either agents A or B receive

a liquidity shock. Agents are uncertain over which agent will receive the shock. Denote φA and φB as the

shock probabilities for A and B. Since only one of A or B will receive the shock,

                                                           φA + φB = φ

However, suppose that A is uncertain over the value of φA . A only knows that φA ∈ [φ/2 − K, φ/2 + K]

(K ≤ φ/2). The treatment of B is symmetric.12

    It is easy to see how the uncertainty affects the date 0 decision. The worst-case for the agent is if their

shock probability is φ/2 + K. Then the agents price the asset so that,

                                                Ps = P̄ − (P̄ − L/2)(φ/2 + K).

Uncertainty reduces the asset price, increasing the importance of the liquidation state. (I have normalized

things by assuming that the intermediary has L/2 units of liquidity, since liquidity needs have been halved

relative to the previous extension.)
  12 In   this model, one solution to the uncertainty problem is for A and B to cross-insure each other. Both buy insurance against

their own shock state and sell insurance against the others’ shock state. I am assuming that markets are incomplete so that

this trade is not possible. Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2008) develop a related model based on uncertainty over idiosyncratic

exposures to aggregate shocks where markets are complete, yet the equilibrium is qualitatively similar to the one described

here. The main modeling difference is that in Caballero and Krishnamurthy, the model is completely symmetric – there is no

distinction between “A” and “B” types.


                                                                 21
3.4        Wasted Liquidity

Thus far I have discussed how increases in uncertainty lead to a fall in the asset price at date s. This section

discusses a second effect of increases in uncertainty. Increased counterparty risk typically triggers demands

to create a “safer” contract. Agents require more collateral from counterparties. A hedge fund pulls its

business from a weaker bank and recontracts with a safer bank. When triggered by uncertainty, the demand

for safety can lead to wasted liquidity, as I explain next.13

    To fix ideas, let us focus on the hedge fund/credit line interpretation of the model. Moreover, suppose

that the liquidation shocks occur not at time t, but at some time between s and t. If hedge fund A receives

such a shock, it immediately requires resources and draws down its credit line from the liquidity provider.

Hedge fund A may receive a liquidation shock between s and t, and then, possible, hedge fund B may

receive another shock. As before, there are four possible histories at date t; ω ∈ {N o, A, B, AB(BA)} with

probabilities {(1 − φ)2 , φ(1 − φ), φ(1 − φ), φ2 }.

    Since now shocks arrive between s and t, and liquidity is needed at the time the shock arrives, liquidity

must be provided at a time before t. Importantly, the bank cannot wait until time t to decide how much

of its L to allocate to each fund (as in the previous examples). Define the pair (L1 , L2 ) as the liquidity

provided to the first and second shock, respectively. We can imagine that the credit line specifies ex-ante a

pair (L1 , L2 ).

    With this change in the modeling, a credit line arrangement has to be optimized over L1 and L2 , subject

to L1 + L2 = L. But, the sequential shock structure in the economy immediately implies that any optimized

pair (L1 , L2 ) must have the property that

                                                         L1 > L2 .

That is, since conditional on one shock arriving, the probability of the second shock arriving is strictly less

than one, it is better to provide more resources to the first shock than the second shock. Given risk neutrality
                                                               L1              1
in all agents’ preferences, it is optimal to set the ratio     L2   equal to   φ,   unless such a solution involves L1 > P̄ .

If φ is sufficiently low, then the solution is to set L1 = P̄ and L2 = L − P̄ .

    Consider this latter case; φ is sufficiently small that,


                                                 L1 = P̄ > L2 = L − P̄ .


That is, it is optimal to set L1 sufficiently high that the hedge fund with the first shock receives enough
  13 The   section draws heavily from Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2008).



                                                             22
funds to fully absorb its liquidation shock at price P̄ , leaving less than P̄ for a potential second hedge fund

shock.

      The date s asset price is,

                                                 Ps = P̄ − φ2 (P̄ − L/2)2.

As before, there is a liquidity discount.

      Now, suppose we introduce uncertainty into this environment. A is uncertain over the value of φB ,

considering values of φB ∈ [φ − K, φ + K] (K ≤ min[φ, 1 − φ]). The treatment of B is symmetric. That is,

each hedge fund is uncertain over the other fund’s shock probability.

      If K is sufficiently large that the φ + K is close to one, then A will be concerned that B will receive the

liquidity shock first, depleting the bank’s liquidity, leaving too little liquidity for A (i.e. L2 < L1 ). Given

this fear, the price of the asset will be,


                                                  Ps = P̄ − φ(P̄ − L/2)2.


As before, the uncertainty concern reduces the asset price, magnifying the importance of the liquidation

event from order φ2 to order φ.

      There is a new result that emerges from the sequential-shock model. Consider that A (and B) will prefer

the following alternative credit line arrangement: The liquidity provider writes two independent contracts,

each collateralized by L/2 units of liquidity. Contract A promises upto L/2 liquidity to hedge fund A

regardless of what happens to B, and likewise for contract B.14

      This implementation disentangles the A shock from the B shock, removing counterparty risk. Effectively

each hedge fund disengages from the risks that he does not understand and guarantees a known amount of

liquidity for himself. The hedge funds then price the asset at date s requiring only the knowledge of their

own shock-probability. Hence,

                                                   Ps = P̄ − (P̄ − L/2)φ.

For

                                                    P̄ − L/2 < 2P̄ − L,

or,

                                                           L < 2P̄ ,
 14 This   two contract implementation can also be thought of as setting L1 = L2 .




                                                              23
which is the maintained assumption, the liquidity discount is smaller under the over-collaterization arrange-

ment. From a hedge fund’s standpoint, removing counterparty risk through over-collateralization provides a

better outcome than contracting with a liquidity provider and running the risk that the provider will default.

    The over-collateralization scheme though comes at a cost. Part of the liquidity provider’s resources of

L/2 are wasted in the equilibrium because there are states at date t, the ones in which only one of A or

B receive the liquidation shock, in which the liquidity of the non-shock contract goes unused. Investors’

uncertainty causes the effective supply of liquidity to contract.

    Financial crises are not typically about an aggregate shortage of resources, but rather about the distri-

bution of these resources. Resources that could be valuably deployed stay on the sidelines. For instance, in

the recent credit market events, regulators have been concerned that many banks have been hoarding their

liquidity, causing the money market to be illiquid. Uncertainty-induced liquidity waste is one way to model

these outcomes.


3.5        History and Financial Innovation

The preceding extensions illustrate how a rise in Knightian uncertainty can lead to a lack of liquidity.15

My modeling choices in the extensions are guided by the subprime crisis. In this section, I turn to other

historical crisis episodes, interpreting these events in light of the uncertainty model.

    The uncertainty model is most suited to environments where market participants have had a limited

experience in dealing with a particular asset. These circumstances provide fertile ground for “unusual”

events – such as the losses on AAA rated subprime tranches. That is, it is likely that something occurs

that is at odds with market participants’ models of the world. Knightian uncertainty and market illiquidity

follow naturally.

    Consider in particular the following narrative of a financial innovation. A successful financial innovation

is a product that meets a market demand and is therefore taken up widely. In the subprime case, securitized
  15 The   uncertainty model may remind the reader of an adverse selection model. That is, consider a model in which an investor

is worried that he may be purchasing the worst asset in a pool (i.e. the “lemon”). This is similar to the uncertainty averse

agent who is worried about a worst-case scenario when investing. Indeed, some observers have argued that adverse selection

problems have played an important role in the current mortgage crisis. These models are also similar in that the behavior of

agents is due to lack of information. However, an important implication of the uncertainty model is that it suggests that crises

are most likely to arise on new asset classes. An adverse selection problem can arise on any asset, new or old. The history I

review in this section thus seems like better motivation for the uncertainty model.




                                                               24
credit products have come to proliferate the market in the short space of five years. Thus, by its very nature,

a successful financial innovation provides market participants with only a short history and there will be

outcomes that people do not expect. The subprime case clearly fits this narrative, but consider some other

historical episodes.

   In 1970, the Penn Central Railroad defaulted on $82m of prime-rated commercial paper. The commercial

paper market at the time was not as mature as it is today. It had developed rapidly through the 1960s to meet

growing corporate borrowing needs. However, ratings were not fine tuned and back-up liquidity facilities,

which are standard practice today, did not exist. When the default occurred, it spooked money-market

investors. These investors went back to the drawing board to re-evaluate their credit models and ratings

guidelines. The result was disengagement. Investors stopped buying commercial paper completely. Over

time, and with the Fed intervening by encouraging banks to buy commercial paper, the market normalized.

   Contrast this event with the 1997 Mercury Finance - another commercial paper borrower – default on

$500m of paper. The default was much larger in real terms than Penn Central and was similarly a surprise

to the market. In contrast to the Penn Central case, there were no effects on the commercial paper market.

The reason is that it quickly became clear that the default was a case of fraudulent accounting in Mercury

Finance. The uncertainty element that had been important in 1970 was not present.

   Another example to illustrate these points is the stock market crash of October 19, 1987. The new

innovation in this episode was portfolio insurance strategies – that is, the synthetic replication of put options.

This was a strategy that had become increasingly common among investors in this period. However, in 1987

it was unclear how widespread these strategies were and how financial markets would equilibrate in the

presence of portfolio insurance strategies. The speed of the market decline on October 19 took everyone by

surprise. Market makers widened their bid-ask spreads and other key market players pulled out of the market

completely. The result was a lack of liquidity. Many observers point to the option-replication drive sales

into an illiquid market as being an important factor in the market crash. Today, these types of replications

strategies are common and well understood by all market participants.

   My last example is the hedge fund crisis of the fall of 1998. In this scenario, hedge funds were still a

relatively new and opaque financial vehicle. Assets under hedge fund management had grown from around

$10 bn in 1991 to $80 bn in 1997 (still far less than the trillions under management today). In the fall

of 1998, even sophisticated market participants such as Long Term Capital Management were taken by

surprise by the unprecedented comovement of Russian government bond spreads, Brazilian spreads, and



                                                       25
U.S. Treasury bond spreads. The standard risk management models that hedge funds used were no longer

applicable (Scholes, 2000). The result was that financial market participants searched for new models and

made decisions based on worst-case scenarios. We now know that hedge funds had similar strategies and

had filled up a similar asset space, and that this was the source of the correlations. Indeed risk management

strategies post-1998 explicitly account for high-correlation illiquidity events. But at the time neither hedge

funds nor their creditor banks understood this point. The result of this uncertainty was illiquidity and

crisis.16

    The preceding discussion covers three of the major financial crises experienced in the U.S. over the last 50

years.17 Each of these episodes is associated with a financial innovation, and occurred at a time when market

participants had only a limited history within which to understand financial developments, suggesting that

Knightian uncertainty is an important factor in many financial crises.


3.6     Policy

The crisis in the model is at date s. It arises because agents anticipate liquidity problems at date t and

adjust decisions at date s accordingly. Thus effective crisis policies in the model are ones that reduce agents’

fears regarding liquidity problems at date t.

    Here are two policies that have such a flavor. First consider the price-floor policy discussed earlier.
                                                                                                                 L
Suppose that the central bank commits to purchase the asset if Pt falls below some P ∗ >                         2.   This policy

can have a large effect in the uncertainty model. In the counterparty risk example, the increase in Ps due

to such a commitment is proportional to φ(P ∗ − L/2) in the uncertainty model, while in the no-uncertainty

case it is proportional to φ2 (P ∗ − L/2). In the correlation risk example, the increase in Ps is proportional

to φ/2 + K, while in the no-uncertainty case, the increase is proportional to φ/2.

    A lender of last resort policy is also valuable in the uncertainty model. Consider that if the central

bank commits to inject one unit of resources into the liquidity provider (increasing L) in the two-shock state

(where both A and B receive a shock), this commitment can have a large ex-ante effect on the price Ps . The

policy raises Pt in the two-shock state and thereby has an order of magnitude larger effect in the uncertainty

case than the no-uncertainty case. In effect, the central bank delivers resources to the market in the states
  16 While   in 1998 hedge funds were still a novel financial vehicle, the large reported losses of the Amaranth hedge fund in 2006

barely caused a ripple in financial markets.
  17 See Calomiris (1994) on the Penn Central default, Melamed (1998) on the 1987 market crash, Scholes (2000) on the events


of 1998, and Stewart (2002) or McAndrews and Potter (2002) on 9/11.



                                                                 26
that agents are most anxious about, which is why these policies have a large effect.

   In addition to raising Ps , these policies have an effect on liquidity waste. Consider the effect of the central

bank’s promise to add one unit of liquidity to the liquidity provider in the context of the wasted liquidity
                                                                                                              L+1
example I have developed. With such a promise, each agent will be happy with a contract that delivers          2

liquidity to that agent if he needs the liquidity. That is, each hedge fund will compute that the maximum
                                                                                              L+1
credit line that the liquidity provider can promise, without any uncertainty concerns, is      2 .   Now suppose

that only one shock hits the economy and the central bank does not deliver the extra unit of liquidity to the
                                                                                                              1
liquidity provider. Note that even in this case, the hedge fund that is hit by the shock gets an extra        2   of

resources. The central bank’s promised liquidity injection changes decisions and contracts at date s in a way

that liquidity is more efficiently utilized. Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2008) develop this point more fully,

discussing some of the welfare issues that arise when agents’ preference do not satisfy the Savage axioms.

   While crisis policy is similar across the uncertainty and liquidation model, my conjecture is that there is

less scope for ex-ante balance sheet regulation in the model. In the liquidation model, the ex-ante policy is

to reduce leverage. As I have noted, in a more sophisticated model this policy will be about incentivizing

agents to improve risk management. Agents must increase the liquidity of their balance sheets only in the

states of the world where a liquidity event will occur. We then have the following question. Does the central

bank know which states are the uncertainty-crisis states? Consider that the central bank is in the same (or

worse) position as the private sector in forecasting how a crisis on a financial innovation will unfold. Of

course the central bank can require a blunt policy such as carry more liquidity/reduce leverage/reduce asset

positions into all states of the world. But such a policy may be prohibitively costly since it distorts private

sector actions in non-crisis states, and these states may be the more likely ones.

   Instead, the logic of the uncertainty model suggests that regulations to limit the aggregate size of a

financial innovation may be optimal. That is, if the CDO credit structures were as complex as they have

come to be, but were in total only $1 trillion rather than $5 trillion, then the fallout from the uncertainty

shock would have had far less impact on the economy. The model suggests that something analagous to a

Tobin-tax, but directed only at financial innovations, may be an optimal policy response. This conjecture

needs to be investigated more thoroughly.




                                                       27
4     Liquidity in a Crisis

Most observers use the phrase “lack of liquidity” to describe a crisis. Liquidity, unfortunately, is a word used

to describe many different aspects of a crisis. This section discusses the different senses in which there is

lack of liquidity in a crisis within the model I have presented. I relate the discussed notions of liquidity to

the different ways in which liquidity is measured in empirical work.

    In the models I have presented, the asset market is illiquid in the sense that the asset price falls below

the long-run fundamental of P̄ . We can think of the spread P̄ − P as a liquidity discount. For example,

if the underlying asset in the model is a defaultable corporate or mortgage bond, then it easy to translate

P̄ − P into the spread between the yield on the bond and the yield on a Treasury bond. In many bond

market crises, such spreads rise significantly.

    The empirical literature in finance offers other ways to describe asset market liquidity, defined broadly as

the ease with which an asset can be converted into a liquid medium such as cash or bank reserves. In a crisis,

market participants find that their assets lose market liquidity. Potential trading partners are hard to find

(Duffie, Garleanu, and Pedersen, 2005). Market-makers are reluctant to accumulate inventories and provide

immediacy to investors (Weill, 2007). It is common in the market micro-structure literature in finance to

measure market liquidity in terms of bid-ask spreads or price impact measures (Kyle, 1985, O’Hara, 1995,

Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam, 2000) or trading volume and volatility measures (Amihud, 2002, Acharya

and Pedersen, 2005). A number of papers measure the resiliency of an asset – how quickly the asset price

recovers following a large trade – by measuring the negative serial correlation in asset returns (Campbell,

Grossman and Wang, 1993, Pastor and Stambaugh, 2003).18

    Liquidity is also often used to describe the condition of a financial institution’s balance sheet. For example,

L is the cash-on-hand of the liquidity provider; more L means a more liquid balance sheet. Likewise the

equity cushion of w − d for the hedge funds is a measure of the hedge funds’ liquidity. Note that while

market liquidity describes a market equilibrium outcome, balance sheet liquidity describes the condition of a

particular actor in the market.

    Balance sheet liquidity appears commonly in the corporate finance literature. An institution is liquid –

or not liquidity constrained – if its balance sheet contains predominantly cash-like or other easily saleable

assets, and its liabilities are tilted away from a hard-claim like short-term debt, for which default may lead
 18 Pastor   and Stambaugh (2003) further distinguish between market liquidity and market liquidity risk – with the latter

carrying a risk premium on innovations to market liquidity.



                                                              28
to bankruptcy, and towards softer claims like equity. In this instance, balance sheet liquidity is high: if

needed, the institution can repay all of its short-term debt and forestall bankruptcy. Empirical work in

corporate finance often uses cash or leverage to measure balance sheet liquidity (see Kashyap and Stein,

1995, Gatev and Strahan, 2006, Adrian and Shin, 2008ab). A common theme in many accounts of crises is

that institutions own long term assets, funded by short term debt, which results in a balance sheet with low

liquidity (Diamond and Dybvig, 1983).

    A drying-up of liquidity is also used to describe deteriorating external financing conditions. For example,

imagine in the model that m, the margin requirement, was to rise in a crisis. That would mean that the

lenders to the hedge fund raise their margin/collateral requirement and thereby tighten financing terms.

    More broadly, the literature refers to deteriorating external financing conditions as a reduction in funding

liquidity.19 During crises, borrowers face higher costs in the loan market. A hedge fund that wants to

borrow using financial securities as collateral (a “repo agreement”), faces higher collateral requirements

(Brunnermeier and Pedersen, 2008, Gorton, 2008). Adrian and Shin (2008a) document that repo market

volumes fall during crises. Unsecured lending, backed broadly by the balance sheet of an institution, also

becomes more costly to obtain. Volume of issuance in the commercial paper market falls and the spreads

of commercial paper yields over Treasury bill yields rise (Gatev and Strahan, 2006). Firms find it difficult

to rollover or renew lines of funding from banks. Banks also face higher costs of funding. The interbank

market for liquidity does not function smoothly. Many regulators during the recent subprime crisis expressed

concern that there was “gridlock” in the interbank market: banks were unwilling to lend to each other and

instead hoarded their reserves (McAndrews and Potter, 2002).

    Many observers refers to a flight to liquidity during a crisis: Investors scramble for liquidity, exiting

illiquid investments and seeking liquid investments during a crisis. They buy secondary market assets that

have high market liquidity, and prefer to hold portfolios in short-term safe claims such as bank deposits that

are de-facto liquid. Empirical work finds that the price differences between less and more liquid Treasury

bonds, which are otherwise similar, rises during crises (Krishnamurthy, 2001). Price differences between less

liquid corporate bonds, mortgage-backed securities, or Agency bonds and more liquid Treasury bonds also
  19 These   different senses of liquidity I have presented are alternative ways of looking at a particular equilibrium. In some

cases the distinctions may seem contrived. For example, funding liquidity is a term used to describe how easy it is to raise debt

financing against an asset, while market liquidity refers to how easy it is to sell the asset outright. But, debt financing is really

a contingent sale of the asset; the lender owns the asset if the borrower does not repay the loan, so that the lender must think

about the market liquidity of the asset in setting the terms of the loan.




                                                                 29
rise (Longstaff, 2004, Gabaix, Krishnamurthy, and Vigneron, 2007, Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen,

2008).

    The flight to liquidity is assumed in my model in that there is an exogenous liquidity shock suffered by

the hedge funds. One way of interpreting this shock is that the end-investors of the fund are scrambling for

liquidity and pulling their money out of the fund. In Diamond and Dybvig’s (1983) model of bank runs,

some households are assumed to receive a preference shock that motivates them to pull their money from

the bank. There is a deeper question of where these “liquidity” shocks arise; see the lengthy discussion in

Footnote 4.

    The final notion of liquidity that appears both in my model and the literature is macroeconomic or

monetary liquidity. The central bank or Treasury has control over the supply of government-backed assets.

These assets include money and bank reserves provided by the central bank as well as Treasury bonds, which

are among the most liquid assets in the marketplace. During crises, the central bank “supplies” liquidity to

ease the crisis, by for example, expanding the supply of bank reserves. The central bank also directly lends

reserves to commercial or investment banks through the discount window, accepting less liquid assets as

collateral. In the subprime crisis, the Fed has conducted swaps of (less liquid) mortgage-backed securities for

(more liquid) Treasury securities through the Term Securities Lending Facility. One can also see Treasury

Secretary Paulson’s original proposal to buy subprime mortgages in this light. The transaction absorbs less

liquid assets onto the government’s balance sheet, placing more liquid Treasury securities in private hands.

    In the models I have presented, the government can improve outcomes when it absorbs less liquid assets

onto its balance sheet, providing more liquid government-backed assets to the private sector in return. The

various policies I have discussed can all be thought of in this light. For example, injecting equity capital

in the financial sector, or offering loans with lower margin requirements through the discount window are

examples of policies where the government accepts a stake in the distressed asset, providing cash to the

financial sector in return. These transaction enhance the financial sector’s balance sheet liquidity and drives

the benefit to policy.



5     Conclusion

This paper has described two amplifications mechanisms – through balance sheets and through uncertainty –

that operate during liquidity crises and studied the scope for ex-ante and ex-post central bank policies under



                                                      30
each mechanism. I have discussed the two mechanisms separately for pedagogical purposes, but there may

be interesting ways in which they interact. Let me conclude by offering some thoughts on such interaction

effects.

    In the uncertainty model, agents are uncertain over the liquidation shock probabilities of other agents.

I have shown how the balance sheet mechanism creates an endogenous source of liquidation shocks that

depends on the leverage of agents. Suppose that agents are uncertain about the leverage of other agents.

Then, there will be uncertainty over the strength of the balance sheet mechanism – are we in the multiple

equilibrium region or not? – and this can lead to a larger liquidity discount at date s.20

    The interaction may also run in the other direction. In the recent subprime crisis, I have argued that

the initial market dynamic was driven by uncertainty. As investors grappled with the complexities of credit

market instruments, their behavioral response caused asset prices to fall. At some point, balance sheet

constraints became an issue and the effects highlighted by the balance-sheet/asset-price feedback began to

dominate the market.

    Another interaction that seems interesting to study has to do with the informativeness of market prices.

Routledge and Zin (2005) develop a micro-structure model of asset trade in which Knightian uncertainty

leads to a trading halt and widening of bid-ask spreads. Their model suggests that uncertainty inhibits the

process of price discovery, rendering market prices uninformative about fundamental value. This too may

be interestingly related to balance sheet effects. Accounting rules require that banks mark their books to

market prices. However in an environment of uncertainty, where market prices are suspect, such mark-to-

market accounting becomes difficult (see Easley and O’Hara, 2009), and can possibly trigger balance sheet

amplifiers.

    These observations can also shed light on how a market recovers from an uncertainty-driven crisis. It is

clear from the model I have outlined as well as the historical examples I have given that the uncertainty crisis

is only resolved over time as investors understand where they went wrong and formulate new models of the

world; in short, as the uncertainty is resolved. Part of this process involves information revelation. What

mistakes have investors made? Which investors have large exposures to the relevant assets, and how big are

their losses? In an environment where the price discovery mechanism is impaired, information revealed from

accounting statements is hard to interpret. Further, in an environment where balance sheets are weak, a
  20 As   another example, consider that in 1998, the Russian default triggered a liquidation event in hedge-fund dominated

markets. The resulting unexpected correlation among market prices was a surprise to most market participants and triggered

an uncertainty dynamic.



                                                             31
financial institution may be reluctant to realize losses, impeding information revelation. These forces tend to

perpetuate an uncertain environment, which may be one factor behind the duration of the subprime crisis.

Indeed, from this perspective, a benefit of the stress-tests performed by the Treasury in the current crisis is

that they force information revelation and reduce uncertainty.




                                                      32
References

 [1] Acharya, Viral and Lasse Pedersen, 2005, “Asset Pricing with Liquidity Risk,” Journal of Financial

    Economics 77(2), pp. 375-410.

 [2] Acharya, Viral V. and Philipp Schnabl, 2009, “Securitization without risk transfer: The anatomy of

    hidden bank debt,” Working Paper, New York University Stern School of Business.

 [3] Adrian, Tobias and Hyun Song Shin, 2008a, “Liquidity and Leverage,” Federal Reserve Bank of New

    York Staff Reports, 328

 [4] Adrian, Tobias and Hyun Song Shin, 2008b, “Financial Intermediaries, Financial Stability and Monetary

    Policy,” Proceedings of the 2008 Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium at Jackson Hole,

    August 21-23, 2008.

 [5] Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale, 2004, “Financial Intermediaries and Markets,” Econometrica 72,

    1023- 1061.

 [6] Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale, 2005, “From Cash-in-the-Market Pricing to Financial Fragility,”

    Journal of the European Economic Association, 3(2-3), 535-546.

 [7] Amihud, Yacov, 2002, Illiquidity and Stock Returns: Cross-Section and Time-Series Effects, Journal of

    Financial Markets, 5, 31-56.

 [8] Berndt, Antje, Rohan Douglas, Darrell Duffie, Mark Ferguson, and David Schranz, 2004, Measuring

    Default Risk Premia from Default Swap Rates and EDFs, mimeo, Stanford University.

 [9] Blanchard, Olivier, 2009, “The Crisis: Basic Mechanisms, and Appropriate Policies,” working paper,

    MIT.

[10] Buiter, Willem, and Anne Sibert, 2007, “Central Bank as Market Maker of Last Resort,” maverecon.com,

    August 12, 2007.

[11] Brunnermeier, Markus, 2008, “Deciphering the 2007-08 Liquidity and Credit Crunch,” J ournal of Eco-

    nomic Perspectives, forthcoming.

[12] Brunnermeier, Markus and Lasse Pedersen, 2008, “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity,” Review of

    Financial Studies, forthcoming.

                                                   33
[13] Caballero, Ricardo and Pablo Kurat, 2009, “Public-Private Partnerships for Liquidity Provision,” work-

    ing paper, MIT.

[14] Caballero, Ricardo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2003, Excessive dollar debt: Underinsurance and do-

    mestic financial underdevelopment, Journal of Finance 58(2), 867-893.

[15] Caballero, Ricardo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2004, “Smoothing Sudden Stops,” Journal of Economic

    Theory, 119(1), 104-127.

[16] Caballero, Ricardo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2008,“Collective Risk Management in Flight to Quality

    Episode,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

[17] Calomiris, Charles, 1994, “Is the discount window necessary? A Penn Central perspective,” Review,

    Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

[18] Campbell, John, Sanford Grossman and Jiang Wang, 1993, “Trading Volume and Serial Correlation in

    Stock Returns,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, 905-940.

[19] Chordia, Tarun, Richard Roll, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2000, “Commonality in liquidity,” Jour-

    nal of Financial Economics, 56, 3-28.

[20] Diamond, Douglas and Philip Dybvig, 1983, “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity,” Journal

    of Political Economy, 91(5), pp. 401-19.

[21] Diamond, Douglas and Raghuram Rajan, 2005, “Liquidity Shortages and Banking Crises,” Journal of

    Finance 60 (2), pp. 615-647.

[22] Duffie, Darrell, Nicolae Garleanu, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2005, “Over-the-Counter Markets,” Econo-

    metrica 73(6), pp. 1815-1847.

[23] Easley, David and Maureen O’Hara, 2009, “Liquidity and Valuation in an Uncertain World, ” Working

    Paper, Cornell University.

[24] Eisfeldt, Andrea, 2007, “Smoothing with Liquid and Illiquid Assets,” Journal of Monetary Economics,

    pp. 1572-1586.

[25] Eisfeldt, Andrea and Adriano Rampini, 2007, “Financing Shortfalls and the Value of Aggregate Liquid-

    ity,” working paper, Northwestern University.

                                                    34
[26] Ellsberg, Daniel, 1961, “Risk, Ambiguity, and the Savage Axioms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 75,

    pp. 643-669.

[27] Gabaix, Xavier, Arvind Krishnamurthy and Olivier Vigneron, 2007, Limits of Arbitrage: Theory and

    Evidence from the MBS market, Journal of Finance, 62(2), 557-596.

[28] Gatev, Evan, and Phil Strahan, 2006, “Banks’ advantage in hedging liquidity risk: Theory and evidence

    from the commercial paper market,” Journal of Finance 61, 867-892.

[29] Garleanu, Nicolae, and Lasse Pedersen, 2007, “Liquidity and Risk Management,” American Economic

    Review 97, pp. 193-197.

[30] Geanakoplos, John and Heracles Polemarchakis (1986), “Existence, Regularity, and Constrained Sub-

    optimality of Competitive Allocations When the Asset Market is Incomplete,” Chapter in Uncertainty,

    Information and Communication, Essays in honor of Kenneth J. Arrow, Volume III. 65 95.

[31] Gilboa, Itzak and David Schmeidler, 1989, “Maxmin expected utility with non-unique priors,” Journal

    of Mathematical Economics 18, 141-153.

[32] Gorton, Gary, 2008, “The Panic of 2007,” in “Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial System,”

    Proceedings of the 2008 Jackson Hole Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, forthcoming.

[33] Gromb, Denis and Dimitri Vayanos, 2002, “Equilibrium and Welfare in Markets with Financially Con-

    strained Arbitrageurs,” Journal of Financial Economics 66, 361-407.

[34] Hanany, Eran, and Peter Klibanoff, 2007,“Updating Smooth Ambiguity Preferences,” Kellogg School of

    Management, working paper.

[35] He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2008a, “A Model of Capital and Crises,” working paper,

    Northwestern University.

[36] He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2008b, “Intermediary Asset Pricing,” working paper, North-

    western University.

[37] Heaton, John and Deborah Lucas, 1996, “Evaluating the Effects of Incomplete Markets on Risk Sharing

    and Asset Pricing,” Journal of Political Economy 104, 443-487.




                                                   35
[38] Holmstrom, Bengt and Jean Tirole, 1998, “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity,” Journal of Political

    Economy, 106(1), 1-40.

[39] Kashyap, Anil and Stein, Jeremy, 1995. “The impact of monetary policy on bank balance sheets,”

    Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 42, pp 151-195.

[40] Kiyotaki, Nobu and John Moore, 1997, “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 105 (2), 211-248.

[41] Knight, Frank, 1921, Risk, Uncertainty and Profit (Houghton Mifflin, Boston).

[42] Krishnamurthy, Arvind, 2002, “The Bond/Old-Bond Spread,” Journal of Financial Economics, 66(2),

    463-506.

[43] Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2007, “The Aggregate Demand for Treasury

    Debt,” working paper, Northwestern University.

[44] Kyle, Albert, 1985, “Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading,” Econometrica 53(6), pp. 1315-1335.

[45] Kyle, Albert and Wei Xiong, 2001, “Contagion as a Wealth Effect,” Journal of Finance 56, 1401-1440.

[46] Longstaff, Francis, 2004, “The Flight-To-Liquidity Premium in U.S. Treasury Bond Prices,” Journal of

    Business, 77, 511-526.

[47] Lorenzoni, Guido, 2008, “Inefficient Credit Booms,” Review of Economic Studies 75(3), 809-833.

[48] McAndrews, Jamie, and Simon Potter, 2002, “The liquidity effcts of the events of September 11, 2001,”

    Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review 8, 59-79.

[49] Melamed, Leo, 1998, Comments to Nicholas Brady’s: The crash, the problems exposed, and the reme-

    dies, in Robert E. Litan and Anthony M. Santomero, eds.: Brookings-Wharton Papers on Financial

    Services (The Brookings Institution Press).

[50] O’Hara, Maureen, 1995, Market Microstructure Theory, (Blackwell Publishers, Cambridge, Mass..

[51] Pastor, Lubos and Robert Stambaugh, 2003, Liquidity Risk and Expected Stock Returns, Journal of

    Political Economy, 111, 642-685.

[52] Plantin, Guillaume, Haresh Sapra, and Hyun Song Shin, 2008, “Marking to Market: Panacea or Pan-

    doras Box?,” Journal of Accounting Research, 46, 435 460.


                                                    36
[53] Routledge, Bryan, and Stanley Zin, 2004, “Model uncertainty and liquidity,” NBER Working paper #

    8683.

[54] Scholes, Myron, 2000, “Crisis and Risk Management,” American Economic Review 90(2), 17-21.

[55] Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, “The Limits of Arbitrage,” Journal of Finance 36, 35-55.

[56] Stewart Jr., Jamie, 2002, Challenges to the payments System following September 11, Remarks by First

    Vice President Jamie B. Stewart, Jr. before the Bankers’ Association for Finance and Trade.

[57] Vayanos, Dimitri, 2004, “Flight to Quality, Flight to Liquidity, and the Pricing of Risk,” working paper,

    LSE.

[58] Weill, Pierre-Olivier, 2007, “Leaning Against the Wind,” Review of Economic Studies 74, pp. 1329-1354.




                                                     37
