NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE RESOLUTION OF THE
LABOR SCARCITY PARADOX

John A. James

Jonathan S. Skinner

Working Paper No.

l5O4

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 198)4

The authors are indebted to Paul David, Stanley Engerman, Bill
Kennedy, Ken Sokoloff and Jeffrey Williamson, as well as to
economic history seminar participants at Columbia, Harvard, and
Yale for very useful criticisms and coniments. James Mackie provided diligent research assistance, while the Midas Muffler waiting
room proved to offer a fertile working environment. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Development
of the American Economy. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1504
November 1984

The Resolution of the Labor Scarcity Paradox
ABSTRACT

This paper reconciles the apparently contradictory evidence about
American and British technology in the first half of the nineteenth century.
Past studIes have focused on the writings of a number of distinguished British

engineers, who toured the United States during the 1850s and comented
extensively on the highly mechanized state of the manufacturing sector. Other
studies, however, have marshalled evidence that the interest rate was higher,

and the aggregate manufacturing capital stock was lower, in the United States

relative to Britain. We resolve this paradox by noting that British engineers
were most impressed by only a few industries which relied on skilled

workers. Using the 1849 Census of Manufactures, we estimate separate
production functions for the skilled sector and for the remaining, less

skilled manufacturing sector. We find strong relative complementarity between
capital and natural resources in the skilled sector, and relative

substitutability between skilled labor and capital. Using these parameters in
a computable general equilibrium model of the U.S. and British economies
indicates greater capital intensity (or labor scarcity) in the skilled

manufacturing sector, but overall capital scarcity and higher interest rates,
in the U.S. relative to Britain.

John A. James
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, Va. 22901
(804) 924-3525

Jonathan S. Skinner
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, Va. 22901
(804) 924-6749

A paradox, a paradox,
A Most ingenious paradox! —— The Pirates of Penzance

The influence of factor endowments on the pattern and rate of economic

growth is an important theme in economic history and development. In particular, the rapid expansion of nineteenth—century American manufacturing has
often been attributed, both by observers at the time and later economic

historians, to the influence of abundant land. Most notably, Rothbarth (1946)
and I-Iabakkuk (1962) have argued that the land to labor ratio, which was higher

in the U.S. than in Britain, raised real wages in American agriculture,

thereby increasing the cost of labor to manufacturers. In turn, the higher
wage rate in American manufacturing induced entrepreneurs to substitute
capital for the dearer labor, leading to a pattern of growth more capital
intensive and more rapid than that in Britain.

Temin (1966) formalized the Rothbarth—Habakkuk hypothesis in a simple

neoclassical model of agricultural and manufacturing production. While abundant land in agriculture implied relative labor scarcity in manufacturing, the
model also implied that the U.S. interest rate should have been lower than in

Britain. Because the U.S. interest rate in the antebellum period was in fact
greater than the British rate, he concluded that U.S. had to have been capital

scarce rather than labor scarce in manufacturing. That is, although labor may
ha.ve been dear, capital was even dearer.

This anomalous conclusion provoked a vigorous and enduring controversy.
Those supporting the Rothbarth—Habakkuk view sought to restore the labor
scarcity result in more general models in which all three factors of production (labor, capital, and land) are used in the production of both outputs

(Fogel, 1967; Summers and Clarke, 1980).1 On the other hand, Field (1983a, b)

2

has marshalled empirical evidence that the U.S. capital—labor ratio was far

below that in Britain. None of these studies, however, provides a plausible
explanation for all of the empirical regularities in the antebellum economy.
The problem with the capital scarcity view of U.S. manufacturing is that one

must simply ignore the reports of many distinguished visitorsto the antebellum United States who found in a number of industries mechanization more
advanced than in Britain, at that time supposedly the most technically devel-

oped and capital rich country in the world. The difficulty with the labor
scarcity hypothesis is that it cannot explain the strong historical evidence
that the aggregate capital—labor ratio in manufacturing was lower, and that
the interest rate was higher, in the United States.
This paper reconciles these apparent contradictions and resolves the long
debate on labor scarcity by distinguishing between manufacturing industries

using primarily skilled workers and those relying on unskilled workers. We
show that the technological compatibility between capital and natural resources in the skilled manufacturing sector provided sufficient incentives to

substitute capital and inexpensive natural resources for skilled labor. This
strong technological complementarity did not extend to the less skilled sector, however; thus while the skilled sector was relatively capital intensive,
the less skilled sector (accounting for the great majority of total

manufacturing output), and hence the aggregate manufacturing sector, was

relatively capital scarce. Furthermore, this argument is not just limited to
demonstrating that such a theoretical structure could have generated the labor
scarcity result, but is instead firmly based on historical evidence from the
antebellum period.

The British engineers who visited the United States picked out only a few
industries, primarily those employing skilled workers, for special notice.

3

Matching those industries with 1850 Census of Manufactures classifications
allows the estimation of two separate production functions, one for "skilled"

industries, and one for "unskilled" industries. These parameters are then
instituted in a three good, four factor computable general equilibrium model
based on the agricultural and manufacturing sectors of the U.S. economy in

1849. The model is strictly neoclassical, dealing with aggregated factors of
production taken to be the same across countries. Even if the machines, the
nature of skilled labor, and capital—labor relations in manufacturing differed
between America and Britain (e.g., Lazonick, 1981), such complications are not
essential to explaining the labor scarcity result and reconciling the

empirical evidence. However, the standard assumption is made that the United
States and Britain faced the same technology so that the same range of
productive techniques was available to entrepreneurs in both countries (Temin,

1966, pp. 283—284; Habakkuk, p. 215).2 Therefore the model is also
appropriate for Britain as well. By substituting British factor endowments
and then simulating the model, we generate factor returns and factor input

ratios. This simulation allows us to compare the capital—labor ratios in
America and Britain for both skilled and unskilled manufacturing. While
direct quantitative evidence on these factor intensities has not been

available, our model allows us to generate the relevant capital—labor ratios

necessary to resolve the labor scarcity controversy. It is shown that the
model produces results consistent both with the labor scarcity result and with
the existing body of empirical evidence on factor and product prices in both
countries.

Section I surveys the labor scarcity debate, one of the longest lived in

economic history. The model is specified and the data are described in

4

Section II, while the results are presented in Section III. Section IV surnma—
rizes the conclusions.

I.

A number of foreign visitors during the first half of the nineteenth
century commented on the sophistication of equipment in some sectors of U.S.

manufacturing (Habakkuk, 1962, pp. 4—5; David, 1975, pp. 20—21). However, it
was

the American displays at the Crystal Palace Exhibition of 1851 that pro-

duced widespread surprise at the state of mechanization in so primitive a
country.

Many Britons were forced to admit grudgingly, "Yankees are no longer

to be ridiculed, much less despised" (Rodgers, p. 89). Two years later, a
group of English commissioners, charged with reporting on exhibits at the New
York Exhibition and not finding it open on time, took the opportunity instead

to tour about and report on the state of American technology. The Special
Reports to parliament of George Wallis and Joseph Whitworth, as well as the
report of the Select Committee on Small Arms (1854), together constituted

perhaps the most detailed and reliable description available of antebellum

U.S. manufacturing. Joseph Whitworth, one of the most prominent engineers of
his time and the world's foremost manufacturer of machine tools (Rosenberg,
1969, pp. 1, 20), confirmed earlier reports on the advanced state of
mechanization when he characterized U.S. production by "the application of
machinery wherever it has been practicable to manufacturers" (Rosenberg, 1969,
p. 388) and argued that this was the consequence of the scarcity and high
costs of labor (p. 28).

S

The effects of this higher labor cost, linked by Rothbarth (1946) and
Habakkuk (1962) to land abundance, was reformulated by Temin (1966) who
attempted to distinguish between the problems of technological practice and

technological progress. Land abundance implied first that U.S. manufacturing
was capital intensive relative to Britain, the "more machines" argument, and
secondly that technical progress was both more rapid and more labor saving in

the U.S., the "better machines" argument. The former he formalized in a
simple two—sector general equilibrium model which, as we have noted, led him

to conclude that U.S. manufacturing must have been capital scarce relative to
Britain because of the higher U.S. interest rate.

Fogel (1967) showed that it was possible to restore the labor scarcity
result in a more complex model based on Cobb—Douglas production functions with

three inputs in each sector rather than the two Temin had specified.3 Elaborating on this model, Summers and Clarke (1980) dropped the Temin assumption

that the U.S. was a small country with prices fixed internationally, instead

allowing for less than perfectly elastic product demand. They solved the
model analytically, obtaining the result that labor scarcity in manufacturing
depends on the elasticity of demand for agricultural products --

if

demand

were inelastic then land abundance, by lowering agricultural prices and wages,
would lead to an increased supply of manufacturing labor, thus contradicting

the Rothbarth-Habakkuk hypothesis.4 However, with perfect international
capital mobility so that the interest rate is taken as given, the case which
they argue was historically relevant, the traditional labor scarcity result
was restored.

Other writers have objected to the restrictions of the Cobb-Douglas
production specification, which was imposed a priori without supporting evi-

dence. Most importantly, Rosenberg (1969, 1977) has emphasized the role of

6

natural resource abundance in biasing U.S. manufacturing towards capital-

intensive techniques. In an ambitious attempt to reintegrate the "more machines" and "better machines" components of the Rothbarth—Habakkuk thesis,
David (1975) developed a theory of induced technical change which linked local

technical change and the process of factor substitution. The abundance of
land or natural resources, taken to have been a relative complement with
capital, encouraged the choice of capital—intensive techniques in manufac-

turing. In turn, the higher wage—rental ratio induced a pattern of localized
technical change such that globally technical progress was more rapid and more
labor—saving in the U.S.
Finally, in contrast to the succession of post—Temjri models attempting to

reestablish the Rothbarth—Habakkuk proposition, Field (1983a, b) argued that
American manufacturing was substantially less capital intensive than in

Britain. He supported this argument by comparing estimates of aggregate
capital stock in the respectiv.e countries for the mid-nineteenth century, and

by documenting the speed and intensity of capital operation by U.S.

entrepreneurs. A two-sector, two-region linear Leontief model was then
developed to demonstrate that a higher interest/profit rate would lead a
country such as the U.S. to adopt lower manufacturing capital intensity.

The debate on labor scarcity has not been conclusive. The focus has
shifted from Habakkuk's documentation of American and British technological
development in the nineteenth century to the formulation of general theoret—

ical models assessing the impact of land abundance. There has been too much
concentration on comparing alternative models in which labor scarcity may or
may not occur and too little concentration on empirical evidence to determine

the appropriate model. Indeed, one of the remarkable features of this long
controversy is how little attention has been paid to the "facts".5 At a

7

minimum, a model explaining (or refuting) the labor scarcity result should be
consistent with the following three empirical regularities for the antebellum
period (which are supported in Appendix A):

1. The United States was relatively capital intensive compared with
Britain only in a limited number of manufacturing industries. These
industries in general required primarily skilled rather than unskilled labor.

2. Both the nominal and the real wage rate were higher in the United
States than In

Britain.

3. Both the nominal and the real cost of capital were higher in the
United States than in Britain.

None of the models in the labor scarcity literature can reconcile all

three of these empirical regularities. Temin greatly clarified the issue by
analyzing it in a general equilibrium framework, but by forcing it into the
Procrustean framework of a very simple model, he ignored Habakkuk's fundamental distinction that U.S. manufacturing was relatively more capital intensive

in only a few industries.6 "In many and probably in most fields of technology
the English were still far ahead of the Americans at this date r1850's]" (p.

5). Why should U.S. entrepreneurs have adopted sophisticated, capital—
intensive technologies relative to Britain in some industries but not in

others? Previous models could not answer such a question because they have
concentrated on demonstrating that the U.S. manufacturing sector as a whole
was labor scarce (or capital scarce), controverting stylized empirical fact

number i. Moreover, previous models have been unable to reconcile general

8

labor scarcity with other empirical evidence. While accepting higher U.S.
interest rates, Temin (1966) and Field (1983a, b) were forced to deny the

United States was relatively labor scarce in manufacturing at all. Summers
and Clarke (1980) supported U.S. relative labor scarcity but only by claiming
that real interest rates were lower in the United States.
The model presented in the following section, while limiting itself to
the "more machines" and not the "better machines" problem, will be more firmly
rooted in Habakkuk's original specification of the labor scarcity phenomenon

by distinguishing between two sectors of manufacturing. Because the extensively mechanized industries were also characterized by more highly skilled
workers, we characterize those industries as the skilled manufacturing sector;

the other industries comprise the unskilled sector.8 Our resolution of the
labor scarcity controversy is based on the relative complementarity of capital
and natural resources inputs in the skilled sector.
The complementarity of cheap natural resources provided sufficient incentive for the entrepreneur to invest in the capital—intensive production

process, despite the high interest rates. Thus we can potentially reconcile
the seemingly contradictory evidence that although some industries displayed
ingenuity in the use of labor—saving equipment, the manufacturing sector as a
whole was capital scarce.

II.

The economy of the antebellum United States is characterized here by a

model with three sectors of production ——

skilled

manufacturing, unskilled

manufacturing, and agricultural goods, and four inputs ——

skilled

labor,

9

unskilled labor, capital, and land. Other sectors extraneous to the argument,

services most importantly, are omitted for simplicity.9 Aggregate factor
endowments are fixed, although some intersectoral factor mobility is allowed.
Industries were classed in the skilled sector if they were noted,
primarily by Whitworth and Wallis but also by Habakkuk, as being particularly

intensive in the use of machinery relative to Britain. These include
agricultural implements, furniture and other woodwork, machinery, hardware,
nails, clocks, and guns (Habakkuk, p. 4; Rosenberg, 1969, pp. 170—73, 216,

269, 273, 342, 343). We exclude two manufacturing industries, boots and shoes
and cotton textiles, from our group of skilled industries because the
mechanized production processes involving skilled workers were only a small
proportion of the total industry (see Appendix A for documentation).
We refer to this grouping of industries as the skilled sector, since
their distinctive feature appears to have been a much greater reliance on

skilled labor.'° In 1849, these industries constituted only 7 percent of
total manufacturing output. The 1849 annual wage in these firms was $329,
substantially greater than the $237 average in all other manufacturing and in
large part an indication of a greater concentration of skilled workers.11
Note, however, that the inclusion of an industry in this group depends on

whether it was singled out by Habakkuk and others as being particularly
capital intensive relative to Britain, and not simply on whether industry

wages were above the norm. The skilled sector is taken to hire only skilled
workers, and the unskilled sector is assumed to hire only unskilled workers,
although both labor classes are assumed equally productive in the agricultural
sector..

12

Although the industries displaying advanced machinery were held to have
been more capital intensive than their British counterparts, they were not

10

especially capital intensive compared with U.S. manufacturing as a whole. In
1849, the capital—labor ratio for this group was $539 as compared with $559
for all other manufacturing.

The skilled and unskilled manufacturing sectors are assumed to have
Mukerji (1962) multifactor production functions that allow the partial elasti-

cities of substitution to differ between pairs of factors. Skilled labor,
capital, and agricultural resources are inputs tn the production of skilled
manufacturing products, while unskilled labor, capital, and agricultural products enter .the unskilled sector. The Mukerji generalization of the CES
function holds the ratio of partial elasticities constant over the entire

range of production. This can be seen by referring to the skilled and unskilled manufacturing production functions in Table I, which, after some
manipulation, indicate that

1+p
im

where

is

1+j

i,j,m =

1,2,3,

I

j

m

is the partial elasticity of substitution between factors i and j,

the constant production function parameter. The equation holds for the

unskilled sector as well. The function is not necessarily linear homogeneous,
though by appropriate scaling of p or Pu, local linear homogeneity can be
assured. Note also that the production function will generally not be
homothetic; thus at constant factor prices, scale effects will cause differing

proportions of inputs to be used. Agricultural production, by which we mean
natural resources processed sufficiently for use either in the manufacturing
sector or for consumption, is taken to be a constant return to scale Cobb—

Douglas function with inputs labor, capital, and farmland. This function is
also shown in Table I.

11

The existence of tariffs and transport costs restricted, within a wide

range of prices, US, and British trading possibilities. The ratio of duties
to the value of dutiable imports was over 25 percent in 1850 and higher than
60 percent during some years in the antebellum period; in addition, Habakkuk
found evidence of wholesale markups between 100-150 percent for imported

products (p. 41). The existence of tariffs and transportation costs are,
moreover, necessary to the labor scarcity argument, since they allowed both
higher interest rates and wages in the United States, given the shared

technology.13 There was, however, significant importation of raw materials
into Britain, accounting for 40 percent of total domestic agricultural con-

sumption in 1851. To a lesser extent the Americans exported agricultural
output as well. We therefore include an exogenous import and export sector,
in which consumption expenditures on the agricultural product diverge from

output value by the amount of the fixed import or export flow. In order to
maintain trade balance, an equal value of manufacturing goods is either imported (in the U.S.) or exported (in Britain), with the composition of skilled
and unskilled manufacturing imports and exports determined by the proportional

output in each domestic sector. The demand functions, taken to be independent
of the income distribution, are derived from a CES utility function and are

also presented in Table i.14,15
We next consider the estimation of parameters for the equations specified

in Table I. The nonlinearity of the Mukerji specification precluded robust
estimation of manufacturing production functions, so we adopted the less
restrictive translog production function instead to provide estimates of the

partial elasticities. The translog function was not chosen for the
simulations, however, because of its potential for wandering into non—economic
regions given counterfactual endowments, as well as for potential changes in

12

the relative substitution elasticities. Using data from the 1850 Census of
Manufactures, the production function with constant returns to scale and
symmetry imposed was estimated concurrently with two cost share equations for

efficiency (Burgess, 1975, p. 110). The estimating equations may be written
as:

in

in Q -

in

A =

-

in

K ln A +

1/2(in

A)2] +

-

in

L in A +

1/2(in

A)2]

aK

in(K/A) +

(L/A) +YKK(1/2(ln K)2

LL112

L)2

K ln L

(la)

inKinA-lnLlnA+(lnA)2]+a0+UQ
MK = aK +

KK

ln(K/A) + 1KL in(L/A) + UK

ML = aL +

KL

ln(K/A) + 1LL ln(L/A) + UL

(ib)

where K, L, and A denote capital, iabor, and agricultural inputs, and MK and
ML are the cost shares of capitai and iabor, in the respective manufacturing

production functions. The parameters satisfy the restrictions
= 1

= 0

,

i,j

=

K,L,A

.

(2)

The equations were estimated for skilled manufacturing on a pooled set of

state data by industry and for unskilled manufacturing on data by state using
the iterative Zeliner-efficient estimator which yields asymptotic maximum
likelihood estimates independent of the choice of which share equations are

included.16 The regression results are reported in Table II; remaining parameters may be computed using the symmetry and constant returns to scale
restrictions in (2).
The Allen partial elasticities of substitution implied by the estimated
parameters and evaluated at the sample means are presented in Table iii.17

The substitution elasticity between capital and labor in unskilled manufác—
turing is less than one, a result consistent with other estimates for

13

nineteenth-century u.S. manufacturing (Abraniovitz and David, 1973, P. 434;

James, 1981, p. 383). Moreover, the pattern of inequalities in unskilled

manufacturing, KL < KA < LA' is consistent with that for all U.S. manufacturing in the late nineteenth century (James, 1981, P. 383).
Skilled labor appears to have been a better substitute for capital than
unskilled labor was, although this inference involves comparing parameters

from different production functions. This result is at variance with some
more recent evidence that skilled labor and capital are relative complements

(Griliches, j969; Hamermesh and Grant, 1979, p. 537),18 Substitution between
agricultural goods (or natural resources) and both skilled and unskilled labor
is elastic, with unskilled labor being the better substitute.

Most importantly for the issues in this paper, the estimates here support
the David-Rosenberg emphasis on the nonseparability of the production function

between capital and natural resources. In both skilled and unskilled
manufacturing, capital and natural resources are relative

complements, KA < LA' although the relative complementarity is much stronger
in the skilled sector. An increase in natural resource inputs implies an
increase in the capital—labor ratio In both sectors (holding factor prices
constant), with a greater increase in the skilled sector.

The influence of natural resource abundance in influencing the choice of

technique in American manufacturing has often been noted. Whitworth himself,
for example, observed that in the U.S., "In no branch of manufacture does the
application of labour-saving machinery produce by simple means more important
results than in the working of wood" (Rosenberg, 1969, p. 343)., Ames and
Rosenberg (1968) extend the argument in discussing the Springfield Armory.
There is evidence which suggests that the woodworking
machines which were popular in America and neglected in
England were not only labour—saving but also wasteful of
wood. Their adoption in America and neglect in England

14

may be attributable not only —- or perhaps not even primarily —— to differences in the capital—labor ratios in
the two countries but rather to the cheapness of wood in
the United States and its high price in England. (p. 831)
Numerous examples of resource—using tendencies, particularly with lumber, in
American manufacturing are cited in Rosenberg (1972) and Hindle (1975).
Probably more significant than the use of greater physical amounts of raw
materials in production was the fact that Mierican resource abundance made for

cheaper energy. Christensen (1981) shows that the cost of both water and
steam power per horsepower was lower in•the United States than in Britain in

the late antebellum period. The combination of inexpensive energy (i.e.,
natural resources) and the strong relative complementarity between natural
resources and capital must have provided a strong impetus for the U.S. skilled
manufacturing sector to substitute away from labor and into capital.'9
Finally, the factor shares in the Cobb—Douglas agricultural production
function are taken from Fogel and Engerman (1974, pp. 131—133) for antebellum
agriculture, and are also presented in Table iii.20
Habakkuk emphasized that industrial labor was not only dearer in the

United States, but also that its supply was less elastic (pp. 1546). We
therefore specify an intersectoral labor supply function of the following
form.

Ls =

WS ' 1
(3)

LA

Err]

13

LA

where Ls, Lu, and LA are labor supplied in skilled manufacturing, unskilled
manufacturing, and agriculture, respectively, W1, i = S,U,A is the sector—

specific wage, and y,

i

=

O,,..,3

are parameters of the labor supply

15

function. Noting that the total supply of labor is assumed fixed, so that
LA + Lu + L5 =

L,

we can write the partial elasticity of manufacturing and

agricultural labor supply as

I
=

y1(1

-

L
L
CU =

3(l

—

—u.)

(4)

L

+
- TiLs —

L
where CS,

and CA

represent the skilled, unskilled, and agricultural

elasticities, respectively.

The labor supply elasticity in each manufacturing sector is thus roughly
proportional to

or y; by varying these parameters, we can impose either

greater or less labor mobility in the U.S. economy. Initially we assume a
labor supply elasticity in the United States equal to .30, a value consistent

with recent estimates for less developed countries (Mundlak, 1978). Capital,
on the other hand, is assumed fixed within the agricultural and aggregate
manufacturing sectors; because we know from historical evidence their actual

levels, we need not simulate them. However, capital is assumed perfectly
mobile between the skilled and unskilled manufacturing sectors.

This model is more Habakkukian In spirit even if not in all exact details

than previous contributions to the labor scarcity debate. However it is still
too simple to reflect the richness of detail and multitudes of conjectures in

Habakkuk's analysis. For example, we neglect the effects of differences in
the price of capital goods across countries,2' as well as those resulting from
greater imperfections in the U.S. labor and product markets, on the choice of

16

capital and labor inputs. Habakkuk argued that average profit rates in U.S.
manufacturing may have been high relative to Britain due to local monopoly
power, but that these profit rates would have fallen rapidly as the firm
expanded past local product and labor markets, thereby providing American
entrepreneurs with Incentives for capital—intensive production methods (pp.

68—69, 74, 75). While these possible discontinuities in the rate of return
are not captured in our model, It is nevertheless complex enough to reconcile
the stylized facts of labor scarcity.

Table IV presents the historical evidence on outputs of and factor inputs
employed in the agricultural and manufacturing sectors of the United States

and Great Britain in the mid—nineteenth century. This date is an appropriate
one to compare the choice of technique in the U.S. and Britain because the

U.S. labor scarcity question has generally been regarded as an issue only for
the antebellum period and it began to be widely discussed in the 1850's.
Quite conveniently, our stylized Mierican and British economies are very

similar in size at this time, both in terms of total output and output per

capita. As would be expected, however, factor endowments differed
dramatically. While the labor forces in each country were quite similar,
there was more than twice as much capital in Britain (Field, 1983a), but only
one—seventh the land.22

Finally, consider the foreign sector. The British economy imported
substantial quantities of natural resource products. The total value of
agricultural products (or natural resources) imported into the U.K. minus re—

exports was £72.5 million for 1851 (Mitchell, 1962, pp. 291—292, 297).23
While there are no data for imports into Great Britain alone in 1851, we note
that in 1829, the destination of 98 percent of total U.K. imports was Britain

(Mitchell, 1962, pp. 289—292). Assuming a similar ratio held in 1851 and

17

converting the figures into dollars at the par exchange rate, we find that

imports into Britain amounted to $354.2 million. Similarly, total exports of
crude materials plus crude foodstuffs from the U.S. in 1849 was $94 million.

The computable general equilibrium model is solved in two steps. In the
first stage, the more detailed U.S. data on output, factor supply, and prices

are used to normalize the production and demand functions. For example, using
observed output, capital stock, labor, and agricultural inputs in skilled

manufacturing, along with estimates of the three elasticities of substitution
from Table 1.11, we can solve for p1. p2, p3, 81, 82, and 83. The final

parameter PS IS then set to ensure local linear homogeneity. Prices of all
final outputs are normalized to $1.00 in the initial U.S. equilibrium.
The second stage is to calculate the new equilibrium in Great Britain.

We substitute factor endowments in Britain for those of the U.S., and allow
the model to iterate from the production side to the consumption side and back
again until a fixed point set of equilibrium factor and product prices are

realized. Solving the model in this way ensures local stability, although the
model may fail to converge for extreme parameters or odd starting values. The
model determines sectoral output in Great Britain. Together with the relative
prices determined within the structure of the simulation, and actual British
GNP in 1851, $1297.7 million, we can express British price levels relative to
the U.S. numeraire prices.

III

The simulation results comparing prices and the capital-labor ratio in

the U.S. and Britain are presented in Table V. The factor returns for the

18

United States based on 1849 historical statistics are presented in the first

column. Recall that these returns are not the outcome of the simulation, but
rather are parameters implied by empirical evidence on factor income,

aggregate employment, and capital stock. The skilled wage exceeds the
unskilled wage by 39 percent ($329/$237), while the agricultural wage is

substantially less than the unskilled wage. Although the annual unskilled
wage rate of $237 compares favorably with the $253 wage constructed from evidence on daily wages by Abbott (1905) and Goldin and Sokoloff (1982),24 the
agricultural, wage is well below estimates of average yearly earnings of farm

laborers. However, the problem here is not so much with the model as a more
fundamental difficulty in reconciling agricultural wages implied by national
product account factor shares with those observed directly; even if all the
proceeds of farm output were paid only to workers, they would have still

received a wage of only $183.25 The gross return to fixed capital in the
skilled and unskilled manufacturing sector, as specified in the 1850 Census,

was 0.45 and 0.43, respectively, figures consistent with higher real interest

and depreciation rates in the U.S. (see Appendix A). The divergence between
the return to manufacturing capital and the lower return to agricultural

capital suggests substantial capital immobility. Although our model does not
allow for capital mobility between agricultural and manufacturing sectors,
expanding the definition of manufacturing capital to include working capital
virtually eliminates the divergence in returns.26

The results in brackets in Table V for the return to capital and for the
capital—labor ratio reflect the adjustment of manufacturing capital to
equalize factor returns, because.in the initial equilibrium the return to
capital in U.S. skilled manufacturing was slightly higher than in unskilled

manufacturing. The parameter values in the brackets therefore correspond to a

19

redistribution of capital within the U.S. manufacturing sector to ensure equal
return to capital.

Results for the simulated British economy are described in the second

column of Table V. First note that relative prices and wages between Britain
and the U.S. appear quite reasonable. The prices of skilled and unskilled
manufacturing goods are, respectively, 0.45 and 0.70, while the price of

agricultural products is one-third higher than in the United States. The
British prices of manufactured products are substantially lower than U.S.
prices,

but not so low as to preclude the existence of an American manufac-

turing industry once tariffs and transport costs are taken into account. As

noted earlier, the US.
costs

tariff

in

1850 averaged

about 25

percent.

Transport

for raw cotton over the 1840-1860 period, computed by comparing New York

and Liverpool prices, averaged about 15 percent of the final price (Mitchell,
1962, p. 491; U.S. Historical Statistics, 1975, p. 209), and such a figure for
shipping a bulk, easily transportable commodity is most probably a lower bound

for transport costs in general. The protection of distance would have sufficiently insulated the U.S. skilled manufacturing sector.27
The British wages in skilled and unskilled manufacturing, $207 and $149,

respectively, are 63 percent of the corresponding American wages, a ratio
slightly less than the 76 percent calculated in the Appendix from historical

sources but nevertheless quite close. The British agricultural wage is
calculated to be 26 percent below the unskilled wage rate, which agrees
closely with the reported difference of 32 percent by Lindert and Williamson

(1983). The essential equality of British and U.S. agricultural wages, while
in accord with Adams (1970), understates the true difference in earnings
between U.S. and British agriculture, because the self—employed American

20

farmer also received a return to land in contrast with British tenant farmers
and laborers.28
The return to capital in Britain is shown to be 0.16 in both manufac-

turing sectors, and 0.07 in the agricultural sector. The return to capital in
British manufacturing in the model is very similar to the independently cal-

culated return on capital of 0.18 (see Appendix A). There is less information
on the return to capital in British agriculture, but again it seems reasonable
that the simulation indicates a lower relative return to the agricultural
capital.

Note that the model shows the United States to have been more capital

intensive in the skilled manufacturing sector. The British capital-labor
ratio in skilled manufacturing, $413 per worker, is lower than the $539 figure
in the United States, while in the unskilled sector there was far less capital

per worker in the U.S., $559 versus $848 in Britain. The U.S. was more
capital intensive than Britain in the skilled sector, even though overall in

manufacturing it was less capital intensive. Thus the labor scarcity
hypothesis is confirmed by the simulation model.

One might ask next: What are the effects of a change in the stock of
land on the capital—labor ratio in manufacturing? Not surprisingly, the
outcome of the simulation model parallels the results from the simpler Temin

two—sector model. Setting the elasticity of labor supply in the agricultural
sector equal to 0.3 (and y1 =
13) allows workers limited mobility between

agricultural and manufacturing sectors. The U.S. case (with equal factor
returns, so that the capital—labor ratios are in brackets) in the first column
of Table V can be compared with the third column, which calculates equilibrium
prices and quantities for the counterfactual U.S., differing from the actual
U.S. only by having a land endowment equal to that of Britain.

Reading from

21

column 3 to 1, we can see that increasing the land endowment increases both
the wage of the agricultural worker and the capital—labor ratio in both

manufacturing sectors. Such a result is not surprising; the introduction of
an increased endowment of land leads to rising farm wages and migration from

manufacturing into farming. Because the capital stock in all of manufacturing
is fixed, the new manufacturing capital—labor ratio is higher, so the return

to capital falls. In agriculture, on the other hand, the migration of labor
along with increased land causes a rise in the return to capital (allowing for
capital mobi.lity would reduce the magnitude of these effects). While the
direction of change is not surprising, the minimal response of factor prices

to the seven—fold increase in land is noteworthy. The physical marginal
product of agricultural capital and labor rises significantly in response to

the abundant land. However, the lower price of agricultural output, caused by
the increased agricultural production, reduces the wage and the return to
capital (i.e., the value of the marginal product) sufficiently that the
magnitude of changes in the factor returns are quite small (Summers and

Clarke, 1980). Varying only the land endowment in this model therefore
provides results which are consistent with previous studies, but cannot

explain the historical pattern of lower overall capital intensity, a higher
real interest rate, and a higher skilled manufacturing capital—labor ratio in
the United States relative to Britain.

A central focus of Habakkuk was the role of labor supply in explaining

American labor scarcity. Not only was industrial labor dearer in the United
States but its supply was also less elastic, owing to the barriers of high

information and transportation costs (p. 15—16). In addition, he felt that
the relative abundance of skilled workers in the U.S. led to a lower skilled

wage differential. The combination of a lower elasticity of unskilled labor

22

supply, a lower perceived skilled wage differential, and complementarity
between skilled labor and capital led Habakkuk to believe that manufacturers
would substitute out of labor and into more capital—intensive production

techniques (p. 25). We can separate the argument into two parts.
Consider first the role of the industrial labor supply elasticity. The
U.S. manufacturing sector, having to attract workers from farming, would have
been more likely to substitute capital for labor when the sector expanded,
since the labor intensive methods would have led to yet higher wages. We can
evaluate the. influence of the labor supply elasticity in our simulation model

by posing the question: How would increasing the manufacturing labor supply
elasticities from our assumed value of 0.3 to the counterfactual case of 0.6

have affected the capital—labor ratio in American manufacturing?29 The
detailed results are presented in the first two columns of Table VIII in

Appendix B. As might be expected, increasing the labor supply elasticity
reduces the capital—labor ratio in both sectors of manufacturing; the higher

manufacturing wages attract more workers into manufacturing, thereby driving

down the capital-labor ratios. That is, if United States labor had been more
mobile (as Habakkuk suggested the British were), the manufacturing capital—

labor ratio would have been much lower. Conversely, if the labor supply
elasticity were significantly lower in the U.S. than in Britain, the labor
scarcity result would have been more likely to occur, strengthening the

simulation results in Table V. Note however that varying the labor supply
elasticity affects the capital—labor ratio levels in both manufacturing
sectors and thus cannot account for U.S. labor scarcity in only the skilled

sector. Differences across countries in labor supply elasticity alone are
neither necessary nor sufficient for a complete resolution to the labor
scarcity debate.

23

The second part of Habakkuk's argument distinguishes between skilled and

unskilled workers. He suggests that a lower skilled wage differential in the
United States created an incentive for manufacturers to substitute skilled
workers and capital (taken to have been relative complements) for the inelas-.

tically supplied unskilled workers. This argument clearly relies on the
specification of the manufacturing production function, which in his implicit
model has three inputs ——

skilled

workers, unskilled workers, and capital.

Our simulation model cannot address this issue directly, because we separate

manufacturing into two sectors and include natural resources in both produc-

tion functions. There are at least a couple of reasons however to suggest
that such an explanation for labor scarcity is not correct. First, our
regression results (Table II) suggest it was the skilled artisans who were the
relative substitutes for capital, while unskilled workers were relative

complements in U.S. manufacturing. Andrew Ure, for example, observed that
early mechanization involved the substitution of unskilled for skilled labor
(Habakkuk, 1962, pp. 153—154). As a result, imposing a higher British skill
differential reduces, rather than augments, the labor scarcity result in the

simulation model. A 20 percentage point greater skill differential in Britain
(following Habakkuk), presented in the third column of Table VIII, increased

the capital—labor ratio in the skilled sector so much as to eliminate the

labor scarcity result. Second, evidence cited in Appendix A suggests the
skill differential in the United States was no different from that in

Britain. Williamson and Lindert (1980, p. 67) argue that while the skill
premium was lower in the U.S. early in the nineteenth century, it increased

rapidly relative to Britain over the antebellum period. This trend in the
skill differential is consistent with a trend toward labor scarcity in U.S.
skilled manufacturing before the Civil War.

24

Neither factor emphasized by Habakkuk, neither the more inelastic industrial labor supply in the U.S. nor the lower skilled wage differential, is
necessary for the greater capital intensity in U.S. skilled manufacturing as

compared with Britain. Indeed, a lower U.S. skill premium weakens rather than
strengthens the labor scarcity result.

Sumers and Clarke (1980) placed considerable importance on the
elasticity of demand for agricultural products. Therefore let us consider the
sensitivity of the labor scarcity result to changes in the elasticity of
substitution. parameter in the utility function. Reducing the substitution

elasticity parameter ()

to

0.75 (corresponding to a price elasticity of the

demand for food equal to 0.32 in the U.S.) indicates a capital-labor ratio of
$474 in skilled British manufacturing, still below the U.S. ratio of $539.
Increasing

to 3.0 (corresponding to a price elasticity of food equal to 1.26

in the U.S.) weakens the labor scarcity result only slightly, to an implied

value for the British skilled sector of $449. The choice of the proper elasticity of substitution in demand is more important for the implied prices and

wages in the simulation model. Either extremely high or extremely low values
of

lead to unreasonably low values for British skilled manufacturing product

and agricultural wages.

If it was neither land abundance alone, or differences in labor supply

elasticities, then what does generate the labor scarcity result? Consider
next simulations which compare the U.S. with Britain, rather than the U.S.

with a counterfactual IJ.S. economy. The simulations indicate that the
production function parameters are essential to obtaining the labor scarcity

result. If the manufacturing sectors are characterized by a CES production
function that imposes an equal elasticity of substitution among the three

factors, then the hypothesis of labor scarcity is rejected. When the common

25

elasticity of substitution is set to either 0.8 or 1.2, the capital-labor
ratios in British skilled manufacturing was $773 and $791, respectively, as

compared with the U.S. figure of $539. The David—Rosenberg hypothesis
emphasized that capital and natural resources were relative complements in

production. Even though they were in fact relative complements in both the
skilled and unskilled manufacturing sectors, It was the much lower partial
elasticity in the skilled sector (.81 as compared with 1.71 in the unskilled
sector) that dictated the pattern of factor intensity reversal between the

U.S. and Brl.tain. Increasing this parameter to the unskilled value, 1.71, for
example, would imply capital scarcity in both U.S. manufacturing sectors.

(The detailed simulation results appear In Table IX of Appendix B). The
results are somewhat sensitive to the partial elasticity of substitution

between labor and capital in skilled industry as well. Reducing its value
from 1.34 to the equivalent value in unskilled industy, .85, makes Britain
slightly more capital intensive in skilled manufacturing (Table IX).

The necessary conditions for the labor scarcity result therefore depend
on the production parameters in the two manufacturing sectors as well as the

pattern of factor endowments. In particular, the relative complementarity
between capital and natural resources, and the relative substitutability
between capital and labor in the skilled sector, combined with abundant land
and scarce capital, led to the curious phenomenon of labor scarcity.

Iv.

This paper reconciles the apparently contradictory evidence about
American and British technology in the first half of the nineteenth century

26

and in doing so resolves the labor scarcity paradox. A computable general
equilibrium model for the U.S. and Britain at mid—century is developed which
follows Habakkuk's emphasis on distinguishing between skilled and unskilled

labor. Using empirically estimated production function parameters and actual
factor endowments, the simulation model supports the existence of limited

labor scarcity in the United States. The sector of manufacturing employing
primarily skilled workers is shown to have been more capital intensive than in
Britain, even though British manufacturing as a whole was much more capital

intensive than in the U.S. Finally, both the real and nominal wage rates and
the return to capital are shown to have been higher in America, a result also
consistent with the empirical evidence.

While the model does indicate that an increase in land promotes labor
scarcity in manufacturing, Temin (1971, p. 177) proves to be ultimately

correct when he observed, "If labor was scarce in American manufacturing this
was not due simply to an abundance of land.1' In addition to land abundance,
the labor scarcity result appears also to depend on differences in production

technology between skilled and unskilled manufacturing. The arguments by
David and by Rosenberg emphasizing the relative complementarity of capital and

natural resources in production are confirmed here. Land or natural resource
abundance in the U.S. promoted greater capital intensity in manufacturing not
so much through its impact on the labor market but rather through its relative

complementarity with capital.3° Moreover, relative complementarity alone is
not sufficient for the labor scarcity result; as we have seen from the skilled
manufacturing sector, capital and natural resources must be strong relative

complements. If the manufacturing production functions are simplified to CES,
the labor scarcity result is lost.

27

In similar fashion, the capital—labor substitution relationship is also

important for the labor scarcity result. If skilled labor is no closer substitution for capital in production than unskilled labor, the greater capital

intensity in U.S. skilled manufacturing disappears. On the other hand, industrial labor supply differences between the U.S. and Britain, emphasized by

Habakkuk, are not crucial to resolving the labor scarcity problem. A more
inelastic supply of labor to manufacturing in the U.S., ceteris paribus, does
lead to greater capital intensity In both the skilled and unskilled sectors in

the model. However, such differences in labor supply elasticities are unlikely to explain labor scarcity by themselves, because they cannot account

for the lower overall capital intensity in the United States. The other
aspect of Habakkuk's argument, that lower skilled wage differentials in the
United States induced the substitution of skilled labor and capital for the
dearer and less elastically supplied unskilled labor, contradicts the

empirical evidence. First, from the Appendix, the skill differential in the
U.S. was no lower than in Britain, at least by the 1850's; second, from the
estimated production functions, skilled, rather than unskilled, labor was more

substitutable with capital. Thus, if the supply of industrial labor had been
more inelastic in the U.S. than in Britain, this would reinforce the labor
scarcity result, but in itself is neither a necessary nor sufficient condition.

A final unanswered question is, why did labor scarcity go away during the

second half of the nineteenth century? Habakkuk (pp. 126—127) suggested that
increased immigration after the 1840's, by increasing the elasticity of the

labor supply, reduced the incentive for capital—intensive investments. If the
labor supply factors were not central to the labor scarcity result during the
first half of the nineteenth century, it seems implausible that they could

28

account for its demise during the latter half. Similarly, Habakkuk's argument
that technical progress in the second half of the century became more
dependent on the autonomous advance of scientific knowledge is neither well
documented nor particularly convincing (pp. 194—195).
The ultimate reason why labor scarcity in U.S. manufacturing ceased to be
noteworthy was that the United States as a whole had, by the end of the nine-

teenth century, became more capital Intensive than Britain. The American
capital—labor ratio in manufacturing, which in 1880 had been slightly below
that in Britain, was by 1890 well above the British ratio ($1535 versus $1176)

(Feinstein, 1972, p. 199; U.S. Census Office, 19O2).3132 The same pattern
held for specific industries; the capital labor ratio in U.S. textiles was
$1963 in 1899, while in U.K. textiles the ratio was, in 1907, $811 at par

exchange rates. Similarly, the 1899 U.S. ratio in iron and steel was about
four times the corresponding 1907 U.K. figure (Great Britain Board of Trade,
1913, pp. 13, 35; U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1913).
The disappearance of the labor scarcity question may well have been a

consequence of localized technical change. David (1975), as we have noted,
suggested that the relative complementarity of natural resources (or land) and
capital led to a pattern of local technical change in the United States that

was globally both more rapid and more labor—saving. James (1981) lent support
to this hypothesis by showing that natural resources and capital were indeed
relative complements in U.S. manufacturing for every Census year between 1850

and 1900. Thus the more rapid U.S. rate of labor—saving technical change
lowered the relative price of capital goods during the middle part of the
nineteenth century, thereby accelerating the rate of capital formation in the

manufacturing sector (David, 1977). Just as the combination of land abundance
and the complementarity between natural resources and capital induced the

29

antebellum skilled manufacturing sector to choose more capital—intensive
techniques, the "more machines" story, it also promoted rapid and labor—saving
technical change in the manufacturing sector, or the Thetter machines"

story. It was the second half of the Rothbarth—Habakkuk argument, that localized innovation in both the skilled and unskilled manufacturing sector led

to greater use of capital, that ultimately can explain the disappearance of
the labor scarcity question by the end of the nineteenth century.

30

APPENDIX A

Extent of Labor Scarcity
The group of manufacturing industries which we Identify in Section II as
having been more highly mechanized in the United States by the 1850's are
essentially those identified by Habakkuk (p. 4) as areas of American

superiority. Since Habakkuk's classification in turn was based primarily on
the Special .Reports of Wallis and Whitworth (Rosenberg, 1969), we consider in

this section some of their observations on the state of American technology.
It should be reemphasized that they were much more than casual observers;

Whitworth in particular was impressively, perhaps uniquely, qualified to

compare American with British prodUctive techniques. Even though the evidence
here is impressionistic without quantified data to support it, it still
clearly must be reckoned with.

The commissioners most probably focused on best practice or state of the

art technology in the various American industries. That these best practice
firms were not atypical representations is suggested by the fact that higher
depreciation rates (see later in the Appendix) insured that a greater proportion of U.S. factories were of recent vintage.

American woodworking superiority in the antebellum period was well recog-

nized (Rosenberg, 1969, pp. 32-49). Whitworth commented extensively on this
industry ("In no branch of manufacture does the application of labor—saving
machinery produce by simple means more important results than in the working
of wood" p. 343), and singled out agricultural equipment in particular
("Labour—saving machines are most successfully employed in the manufacture of

agricultural implements" p. 343). In addition, Wallis was impressed by the

31

manufacture of decorative furniture (".

• .exterisjve

establishments exist for

the production of decorative furniture, the constructive portions being for
the most part prepared by machinery by which labour is greatly economised.
." p. 294).

The industries distinguished by their mechanization were not limited to

woodworking. In metal working and hardware, Wallls declared that "In the
finish of the joints great accuracy is obtained, whilst the labour of filing
is saved by grinding the joints of the hinges on stones adapted to the pur-

pose, and driven by steam—power" (p. 269). Whitworth was similarly impressed
with clock manufacturing:

the superiority obtained in this particular manufacture is not owing
to any local advantage; on the contrary, labour and materials are more
expensive than in the countries to which the exportations are made; it
is to be ascribed solely to the enterprise and energy of the manufacturer, and his judicious employment of machinery (p. 342; see also
Church, 1975).

Finally, the speed in which skilled gun workers could assemble a rifle
stock, as carefully timed and documented by Whitworth (pp. 364—65), so impressed the British government that they sent a committee on machinery back to
the United States, ultimately to purchase more than 12000 in muzzle arid stock
producing machines.

Not all industries awed the visiting British. Wallis, for example, did
not find particularly advanced technology in industries such as silk (".

. .in

the growth and preparation of the raw material, the United States have re-

ceded, and not advanced, since 1844" p. 232). Similarly, production techniques In leather and furs differed "in no important point with the methods

used, or the purposes to which it is applied in Europe." (p. 235) Aside from
these clearly negative comments, many descriptions of the individual

32

industries simply lacked any specific comparison of production methods in the
two countries; these industries included woolens and worsted, flax and hemp,
carpets, wearing apparel and standard clothes, and glass and porcelain.
We have excluded a few minor industries from our skilled sector, despite
mention by the British observers, primarily because there was no straightforward match between the 1850 Census classification and the observers' cate-

gory. These include fishing net manufacture (p. 353), printing and dyeing (p.
246) and type foundries in printing and publishing (p. 240).
Two maj.or industries, boots and shoes and cotton textiles, are sometimes

identified as having been more mechanized in the United States. While it was
likely that they were more capital intensive than other U.S. manufacturing
industries (Sokoloff, 1984a), we omit them from our specified group of industries because American superiority was limited to only particular production

processes and was not characteristic of the industry as a whole. In boots and
shoes, lasts were cut using advanced techniques (p. 171), but the rest of the

industry was unmechanized. Of the 11,639 workers employed during the late
1840's by the Lynn, Massachusetts shoe companies, only 321 cut the shoes from

the stock. The remainder were either female binders (7,170), male cordwainers
(4,132) or management. Owing to the aggregated nature of the data, we there-.
fore include the machine operators with the sewers and cordwainers in the
unskilled sector.

Cotton textiles was another industry meriting notice by the British

visitors. Wallis noted that ".

. .it

is often found that a weaver will attend

to four looms in the United States, who, in the same quality of work, would

attend to only two in England." (p. 216) His observations are supported by a
comparison of looms per total factory workers in Lowell and the United Kingdom.

In 1850, the ratio of looms to workers in Lowell was 1.07, while the

33

ratio in the U.K. was only 0.76 (Rosenberg, 1969, pp. 308—309; Mitchell, 1962,

pp. 185, 187). However, the ratio of spindles to total factory workers was
far lower in Lowell, 34.5, than the ratio in the U.K. as a whole, 63.4
although this difference may be an overstatement if British factories were

less integrated than those in Lowell. Aside from differences in machine speed
and quality of fabric, it seems clear that Lowell mills were relatively labor

saving in looms, but labor abundant in spinning. Because weaving cannot be
separated from spinning operations in the data, however, we are also forced to
consider the, aggregated industry, cotton textiles, as an unskilled industry.

It is interesting to note that wages for weavers (who were predominately
women) were between 18 and 48 percent higher than spinners in 1839—41 (Ware,
1931, p. 239), suggesting that the factories most readily substituted capital
for the skilled, rather than unskilled workers.
Wage Differences

Extensive impressionistic and quantitative evidence indicates that unskilled wages were substantially higher in the United States than in Great

Britain during the first half of the nineteenth century. Habakkuk (p. 11)
cites estimates that wages were a third to a half higher, while Adams found
that American skilled workers earned 37 percent more, and unskilled workers 25

percent more than equivalent British workers in 1830. A comparison of 1850
nonagricultural unskilled wage in Britain and the United States (Williamson
and Lindert, 1983, p. 4; Abbott, 1905) indicates that the British wage, valued
at the par exchange rate, was only .76 of the American rate.

Moreover, real wages, nominal wages adjusted by a cost of living index,

were even higher in the United States. The cost of living was lower in the
United States because of the lower prices for agricultural goods, which at
that time constituted the bulk of expenditures in a workingman's budget.

34

Using U.S. weights from Hoover's consumer price index (1960, pp. 177-178) and
U.S. and British price data from the Aldrich Report (the British Sauerbeck
price series is reprinted there), we calculate that the real wage for a nonagricultural worker in 1850 was 32 percent higher in the United States.33
With the much more aggregated budget shares for British laborers reported in
Lindert and Williamson (1983) the U.S. real wage advantage rises to 52 percent.34 'Thus even though nominal wage rates in agriculture were similar in

the U.S. and England (Adams, 1970), the real wage in the U.S. would have been
higher because of the lower cost-of—living index.

There is a substantial amount of evidence on the wage differential for

male skilled workers in Britain and America. Rosenberg (1967), citing
Zachariah Allen's 1829 manual The Science of Mechanics, found that carpenters
in the United States were paid 45 percent, and masons 65 percent above un-

skilled workers. The differential for most machine workers was not as significant; between 25 and 42 percent for ordinary machine makers, and 50 to 75
percent for best machine makers.

Zabler (1974) used evidence from iron firms in eastern Pennsylvania to

suggest that the skill differential in the U.S. was not particulary high. He
found a wage premium for skilled workers of only .15 during the period 1821—

1830. The problem common to all of these comparisons, that a large number of
occupations must be divided into only two categories, is most evident in this

study since the "skilled" miller earned less than the "unskilled" filler in 26

of the 31 years recorded. Adams (1970), on the other hand, reported higher
wage differentials of .73 in Philadelphia during the year 1830.
Williamson and Lindert (1980) found a substantial surge in the relative

price of skilled workers from 1816 to 1856. While machinists received a 50
percent differential in 1825, it grew to 90 percent during the 1840's and rose

35

to 120 percent in the 1850*s (p. 68). The wage differential reached its
maximum during the period 1850—60; "(T)he wage structure in urban Massachu-

setts in the 1850's was almost exactly like that in England in 1825. It never
again reached that height in the three decades that followed." (p. 71)
Using a detailed compilation of army reports listing wages paid to civilians at military forts, Margo and Villaflor (1983) examined the skill diffe-

rential paid to carpenters in the United States. The premium was highest in
the southern New England states, where, for example, carpenters in Boston and
New London were paid 73 percent more than laborers during the late 1830s and
1840s, but the difference declined substantially in the frontier areas.
According to their regression results, carpenters in the west north central
region in 1840 were paid only 20 percent more than the unskilled workers.
Finally, we present evidence on skilled daily wages, by detailed occupa-

tional group, from the Aldrich Report. The averages were weighted by the
number of employees reported as receiving the wage, and we calculate the skill
differential by comparing these wages with the average wage for male unskilled
workers (also using the Aldrich Report) computed by Abbott (1905). Table VI

presents the results; building trades were paid a premium of 65 percent during
1850—51, printing trades a premium of 75 percent, and engineers a difference
of 66 percent.

The evidence suggests then that the skill differential in the United
States during the early 1850's was approximately 60 to 70 percent in the
eastern states, and somewhat lower in frontier regions.

Furthermore, the

decade of the 1850's probably represented a peak in the wage differential
relative to preceding and later years (although see Margo and Villaflor,

1983). We next turn to studies of British skill differentials.

36

Zachariah Allen observed British wage rates during the 1820's as well.
The wages of carpenters were 31 percent above wages of common laborers, while
both masons and ordinary machine makers were paid a 49 percent differential.
The greatest wage premium was paid to best machine makers, who earned 2.62
times the unskilled wage rate (Adams, 1970).

The most detailed source of British relative wage data from around 1850
comes from the series of papers by Bowley and Wood, and compiled by Lindert

and Williamson (1983). Table VI also includes these estimates of British
wages. Ship.builders were paid a premium of 43 percent over nonagricultural
unskilled workers, while building trades and printing trades received a dif-

ferential of 48 and 67 percent, respectively. Although these two skill premiums are less than the corresponding American values from Table VI, engineers
in Great Britain enjoyed a substantially larger differential than engineers in

the U.S. On average, however, the skill differential is about 60 percent, a
value quite similar to the premium in the U.S.

There is little evidence from the late 1840's and 1850's therefore to
support Habakkuk's proposition that the skill differential was less in the

United States than in Britain (pp. 21—22). For both countries, the differential was approximately 60 or 70 percent in the more industrialized regions.

Since the skill differential was widening in the antebellum United States, the
1850's then may have been the first decade during which the United States had
caught up to Britain in terms of the skill differential.

On the basis of this evidence, we constrain the skill differential in
British manufacturing to be equal to that in U.S. manufacturing in the

model. The premium actually used, 39 percent, represents the difference
between average annual wages in U.S. skilled and unskilled manufacturing. On
the one hand this figure may overstate the "true" skill differential between

37

male workers because of the greater proportion of lower—paid women and
children in the unskilled manufacturing labor force;35 on the other hand,
however, the differential may be understated because many of the "skilled"
industries employed less skilled workers and assistants as well, while the
"unskilled" industries similarly employed some skilled workers and foremen.
Although we adopt 39 percent as our aggregate skill differential, the pattern
of results is not particularly sensitive to the level of the skill
differential.

Capital Cost Differences

The real return to capital in manufacturing was significantly higher in
the United States than in Great Britain during the first half of the nineteenth century —- both gross and net, on average, and at the margin. The
average gross return to fixed capital in U.S. manufacturing in 1849 calculated
from Census data was 42.6 percent as compared with 18.0 percent in Great
Britain in 1851 (constructed from Table IV; Deane and Cole, 1969, pp. 143,

152; Lindert and Williamson, 1983, p. 4)•36 The relevant consideration in
choice of technique, the marginal user cost of capital, was higher in U.S.
manufacturing as well.

Summers and Clarke (1980, p. 134) argue that even though nominal rates
were higher in the antebellum U.S. than in Britain the more rapid deflation
rate in Britain implied approximately equal real interest rates over the

period. This assertion is contraverted by Table VII which presents nominal
and expected real interest rates for the two countries averaged by decade for
the 1801-1860 period and is based on the same data used by Summers and

Clarke. Nominal interest rates in the U.S. are represented by yields on New
England municipal bonds and in Britain by yields on 3 percent consols.

38

Expected real rates are constructed by adjusting the nominal interest rate by
the anticipated inflation rate ——

the predicted value from a regression of the

present inflation (or deflation) rate on those for the preceding two years
(the Warren—Pearson price index is used for the U.S. and the Rousseaux index

for Britain).37 With the exception of the first two decades, influenced by
the Napoleonic Wars, real interest rates were consistently and significantly

higher in the U.S. than in Britain. Over the whole antebellum period U.S.
real rates averaged 1.13 percentage points higher, and in the "peacetime"
decades of 1821-1860 they averaged 1.61 percentage points (or 46 percent)

greater. Indeed, taking the anticipated rate of price change into account has
virtually no effect on the magnitude of the differential. For the 1821-1860
period the US-GB differential in terms of nominal rates was 1.59 percentage
points and in terms of real rates, 1.61 percentage points.

Furthermore, it seems quite unlikely that the observed differential could

be accounted for entirely by a risk premium.38 Precise measurement of the
premium resulting from a higher possible default risk of American bonds would

be very difficult or impossible. However, we may observe the response to the
defaults in the U.S. in the early 1840's. These defaults were not widely
anticipated, but they caused the differential to increase by only .42 percentage points —-

from 1.43 percentage points in the 1830's to 1.88 percentage

points in the 1840's. By the 1850's the differential fell to only .18 percentage points above the level in the pre—default decade. This relatively small
response suggests that risk considerations alone cannot explain higher U.S.

interest rates. Real interest rates therefore appear to have been higher in
the United States than in Britain in the period before the Civil War. Such
higher interest rates in the U.S. moreover are consistent with a wide range of
American social and economic phenomena —— from eating more quickly to holding

39

smaller inventories than Europeans (Field, 1983a, pp. 414-415). They are also
consistent with the evidence on international net capital flows which shows
the United States to have been a continual net importer of British capital
(Williamson, 1964, pp. 89—124).

The marginal gross return to manufacturing capital was higher in the
United States, owing to both the higher interest rates and higher depreciation

rates.39 In response to the higher real rate Americans attempted to reduce
capital costs by running their machines and factories longer and faster. In
cotton texti.les, for example, spindle speed was significantly more rapid in

the U.S. and increased substantially as well after 1828 (Habakkuk, 1962, pp.

54—55; Brito and Williamson, 1973, P. 243; Field, 1983a, pp. 412—413). Such
higher utilization, rates were in turn reflected in more rapid rates of depre-

ciation in the U.S.4° Further evidence may be seen in the well-known "flimsiness" of American capital goods, such as machine tools and woodworking

machinery, relative to British products. Similarly, in railroad and canal
construction Americans produced less durable results than did the British

(Habakkuk, 1962, pp. 86—89). Again, here the construction of less durable,
more rapidly depreciating structures and equipment may be viewed as consistent
with a higher U.S. real interest rate.

Direct calculation of the gross return to manufacturing capital from
national income figures and of a real interest rate series from nominal interest and inflation rates both confirm that the cost of capital services or

return to capital was higher in the antebellum U.S. than in Britain. The
widely noted higher rates of utilization and depreciation of U.S. capital are
consistent with this, and Habakkuk's argument that product and factor markets
were more imperfect in America than in Britain in the early nineteenth century
reinforce this conclusion as well (pp. 63—79).

40

APPENDIX B
Table VIII

Prices, Factor Returns, and Capital—Labor Ratios
in the United States and Great Britain:
Tests of the Habakkuk Hypothesis

United States, 1849
Labor Supply
Elasticity = .3

United States, 1849
Labor Supply
Elasticity = .6

Great Britain, 1851
Skilled Wage
Differential = 59%

1.00

.93

.58

1.00

.97

.69

1.00

1.01

1.34

329.

291.

236.

237.

211.

142.

WA

103.

105.

120.

rS

.46

.43

.16

rU

.43

.43

.16

rA

.19

.19

.07

(K/L)s

539.

466.

559.

(K/L)u

559.

475.

785.

PS
pU

41

Table

IX

Prices, Factor Returns, and Capital—Labor Ratios
in the United States and Great Britain:
Varying Skilled Manufacturing Production Parameters

P5
PU

Great Britain

Great Britain

United States
1849

Great Britain

Base Case

Base Case

1.00

.45

.65

.87

1.00

.70

.68

.68

1.00

1.33

1.34

1.35

1851

1851

= 1.71

1851

= .85

329.

207.

191.

193.

237.

149.

138.

139.

103.

118.

119.

120.

.46

.16

.17

.16

.43

.16

.17

.16

.19

.07

.07

.07

(K/L)5

539.

413.

1476.

559.

(K/L)u

559.

848.

712.

776.

WA

rU

rA

Notes

1.

In Temin's model (1966) only land and labor are used in the production of

agricultural goods, and labor and capital in the production of manufactured
goods.
2.

By specifying a smooth factor price frontier (as a result of assuming

common well-defined production functions) we rule out the possibility of a
factor intensity reversal due to a shift in technology.

In such a case a

higher interest rate (in the u.s., say) might be associated with a more cap-

ital—intensive technology. See Yeager (1976), pp. 323-324 and the discussion
in Field (1983a), pp. 429—431.
3.

This point is also argued by Ames and Rosenberg (1968). Such a result

however is not inconsistent with Temin's more general argument (1971) that in
more complicated models the labor scarcity result may be possiblebut not

necessarily follow. Only in the simple two sector, two input model is the
general labor scarcity proposition a necessary consequence.
4.

Two other conditions must be met as well: 1) the share of land in agri-

culture must be greater than in manufacturing; 2) manufacturing must use a
higher proportion of the economy's capital than the labor (Summers and Clarke,
p. 132).
5.

Some valiant exceptions to this are Uselding (1972), Brito and Williamson

(1973), James (1981), and Field (1983a, b).
6.

Ternin (1966, pp. 281—283) is aware of this distinction but does not

incorporate it into his model.
7.

For example, Earle and Hoffman (1980, p. 1057) flatly and erroneously

assert, "Most American industries used demonstrably more machinery than

equivalent British industries." Their analysis of the labor scarcity question
is particularly confused, but they do find that "the characteristic feature of
American capitalism" is "the use of cheap, instead of expensive inputs, provided any differences in productivity are overcome."
8.

(p. 1090)

The importance of the distinction between skilled and unskilled labor to

the labor scarcity result, developed by Habakkuk, has been noted by Uselding
(1975; 1977, pp. 164—165), Brito and Williamson (1973), and Goldin and

Sokoloff (1982, pp. 755—756). Goldin and Sokoloff emphasize in particular the
use of women-and children in manufacturing as another response to the problem
of expensive male labor (1982, pp. 742, 755—756; 1983).
9.

Moreover, little is known empirically about production in the service

sector, so specification would have had to have been rather arbitrary. See
James (1978).

10. For example, Field (1980, pp. 162—163) classes the workers in these
industries in the two highest skill categories —— balanced and high skills.

11. Part of the difference however reflects the greater presence of females
in the unskilled sector. Counting the female wage as .5 of the male wage
(Sokoloff, 1984b), we calculate the annual male wage in the skilled sector as
$325 as compared with $276 in other manufacturing, still a significant difference.

12. Restricting the use of skilled labor to skilled manufacturing and unskilled labor to unskilled manufacturing ignores the possibility of substituting among skilled labor, unskilled labor, and capital in a generalized four

factor production function. The specification of such a function however
would present a very complex problem. Habakkuk, for example, quotes Andrew
Ure to the effect that early manufacturing growth involved the substitution of
unskilled labor and capital for skilled labor (pp. 153—154), but he himself

argued that more capital—intensive production methods required more skilled
labor per unit output than relatively labor—intensive ones (p. 24). Later
writers have focused on one thread or the other of this argument. For
example, Williamson and Lindert (1980) assume skilled labor and capital to
have been relative complements, but Harley (1974) in his study of the choice
of technique in Edwardian industry emphasizes the substitution of unskilled
labor and capital for skilled labor.
Nevertheless, in our specification here the unskilled labor market is
still able to influence skilled labor conditions and the choice of technique

through labor supply channels. In any case, this characterization is roughly
consistent with empirical evidence and available data do not permit satisfactory estimation of a four factor production function (unskilled

labor, skilled

labor, capital, natural resources).

13. Habakkuk (p. 43) also raises the possibility that if the tariff was
levied primarily on relatively labor—intensive imports, it would have raised
real wages relative to capital and thereby shifted U.S. demand toward products

made by capital—intensive techniques. The antebellum tariff did in fact
increase real wages the most, but its principal effect was to increase the
returns to both labor and capital at the expense of land and slaveholders, a

possibility which Habakkuk recognizes in a footnote. (James (1978), p. 248.)
14. Prices are not taken to be fixed at world levels in spite of the presence

of an international sector. The protection of tariffs and distance makes it
quite reasonable that U.S. producers faced downward sloping demand curves, and
it is not implausible that British producers faced them as well. British

manufacturers may well still have been price makers rather than price takers
in world markets, while in agriculture complete adjustment to the repeal of

the Corn Laws may not yet have occurred. To be sure, demand elasticities may

have been greater than those facing krierican producers and if this were the

case the differences between U.S. and British output and factor prices which
the model predicts will be overstatements.

15. Lack of data on Consumption patterns precludes a more detailed specification. A similar one for the demand side has been used by Williamson and
Lindert (1980, p. 225). Rosenberg (1972, pp. 39—51) has argued that Americans
were more disposed to accepting standardized goods produced by

mechanization. If this had been the case, then the model, which assumes no
differences in the nature of demand between America and Britain, is biased
against finding labor scarcity in U.S. manufacturing.

16. Value of output is deflated by a regional price index (Coelho and
Shepherd, 1974). Labor input is measured by total employment with one additional worker per firm added to correct for entrepreneurial labor input

(Sokoloff, 1984b). Atack (1976, p. 279) has shown that different measures of
labor input, such as taking interstate variation in the sex composition of the
labor force into account, for example, has only very small effects on parameter estimates in nineteenth—century u.s. production functions. Capital
figures used are those reported in the Census of Manufactures, which are

argued by Davis and Gailman (1978, p. 9) to have represented market values.
The measure of agricultural goods input, A, is taken as the value of raw
material inputs deflated by a regional index of natural resource prices (see

James (1981), pp. 385—386). The observations are weighted by the ratio of the
number of firms in a given state to the total.

17. The Allen partial elasticity of substitution between inputs I and j
defined as

=

(

fjXi/XjXj)(IF..(/IFI)

i,j = K, L, A

is

where F is the bordered Hessian of the production function f and

is the

cofactor of the ijth element of F.

18. Williamson and Lindert (1980, P. 223) take this twentieth—century result
to have been the case in the nineteenth century as well.

19. Habakkuk (pp. 33—34) considered but rejected the influence of American
resource abundance in accounting for labor scarcity. He suggested that away
from the Fall Line supplies of power would have been both dearer and less
elastic in fact than in England, contrary to Christensen's later calculations
(1981, p. 322).

20. The production function itself was based on data for Southern agriculture, although Fogel and Engerman take the estimated factor shares to have
prevailed in Northern agriculture as well in their relative efficiency calcu—

lations. We use these estimates rather than Gallman's (1972) which are based
on assumed rates of return to agricultural capital much lower than the ones in
our model (Table V).

21. Note that if the price of capital goods had been higher in the IJ.S., the
capital—labor ratio in U.S. skilled manufacturing would have been

overstated. However, somewhat tenuous evidence from 1865 on British machine
tools suggests that the capital prices may have been roughly comparable
between the two countries by around mid-century. The mean price of machines
produced that year by the British firm of Greenwood and Batley was E89 as

compared to £92, the average price of machine tools sold in England by the
American firm of Brown and Sharpe (Floud, 1976, pp. 113-114). See also note
39.

22. In general, there has been little effort made to refine these measures of
factor endowments. For example, because of insufficient data labor force

totals have not been adjusted for differences in composition, such as by
converting them into a measure of male equivalent workers (Sokoloff,

1984b).

Differences between slave and free workers in terms of hours worked are neglected as well (Fogel and Engerman, 1977, PP. 285—288). Land input is simply
measured in acres, not taking fertility differences between the U.S. and
Britain into account.

23. The natural resource imports

were corn, coffee, sugar, tea, wine, timber,

raw cotton, raw wool, silk, tobacco, flax, hemp, oils, seeds, hides and skins,
dyewoods and. dyestuffs.

24. Abbott (1905) reported daily unskilled wages of $.91. Noting that women
comprised 26 percent of unskilled workers and that their relative wage was
approximately 60 percent of men's (although this differential varied by
region; Goldin and Sokoloff, 1982), average annual wages for 310 days of work
would have been $253.

25. Budd (1960, pp. 384—385) working up. from wage data and including implicit
earnings of slaves finds the labor share more than exhausts agricultural
sector income in 1850, a rather improbable result.

Part of this discrepancy

might be the result of assuming that slave workers, like free workers, receive
the going wage.
26.

In our basic simulation capital is measured as fixed capital, as reported

by the Census, and working capital is not counted.

Bateman and Weiss (1981,

pp. 116, 193—195), allowing for depreciation and adding a correction for

working capital to the denominator of the rate of return
the 1849 net return to U.S.

calculation, compute

manufacturing as 22 percent, a figure very close

to the 19 percent rate of return on agricultural capital in the model.
Equality of returns to capital across sectors therefore could be achieved by
Simply appropriately inflating the figures for manufacturing capital to

reflect working capital as well as fixed. The problem with using this latter
measure of capital, which would eliminate

possibly theoretically objectionable

divergencies in rate of return across sectors, is that there is not a good

measure of working capital in the U.K. American entrepreneurs, responding to
higher interest rates, were generally viewed as Conserving on working capital
and holding smaller inventories than

their British counterparts (Field, 1983a,

pp. 414-415), but we do not know exactly how much lower.

Imposing some

undocumented differential in the ratio of working to fixed capital across
countries adas an element of arbitrariness

to the comparison, while not

influencing the results. In any case, it should be noted that the higher
return to capital in manufacturing than in agriculture is consistent with the
results of Bateman and Weiss (1981, P. 130).

27. Moreover, the export of machinery from Britain was prohibited until 1843
(Habakkuk, 1962, p. 96).

28. This point is also made by Habakkuk (1962, p. 13).

29. We do this computatonally

by fixing y and 2 assuming that the true

elasticity is 0.3. Then we double y and

and solve the simulation model.

30. Note that the focus has shifted from land abundance increasing the
agricultural wage (Habakkuk) to the influence of abundant natural resources,
primarily through decreasing the cost of power, and thereby spurring

mechanization. By land abundance here therefore we really mean natural
resource abundance.

31. This calculation of the British capital—labor ratio in manufacturing
assumes the share of manufacturing capital in the gross reproducible capital
stock to have been the same in 1880 and 1890 as in 1920.

32. Note that a more elastic supply of unskilled workers after mid—century,
as argued by Habakkuk, would seem to imply a lower manufacturing capital—labor
ratio in the U.S. rather than a higher one.

33. This figure probably understates the iS, advantage, because firewood and
rents were excluded from the cost of living adjustments. In both of these
categories U.S. prices should have been lower.

34. This result, of course, ostensibly violates well known properties of
index numbers. However, the U.S. and British weights do not cover the same

range of comodjtjes, the U.S. weights being much more detailed. The results
are consistent, however, in indicating substantially higher real wages in the
U.S.

35. See note 12.
36. These figures are overestimates of the true rate of return because they
omit working capital from the denominator of the true rate of return

calculation. See note 28.
37. Summers and Clarke compute realized or ex post real rates (p. 134),
rather than expected rates which should be the relevant ones in the choice of
technique.

38. Summers and Clarke suggest that taking risk factors into account it may
well have been the case that the real return on capital in the United Kingdom
may have been actually higher than in the United States (p. 135).

39. Brito and Williamson (1973) emphasize another factor influencing the cost
of capital services, differences in the relative price of investment goods in

the two countries. They suggest that due to the tariff the ratio of the price
of capital goods to that of manufactured consumption goods was lower in the
U.S. and that the real costs of capital services were in fact lower in the

U.S. as well. To be sure, the relative price of capital goods in the U.S. did

decline over the middle part of the nineteenth century, but this was not
characteristic of the entire antebellum period (David, 1977). Direct evidence
on Brito and Williamson's asserted inequality relationship is rather

inconclusive. Sketchy data on American and British antebellum machinery
prices preclude detailed comparisons, but the price difference between U.S.
and British machinery in cottons and woolens did not appear to be
systematically less than the tariff on manufactured goods over the 1810-1830

period (Jeremy, 1981, pp. 188, 229). For example, for woolen spinning in the
1820s the British price per spindle was $.40, while in the U.S. it was

1.25. Habakkuk (1962, p. 106) cites for a later period, the 1840s, the best
English opinion as believing that the same types of machines were generally
cheaper in Britain than in America (also see note 21).

40. It may be noted that this characterization of more intense capital use
and hence more rapid depreciation in the antebellum U.S. than in Britain is
reflected in the assumptions underlying the construction of capital stock

figures in the two countries. For the U.S. Gallman assumes a lifetime for
equipment of 15 years and for structures of 50 years, while for Britain Fein—
stein takes lifetimes of 40 and 100 years respectively (Davis and Gallman,
1978, p. 457; Feinstejn, 1978, pp. 52, 56).

Table I

Production, Consumption, and Import—Export Equations
Production
—p1

=

ooCoiLs
*

—p3

+ o3As

*

*

*

= ô0[ô1Lj

+

* P2
ô2K

*
+

83Au

P3

—i/pu
I

8 82 83

—
-

A

—p2

+ 82K5

OLAKAT

where:

I =LS+LU+LA
K =

A =

K
A5

+
+

K
A.d

+

KA

+

= SQS + P1Q, +
and

PAA

is skilled manufacturing output,

is unskilled manufacturing output,

A is agricultural output,
L is labor in sector i,
K1 is capital in sector I,

T is the acres of land, and
ZA is the portion of domestic agricultural (or natural resource)
output not used in domestic manufacture,
is the price in sector i,

Y is the total GNP, and
o., p1, o, e. are production parameters, i =

Consumption
Utility:

U =

+ LUXJ +

AXA)

0,1,2,3

Budget Constraint:

''

Demand:

= PsXs +

i =

PX

+

PAXA

+

PS

iS
Si
lL.P

where

=

and

P is the constant elasticity of substitution between any two consumption
goods, and
X1 is domestic consumption in sector 1.
I.

Import—Export

=ZA+

s s PS
X -

u_ u
Q

(1-rj)E

QS
7)

where E is the total dollar value of natural resource imports (E > 0) or
exports (E < 0), and
is the proportion of total manufacturing output produced by the skilled sector.

Note: British and Mierican subscripts are suppressed for simplicity.

Table II

Production Function Parameter Estimatees, 1849 United States
(t statistics in parentheses)

Unskilled Manufacturing

Skilled Manufacturing

aK

________

.2748
(13.01)

.2051
(22.20)

.0521
(1.89)

.0723

.3036

.2952

.0554

.0614

(14.04)

(19.76)

(2.74)

(3.51)

1KK

1LL

(5.42)

TKL

—.0040
(—2.81)
-.0266
(—1.88)

Table III

Parameter Specifications

Skilled Manufacturing
Unskilled Manufacturing

Agriculture

aKL

KA

LA

1.26

.81

1.34

.85

1.71

2.07

81

62

83

.58

.17

.25

Demand Functions

Note: Symbols and subscripts are defined in Table I.

1.5

Table IV

Output and Factor Endowments of the United States and Great Britain

United States, 1849

Great Britain, 1851

Outputs:

Gross Agricultural Output
Value Added in Skilled
Manufacturing
Value Added in Unskilled
Manufacturing
Total Product

$

828. mill

$

518.2

mill

43. mill

421. miii

779.5 mill

$1292. miii

$1297.7 mill

4.52 mill
0.07 mill

2.10 mill

.88 mill

3.20 miii

5.47 mill

5.30 miii

Endowments:

Labor tn Agriculture
Labor in Skilled Manufacturing
Labor in Unskilled
Manufacturing
Total Labor Force

Capital in Agriculture
Capital in Skilled
Manufacturing
Capital in Unskilled
Manufacturing

$1324.8 mill

$1946.4 mill

40.3 mill

424.9 mill

2441.3 miii

Total Capital

$1858.0 mill

$4387.7 mill

Land in Agriculture

293.6 miii acres

38.8 mill acres

Note: British figures are converted into dollars at the par exchange rate

$4.86ss/
Sources:

United States
Gross Agricultural Output — Gallman (1960), p. 43.
Value Added in Manufacturing — U.S. Census of Manufactures, (1850),
p. 143.
Labor in Agriculture — Lebergott (1964), p. 511.
Labor in Manufacturing — U.S.
Census of Manufactures, (1850), p.
143.

Capital in Agriculture — Calculated from Davis and Gallman, (1978),
pp. 18—21.
Capital in Manufacturing — U.S. Census of Manufactures, (1850) p.
143.

Land — U.S.
istorical Statistics, (1975), p. 457.

Table IV (Cont.)

Great Britain
Gross Agricultural Output — Deane and Cole, (1969), pp. 166—167.
Value Added in Manufacturing - Deane and Cole, (1969), pp. 143, 166167; Gallman (1960), p. 43; U.S. Historical Statistics (1975), p.
139. Constructed from Value Added in Mining Manufacturing, and
Building by assuming average labor productivity in mining and
building between the U.S. and Great Britain to have been the same.
Working with Lewis's figures (1978, pp. 246—266) produces an estimate
for 1852 of159.5 million (or $776 million), very close to the
figure reported here.
Labor in Agriculture and
Labor in Manufacturing — Deane and Cole, (1969), p. 143.
Capital in Agriculture and
Capital in Manufacturing — Interpolated from Feinstein, (1978), p.
42.

Land —

O'Brien

and Keyder, (1978), p. 105.

Table V

Prices, Wages, the Return to Capital, and Capital—Labor Ratios
in the United States and Great Britain: Simulation Results

United States, 1849

PS

Great Britain, 1851

United States, 1849
(with 38.8 million
acres)

1.00

0.45

1.17

1.00

0.70

1.28

1.00

1.50

329.

207.

325.

Wv

237.

149.

232.

WA

103.

118.

91.

r5

0.46 [.43]

0.16

.46

r

0.43 [.43]

0.16

.46

rA

0.19

0.07

.17

(K/L)5

539. [571.]

413.

499.

(K/L)u

559. [558.]

848.

490.

Note: Figures in brackets represent the simulation that initially adjusts the
base case U.S. manufacturing capital stock so that the marginal return to
capital is equalized. S, tJ, and A stand for skilled manufacturing, unskilled
manufacturing, and agriculture, respectively.

Table VI

Daily Wages in the United States and Britain, 1850—51

Occupation
Nonagricultural,
Unskilled

Building Trades,
Skilled

U.S.
Nominal
Wage

U.S.
Skill

Differential

$0.91

British
Nominal
Wage

British
Skill

Differential

$0.70

1.50 (471)

0.65

1.04

0.48

1.59 (34)

0.75

1.17

0.67

1.51 (1093)

0.66

1.32

0.87

Printing Traties,

Skilled
Engineering, Skilled
[Iron Foundry Workers]

[2.23]

[1.45]

Shipbuilders, Skilled

1.00

0.43

Note: Sample size of U.S. workers are in parentheses.
Note: British annual wages are converted to daily ones by assuming (as
Williamson and Lindert do) that employers worked 52 weeks per year, 6 days per
week.

Sources: U.S. unskilled wage — Abbott (1905).
U.S. skilled wages - Compiled from the Aldrich Report (U.S. Senate
Committee on Finance, 1893).
British wages — Williamson and Lindert (1983), p. 4.

Table VII

U.S. and British Real and Nominal Interest Rates, 1801—1860
(in percent)

Nominal Interest Rates

Real Intrest Rates

U.S.

GB.

Differential

U.S.

G.B.

Differential

1801—1810

5.23

4.78

.45

5.26

5.64

-.38

1811—1820

5.20

4.56

.64

5.65

4.94

.71

1821-1830

4.76

3.63

1.13

4.99

3.48

1.51

1831-1840

4.97

3.39

1.58

5.03

3.60

1.43

1841-1850

5.03

3.24

1.79

5.42

3.54

1.88

1851—1860

3.17

1.86

1.86

5.09

3.48

1.61

1801—1860

5.03

3.79

1.24

5.24

4.11

1.13

1821—1860

4.95

3.36

1.59

5.13

3.52

1.61

Sources: Interest rates — Homer (1963), pp. 195—196, 286—287.
Price indices — Historical
Statistics (1975), p. 201; Mitchell
(1962), p. 471.

References

Abbott, Edith (1905), The Wages of Unskilled Labor in the United States, 18501900. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Abramovitz, Moses, and David, Paul (1973), "Reinterpreting Economic Growth:
Parables and Realities," American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
63, pp. 428—439.
Adams, Donald (1970), "Some Evidence on English and American Wage Rates, 17901830," Journal of Economic History 30, pp. 499—520.
___________ (1973), "Wages in the Iron Industry: A Comment," Explorations in
Economic History 11, pp. 89-99.

Ames, Edward, and Rosenberg, Nathan (1968). "The Enfield Arsenal in Theory and
Practice," Economic Journal 78, pp. 827—842.

Atack, Jeremy (1976), "Estimation of Economies of Scale in Nineteenth Century
United States Manufacturing and the Form of the Production Function,"
unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Indiana University.

Bateman, Fred, and Weiss, Thomas (1981), A Deplorable Scarcity. Chapel Hill,
N.C.: University of North Carolina Press.
Brito, D.L, and Williamson, Jeffrey (1973), "Skilled Labor and Nineteenth
Century Anglo—American Managerial Behavior," Explorations in Economic
History 10, pp. 235-252.
Budd, Edward C. (1960), "Factor Shares, 1850—1910." In Conference on Research
in Income and Wealth, ed., Trends in the American Economy in the
Nineteenth Century, Studies in Income and Wealth, Volume 30. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, pp. 365—406.
Burgess, David (1975), "Duality Theory and Pitfalls in the Specification of
Technologies," Journal of Econometrics 3, pp. 105—21.
Christensen, Paul P. (1981), "Land Abundance and Cheap Horsepower in the
Mechanization of the Antebellum United States Economy," Explorations in
Economic History 18, pp. 309-329.
Church, R. A. (1975), "Nineteenth—Century Clock Technology in Britain, the
United States, and Switzerland," Economic History Review 28, pp. 616—630.
Clark, Victor (1929), History of Manufactures in the United States, Volumes I,
II. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co.
Coelho, Philip, and Shepherd, James (1974), "Differences in Regional Prices:
The United States, 1851—1880," Journal of Economic History 34, pp. 551591.
David, Paul A. (1975), Technical Choice, Innovation, and Economic Growth.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

__________ (1977), "Invention and Accumulation in America's Economic Growth: A
Nineteenth—Century Parable." In Karl Brunner and Allan Meltzer (eds.),
International Organization, National Policies and Economic Development.
Amsterdam: North Holland, pp. 179—228.

Davis, Lance, and Galiman, Robert (1973),"The Share of Savings and Investment
in Gross National Product During the 19th Century in the U.S.A." In F.
C. Lane (ed.), Fourth International Conference of Economic History.
Paris: Mouton, pp. 437—466.
___________ and __________ (1978), "Capital Formation in the United States
during the Nineteenth Century." In Cambridge Economic Histor.y of Europe,
Vol. VII, Part 2. New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 1—69.

Deane, Phyllis, and Cole, W. A. (1969), British Economic Growth, 1688—1959,
2nd Edition. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversjty Press.
Drummond, Ian (1967), "Labor Scarcity and the Problem of American Industrial
Efficiency in the 1850's: A Comment," Journal of Economic History 27, pp.
Earle, Carville, and Hoffman, Ronald (1980), "The Foundation of the Modern
Economy: Agriculture and the Costs of Labor in the United States and
England, 1800—60," American Historical Review 85, pp. 1055—1094.

Field, Alexander J. (1980), "Industrialization and Skill Intensity: The Case
of Massachusetts," Journal of Human Resources 15, pp. 149—175.
___________ (1983a), "Land Abundance, Interest/Profit Rates, and Nineteenth—
Century American and British Technology," Journal of Economic History 43,
pp. 405—431.

___________

(1983b),

"Or,

the

Unimportance of Machinery," unpublished

nianuscri pt.

Feinstein, Charles (1972), National Income, Expenditure, and Output of the
United Kingdom, 1855-1965. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
___________

(1978), "Capital Formation in Great Britain." I Cambridge

Economic History of Europe, Vol. VII, Part 1. New York: Cambridge
University Press, pp. 28—96.
Floud, Roderick (1976), The British Machine Tool Industry, 1850—1914.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

____________ and McCloskey, Donald, eds. (1981), The Economic History of
Britain Since 1700, Volume I. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fogel, Robert (1967), "The Specification Problem in Economic History," Journal
of Economic History 27, pp. 283—308.
___________ and Engerman, Stanley (1974), Time on the Cross, Volume II.
Boston: Little, Brown and Co.

Galirnari, Robert (1960), "Commodity Output, 1839—1899." In Conference on
Research in Income and Wealth, ed., Trends in the American Economy in the
Nineteenth Century, Studies in Income and Wealth, Volume 30. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, pp. 13—67.
___________ (1972), "Changes in Total U.S. Agricultural Factor Productivity in
the Nineteenth Century." In Darwin P. Kelsey, ed., Farming in the New
Nation. Washington: Agricultural History Society, pp. 191—210.

Goldin, Claudia, and Sokoloff, Kenneth (1982), "Women, Children, and
Industrialization in the Early Republic: Evidence from Manufacturing
Censuses," Journal of Economic History 42, pp. 741—774.

__________ and __________ (1984), "The Relative Productivity Hypothesis of
Industrialization: The American Case, 1820—1850," Quarterly Journal of
Economics 44,

Great Britain Board of Trade (1913), Final Report of Production of the United
Kingdom, 1907. London.
Griliches, Zvi (1969), "Capital—Skill Complementarity," Review of Economics
and Statistics 51, pp. 465—468.

Habakkuk, H. J. (1962), American and British Technology in the Nineteenth
Century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hamermesh, Daniel, and Grant, James (1979), "Econometric Studies of Labor—
Labor Substitution and Their Implications for Policy," Journal of Human
Resources 14, pp. 518—542.
Harley, C. K. (1974), "Skilled Labour and the Choice of Technique in Edwardian
Industry," Explorations in Economic History 11, pp. 391—414.
Hindle, Brooke, ed. (1975), America's Wooden Age: Aspects of its Early
Technology, Tarrytown, N.Y.: Sleepy Hollow Restorations.

Homer, Sidney (1963), A History of Interest Rates. New Brunswick, N. J.:
Rutgers University Press.
Hoover, Ethel (1960), "Retail Prices After 1850." In Conference on Research
in Income and Wealth, ed., Trends in the American Economy in the
Nineteenth Century, Studies in Income and Wealth, Volume 30, Princeton:
Princeton University Press, pp. 141—190.
James, John A. (1978), "The Welfare Effects of the Antebellum Tariff: A
General Equilibrium Analysis," Explorations in Economic History 15, pp.
23 1—256.

___________ (1981), "Some Evidence on Relative Labor Scarcity in 19th—Century
American Manufcturing," Explorations in Economic History 18, pp. 376—388.

Jeremy, David (1981), Transatlantic Industrial Revoution: The Diffusion of
Textile Technologies between Britain and America, 1790-1830s. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.

Jones, R. W. (1971), "A Three-Factor Model in Theory, Trade, and History." In
J. Bhagwati, et al., (eds.), Trade, Balance of Payments and Growth.
Amsterdam: NoiTIf11olland, pp. 3—21.
Lazonick, William (1981), "Production Relations, Labor Productivity, and
Choice of Technique: British and U.S. Cotton Spinning," Journal of
Economic History 41, pp. 491—516.

Lebergott, Stanley (1964), Manpower in Economic Growth. New York: McGraw—Hill
Book Co.

Lewis, W. A. (1978), Growth and Fluctuations, 1870—1913. London: Allen and
Unwi n.

Lindert, Peter, and Williamson, Jeffrey(1982). "Antebellum Wage Widening Once
Again,". Journal of Economic History 42, pp. 419—422.
_____________ and _____________ (1983), "English Workers' Living Standards
during the Industrial Revolution: A New Look," Economic History Review
36, pp. 1—25.

Margo, Robert, and Villaflor, Georgia (1983), "Reports of Persons and Articles
Hired: New Evidence on Antebellum Wage Rates, 1819—1844," unpublished
manuscript.
Mitchell, B. R. with Deane, Phyllis, (1962), Abstract of British Historical
Statistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Montgomery, James (1840), The Cotton Manufacture of the United States
Contrasted and Compared with That of Great Britain. Glasgow:

Mukerji, V. (1963), "A Generalized S.M.A.C. Function with Constant Ratios of
Elasticity of Substitution," Review of Economic Studies 30, pp. 233—236.
Mundlak, Y. (1978), "Occupational Migration out of Agriculture——A Cross—
Country Analysis," Review of Economics and Statistics 60, pp. 392—398.
O'Brien, Patrick, and Keyder, Caglar (1978), Economic Growth in Britain and
France, 1780—1914. London: Allen and Unwin.
Rodgers, Charles (1852), American Superiority at the World's Fair.
Philadelphia: John J. Hopkins.

Rosenberg, Nathan (1963), "Technological Change in the Machine Tool Industry,
1840—1910," Journal of Economic History 23, pp. 414—443.
___________ (1967), "Anglo—American Wage Differences in the 1820s," Journal of
Economic History 27, pp. 221—229.
___________ (1969), The American System of Manufactures. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.

__________ (1972), Technology and American Economic Growth, White Plains,
N.Y.: M. E. Sharpe, Inc.

__________ (1976), Perspectives on Technology. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
___________ (1977), American Technology: Imported or Indigenous?" American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 67, pp. 21—26.

__________ (1984), Inside the Black Box: Technology and Economics. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Rothbarth, E. (1946), "Causes of the Superior Efficiency of U.S.A. Industry as
Compared with British Industry," Economic Journal 56, pp. 383—390.
Sokoloff, Kenneth (1984a), "Investment in Fixed and Working Capital during
Early Industrialization: Evidence from U.S. Manufacturing Firms," Journal
of Economic History 44, pp. 545-556.

_________ (1984b), "Was the Transition from the Artisanal Shop to the Small
Factory Associated with Gains in Efficiency?: Evidence from the U.S.
Manufacturing Censuses of 1820 and 1850," Explorations in Economic
History 21, pp. 351—382.

Summers, L., and Clarke, R. (1980), "The Labor Scarcity Controversy
Reconsidered," Economic Journal 90, pp. 129—139.
Temin, Peter (1966), "Labor Scarcity and the Problem of American Industrial
Efficiency in the 1850s," Journal of Economic History 26, pp. 277—298.
___________ (1971), "Labor Scarcity in America," Journal of Interdisciplinary
History 1, pp. 251-265.

U.S. Bureau of the Census (1913), Thirteenth Census of the United States,
1910, Volume VIII: Manufactures. Washington: Government Printing Office.
___________ (1975), Historical Statistics of the United States. Washington:
Government Printing Office.

U.S. Census Office (1902), Twelfth Census of the United States, 1900, Volume
VII: Manufactures. Washington: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Senate (1859), Seventh Census of the United States, 1850, Statistics of
Manufactures, Ex. document 39, 35th Cong., 2nd sess.
U.S. Senate Committee on Finance (1893), Wholesale Prices, Wages, and
Transportation, Senate Report 1394, 52nd Cong., 2nd sess.
Uselding, Paul (1972), "Technical Progress at the Springfield Armory, 1820—
1850," Explorations in Economic History 9, pp. 291—316.
___________

(1975), Studies in the Technological Development of the American

Economy during the First Half of the Nineteenth Century. New York: Ama
Press.

__________ (1977), "Studies of Technology in Economic History." In Robert E.
Gailman, ed., Recent Developments in the Study of Business and Economic
History: Essays in Memory o Herman E. Krooss, Research in Economic
History, Supplement 1. Greenwich, Ct.: JAI Press, pp. 159—220.

Ware, Caroline F. (1931), The Early New England Cotton Manufacture. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Co.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. (1964), American Growth and the Balance of Payments,
1820—1913. Chapel Hill, N.C.: University of North Carolina Press.
___________ (1971), "Optimal Replacement of Capital Goods: The Early New
England and British Textile Firm," Journal of Political Economy 79, pp.
1320—1334.

___________ (.1980), "Earnings Inequality in Nineteenth—Century Britain,"
Journal of Economic History 40, pp. 457—476.

(1982a), "The Structure of Pay in Britain, 1710—1911." In Paul
Uselding, ed., Research in Economic History, Volume 7. Greenwich, Ct.:
JAI Press, pp. 1—54.

___________

__________ (1982b), "Was the Industrial Revolution Worth It? Disamenities and
Death in 19th Century British Towns," Explorations in Economic History
19, pp. 221—245.

__________ and Lindert, Peter (1980), American Inequality. New York:
Academic Press.

Yeager, Leland (1976), "Toward Understanding Some Paradoxes in Capital
Theory," Economic Inquiry 14, pp. 313—346.
Zabler, Jeffrey (1972), "Further Evidence on American Wage Differentials,
1800—1830," Explorations in Economic History 10, pp. 109—117.

_________ (1973), "Wages in the Iron Industry: Reply," Explorations in
Economic History 11, pp. 89-99.

