NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BAILOUTS, THE INCENTIVE TO MANAGE RISK, AND FINANCIAL CRISES
Stavros Panageas
Working Paper 15058
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15058

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2009

I would like to thank Andy Abel, Andy Atkeson, Peter DeMarzo, Nicolae Garleanu, Rich Kihlstrom,
Dirk Krueger, George Pennachi, Michael Roberts and participants of seminars, lunches and conference
sessions at Chicago Booth, MIT, Wharton, Univ. of Tokyo, the Minneapolis FED, the New York FED,
the BIRS center on Financial Mathematics, the NBER Summer Institute (2006), and the Western Finance
Association Meetings (2008), for useful comments and discussions. Jianfeng Yu provided exceptional
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Stavros Panageas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Bailouts, the Incentive to Manage Risk, and Financial Crises
Stavros Panageas
NBER Working Paper No. 15058
June 2009
JEL No. G01,G32,G33
ABSTRACT
A firm’s termination leads to bankruptcy costs. This may create an incentive for outside stakeholders
or the firm’s debtholders to bail out the firm as bankruptcy looms. Because of this implicit guarantee,
firm shareholders have an incentive to increase volatility in order to exploit the implicit protection.
However, if they increase volatility too much they may induce the guarantee-extending parties to “walk
away”. I derive the optimal risk management rule in such a framework and show that it allows high
volatility choices, while net worth is high. However, risk limits tighten abruptly when the firm’s net
worth declines below an endogenously determined threshold. Hence, the model reproduces the qualitative
features of existing risk management rules, and can account for phenomena such as “flight to quality”.

Stavros Panageas
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL, 60637
and NBER
stavros.panageas@chicagobooth.edu

1

Introduction

In debating the charter for the Bank of England in 1840, Sir Robert Peel (the Prime Minister
of Britain at the time) used the following words:
While the charter is well-designed and while we are taking all precautions
which legislation can prudently take against the recurrence of a monetary crisis,
a crisis may occur despite of our precautions. If it does, and if it be necessary to
assume grave responsibility for the purpose of meeting it, I dare say men will be
found willing to assume such responsibility.
Sir Robert Peel’s words are as relevant today as they were 168 years ago. As the Unites
States is going through one of the worst financial crises of the last decades, and as its leaders
contemplate a large bailout, it seems important to recall that the current crisis is not unique
in its features. During the last few decades, the world has seen several financial crises
(Asian crisis, Russian crisis etc.) that all shared a common theme: Periods of increased
risk appetites, as typically evidenced by high leverage ratios, led financial institutions to
the brink of bankruptcy. Bailouts and restructuring followed, sometimes undertaken by the
government and sometimes resulting from negotiations between the parties directly involved
in these institutions. At the same time, large liquidations of risky positions - sometimes
referred to as “flight to quality” - exacerbated the initial negative shocks and led to prolonged
periods of depressed asset valuations.
The subprime lending crisis that the United States is experiencing these days provides a
reconfirmation of the general pattern: In the years 2004-2006 the quest for higher expected
returns led financial institutions to increase their leverage and their lending to subprime
borrowers. The expansion of leverage left little margin for error when house values declined
and delinquencies increased. The initial reaction to the ensuing crisis consisted of private
sector bailouts of the aﬀected entities1 followed by outright government bailouts once some of
1

For instance, during the early stages of the recent subprime lending crisis the parent companies of hedge
funds, structure investment vehicles, or originators of CDOs had to provide infusions of liquidity in order

1

the largest private entities were considered “too big to fail”. At the same time, risky markets
that attracted several participants between 2004-2006 (such as the market for collateralized
debt obligations) were abandoned in a quite dramatic fashion in favor of simpler and safer
investment forms. This abrupt change in the willingness to take risk led to large risk premia,
illiquidity and deep discounts in several markets, which further exacerbated the crisis.
The commonality of the structure of financial crises suggests the possibility of an economic
mechanism that can simultaneously explain their recurrent themes. Two phenomena seem
to be of first order importance: a) the pattern of high initial risk taking followed by rapid
reversals of risk appetite around the onset of a crisis and b) the prevalence of bailouts and
restructuring during a crisis.
Pre-existing research has suggested that the first phenomenon may have a simple, almost
mechanical explanation: A large body of research has argued2 that it is the very nature of
the risk management practices followed by financial institutions that makes them prone to
risk appetite reversals. Indeed, existing risk management rules3 allow high volatility choices
in good times and automatically tighten the risk limits in response to declining market
values. This tends to exacerbate the eﬀects of negative shocks. Then why do such risk
management rules exist in the first place ? This question is important both for positive as
well as normative reasons.
The present paper proposes an answer to this question. It develops a model where risk
management rules are derived as optimal responses to the adverse risk taking incentives
created by bailouts. Additionally, the incentives to undertake a bailout are endogenously
determined, making it possible to provide a joint explanation for the observed risk appetite
reversals and the prevalence of bailouts.
to avoid abrupt liquidation of these entities. (For instance Bear Sterns had to bail out two of its hedge
funds at the onset of the crisis). Such guarantees were sometimes explicit (through market value swaps)
and sometimes implicit (due to reputational concerns of the investment banks). See JP Morgan “US Fixed
Income Markets weekly” August 10, 2007 p. 66 for a discussion.
2
See e.g. Basak and Shapiro (2001). Papers that are similar in spirit include Grossman and Zhou (1996),
Basak (1995), Pavlova and Rigobon (2005), Gromb and Vayanos (2002).
3
One such example is Value at Risk (VAR).

2

Specifically, in the baseline version of the model there are three agents: the firm’s shareholders, its debtholders and a stakeholder (such as the parent company of the firm, an insurer
that guarantees principal repayment to debtholders, junior claimants, potentially the government etc.). The stakeholder incurs a discrete cost or externality if the firm is terminated.
The presence of this cost or externality makes the stakeholder willing to bail out the firm, by
injecting funds, once bankruptcy looms. However, the stakeholder’s guarantee to the shareholders is implicit and the benefit from the firm’s continued presence is bounded. Hence,
bailouts can occur only if the stakeholder finds it profitable to undertake them. (The paper
also discusses a variant of the model, where there is no stakeholder and the bankruptcy cost
is incurred directly by the debtholders, who may have an incentive to “forgive” some debt
in order to avoid the discrete bankruptcy cost.)
In this baseline framework, the paper studies the shareholders’ incentive to take risk.
As one might expect, the presence of an implicit guarantee makes the shareholders inclined
to raise the volatility of the projects that they undertake. However, high volatility choices
could deter the stakeholder from bailing out the firm. This produces a tension. On the one
hand, shareholders want to raise volatility, but not so much that the stakeholder will find it
prohibitively costly to bail out the firm.
In reality, the tension produced by such conflicting goals leads to the adoption of regulations, self-regulations, covenants, laws etc. that I will refer to as “risk management rules” or
commitments. Such rules place limits on the risks that firms can take and hence serve the
purpose of reassuring the stakeholder.
A new aspect of the model is that rules, regulations and commitments are allowed to
be imperfect, as they are likely to be in reality. The imperfection stems from the fact that
future shareholders may choose to renege by paying a cost. This helps capture situations
where firms can circumvent risk management rules by undertaking costly activities such as
setting up oﬀshore, oﬀ-balance sheet entities etc. The imperfection of commitment implies
that the credibility of a risk management rule is not taken as given. Instead, adherence to
the rule has to be dynamically consistent.

3

Within this framework, I analyze the optimal choice of a risk management rule and show
that it has a particularly simple form: undertake projects with high risk levels when net
worth (defined as assets minus liabilities) is suﬃciently high and switch to projects with low
risk levels when net worth falls below an endogenously determined threshold.
The intuition for this result is simple. An optimal risk management rule should induce
the stakeholder to bail out the firm, in order to avoid the deadweight cost of bankruptcy.
Simultaneously, it should provide future shareholders with high continuation values, in order
to reduce the temptation to renege. The optimal risk management rule achieves both of
these objectives. By tightening the risk limits when net worth is low, it becomes possible
to allow projects with high volatilities when the firm’s assets safely exceed its liabilities.
By postponing the high volatilities for the times when net worth is high, the anticipated
growth rate of shareholder value is maximized. This “backloading” eﬀect is common in
many dynamic contracting contexts.4
This paper belongs to the continuous time literature that analyzes capital structure via
contingent claim methods. This literature was initiated by the seminal Merton (1974) paper.
Duﬃe (2001) presents a textbook treatment.5 This literature takes the cash flow and control
rights of debt and equity claims as given and uses the risk neutral pricing approach of Cox
and Ross (1976) in a continuous time framework to price claims on a firm (including implicit
guarantees) by option valuation techniques. The present paper contributes to this literature
by explicitly modeling the incentives of the shareholders to take risk and the incentives of
the stakeholder to undertake a bailout.
Leland (1998) also models endogenous volatility choice. The present paper supports the
results in Leland (1998), in that it shows analytically the optimality of simple Markovian
“bang-bang” type volatility policies. However, the two papers have a diﬀerent focus and
consider diﬀerent frictions and choices, so that the optimal volatility process takes a diﬀerent
form. Specifically, in Leland (1998) shareholders have an incentive to increase rather than
4

See e.g. DeMarzo and Fishman (2007), DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006).
A representative sample of papers in this voluminous literature includes Ronn and Verma (1986), Leland
(1994), Leland and Toft (1996), Anderson and Sundaresan (1996), Lucas and McDonald (2005), Constantinides, Donaldson, and Mehra (2002), Pennacchi and Lewis (1994).
5

4

decrease volatility as net worth declines and termination looms.6 The reason is that in
Leland (1998) there are no bailouts or debt renegotiations, so that the terminal nature of
bankruptcy removes the incentives to mitigate risk that are present in this paper. Therefore,
in Leland (1998) the incentives to mitigate risk result from the callability of debt, rather than
the participation constraint of the stakeholder. For parsimony, and in order to illuminate
the new insights of the present paper, I abstract from taxes, callability, and the endogenous
choice of capital structure, so that the only reason to mitigate risk is the participation
constraint of the stakeholder. In such a context the optimal rule is for firms to increase their
volatility when their net worth is high and reduce it as they come close to bankruptcy, giving
rise to a “flight to quality” phenomenon.
The model is also related to a literature in financial economics that studies how commonly
observed risk management practices can lead to variations in institutional risk taking. See
e.g. Grossman and Zhou (1996), Basak (1995) Pavlova and Rigobon (2005), Basak and
Shapiro (2001), Gromb and Vayanos (2002). Taking these risk management approaches
as given, previous literature has recognized their importance in limiting a firm’s ability to
absorb risk during times of crisis. The contribution of this paper is to understand why the
prevailing risk management rules dictate risk limits that tighten as firm’s net worth declines.
There exists a voluminous literature on debt, default and reorganization, that I will
not attempt to summarize here.7 This literature studies the allocation of control and cash
flow rights, strategic default service, reorganization etc. There are several major diﬀerences
between the present paper and that literature. First of all, for the most part the present
paper studies the incentives to inject “new money” into a company, as opposed to splitting
the existing cash flows. Second, and more importantly, the present paper focuses on the
risk taking and risk management incentives of bailouts. By having an explicit intertemporal
framework, it becomes possible to address the important issue of commitment and rules in
the context of choosing optimal risk management policies.8
6

This result holds irrespective of whether one assumes commitment or not.
See Hart and Moore (1998) for a seminal contribution in this literature.
8
See e.g. Leland (1994) on the issue of commitment. In the context of banking, Ritchken, Thompson,
DeGennaro, and Li (1993) show that charter value can create risk management incentives. However, in their
7

5

As Leland (1998) points out, commitment (and the lack thereof) is a central issue behind
the asset substitution problem of Jensen and Meckling (1976). Recent literature in economic
theory and monetary economics has made advances in terms of making commitment an
endogenous choice rather than imposing it as an assumption.9 In the context of the asset
substitution problem studied in this paper, section 5 introduces a new approach to modeling
commitment and more generally regulations or self-regulations. This approach allows commitment that is somewhere between the two extremes of a) full commitment without any
requirement of time consistency and b) full dynamic consistency which completely precludes
firms from “tying their hands” through some form of covenant or regulation. The notion
of commitment that is proposed in section 5 allows for the possibility of reneging at a cost.
Therefore, commitment is not perfect, but it is not impossible either.
To endogeneize the extent of commitment, I let the involved parties choose both the risk
management rule and how large will be the cost if the commitment is abandoned. Furthermore, I assume that higher costs of reneging (more stringent regulations or self-regulations)
are associated with higher oppotunity costs associated with distortions, implementation,
monitoring etc..
Surprisingly, it turns out that endogeneizing commitment in this way implies two results:
a) Simple Markovian policies are optimal, since current decisionmakers have an incentive
to choose a commitment, that limits future shareholders’ temptation to renege. b) The
qualitative nature of the optimal risk management rule (high volatility in high net worth
states, low volatility in low net worth states) is not aﬀected by whether the commitment
is imposed as a regulation by the stakeholder or is voluntarily chosen by the shareholders;
only the distribution of the rents from the bailout depends on the party that determines the
volatility policy.
Motivated mostly by the Asian crisis, a literature in international economics considers the eﬀects of bailouts and balance sheet eﬀects for understanding crises in developing
simpler setup there are no commitment or strategic issues.
9
See e.g. Caruana and Einav (2008) for game theoretic applications and Giannoni and Woodford (2002)
for applications to monetary economics.

6

economies by taking a general equilibrium perspective.10 Typically, this literature does not
consider the incentives of the parties who undertake the bailout. The present paper takes
a microeconomic approach in order to understand jointly the incentives of stakeholders and
shareholders in a dynamic setting. The conclusions reached in this paper naturally complement the international finance literature, which is mostly concerned with general equilibrium
issues. An application of the present model is that levered institutions in developed markets
will rapidly decrease their risky positions in response to negative net worth shocks.11 Such
risk management practices could help explain contagion eﬀects not only across countries but
also across seemingly unrelated markets.12
Methodologically, the paper uses continuous time methods to analyze an intertemporal
incentive problem. Continuous time methods allow a close and explicit characterization of
the solution to dynamic incentive problems. However, the present paper diﬀers with the
dynamic contracting literature,13 since the goal is not to study the optimal design of debt
and equity or the dynamic evolution of a firm’s capital structure, the allocation of cash flows
etc.. The present paper takes the capital structure as given, and focuses exclusively on the
incentives to take risk and the incentives to undertake bailouts within a dynamic framework.
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 presents the setup of the basic model.
In order to expedite the presentation of the main result, Section 3 restricts attention to
Markovian policies and derives the optimal volatility policy in that class assuming the presence of full commitment. Section 4 presents several realistic extensions of the baseline model
and a discussion of its real world implications. Section 5 introduces the notion of imperfect/costly commitment and shows that Markovian commitments are optimal even after
allowing for general (potentially history dependent) commitment policies. Assuming imper10

See e.g. Schneider and Tornell (2004) and references therein.
An illustrative example is the behaviour of Japanese banks during the Asian financial crisis. (See
Kaminsky and Reinhart (2001).) It is interesting to note that one of the financing forms that most rapidly
evaporated during the East Asian crisis was short term lending by international banks - especially Japanese
and European banks - that provided the bulk of credit lending to these countries. The risk management
practices of these banks coupled with capital adequacy requirements are viewed by many researchers as
responsible for the prolonged capital flow reversal.
12
See e.g. Calvo (1999), Caballero and Panageas (2005)
13
See e.g. DeMarzo and Fishman (2007),DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006).
11

7

fect/costly commitment, section 6 establishes that the qualitative features of the optimal risk
management rule are the same irrespective of whether the rule is determined by the shareholders or by the stakeholder through regulation. Finally, section 7 presents the implications
of imperfect/costly commitment for times prior to the first bailout. Section 8 concludes. All
proofs are relegated to the appendix.

2

Model

The baseline model makes a number of simplifying assumptions for expositional reasons.
Several of the simplifying assumptions are relaxed in subsequent sections.

2.1

Lenders and the outside stakeholder

There are three types of agents in the baseline model: a continuum of competitive lenders, a
continuum of anonymous shareholders and an outside stakeholder, who derives some benefit
from the firm’s continued existence.
The lenders hold a fixed liability of the firm in the amount L. This liability remains
constant throughout time for simplicity. The firm also owns assets in the amount Wt , so
that the firm’s net worth at time t is Wt − L. The assets of the firm satisfy W0 > L at time
0.
The firm is a productive entity that can never fully eliminate the risks associated with
its operation. However, it can choose to invest its assets in projects involving either high
or low risk. Under the risk neutral measure14 both high and low risk projects yield an
expected return equal to the interest rate r per unit of time dt. However, projects involving
high risk have instantaneous volatility σ 2 , while less risky projects have a lower volatility
0 < σ 1 < σ 2 .15 The firm can costlessly adjust the fraction that it invests in high and low risk
14
Roughly speaking, pricing under the risk neutral measure means that the implied Arrow Debreu prices
in the market are used to determine the value of the firm. For more details on the relationship between
Arrow Debreu prices and risk neutral measures, see Duﬃe (2001).
15
The fact that σ 1 > 0 implies that the nature of the firm’s business is such, that it can never fully

8

projects. As a result, its assets follow a geometric Brownian Motion under the risk neutral
measure
dWt
= rdt + σ t dZt
Wt

(1)

where the drift r > 0 is the prevailing (real) interest rate in the economy, dZt is a standard
Brownian motion, and σ t presents the volatility of total assets. By constantly adjusting
the fraction it invests in high risk and low risk projects, a firm can attain any level of σ t ∈
[σ 1 , σ 2 ] for all t ≥ 0.
To keep the analysis simple, in the baseline model the firm can pay no intermediate
dividends to its shareholders until a random time τ , at which time it pays a liquidating dividend in the amount of Wτ − L. Section 4 relaxes this assumption and considers intermediate

dividends. The firm also pays a flow of rL to its lenders, up to the time of its liquidation.16

Liquidation occurs either exogenously or endogenously. Exogenous liquidation happens
at a random exponentially distributed time τ with constant hazard λ > 0. This will facilitate
the use of infinite horizon optimization techniques by making all solutions independent of
time. In addition to this exogenous arrival of termination, lenders can terminate the firm
prior to τ : By covenant, (or because lending is secured by the assets of the firm, or is
short term) they can enforce liquidation if the assets of the firm fall below its liabilities,
i.e. if Wt < L. This assumption and the associated simplicity of the bankruptcy trigger will
expedite the presentation of the results without aﬀecting the conclusions.
When the firm gets terminated by its lenders (“endogenous liquidation”), the outside
stakeholder incurs a monetary cost B. Purely for simplicity, I assume that this cost does not
arise if liquidation is exogenous.17 The source of the cost B typically depends on whether
eliminate risk. For instance, if the firm is a mortgage granting institution, σ 1 > 0 implies that there is
no perfectly safe mortgage. The idea that there is always some risk in a productive entity is a common
assumption in production economies (see e.g. Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross (1985)).
16
As Leland (1994), I assume that equity issuance can be used to finance the payments to the debtholders,
as long as shareholder value is positive.
17
This assumption can be easily relaxed without aﬀecting any of the results.

9

the firm is non-financial or financial. For the first type of companies, the cost B could have
political origins (e.g. the political cost associated with increased unemployment in a region).
For financial companies, the cost B could be interpreted as a fire sale or bankruptcy cost
due to rapid liquidation of the assets. In particular, assume that the outside stakeholder is
an insurer to the lenders and has committed to incur any fire sale or bankruptcy costs in the
event of a liquidation, so that debtholders do not experience any principal losses. In that
case, if the firm’s assets drop to L and the debtholders force liquidation of the firm, there
will be bankruptcy and fire sale costs in the amount of B, that the stakeholder will have to
incur.18 A further interpretation of B as an externality occurs when a firm has claimants of
diﬀerent seniority that could be hit asymmetrically by bankruptcy costs.19 B could also be
the result of systemic risk, or it could have reputational origins. For instance, at the onset
of the recent subprime lending crisis, several major investment banks bailed out structure
investment vehicles or hedge funds they were sponsoring, so as to shield their claimholders
from losing their invested capital.
Before proceeding, it should be noted that even though the assumption of a discrete
bankruptcy cost or externality B is critical for the results, the assumption about the existence
of an outside stakeholder isn’t. Section 4.1 presents a variant of the basic model where it is
the debtholders who incur the cost B rather than some outside stakeholder.
Whatever the reason for the cost or externality B, the outside stakeholder has the option
of making transfers to the firm in order to keep its assets above L, and hence prevent
liquidation by the lenders. In mathematical terms
(2)

dWt = rWt dt + σ t Wt dZt + dGt
18

For instance, a standard practice of major investment banks was to provide their structured investment
vehicles (SIV’s) with a guarantee to purchase their short term paper at fixed rates, if the need presented
itself. Economically this is identical to providing a guarantee to the debtholders of the fund. Similarly, the
deposit insurance agency of a given country might have to incur such bankruptcy costs in order to protect
the bank’s lenders.
19
As an example, consider a firm that has debt in the amount L = LS + LJ , whrere LS is senior debt and
J
L is junior debt. If there are bankruptcy costs in the amount B ≤ LJ and senior debtholders can request
liquidation once the firm’s assets reach L, then they can impose an externality on junior debtholders by
requesting liquidation.

10

where dGt ≥ 0 represents incremental transfers that can be used once Wt = L in order to
enforce Wt ≥ L for all t. Intuitively, one should think of these injections as follows: Each
time the firm’s assets Wt fall by an amount ε > 0 below L, the stakeholder transfers ε to the
firm. Since the stakeholder has no incentive to make transfers to the firm beyond the ones
that are absolutely necessary to ensure its existence, one can focus on the minimal process
that is required to keep Wt > L. Karatzas and Shreve (1991) (p.210-211) show that the
unique minimal process for Gt that will safeguard Wt ≥ L for all t is given by
Rt
0

½ µ
¶¾¸
∙
Z s
Z
dGs
1 s 2
. (3)
σ du +
σ u dZu
= max 0, max − log (W0 ) − log (L) + rs −
0≤s≤t
L
2 0 u
0

In the baseline model the stakeholder injects funds without receiving a share of the firm’s
dividends (or other form of security) in exchange for the transfers Gt . Section 4 enriches the
model to allow for this realistic extension.
A key assumption of the model is that the stakeholder has a choice on whether to bail
out the firm or not. In particular, once the assets of the firm become equal to its liabilities,
the stakeholder can decide whether to make the transfers dGt or to just let the lenders seize
the assets and terminate the firm.
Defining τ l to be the time of firm liquidation (be it exogenous or lender-induced), a
suﬃcient condition for the stakeholder to always prefer to bail out the firm is that the net
present value of the costs associated with keeping the firm alive is less than the benefit of
doing so

Et

ÃZ

t

τl

!

e−r(s−t) dGs |Wt = L

≤ B,

(4)

where the process Gt is given by (3). The expectation is taken under the risk neutral
measure, and so are all expectations in the rest of the paper. Since the firm controls the
volatility process σ t , it also influences the net present value of the transfers on the left hand
side of this equation.

11

2.2

Shareholders

The volatility choices of the firm are determined by its shareholders. Therefore, I use the
terms “the firm” and “the shareholders” interchangeably.
To determine the value of the firm to shareholders, observe that the total value of the
firm is given by Wt + Pt , where Pt is the value of the implicit option that the stakeholder
extends to the firm
Pt = Et

ÃZ

τl
−r(s−t)

e

dGs

t

!

(5)

The total value of the firm is just equal to the sum of the claims that debtholders and
shareholders hold. Letting Vt denote shareholder value and Dt denote debtholder value, one
obtains Wt + Pt = Vt + Dt . Since debtholders can always induce liquidation once Wt = L,
they hold eﬀectively riskless debt. Accordingly Dt = L. Using this observation, shareholder
value is
V (Wt ) = Wt − L + Pt

(6)

Equation (6) has two implications. First, diﬀerent volatility processes will aﬀect shareholder value through their eﬀect on the value of the guarantee Pt . Since Pt ≥ 0, shareholders
always have an incentive to induce the stakeholder to extend the guarantee once Wt = L.
To check intuition, it is also useful to confirm that the firm has an incentive to set
high levels of volatility in order to exploit the guarantee provided by the stakeholder. To
be more specific, ignoring temporarily the constraint (4) and assuming that the stakeholder
unconditionally guarantees the perpetual continuation of the firm until the time of exogenous
termination, the following result holds:
Lemma 1 Assume that τ l = τ in expression (5). Assume furthermore that volatility is

12

constant at the level σ for all t ≥ 0 and define α as:

α (σ) =

r³
−(r − 12 σ 2 ) −
r−

σ2
2

σ2

´2

+ 2σ 2 (r + λ)
<0

(7)

Then, the value of the stakeholder guarantee is given by:
L
P (Wt ; σ) =
|α (σ)|

µ

W
L

¶α(σ)

(8)

It is also straightforward to show the following result
Lemma 2 Assume that τ l = τ in expression (5). Then the volatility choice that maximizes
Pt is given by σ t = σ 2 .
In light of the above result, if the stakeholder extended an unconditional and perpetual
guarantee to the firm, then the shareholder value maximizing choice of volatility would be to
set σ t equal to its upper bound σ 2 for all t > 0. This captures the standard asset substitution
intuition of unconditional guarantees.
The above two Lemmas only apply if the guarantee is unconditional. The focus of this
paper, however, is on guarantees that are implicit, i.e. guarantees that will only be extended
if (4) is satisfied. In order to make the problem interesting, I make the following assumption:
Assumption 1
P (L; σ 1 ) =

L
L
<B<
= P (L; σ 2 )
|α (σ 1 )|
|α (σ 2 )|

(9)

In light of Lemma 1 and equation (4), assumption 1 has two implications: a) to ensure
that the firm has at least one feasible choice of volatility that will make it possible to satisfy
the constraint (4) (namely by setting σ t = σ 1 ) and b) to impose that setting volatility equal
to the upper bound σ 2 for all t > 0 will violate the constraint (4).
In the baseline model, B is a time invariant constant that satisfies assumption 1. Previewing results, this will imply that optimal volatility choices will always induce the stakeholder
13

to bail out the firm. Section 4.3 presents a simple example where B is time-varying and
shows that termination can occur in equilibrium.

2.3

Commitment and risk management rules

The above discussion illustrates the tension that is at the core of this paper. On the one
hand, shareholders would like to set high volatility levels in order to increase the value of the
implicit guarantee. On the other hand, if volatility choices are too large, then it will become
too expensive for the stakeholder to extend the guarantee.
To resolve this tension, I introduce commitment via some form of regulation that I will
refer as a “risk management rule”. Commitment serves the purpose of reassuring the stakeholder that the firm will not exploit the implicit protection.
To expedite the presentation of the key results, this section makes several simplifying
assumptions: Specifically, once the firm is started shareholders have the ability to precommit costlessly and perfectly as to how future volatility will be determined. Furthermore,
shareholders can only formulate Markovian commitments, i.e. the promised volatility choice
depends exclusively on the state variable Wt . Finally, the risk management rule is determined
in a shareholder-value maximizing way.
Section 5 relaxes all these simplifying assumptions by allowing arbitrary adapted policies
(i.e. not necessarily Markovian policies). Furthermore, that section allows for the possibility
of imperfect and costly commitment, in the sense that the risk management rule can be
circumvented at a cost. Section 6 discusses the case where the stakeholder can impose the
risk management rule on the shareholders via regulation or law. The main result of sections
5 and 6 is that the features of the optimal risk management rule are not altered by these
extensions.
In light of the simplifying assumptions introduced in the present section, determining the
optimal risk management rule amounts to solving the following problem.
Problem 1 Let M denote the class of Markovian policies, i.e. policies of the form σ t =
14

f(Wt ) for some f : [L, ∞) → [σ 1 , σ 2 ]. Then for any Wt , choose σ so as to maximize
(10)

max P (Wt ; σ)
σ∈M

subject to the constraint
P (L) ≤ B.

(11)

In light of (6) maximizing P (Wt ; σ) is equivalent to maximizing shareholder value. Hence,
the objective (10) is the familiar shareholder value maximization objective, while (11) simply
re-states the stakeholder’s participation constraint (4) taking into account that the Markovian nature of the volatility policies makes Pt also Markovian.

3

Solution

3.1

The set of feasible payoﬀs

The first step towards solving problem 1 is to characterize the set of payoﬀ functions P (W )
that can be attained by σ(W ) ∈ M, while also satisfying (11). This is the purpose of the
next Lemma.
Lemma 3 Let the payoﬀ function P be defined as in (5), and assume that it satisfies constraint (11). Then the following results hold for any σ(W ) ∈ M :
1. In the domain (L, ∞) , P satisfies the ordinary diﬀerential equation
σ2 (W ) 2
W PW W + rPW W − (r + λ)P = 0
2

(12)

2. P is within the bounds 0 ≤ P (W ) ≤ B for all W ∈ [L, ∞). At +∞ the function P
satisfies limW →∞ P (W ) = 0
15

3. P ∈ C 1 and the derivatives of P satisfy PW (L) = −1, PW < 0, PW W > 0.
Lemma 3 states several properties of any feasible payoﬀ function. The first property
is a familiar Black-Scholes type diﬀerential equation. Heuristically, it can be derived by
observing that Pt is a “claim” whose rate of appreciation in the domain [L, ∞) is equal to
the sum of the interest rate r and the hazard rate of termination λ
dE (Pt )
= (r + λ) Pt
dt
Using Ito’s Lemma,

dE(Pt )
dt

(13)
can be expressed as

σ2 (W )
W 2 PW W
2

+ rPW W . Combining Ito’s

Lemma with (13) leads to (12).
Property 2 in Lemma 3 places upper and lower bounds on the set of feasible payoﬀs.20
Property 3 has a somewhat more intricate proof, which is given in the appendix. It is however
straightforward to give a heuristic intuition for PW (L) = −1. Consider a situation where the
assets of the firm fall below L by a small amount ε. Assuming participation compatibility,
the stakeholder will intervene in order to restore the assets back to L by making a transfer of
ε. Therefore, it is as if the “claim” P pays a “dividend” ε and the state variable W is reset
back to L. Therefore P (L − ε) = ε + P (L). Expanding the left hand side of this equation
in a Taylor fashion around L gives P (L) − εPW (L) = ε + P (L). Cancelling P (L) from both
sides and dividing by ε gives PW (L) = −1.
20

To see why P will always be between those two bounds, fix a t ≥ τ 0 and let τ L be the first time (after
t) such that Wτ L = L. Then
´
³
´
³
L
L
P (Wt ) = Et e−(r+λ)(τ −t) Pτ L ≤ Et e−(r+λ)(τ −t) B ≤ B
(14)
The first equality in (14) follows from dGs = 0 for all s ∈ [t, τ L ] . The first inequality in (14) follows by
L
constraint (11) and the second inequality follows since e−(r+λ)(τ −t) ≤ 1.

16

3.2

The optimization problem as a regular optimal control problem

Note that P (Wt ) in the maximization problem 1 can be rewritten as
P (Wt ) = P (L) +

Z

∞

L

P 0 (x)1{x < Wt }dx

1{x < Wt } is an indicator function taking the value 1 if x < Wt and 0 otherwise. Assuming
that the participation constraint binds, P (L) = B.(Lemma 6 in section 5 verifies that this
constraint optimally binds). Furthermore, using the characterization of all attainable payoﬀs
from Lemma 3, one can rewrite the optimization problem 1 as a standard (deterministic)
optimal control problem using (P, P 0 ) as state variables
max
σ(x)

Z

∞

L

P 0 (x)1{x < Wt }dx
⎤
⎡
∙ ¸
∙ 0¸
0
1
P
⎦ P
⎣
=
2(r+λ) 1
P0
P 00
− σ2r2 x1
σ 2 x2
∙
¸
∙ ¸
P (L)
B
=
, lim P (x) = 0
P 0 (L)
−1 x→∞

(15)
(16)
(17)

Equation (16) is simply a transformation of the second order equation (12) into a system
of two first order ordinary diﬀerential equations, while equation (17) gives the boundary
conditions of the state variables (P, P 0 ) at L and ∞.
Letting π 1 , π2 denote the co-state variables for the two state variables (P, P 0 ) , the Hamiltonian for this optimal control problem is
H = 1{x < Wt }P 0 (x) + π 1 P 0 (x) + π 2

2
1
1
((r + λ) P (x) 2 − rP 0 (x) )
2
σ
x
x

(18)

The fact that P 00 > 0 (by Lemma 3) implies that ((r + λ) P (x) x12 − rP 0 (x) x1 ) > 0 (by [12]).

17

Hence, maximizing H w.r.t. σ gives the optimal policy
½
σ1 if π 2 > 0
σ (x) =
σ 2 if π 2 < 0
∗

(19)

By standard optimal control theory, the co-state variables must satisfy:
π̇ 1 = −

2 (r + λ) 1
π2
[σ ∗ (x)]2 x2

(20)

π̇ 2 = − (π 1 + 1{x < Wt }) + r

1

2

(21)

π2
[σ ∗ (x)]2 x

The form of (19) suggests that the optimal policy will have a “bang-bang” form, with a
switch at the point W ∗ where π 2 changes sign. Motivated by this observation, a reasonable
conjecture is that the optimal policy is of the form
∗

σ (x) =

½

σ 1 if x < W ∗
σ 2 if x ≥ W ∗

(22)

for an appropriately chosen constant W ∗ . The next Lemma uses policy (22) to determine
a closed form solution for P (Wt ; σ ∗ ) taking an arbitrary W ∗ ≥ L as given. It then determines

W ∗ in such a way as to satisfy the boundary condition P (L; σ ∗ ) = B. In a final step,
Proposition 1 verifies that (22) solves (19), and hence is optimal.
Lemma 4 Take an arbitrary W ∗ > L and suppose that shareholders adopt policy σ ∗ of
equation (22). Then P (Wt ; σ ∗ ) is given by

P (Wt ; σ ∗ )
=
L

¡ Wt ¢α+1
½ L

−
−
α−
α+
L
1 −α1
2 −α1
+ W∗
α−
−α
2
1


−
−
α+ −α−
−
+ α2 −α1
1
α1 −α1 − + WL∗ 1
α2 −α1

(

)

(

)

−

¡ Wt ¢α−1
L

1


−
−
α+ −α−
−
+ α2 −α1
1
α1 −α1 − + ( WL∗ ) 1


−
−
α−
α−
L
2 −α1 −1
2 −α1
∗
−
+
W
α2 −α1

−
−
α+
α−
−
L
1 −α1
2 −α1
α1 −α+
∗
1 α− −α+ W
2
1


(

)

(

18

)

α2 −α1

¡ Wt ¢α−2
L

if L ≤ Wt ≤ W ∗

if Wt > W ∗
(23)

where

α±
1

=

³
− r−

σ21
2

´

r³
±
r−

σ21
2

σ 21

´2

+ 2σ 21 (r

+ λ)
and

α±
2

=

³
− r−

σ 22
2

´

r³
±
r−

σ 22

σ 22
2

´2

+ 2σ 22 (r + λ)
(24)

Accordingly, P (L; σ ∗ ) = B if and only if W ∗ is chosen as:

W∗ = L

"µ

α−
2
α−
2

−
−

¶
α+
1
α−
1

¢# − 1 +
¡
α1 −α1
1 + BL α−
1
¡
¢
1 + BL α+
1

(25)

Lemma 4 determines the appropriate value of W ∗ , that makes the policy of equation (22)
satisfy (11). The appendix solves the diﬀerential equations (20), (21), and confirms that
this policy also satisfies (19). It becomes then straightforward to establish the optimality of
policy σ ∗t :
Proposition 1 Let σ ∗t be defined as in (22) with W ∗ given by (25). Then
P (Wt ; σ ∗t ) ≥ P (Wt ; σ t )
for any volatility policy σ t ∈ M and for any Wt ≥ L. The inequality becomes an equality if

σ t = σ ∗t .

This proposition implies that the firm will always follow a simple policy: keep volatility
at the lower bound σ 1 while Wt ≤ W ∗ , and then switch to maximal volatility σ 2 if current
assets Wt exceed W ∗ . The critical wealth level W ∗ is determined in such a way as to make
the key constraint (11) hold as an equality.
Why is it optimal for the firm to lower, instead of raise volatility as its net worth declines
? To see intuitively why, let τ 0 be a time when Wτ 0 = L, fix a level W1 > L and let τ 1 be
the first time after τ 0 such that Wτ 1 = W1 . Because of (4), the continuation value Pτ 1 must

19

satisfy the constraint
Eτ 0

µZ

τ1
−(r+λ)(s−τ 0 )

e

τ0

¶

¡
¢
dGs + Pτ 1 Eτ 0 e−(r+λ)(τ 1 −τ 0 ) ≤ B,

which implies that

Pτ 1 ≤

B − Eτ 0

³R
τ1
τ0

e−(r+λ)(s−τ 0 ) dGs

Eτ 0 (e−(r+λ)(τ 1 −τ 0 ) )

´

≤

B − minσs∈[τ 0 ,τ 1 ] Eτ 0

³R
τ1
τ0

e−(r+λ)(s−τ 0 ) dGs

minσs∈[τ 0 ,τ 1 ] Eτ 0 (e−(r+λ)(τ 1 −τ 0 ) )

´

. (26)

The rightmost expression of equation (26) gives an upper bound to the continuation
value that can be assigned at time τ 1 . It is possible to show that the solution to the two
minimization problems of equation (26) is obtained by setting σ s∈[τ 0 ,τ 1 ] = σ 1 . This is intuitive:
By setting volatility at the lowest level between τ 0 and τ 1 , it becomes possible to obtain the
highest possible guarantee value at time τ 1 , while still satisfying (4). Of course, after a
certain point, the optimal risk management rule needs to switch to high levels of volatility
in order to “deliver” on these high continuation values to the shareholders.
Proposition 1 is the main result of the paper. It illustrates that the optimal risk management rule is to set high volatilities when the firm is doing well (in the sense that it has a high
net worth) and reduce volatility when the firm’s net worth declines. The rest of the paper
studies how general is this conclusion. The next section describes variations and extensions
of the baseline model, that take into account the many forms that real-world bailouts take.
Section 5 introduces costly and imperfect commitment and shows that Markovian policies
are optimal. The last two sections develop implications of costly and imperfect commitment.
Section 6 discusses cases, where the stakeholder has all the bargaining power and can impose
the risk management rule via law or regulation, while Section 7 discusses implications of the
model for times prior to the first bailout.

20

4

Extensions and Discussion

4.1

Absence of a stakeholder and debt forgiveness

It seems reasonable to ask if the model’s predictions carry through even in cases where no
stakeholder is present. To answer this question, this subsection discusses a simple model with
only shareholders and debtholders. It is possible to show in a simple and stylized variant of
the previous model that optimal principal writedowns can produce eﬀects that are similar
to bailouts.21
Specifically, this subsection keeps all the assumptions made sofar with the exceptions
that 1) there is no stakeholder and hence dGs = 0, 2) endogenous liquidation makes the
firm’s assets instantaneously decline by a fraction b < 1, i.e. Wτ + = (1 − b) Wτ − , and most
importantly 3) whenever Wτ < Lτ the debtholders either have the option to declare the firm
bankrupt and obtain its assets that are worth (1 − b) Wτ , or they can forgive debt ∆Lτ < 0
so as to ensure that Lτ + ∆Lτ = Wτ . Under these assumptions, if a firm has survived by
time t, it means that Lt is given by
Lt = min{L0 , min Ws }.
0≤s≤t

A suﬃcient condition to induce debtholders to always prefer to write down principal is
that for every time τ such that Wτ = Lτ , the value of a bankrupt firm is less than the
anticipated present value of interest and principal payments. Mathematically,
(1 − b) Wτ ≤ Eτ

Z

τ

τL

h
i
L
e−r(s−τ ) (rLs )ds + Eτ e−r(τ −τ ) Lτ L for all τ : Wτ = Lτ

(27)

Applying integration by parts on the right hand side of (27), using the fact that Wτ = Lτ ,
21

For a rich and tractable model that studies allocation of cash flows and strategic debt service within a
dynamic valuation framework, see Anderson and Sundaresan (1996). Sundaresan and Wang (2007) study
strategic debt service in the presence of real options.

21

and simplifying gives the simpler condition:
−Eτ

Z

τ

τL

e−r(s−τ ) dLs ≤ bLτ .

(28)

Notice that (28) has a form that is quite similar to (4) except that dGs is replaced by
−dLs (recall that dLs < 0) and the right hand side is proportional to Lτ .
Assuming that equation (28) will always be satisfied, shareholder value is given by

V (Wt , Lt ) = Wt −Et

Z

τL

t

i
h
L
e−r(s−t) (rLs )ds+Et e−r(τ −t) (Wτ L − Lτ L ) = Wt −Lt + Pb(Wt , Lt )

where Pb(Wt , Lt ) is defined as
Pb(Wt , Lt ) ≡ −Et

Z

τL

e−r(s−t) dLs .

(29)

t

Assuming that one can constrain attention to volatility policies that set σ t as a function of
the asset to liability ratio wt ≡

Wt
,
Lt

then the following analog of Lemma 3 obtains.

Lemma 5 Let the payoﬀ function Pb be defined as in (29), and assume that it satisfies (28).
Then the following results hold for any σ(wt )

1. There exists a function p(wt ) such that Pb(Wt , Lt ) = Lt p(wt ). In the domain (1, ∞) ,
p (wt ) satisfies the ordinary diﬀerential equation
σ 2 (w) 2
w pww + rpw w − (r + λ)p = 0
2
2. p is within the bounds 0 ≤ p (w) ≤ b for all w ∈ [1, ∞). At +∞ the function p satisfies
limw→∞ p(w) = 0.
3. p ∈ C 1 and the derivatives of p satisfy pw (1) = −1 + p(1), pw < 0, pww > 0.

22

The proof of this Lemma is practically identical to the proof of Lemma 3 and is therefore
omitted.22
Given the similarity between the characteristics of feasible payoﬀs of Lemma 3 and Lemma
5, the volatility policy that maximizes p(wt ) has a similar form. Indeed, assuming that
1
1
,
− ≤ b ≤
1 − α1
1 − α−
2
and repeating the same logic of section 3, one obtains that the optimal policy is given by

σ ∗ (x) =

∙ n³
´³
´o − 1 + ¸
+
−
α−
−α
1+bα
−b
α1 −α1
2
1
1
½σ1 if x ∈ 1,
α− −α−
1+bα+ −b
2

σ 2 if x ≥

n³

1

´³
+

α−
2 −α1
−
α−
2 −α1

1

1+bα−
1 −b
1+bα+
1 −b

´o

1
+
α−
1 −α1

Notice that the optimal policy has the same familiar form as before: choose high volatilities
when the asset to liability ratio is high and switch to low volatilities when the asset to
liability ratio is low.
In summary, this section showed that the assumption of a stakeholder is not crucial for
the key results. All that is required is a discrete drop in the value of assets upon bankruptcy.
Of course in reality debt renegotiations are much more complex than outright principal
writedowns. In most cases the existing debt is exchanged for some other claim (for instance
some debt with alternative terms, equity etc.) The next subsection discusses such cases.
22

The only part that requires some explanation is the fact pw = −1 + p(1). This follows from the fact
that when Wt declines below Lt by a small ε we obtain Pb(Lt − ε, Lt ) = ε + Pb(Lt − ε, Lt − ε). (This follows
because once Wt becomes smaller than L by ε > 0, the assets Wt don’t change but Lt is reset downward by
ε.) Taking a first order Taylor expansion leads to Pb(Lt − ε, Lt ) = Pb(Lt − ε, Lt − ε) + εPbL (Lt − ε, Lt − ε) + o(ε)
b
where o(ε)
ε → 0 as ε → 0. Combining the last two equations gives εPL (Lt − ε, Lt − ε) + o(ε) = ε. Dividing by
t
b
b
ε and sending ε → 0 leads to PL (Lt , Lt ) = 1. Since P (Wt , Lt ) = Lt p(wt ), and wt = W
Lt it follows at once
that PbL (Lt , Lt ) = p(1) − p0 (1) and therefore pw (1) = −1 + p(1). Since any optimal policy should make the
constraint (28) binding, it follows that p(1) = b and pw (1) = −1 + b.

23

4.2

Bailouts and Security Issuance

In the baseline model bailouts have taken the form of direct transfers. In reality, the stakeholder undertaking the bailout often obtains some form of security in exchange for injecting
funds. To have a simple example, return to the baseline model and suppose that the first
time that Wt = L, the firm gives the stakeholder a claim to a share x < 1 of the firm’s liquidating dividends in exchange for receiving the transfer process Gt as described by equation
(3).
Since the shareholder value of the firm is given by (6), and Wt = L, the total value of the
firm (including the newly issued shares) is Pt . By obtaining a fraction x of the firm’s shares,
the cost of the bailout to the shareholder is reduced to (1 − x) Pt and hence the constraint
(4) becomes

(1 − x) Et

ÃZ

τl

t

!

e−r(s−t) dGs |Wt = L

≤B

(30)

More importantly, even though the value of the firm to the original shareholders is now
xPt , the same volatility commitments that maximize Pt will maximize xPt , and all the
analysis of the paper can be repeated after replacing the constraint (4) with (30).
An alternative way to think about equation (30) is as follows: Through the bailouts, the
stakeholder “pays” an amount Pt (this is the net present value of the transfers) to purchase
shares that are worth (1 − x) Pt . Hence, she eﬀectively purchases over-priced shares, which
results in a net transfer to the original shareholders. Whether the transfer takes the form of
outright cash injections, or purchases of “over-priced” shares has no material consequence
for the analysis.
It should also be clear that the above argument does not depend on the type of claim
that stakeholders obtain. As long as a) the firm survives once Wt = L, b) the shareholder
retains some non-zero cash flow rights on the liquidating dividend, and c) the debtholder gets
repaid capital and interest in all states of the world, then the stakeholder must be purchasing
overpriced securities.
24

Even though the argument of this subsection was developed in the context of the baseline
model, it carries over also to the case of principal writedowns (section 4.1). In particular,
the conclusions of this section also apply to the setups, where the debtholders write down
principal in exchange for obtaining equity - a common outcome of renegotiations to avoid
bankruptcy.
Finally, a practical implication of allowing security issuance during a bailout is that the
guarantee-extending party can even gain from a bailout ex-post, even though ex-ante the
bailout is not profitable.

4.3

Temporary Externalities

Realistically, it is sometimes observed that firms wind down after being bailed out. The
present framework allows for this, if one assumes that externalities are temporary. In reality,
one motivation for bailouts is that there is a temporary shortage of liquidity in the market
that could produce large termination costs B. With the passage of time however, and with
active search for buyers for the firm’s assets, these costs could be eliminated.
To model such a situation in the simplest possible way, suppose that after bailing out
a firm (i.e. the first time that Wt = L), the stakeholder can start a project to reduce the
termination cost B (such as searching for an appropriate buyer for the firm’s assets). This
project has a constant hazard rate of success β. However, if the project succeeds, it can
reduce the externality from B down to 0.23
This modification of the setup can be easily accommodated by changing equation (12) to
σ 2 (W ) 2
W PW W + rPW W − (r + λ + β)P = 0.
2

(31)

Equation (31) asserts that once the stakeholder starts her eﬀorts to eliminate the externality, the overall hazard rate of guarantee termination is λ + β. This stylized setup shows
23

The results also go through when B drops to a level smaller than
violated.

25

L
|α(σ 1 )| ,

because then assumption 1 is

that if bailouts are associated with active eﬀorts by the stakeholder to reduce the externality
produced by the firm, then one should expect that bailouts will be temporary phenomena.

4.4

Bailouts through mergers and acquisitions

Especially in government sponsored bailouts, there is pressure for the government to not
bailout the existing shareholders for reasons of “fairness”. However, in many such cases
the government may still try to salvage the company by finding a buyer, who acquires the
company with all of its assets and its liabilities. In such a situation the government and the
buyer typically enter negotiations. The joint surplus that the government and the buyer can
obtain is B, i.e. the cost of liquidating the firm. In these negotiations the government may
agree (implicitly or explicitly) to provide transfers to the buyer in order to incentivize him or
her to acquire the company24 and the buyer will have an incentive to give a volatility promise
that satisfies the constraint (4). From this point on, one can simply repeat the analysis of
the baseline version of the model. Furthermore, if political redistribution concerns imply
that the amount of time that the new shareholders can enjoy the government’s protection is
exponentially distributed with parameter β, then the model from the perspective of the new
buyer becomes formally equivalent to the model of temporary externalities of the subsection
4.3.25
In summary, the model’s qualitative predictions do not depend on whether it is the
existing shareholders or the new buyers who enter the volatility management commitment.
As long as there is a surplus to be had, negotiations between the government and the acquiror
will give the acquiror the incentives to enter a volatility commitment. (See also section 6 for
the case where the government has some bargaining power.)

4.5

Intermediate Dividends

24

For instance in the recent bailout of Bear Stearns by JP Morgan, the government agreed to provide a
muti-billion dollar credit line to JP Morgan in order to provide incentives for the acquisition.
25
One can extend the model in a straightforward way to allow for repeated purchases of the company
by newly arriving buyers, once the “grace” period of past buyers has elapsed and the company is about to
become bankrupt again.

26

Finally, the assumption that the firm only distributes a terminal dividend can easily be
relaxed. Specifically, assume that the firm distributes a constant fraction δ of its assets as
dividends to shareholders. In this case, equation (2) becomes
dWt = (r − δ) Wt dt + σ t Wt dZt + dGt .
The expression for shareholder value, however, is still given by (6). The reason is that
the total value of the firm is still given by Wt + Pt and the claim of the debtholders is still
L. The only subtlety introduced by intermediate dividends is that equation (12) becomes
σ 2 (W ) 2
W PW W + (r − δ) PW W − (r + λ)P = 0.
2
e = λ +δ, all the expressions obtained in Lemma 4 and
Accordingly, letting re = r −δ and λ

Proposition 1 continue to apply in the presence of intermediate dividends with re replacing r

e replacing λ.26
and λ

5

Imperfect and Costly commitment

So far, the paper has only considered Markovian policies. A voluminous literature restricts
attention to Markovian policies on a priori informational grounds.27 However, a more important reason why the analysis sofar has focused attention on such policies, is that Markovian
policies turn out to be optimal in the space of all (possibly history-dependent) policies as
long as commitment is imperfect and costly rather than perfect and costless.
To introduce the notion of imperfect and costly commitment, let τ 0 be the first time that
26

A more complex issue, that is beyond the scope of this paper, arises if dividends are assumed to be
endogenous. Then the shareholders have an incentive to distribute excessive dividends in order to maximize
the value of the guarantee. In that case the optimal commitment to the stakeholder needs to include
provisions not only about volatility choice, but about dividend distribution as well.
27
See e.g. Chapter 13 in the textbook of Fudenberg and Tirole (1991) for a list of papers that restrict
player’s actions to be Markovian. In the case where the players are firms, this restriction to “memory-less”
strategies is routinely motivated by the fact that firms -unlike individuals- are run by continuously changing
managers who may not have full access to the past history. However, they do know the current state variables.

27

Wτ 0 = L, so that the stakeholder needs to form a view as to how the firm will set volatility in
the future. Importantly, from this point onward shareholders will be able to choose arbitrary
adapted volatility policies.
In reality, commitment is likely to be imperfect and costly. To model these notions,
I assume that any risk management rule can be circumvented (i.e. abandoned) by future
shareholders at a cost I > 0. For instance, in a world of imperfect accounting, shareholders
can pay a cost and create legal entities or invest in oﬀ-balance sheet items that make it hard
to assess the value of the firm’s assets, thus allowing them to take extra risk.
To endogeneize the extent of commitment, I assume that the parties currently involved
in the formulation of a risk management rule can choose ex-ante the penalty I that future
shareholders will have to pay if they choose to deviate. In most real-world examples such a
choice is achieved by restricting the firm’s ability to invest in certain instruments. As already
noted, such restrictions can be circumvented -say by creating new legal entities. However, by
making the restrictions more stringent, the cost of circumventing them is likely to become
higher. In that sense, by making the restrictions more stringent, the current shareholders
and stakeholders can choose how costly it will be to circumvent the risk management rule.
Clearly, the higher I, the more credible any risk management rule will become. However,
it also seems plausible that rules that impose a high I may have other unintended distortions:
For instance, by making it very costly for a firm to engage in certain types of transactions
(such as derivatives, oﬀ-balance sheet and oﬀ-shore transactions) it also becomes hard for
the firm to use these instruments for tax-planning or risk sharing. To capture the idea
that more “draconian” commitment devices lead to more distortions, I assume that if future
shareholders’ cost of reneging is set to some level I, then current shareholders will incur a
monetary deadweight cost equal to kI, where k ∈ (0, 1). This is the “implementation cost”
associated with the risk management rule.
A novel implication of this setup is that since commitment is costly, both the rules and
the cost of reneging are jointly and endogenously determined. Diﬀerent choices of I between
0 and infinity span the spectrum between no commitment and limitless commitment.

28

The definitions that follow formalize the notions described above. In this section, shareholders have all the bargaining power and hence can choose both the risk management rule
and the penalties associated with deviation (self-regulation). The next section discusses the
opposite case, whereby the stakeholders can impose both the risk management rule and the
penalties via law or regulation.
In the following definitions, the notation σ s>t refers to the volatility process that is
adopted after time t. Importantly, σ s>t can be an arbitrary adapted process (i.e. not necessarily Markovian).

Definition 1 Let τ L be any time such that Wτ L = L. Then a volatility process σs is participation compatible if
P (L; σ s≥τ L ) ≤ B

(32)

Clearly, a stakeholder will never agree to bail out a firm at time τ L unless constraint (32)
is satisfied. The next definition captures the idea of commitment credibility.
Definition 2 Let τ 0 be the time at which the commitment is entered. Fix a t > τ 0 and let
χ be the first time after t, such that Wχ = L. For a given level of I, a volatility process σs≥τ 0
is credible if for all t and Wt
"

#

P (Wt ; σ s≥t ) ≥ sup Ee−(r+λ)(χ−t) sup P (L; σ s≥χ ) − kI − I
σ s∈(t,χ)

σs≥χ

(33)

and σ s≥χ is participation compatible.
Definition 2 captures the simple notion that the value of the guarantee under commitment
and/or the cost I should always be large enough, so that future shareholders will not find
it optimal to pay the cost I and then reset the volatility from that point on. The term
inside square brackets is the value that the shareholder can obtain by re-entering a new
promise at some future time χ > t, at which time the shareholders and the stakeholder will
29

have to contemplate a new bailout. The term supσs∈(t,χ) Ee−(r+λ)(χ−t) captures the idea that
shareholders can choose volatility freely between t and χ, if they choose to renege.
Definition 2 implies that for any given volatility process σs≥t , there exists a minimal
amount Ib (σ s≥t ) that will make that volatility process credible.28

With all these definitions in hand, it is now possible to give the definition of an optimal

volatility process.
Definition 3 Let Ib (σ) = min I ∈ [0, ∞) such that σ s≥τ 0 is credible. A volatility process
σ ∗s≥τ 0 is optimal if it is participation compatible, and

¢
¡
¢
¡
P L; σ ∗s≥τ 0 − kIb σ ∗s≥τ 0 ≥ P (L; σs≥τ 0 ) − kIb (σ s≥τ 0 )

(34)

for any other participation compatible σ s≥τ 0 .

According to this definition, a process σ ∗s≥τ 0 is optimal if it is participation compatible
and maximizes the value of the implicit guarantee net of the costs that are required to ensure
its credibility.
It will be useful at this stage to make a conjecture, that is verified later. Let τ L denote
any time at which Wτ L = L. Then
P (L; σ ∗s≥τ L ) = B

(35)

In particular the conjecture (35) applies to time τ 0 .
Given conjecture (35), the search for the optimal commitment σ∗s≥τ 0 amounts to minimizing Ib (σ s≥τ 0 ) over all policies that satisfy (35). Intuitively, shareholders would like to

put the stakeholder against her participation constraint, while keeping the implementation
cost kIb (σ s≥τ 0 ) as low as possible. An additional implication of (35) is that equation (33)
28

Since the volatilities are bounded, both the left hand side and the second term on the right hand side
are bounded.

30

becomes
−(r+λ)(χ−t)

P (Wt ; σ s≥t ) ≥ [B − kI] sup Ee
σs∈(t,χ)

µ

Wt
− I = [B − kI]
L

¶α(σ2 )

−I

(36)

The rightmost equality of (36) asserts that once shareholders renege, they will set volatility to the highest possible level, until they have to negotiate with the stakeholder again.29
Given this constant volatility choice, the expression Ee−(r+λ)(χ−t) has a simple closed form
expression30 given by (Wt /L)α(σ2 ) .
Re-arranging equation (36) and recognizing that Ib will have to be determined so that

(36) holds at all times and for all levels of Wt gives
Ib (σ s≥τ 0 ) = max

B

Wt ≥L

¡ Wt ¢α(σ2 )
L

− inf t≥τ 0 P (Wt ; σ s≥t )
¡ ¢α(σ2 )
1 + k WLt

(37)

Under conjecture (35), the aim of the shareholders is to choose a volatility process that will
b while satisfying (35).
minimize I,

Equation (37) implies that Ib is a decreasing function of the continuation values P (Wt ; σ s≥t ) .

Between two participation compatible commitments, the one that implies higher continua-

tion values at each point in time, will be preferred since shareholders in the future will be
less tempted to renege. Accordingly, Ib will be lower.

An important implication of (37) is that shareholders at two times t1 and t2 such that

Wt1 = Wt2 are treated symmetrically; equation (37) implies that it is only min(Pt1 , Pt2 ) that
matters for the determination of Ib (σ s≥τ 0 ), whether t1 < t2 or t2 > t1 . This time invariance

makes Markovian policies (that set by definition Pt1 = Pt2 ) optimal. Formally, this is shown
in the next proposition.
Proposition 2 For any (potentially non-Markovian) participation compatible policy σ,
b
Finally, for the Markovian policy σ ∗
there exists a lower bound Ib∗ , such that Ib∗ ≤ I(σ).
29
30

The proof of this fact follows the same steps as Lemma 2 and is omitted.
See Øksendal (2003), p. 217.

31

b ∗ ).
of equation (22), one obtains Ib∗ = I(σ

Proposition 2 shows that the policy of equation (22) is optimal, since it attains the lower

bound Ib∗ , while satisfying the constraint (35).3132
The last step is to verify the conjecture (35).

Lemma 6 It is always optimal for constraint (32) to hold as an equality.

6

Allocation of bargaining power

In several realistic situations risk management rules are imposed by the stakeholder via
regulation. Assuming costly commitment, this section shows that the distinction between
regulation and self-regulation aﬀects the rents of the two parties, but not the qualitative
features of the optimal rule.
To be precise, suppose that the shareholders of the firm have some outside option when
Wτ = L. Such an outside option could be the result of legal diﬃculties in enforcing absolute
priority, or more simply it could result from some scarce expertise that the shareholders can
use elsewhere if the firm gets liquidated. Whatever the source, suppose that the monetary
value of this outside option is ve ∈ (P (L; σ 1 ) , B). Since shareholders can always “walk away”

An implication of Proposition 2 is that there exists a minimum amount of Ib∗ , that needs to be paid in
order to insure the credibility of any participation compatible policy. A corollary of Proposition 2 that can
be proven in a similar way, is that it is impossible to find any participation compatible strategy unless the
firm pays at least Ib∗ . From a practical perspective this shows that the conclusions of the model are robust
to how exactly one models credibility. Specifically, definition 2 requires that a commitment be credible at
all states and dates. This assumption may seem too strong at first. However, the above argument implies
that participation compatibility alone and by itself places a lower bound on I. The reason is intuitive. If I is
not large enough, then the stakeholder anticipates that the shareholders will renege, which in turn increases
the stakeholder’s cost and makes it harder to satisfy the constraint (32). Hence, as long as one requires
the rather unobjectionable property of participation compatibility, the proposed policy of this paper will be
optimal.
32
Proposition 2 does not assert that σ ∗ is the unique policy that attains the lower bound Ib∗ . However, it
does assert that no other participation compatible (potentially non-Markovian) policy can improve on the
markovian policy σ ∗ .
31

32

with ve, it must be the case that
b ≥ ve
P (L; σ) − kI(σ)

(38)

Now suppose that the stakeholder can determine the risk management rule and the associated
punishments. Since the stakeholder is trying to minimize the value of the implicit guarantee,
the stakeholder has an incentive to impose a risk management rule that will make equation
(38) hold as an equality. However, as long as the assumptions of section 5 still hold, and
shareholders could deviate from the prescribed policy at some cost I, then the optimal policy
b
that minimizes P (L; σ) is the one that minimizes the implementation cost k I(σ).
To see this,

b
note that since (38) has to hold as an equality it follows that P (L; σ) = ve + kI(σ)
for any
b
policy and hence minσ P (L; σ) = ve+k minσ I(σ).
(It should also be noted here, that it doesn’t

b
matter if the implementation cost kI(σ)
is “levied” on the shareholders or the stakeholder,
since it simply reduces the joint surplus.)

From this point on, the entire analysis of the paper is applicable, with the only exception
b
that the binding constraint P (L) = ve + kI(σ)
replaces the binding constraint (35). Since
the optimal policy has always the same qualitative form irrespective of the value of P (L),

it follows that the optimal risk management rule remains qualitatively intact: choose low
values of σ1 when Wt is lower than some threshold, and choose σ 2 when Wt is above that

threshold. However, the exact magnitude of the threshold, and hence the distribution of
rents, does depend on whether it is the stakeholder or the shareholders that choose the
optimal risk management rule.
In summary, the qualitative features of the optimal rule are invariant with respect to
the party that chooses the rule. Be it through regulation or self-regulation, an optimal rule
should “tempt” future shareholders as little as possible. By choosing a rule that postpones
the high volatilities for times when net worth is high, the anticipated growth rate of the value
of the guarantee is maximized. In turn, this reduces the temptation of future shareholders
b
to circumvent the risk management rule, which results in smaller required punishments I(σ)

b
and smaller distortions kI(σ).

33

7

The implications of the model for t < τ 0

In section 5, the discussion focused on risk management rules that are imposed at τ 0 , the
time at which the firm may be threatened with bankruptcy. However, risk management rules
are likely to take eﬀect already at time t < τ 0 .
To give an example suppose that at time 0 shareholders have the ability to start a firm by
making an equity contribution equal to W0 − L. If started, the firm will produce a total gain
equal to v0 to the shareholder and U0 to the stakeholder. For instance, if the stakeholder is
the government, the new firm will produce a positive externality because it will pay taxes,
reduce unemployment due to job market frictions etc. In a private sector context the new
firm could be a joint venture between an established firm (“the stakeholder”) and a smaller
firm with scarce abilities (“the shareholders”) that will lead to synergies. In either case, the
termination of the newly created firm could lead to an externality B for the stakeholder as
assumed throughout.
If the shareholders have an outside option with value equal to ve0 , (such as investing

abroad) then the firm will only get started if
W0 − L + v0 + P (W0 ) ≥ W0 − L + ve0 .

(39)

The left hand side of equation (39) is the value of the firm to shareholders once started, while
the right hand side is the value of the outside option. To make the situation interesting,
suppose that the stakeholder enjoys no benefit if the firm does not get created and that
v0 < ve0 and U0 ≥ e
v0 − v0 . In such a situation, there is an incentive for the stakeholder to
extend an implicit guarantee such that

ve0 − v0 ≤ P0 = E0

ÃZ

0

τl

e−r(s−t) dGs

!

≤ U0 .

(40)

Moreover, the risk management rule should also satisfy (32) since the stakeholder has the
possibility of “walking away” in the future. The inequality (40) leaves room for many possible

34

values of P0 . For instance, if shareholders have all the bargaining power then
P0 = E0

ÃZ

τl

e−r(s−t) dGs

0

!

(41)

= U0 ,

while P0 = ve0 − v0 when the stakeholder has all the bargaining power. I will focus on the

first case, since the latter one can be handled analogously. Assuming that the shareholders

b
(or the stakeholder) still have to incur costs kI(σ)
for any risk management rule σ that is
b
adopted at time 0, then the policy that satisfies (41) as an equality and minimizes I(σ)
is
given as follows.

Lemma 7 Let P ∗ (W ) ≡ P (W ; σ∗ ) be the value of the guarantee that is defined in Lemma
4 and let τ 0 be the first time that Wτ 0 = L. Letting W0 denote the assets of the firm at
c∗ ≤ W ∗ , such that
t = 0, and assuming that33 U0 ≥ P ∗ (W0 ), there exists a level of assets W

the optimal risk management rule prescribes the policy of equation (22) for t ≥ τ 0 , and the
following policy for t < τ 0 :
∗

σ (x) =

8

½

c∗
σ 1 if x < W
c∗
σ 2 if x ≥ W

Conclusion

This paper presented a model, whereby a firm is bailed out so as to avoid costs associated with
bankruptcy. The optimal actions for the stakeholder, the firm and the lenders were derived
endogenously. Even though the presence of an implicit guarantee increases the shareholders’
incentives to take risk, it also makes it more and more costly for the stakeholder to continue
33

The assumption U0 ≥ P ∗ (W0 ) is made purely to simplify the proof and save space. A full discussion of
the optimal policy for arbitrary values of U0 is beyond the illustrative scope of this Lemma. An empirical
advantage of this assumption is that a firm that hasn’t received bailouts in the past will have less tight risk
c∗ ≤ W ∗.
limits than firms that have received bailouts in the past, since W

35

providing the implicit protection.34
The optimal risk management rule is to increase volatility when the firm’s net worth is
high and reduce volatility when its net worth declines. This policy reduces future shareholders’ temptation to renege, when assets are safely above liabilities. At the same time, it keeps
the stakeholder at her participation constraint.
The predictions of the model seem to be qualitatively in line with existing risk management practices that tighten risk limits in response to declining net worth. Therefore, the
model provides a potential justification for existing risk management rules, and is consistent
with empirical phenomena such as flight to quality.

34

For a paper that shows that moral hazard is attenuated in an infinite horizon setting, see e.g. Panageas
and Westerfield (2005).

36

A

Appendix

Proof of Lemma 1.

Let τ W denote the first passage time to some W > Wt > L, defined as

τ W = inf s≥t {s : Ws ≥ W }. Consider the price of a guarantee that is terminated at either the
exogenous liquidation time τ l or τ W , whichever comes first
P (W ) (Wt ; σ) = Et

ÃZ

τ W ∧τ l

e−r(s−t) dGs

t

!

(42)

It is easiest to price this claim first and then take the limit as W → ∞ in order to arrive at (8).
One can use standard results to express P (W ) as
P (W ) (Wt ; σ) = Et

ÃZ

τW

e−(r+λ)(s−t) dGs

t

!

(43)

In order to construct P (W ) it is simplest to start by searching for a function that satisfies the
following properties
σ 2 Ws2 (W )
(W )
PW W + rPW Ws − (r + λ)P (W ) = 0
2

(44)

(W )

PW (L) = −1
P (W ) (W ) = 0
(W )

PW
(W )

Finding a PW

(45)
(46)

£
¤
< ∞ for all W ∈ L, W

(47)

that satisfies (44), along with the boundary conditions (45) and (46) is straight-

forward. With α given by (7) and α+ defined as

+

α =

r³
r−
−(r − 12 σ 2 ) +

σ2
2

σ2

´2

+ 2σ 2 (r + λ)
> 0,

the general solution to (44) is:
+

P (W ) (Wt ) = C1 Wtα + C2 Wtα

where C1 , C2 are arbitrary constants. One needs to determine the constants C1 , C2 so that (45)

37

and (46) hold. Carrying out this computation, yields the following unique solution to (44), that
satisfies (45), (46) and (47):

P

(W )

(Wt ) =

L
α

³

W
L

´α

+

Wtα −

W

α+

−

L
α

³

W
L

α+ α+
α L

´α

α+ −α

W
³ ´α

Wtα

W
L

(48)

It is now straightforward to verify that (48) is the solution to (43). Applying Ito’s Lemma to
P (W ) and taking expectations yields
0 = P (W ) (Wt )
h
i
W
−Et e−(r+λ)(τ −t) P (W ) (W ) +
"Z W
µ 2 2
¶ #
τ
(W )
−(r+λ)(s−t) σ Ws (W )
(W )
PW W + rPW Ws − (r + λ)P
e
ds
+Et
2
t
"Z W
#
τ
(W )
+Et
e−(r+λ)(s−t) σPW Ws dBs
t

+Et

"Z

τW

−(r+λ)(s−t)

e

t

(W )
PW (L)dGs

(49)

#

The second line in (49) is zero because of (46). The third line is zero because of (44). The fourth
£
¤
(W )
line is zero because σPW Ws is bounded for all W ∈ L, W by (47). Hence (49) reduces to
P

(W )

(Wt ) = −Et

"Z

τW

−(r+λ)(s−t)

e

t

(W )
PW (L)dGs

#

(50)

Combining (45) and (50) leads to (43).
To conclude the proof, let W → ∞ in equation (48) and apply the monotone convergence
¡ Wt ¢α
.
theorem to obtain limW →∞ P (W ) (Wt ) = P (Wt ) = − L
α
L
¡ Wt ¢α
Proof of Lemma 2. By Lemma 1, P (σ2 ) = P (W ; σ 2 ) = − L
is convex in W, because
α
L

α(σ 2 ) < 0. Hence P (σ2 ) satisfies the Hamilton Jacobi Bellman equation
max

σ∈[σ 1 ,σ 2 ]

½

σ 2 2 (σ2 )
W PW W
2

¾

(σ )

+ rW PW 2 − (r + λ) P (σ2 ) = 0.

(51)

The boundary conditions at L and at +∞ are the same as in Lemma 1. Given the continuous

38

diﬀerentiability of P (σ2 ) , a classical verification theorem along the lines of Fleming and Soner
(1993) implies that setting σ t = σ 2 is optimal.
Proof of Lemma 3. To show result 1, let U be any domain of the form: (L, W2 ) for arbitrarily
large W2 such that Wt < W2 < ∞. Consider now any stopping time τ U before Wt exits the domain
U. Then, by the definition of P and for any volatility process σ t :
i
h
U
e−(r+λ)t P (Wt ) = Et e−(r+λ)τ P (Wτ U )
This local martingale property of e−(r+λ)t P (Wt ) in the domain U implies that (12) holds and that
P ∈ C1 (for details see Øksendal (2003), Chapter 9). The first part of the proof of result 2 is

contained in the text (see equation [14]). To see why limW →∞ P (W ) = 0, define τ L = inf s≥t {s :
Ws = L} and note that for arbitrary x > t :
µ
µZ τ
¶¶
³
´
L
L
L
P (Wt ) = E e−(r+λ)(τ −t) E
e−r(s−τ ) dGs |Wτ L = L
≤ E e−(r+λ)(τ −t) B =
τL
´
³
´
¢ ³ −(r+λ)(τ L −t)
¡
¢
¡ L
L
B|τ L < x + Pr τ L ≥ x e−(r+λ)(x−t) E e−(r+λ)(τ −x) B|τ L ≥ x
= Pr τ < x E e
h ¡
i
¢
¡
¢
≤ B Pr τ L < x + Pr τ L ≥ x e−(r+λ)(x−t)
(52)
Now, fix an arbitrary ε > 0 and choose large x such that e−(r+λ)(x−t) =

ε
2B .

The properties of
¡ L
¢
ε
. In
Brownian motion imply that there always exists Wt large enough such that Pr τ < x < 2B

light of (52), this then implies that P (Wt ) < ε. Since ε can be chosen arbitrarily small, the result
follows.
Assertion 3 contains three specific statements. The first statement is that PW (L) = −1. To see
why this is so, take any W and define τ = inf{s ≥ t : Ws ≥ W }. Applying Ito’s Lemma to P gives:
−(r+λ)(T ∧τ −t)

e

P (WT ∧τ ) = P (Wt ) +
+

Z

T ∧τ

Z

T ∧τ

−(r+λ)(s−t)

e

t

µ

σ 2 (Ws ) 2
Ws PW W + rPW Ws − (r + λ)P
2

e−(r+λ)(s−t) PW σ(Ws )Ws dBs

t

+

Z

T ∧τ

e−(r+λ)(s−t) PW (L)dGs

t

39

¶

ds

Taking expectations on both sides and using equation (12) leads to:
P (Wt ) = −Et

µZ

T ∧τ

−(r+λ)(s−t)

e

PW (L)dGs

t

µZ

T ∧τ

¶

(53)

e−(r+λ)(s−t) PW σ(Ws )Ws dBs
i
h t
+Et e−(r+λ)(T ∧τ −t) P (WT ∧τ )
−Et

¶

Since P (Wt ) represents the payoﬀ of strategy σ(W ) it follows that:
P (Wt ) = Et

µZ

T ∧τ

−(r+λ)(s−t)

e

t

¶

h
i
dGs + Et e−(r+λ)(T ∧τ −t) P (WT ∧τ )

(54)

for any stopping time τ . Combining (54) and (53), it follows that:
Et

µZ

T ∧τ

−(r+λ)(s−t)

e

[1 + PW (L)]dGs

t

¶

= −Et

µZ

t

T ∧τ

−(r+λ)(s−t)

e

PW σ(Ws )Ws dBs

¶

(55)

As the diﬀerential equation (12) has a classical solution35 , PW is a continuous and hence bounded
¤
£
¤
£
function in the closed interval L, W .Therefore, PW σ(Ws )Ws is bounded in L, W . Hence the

integrand on the right hand side of equation (55) is a martingale. Therefore, the right hand side of
equation (55) is 0, and hence so must be the left side. This can only be the case if PW (L) = −1.

The proof that PW < 0 proceeds by contradiction. Assume otherwise. In particular assume
that there exist a W ∗∗∗ > L such that PW (W ∗∗∗ ) > 0. Since PW (L) = −1 and the diﬀerential

c) =
c > L such that PW (W
equation (12) has a continuous first derivative, there must be a point W
³ ´
³ ´
c )/2)W
c 2 PW W W
c , one obtains (σ 2 (W
c = (r + λ)P W
c >
0. Since equation (12) holds at W
³ ´
c > 0. Therefore, at W
c the function P must have a local
0, since P > 0. Hence PW W W
minimum. Since P > 0 for all W ≥ L and limW →∞ P (W ) = 0, the function P must also have
³ ´
³ ´
f
c
f
f < 0. But this is
a local maximum at some point W > W , so that PW W = 0, and PW W W
³ ´
f )/2)W
f 2 PW W W
f it would have to be the case that (σ2 (W
f
impossible, by equation (12), since at W
³ ´
³ ´
f < 0. Hence it must be the case that
f > 0, which is a contradiction to PW W W
= (r + λ)P W

PW (W ) ≤ 0 for all W. Given that PW ≤ 0 it is now straightforward to use (12) to establish that
PW W =
35

2
σ2 (W )W 2

[−rPW W + (r + λ)P ] > 0. In turn, PW W > 0 implies that PW is increasing

See Øksendal (2003), Chapter 9

40

throughout. Moreover it can never cross 0. Hence it must be bounded between PW (L) = −1 and
0 as was asserted above.
A detailed proof of this Lemma would replicate the same steps as

Proof of Lemma 4.

Lemma 1. To save space, I only give a sketch. Applying the same logic as in Lemma 1, P should
satisfy:

0=

½ σ22 W 2

2 PW W
σ 21 W 2
2 PW W

+ rPW W − (r + λ)P if W > W ∗ ≥ L
+ rPW W − (r + λ)P if L ≤ W ≤ W ∗

The general solution to this equation is
+
−
½
C21 W α2 + C22 W α2 if W > W ∗ ≥ L
P (W ) =
+
−
C11 W α1 + C12 W α1 if L ≤ W ≤ W ∗

−
+
−
where the constants α+
1 , α1 , α2 , α2 are defined in (24). In order to be able to replicate the same

steps as in Lemma 1, P (W ) must be continuous and continuously diﬀerentiable36 at W ∗ . This
implies:
−

+

C21 (W ∗ )α2 + C22 (W ∗ )α2
−

+

−

+

= C11 (W ∗ )α1 + C12 (W ∗ )α1
+

(56)
−

∗ α2 −1
∗ α2 −1
∗ α1 −1
∗ α1 −1
α+
+ α−
= α+
+ α−
2 C21 (W )
2 C22 (W )
1 C11 (W )
1 C12 (W )

(57)

To enforce limW →∞ P (W ) = 0, it is also necessary to impose C21 = 0. Finally, the condition
PW (L) = −1 implies:
+

−

α1 −1
α1 −1
α+
+ α−
= −1
1 C11 (L)
1 C12 (L)

(58)

Solving for C11 , C12 , C22 from equations (56), (57), (58) leads to (23). Equation (25) follows immediately by setting P (L) = B and solving for W ∗ .
Proof of Proposition 1.

The first step towards proving Proposition 1 is to establish the

existence of a solution to the system of equations (20) and (21), satisfying π 2 (W ∗ ) = 0 and
½
≥ 0 if x < W ∗
π 2 (x)
≤ 0 if x > W ∗
36

(59)

In particular, these conditions will make it possible to apply Ito’s Lemma as in Lemma 1.

41

with at least one of the two inequalities being strict for some values x. Furthermore, to provide
suﬃcient conditions for the optimality of policy (22), the following properties will also be required:
lim

|π 1 (x)| < ∞

(60)

lim |π 2 (x)| < ∞

(61)

x→∞
x→∞

The next Lemma constructs an explicit continuous solution to π 1 , π 2 that satisfies (20), (21), (59),
(60), (61) and π 2 (W ∗ ) = 0.
Lemma 8 Let W ∗ be given by (25). Then, there exist continuous functions π 1 and π 2 that solve
the pair of diﬀerential equations (20), (21) and satisfy π 2 (W ∗ ) = 0, (59), (60), (61).
Proof of Lemma 8. The proof proceeds by explicitly constructing two functions that satisfy
all the stated properties. Assume first that W > W ∗ . By the form of the conjectured optimal
policy, one needs to distinguish 3 sub-regions for x :
(a) L ≤ x < W ∗
(b) W ∗ ≤ x ≤ W
(c) x > W
− + −
Define the four constants β +
1 , β 1 , β 2 , β 2 as

β±
1

=

−

³

σ 21
2

´

−r ±

r³

σ21
2

−r

σ 21

´2

+ 2σ 21 (r + λ)
and

β±
2

=

−

³

σ22
2

´

−r ±

r³

σ22
2

−r

σ 22

´2

+ 2σ 22 (r + λ)

In light of the conjectured optimal policy, in region (a) the diﬀerential equation (20), (21) has the
general solution:
+

−

π 1 (x) = D11 xβ 1 + D21 xβ 1 − 1
+
−
σ2β+
σ 21 β −
1
D21 xβ 1 +1
π 2 (x) = − 1 1 D11 xβ 1 +1 −
2 (r + λ)
2 (r + λ)

42

for appropriate constants D11 , D21 . Similarly, in region (b) the general solution is:
+

−

+

−

π 1 (x) = D12 xβ 2 + D22 xβ 2 − 1
+
−
σ2 β +
σ 22 β −
2
D22 xβ 2 +1
π 2 (x) = − 2 2 D12 xβ 2 +1 −
2 (r + λ)
2 (r + λ)
and in region (c):
π 1 (x) = D13 xβ 2 + D23 xβ 2
+
−
σ2 β +
σ 22 β −
2
D23 xβ 2 +1
π 2 (x) = − 2 2 D13 xβ 2 +1 −
2 (r + λ)
2 (r + λ)
It remains to determine the 6 constants in the above equations in order to obtain the solution
to π 1 , π 2 . Starting with region (c), it is clear that (60), (61) can only hold if D13 = 0, since β +
2 > 0.
To ensure continuity of π 1 (x), π 2 (x) at point W , the constants D23 , D12 , D22 need to satisfy (after
some straightforward cancellations):

−

+

D12 W β 2 + (D22 − D23 ) W β 2

= 1

(62)

β 2 +1
β 2 +1
− β−
= 0
−β +
2 D12 W
2 (D22 − D23 ) W

(63)

−

+

Similarly, continuity of π 1 (x), π 2 (x) at W ∗ implies that
−

+

D11 (W ∗ )β 1 + D21 (W ∗ )β 1
−

+

∗ β 1 +1
∗ β 1 +1
−β +
− β−
1 D11 (W )
1 D21 (W )

+

−

= D12 (W ∗ )β 2 + D22 (W ∗ )β 2
µ ¶2 h
i
+
−
σ2
∗ β 2 +1
∗ β 2 +1
β+
= −
+ β−
2 D12 (W )
2 D22 (W )
σ1

Finally, to ensure π 2 (W ∗ ) = 0 it must also be the case that
+

−

∗ β 1 +1
∗ β 1 +1
− β−
=0
−β +
1 D11 (W )
1 D21 (W )

Solving this system of equations leads to the following solution for π 1 , π 2 :

43

(64)

(a) L ≤ x < W ∗
¶β +
2

∙
−¸
³ x ´β −
³ x ´β +
1
1
1 −β 1
+
−
¡ +
¢
β1 − β1
−1
π 1 (x) =
W∗
W∗
β1 − β−
1
µ ∗ ¶β +
∙
−¸
³ x ´β −
³ x ´β +
2
W
β−
β+
σ 21
1
1 −β 1
1
1
¡ +
¢
π 2 (x) = −
1−
x
2 (r + λ) W
W∗
W∗
β1 − β−
1
µ

W∗
W

(b) W ∗ ≤ x ≤ W
#
³ x ´β +
−β −
2
2
− β−
π 1 (x) =
β+
−1
2
2
W
"µ
#
¶ + −
+
−
³ x ´β −
W ∗ β 2 −β 2 ³ x ´β 2 −β 2
β−
β+
σ 22
2
2
2
¡
¢
−
x
π 2 (x) = −
−
2 (r + λ) β +
W
W
W
2 − β2
³ x ´β 2
1
¡ +
¢
W
β2 − β−
2

−

"

µ

W∗
W

−
¶β +
2 −β 2

(c) x > W
#
¶ + −
³ x ´β −
W ∗ β 2 −β 2
2
−1
π 1 (x) =
W
W∗
#
"µ
µ ∗ ¶β −
¶ + −
³ x ´β −
−
∗ β 2 −β 2
2
W
W
β+
β
σ 22
2
2 2 ¢
¡
π 2 (x) = −
−1
x
+
−
∗
2 (r + λ) β 2 − β 2
W
W
W
β+
¡ + 2 −¢
β2 − β2

µ

W∗
W

"µ
¶β −
2

By construction, π 1 (x), π 2 (x) are continuous and satisfy π 2 (W ∗ ) = 0, (60), (61). It remains
−
+
to verify that this solution also satisfies (59). This follows from β +
2 > 0, β 2 < 0 and also β 1 >
∗
0, β −
1 < 0. The proof for W < W follows similar steps and is therefore omitted.

Proof of Proposition 1 continued. Given the existence of an appropriate pair of co-state
variables π 1 , π 2 it is now possible to verify optimality by using a standard suﬃciency theorem of
optimal control (see e.g. Leonard and Van Long (1992), p. 289). To save space, I omit a proof of
the suﬃciency theorem and make it available on request.
Proof of Proposition 2.

Let Π be the set of all participation compatible policies σ. The

first step in order to obtain Ib∗ is to find a function g(Wt ) such that
g(Wt ) ≥ inf P (Wt ; σ s≥t ) for all σ ∈ Π
t≥τ 0

44

(65)

Constructing such an upper bound is straightforward. First, fix a level W1 > L and let τ 1 be
the first time after τ 0 such that Wt = W1 . An upper bound to inf t≥τ 0 P (W1 ; σ s≥t ) is given by
the highest possible value Pτ 1 that can be assigned by any participation compatible policy. Two
observations are useful in order to determine Pτ 1 . The first observation is that Pτ 1 must satisfy the
constraint
Eτ 0

µZ

τ1

−(r+λ)(s−τ 0 )

e

τ0

¶

³
´
dGs + Pτ 1 Eτ 0 e−(r+λ)(τ 1 −τ 0 ) ≤ B,

which can be rewritten as

Pτ 1 ≤

B − Eτ 0

³R
τ1
¡

τ0

e−(r+λ)(s−τ 0 ) dGs
¢

Eτ 0 e−(r+λ)(τ 1 −τ 0 )

´

(66)

Using an argument similar to the proof of Lemma 2, one can show that37 setting σ s = σ 1 for
³R
´
¡
¢
τ
all s ∈ [τ 0 , τ 1 ] will minimize both Eτ 0 τ 01 e−(r+λ)(s−τ 0 ) dGs and E e−(r+λ)(τ 1 −τ 0 ) , and hence

will maximize the right hand side of (66). This is intuitive. In order to have the highest possible

flexibility to promise a high level of Pτ 1 , one needs to set volatility prior to τ 1 as low as possible.
More importantly, this simple observation suggests that it is possible to find an explicit expression
for the right hand side of equation (66). In particular, let u(W ) be the solution to the diﬀerential
equation

σ 21
2
2 uW W W

+ ruW W − (r + λ) u = 0, subject to the boundary conditions u(L) = B, and

uW (L) = −1. There is a unique solution to this equation which is given by
"

α+ B + 1
u(W ) = L 1+ L −
α1 − α1

µ

W
L

¶α−
1

α− B + 1
− 1+ L −
α1 − α1

µ

W
L

#
¶α+
1

.

(67)

By arguments similar to the ones used in the proof of Lemma 3, the function u(W ) satisfies:

u(W1 ) =

³R
τ1

−(r+λ)(s−τ 0 ) dG |σ
s s∈[τ 0 ,τ 1 ] = σ 1
τ0 e
¡
¢
Eτ 0 e−(r+λ)(τ 1 −τ 0 ) |σ s∈[τ 0 ,τ 1 ] = σ 1

B − Eτ 0

´

(68)

and hence it gives a closed form expression for the right hand side of (66).
Letting χ be the first time after τ 1 such that Wχ = L, a second observation about Pτ 1 is that
37

The proof of this fact follows steps similar to Lemma 2 and is ommited. It is available upon request.

45

it is bounded above by

Pτ 1

µ
¶ −
´
³
´
³
W1 α2
−(r+λ)(χ−τ 1 )
−(r+λ)(χ−τ 0 )
B=E e
≤ max E e
|σ s∈[τ 1 ,χ] = σ 2 B = B
.
σ
L

(69)

This bound is intuitive. It states that even if volatility is set at its maximum between times τ 1 and
χ, the continuation value after that point cannot be larger than B.
The above∙observations, together
with the fact that W1 is arbitrary, imply that the function
¸
¡ W ¢α−
g(W ) ≡ min u(W ), B L 2 satisfies the equation (65). In turn, this implies that for any
participation compatible policy
⎡

¡ W ¢α−
2

⎤

⎡

¡ W ¢α−
2

⎤

− g(W )
− g(W )
B L
B L
b
⎦,
max ⎣
I(σ)
≥ Ib∗ ≡ max ⎣
¡ W ¢α(σ2 ) ⎦ = W
¡ W ¢α−
W >L
>L
2
1+k L
1+k L

(70)

where the rightmost equality follows from α(σ 2 ) = α−
2 . It will be useful to establish a few properties
of the expression inside the square brackets of (70). To this end define

n(W ) =

B

¡ W ¢α−
2
L

1+k

− g(W )
¡ W ¢α−
2
L

By its definition g(L) = B, and hence n(L) = 0. Also, the definition of g(W ) implies that n(W ) ≥ 0.
Moreover, uW (L) = −1 and assumption (9) implies that
∙
¸
¡ W ¢α−
2
d B L
dW|Wt =L

= α−
2

B
> −1.
L

These two last facts can be used to show that nW (L) > 0, and hence n > 0 in a neighborhood of
L.
B
38 u
Finally, by assumption (9), α−
W → 0 as W → ∞. By
1 L + 1 < 0. Hence, u(W ) → ∞ and
−
−
¡ W ¢α2
¡ W ¢α2
→ 0 as W → ∞ and the derivative of B L
is always negative. Hence there
contrast B L
−
¡
¢
α
2
for all w ≥ W u . Therefore n(w) = 0 for all
always exists a value W u , such that g(w) = B w
L

w ≥ W u . Since the function n starts at 0 when W = L, and becomes 0 for all W ≥ W u , and is

positive and continuous for W ∈ [L, W u ], it must attain a maximum at some point W ∗∗ between
38

Since α+
1 > 1.

46

L and W u .
To compute this maximum it is easiest to take the log of n(W ), diﬀerentiate with respect to W
and set the resulting expression equal to 0 to obtain
B
α−
2 L

∙
¸
+B
−B
¡
¢ −
¡
¢ +
− α1 L +1 W ∗∗ α1 −1
+ α1 L +1 W ∗∗ α1 −1
¡ W ∗∗ ¢α−
− α1 α+ −α− L
− α1 α+ −α− L
2 −1
α−
1
1
1
1
2k
L
¸
∙
(71)
=
¡ W ∗∗ ¢α−
B
B
¡ W ∗∗ ¢α−
¡ W ∗∗ ¢α−
¡ W ∗∗ ¢α+
α+
α−
2
2
1
1
1 L +1
1 L +1
1+k L
− α+ −α− L
− α+ −α− L
L

¡ W ∗∗ ¢α−
2 −1
L

B
L

1

1

1

1

Straightforward, but tedious algebra can be used to show that this equation has a unique root.39
b
Having obtained Ib∗ as a lower bound on I(σ),
it is now possible to verify the optimality of the

b ∗ ) = Ib∗ . As a first step towards showing this, I use
policy σ ∗ of equation (22), by showing that I(σ
the quantity W ∗ as defined in equation (25) and show that W ∗ < W ∗∗ . After some manipulations
one can verify that
B
α−
2 L

¸
∙
+B
−B
¡ ¢ −
¡ ¢ +
− α1 L +1 W ∗ α1 −1
+ α1 L +1 W ∗ α1 −1
¡ W ∗ ¢α−
µ ∗ ¶−1
− α1 α+ −α− L
− α1 α+ −α− L
−
2 −1
k
α
W
1
1
1
1
2
−
L
¸
∙ +
= α2
<
¡ W ∗ ¢α−
B
¡ W ∗ ¢α−
¡ W ∗ ¢α+
L
α1 B
+1 ¡ W ∗ ¢α−
α−
2
2
1
1
1 L +1
L
1
+
k
−
−
L
L
L
L
α+ −α−
α+ −α−

¡ W ∗ ¢α−
2 −1
L

B
L

1

1

1

1

(72)

∗

W
where the equality follows from (56)-(57) and the inequality follows from α−
2 < 0, k < 1, L > 1.

Combining (71) and (72) shows that nW (W ∗ ) < 0. Hence it must be the case that W ∗∗ < W ∗ .
Since the functions P (W ) of equation (23) and u(W ) coincide between L and W ∗ , and W ∗∗ <
W ∗ , it follows that
⎡

B
Ib∗ = max ⎣
L<W

¡ W ¢α−
2
L

1+k

⎤

⎡

− g(W )
B
⎦ = max ⎣
¡ W ¢α−
∗
L<W <W
2
L

¡ W ¢α−
2
L

1+k

⎤

⎡

− u(W )
B
⎦ = max ⎣
¡ W ¢α−
∗
L<W <W
2
L

¡ W ¢α−
2
L

1+k

⎤

− P (W )
⎦.
¡ W ¢α−
2
L

(73)

The first equation in (73) is the definition of Ib∗ , the second and third equations follow from the
−

fact that u(W ) = P (W ) < B(W/L)α2 for all W ∈ (L, W ∗ ]. The final step of the proof is to verify
39

Details are available upon request.

47

that

max

L≤W ≤W ∗

⎡
⎣

B

¡ W ¢α−
2
L

1+k

⎤

⎡

B
− P (W )
⎦ = max ⎣
¡ W ¢α−
L<W
2
L

¡ W ¢α−
2
L

1+k

⎤

− P (W )
b ∗ ).
⎦ = I(σ
¡ W ¢α−
2

(74)

L

¸
∙
¸ ∙
¡ W ¢α−
¡ W ¢α−
2
2
is a declining function of W
This follows from the fact that B L
− P (W ) / 1 + k L

for W > W ∗ , and hence
⎡

max∗ ⎣

W >W

B

¡ W ¢α−
2
L

1+k

⎤

− P (W )
B
⎦=
¡ W ¢α−
2
L

¡ W ∗ ¢α−
2
L

1+k

− P (W ∗ )

¡ W ∗ ¢α−
2
L

≤

max

L≤W ≤W ∗

⎡
⎣

B

¡ W ¢α−
2
L

1+k

⎤

− P (W )
⎦ (75)
¡ W ¢α−
2
L

b ∗ ).
Using (75), it follows that (74) holds. Finally combining (74) and (73) implies that Ib∗ = I(σ
Proof of Lemma 6.

Lemma 2 has established that for any level of B, the policy σ ∗ of

equation (22) is optimal, in the sense that it attains the lower bound Ib∗ (which also depends on B).

Since the optimal policy σ ∗ assigns the same value P (L) = B every time that Wt = L, it suﬃces
to check that is is optimal to set Pτ 0 = B. To verify this, note that the shareholders’ value if they
set Pτ 0 = B, is given by V = B − k Ib∗ . Diﬀerentiating V with respect to B, combining (70) with
(67) and using the envelope theorem shows that
⎡

VB = 1 − ⎣

k

¡ W ∗∗ ¢α−
2

1+k

L

¡ W ∗∗ ¢α−
2
L

⎤
⎦

α+
1

∙
¸
∙
¸
−
−
¡ W ∗∗ ¢α−
¡ W ∗∗ ¢α+
−
1 −α2
1 −α2
1− L
− α1 1 − L
−
α+
1 − α1

(76)

−
¡ ∗∗ ¢α−
1 −α2
The second term on the right hand side of (76) is smaller than 1, because 1 − WL
<1
+
−
¡
¢
−
W ∗∗ α1 −α2
< 0. Hence VB > 0, and hence it is optimal to set
(because α−
1 < α2 < 0) and 1 −
L

P (L) = B.

Proof of Lemma 7.

The proof of this fact is rather straightforward. To save space, I

only give a sketch. First observe that the definition (37) implies that extending the duration of
b
since inf t≥τ 0 P (Wt ; σ s≥t ) ≥
a risk management rule from [τ 0 , ∞) to [0, ∞) can never lower I(σ),

inf t≥0 P (Wt ; σ s≥t ) . Furthermore, proposition 2 implies that any participation compatible commit-

b s≥0 ) = Ib∗ . Since the policy
b s≥0 ) ≥ Ib∗ . Therefore, it suﬃces to show that I(σ
ment will involve I(σ

48

σ ∗ is identical to the policy of equation (22) for t ≥ τ 0 , it is suﬃcient to show that Pt∈[0,τ 0 ] (Wt ) ≥

c ∗ ≤ W ∗ . Following a strategy similar to
Pt≥τ 0 (Wt ). In turn this will automatically be the case if W

Lemma 4, the value P (Wt ) for t < τ 0 , satisfies (12), P (L) = B, and limW →∞ P (W ) = 0. Further-

c ∗ needs to be determined so that P (W0 ) = U0 . Since U0 ≥ P (W0 , σ∗ ), it follows that
more, W
s≥τ 0

c∗ ≤ W ∗ .
W

49

References
Anderson, R. W., and S. Sundaresan (1996): “Design and Valuation of Debt Contracts,”
Review of Financial Studies, 9(1), 37—68.
Basak, S. (1995): “A General Equilibrium Model of Portfolio Insurance,” Review of Financial
Studies, 8(4), 1059—1090.
Basak, S., and A. Shapiro (2001): “Value-at-Risk-Based Risk Management: Optimal Policies
and Asset Prices,” Review of Financial Studies, 14(2), 371—405.
Caballero, R., and S. Panageas (2005): “A Quantitative Model of Sudden Stops and External
Liquidity Management,” NBER Working Paper 11293.
Calvo, G. (1999): “Contagion in Emerging Markets: When Wall Street is a Carrier.,” Working
Paper, University of Maryland.
Caruana, G., and L. Einav (2008): “A Theory of Endogenous Commitment,” Review of Economic Studies, 75(1), 99 — 116.
Constantinides, G. M., J. B. Donaldson, and R. Mehra (2002): “Junior Must Pay: Pricing
the Implicit Put in Privatizing Social Security,” NBER Working Paper 8906.
Cox, J. C., J. E. Ingersoll, and S. A. Ross (1985): “A Theory of the Term Structure of
Interest Rates,” Econometrica, 53(2), 385—407.
Cox, J. C., and S. A. Ross (1976): “The Valuation of Options for Alternative Stochastic
Processes,” Journal of Financial Economics, 3(1/2), 145—166.
DeMarzo, P. M., and M. J. Fishman (2007): “Optimal Long-Term Financial Contracting,”
Review of Financial Studies, 20(6), 2079 — 2128.
DeMarzo, P. M., and Y. Sannikov (2006): “Optimal Security Design and Dynamic Capital
Structure in a Continuous-Time Agency Model,” Journal of Finance, 61(6), 2681—2724.
Duffie, D. (2001): Dynamic asset pricing theory. Princeton University Press, Princeton and
Oxford.

50

Fleming, W. H., and H. M. Soner (1993): Controlled Markov processes and viscosity solutions,
vol. 25. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Fudenberg, D., and J. Tirole (1991): Game theory. MIT Press, Cambridge MA.
Giannoni, M. P., and M. Woodford (2002): “Optimal Interest Rate Rules I: General Theory,”
Working Paper, Columbia University.
Gromb, D., and D. Vayanos (2002): “Equilibrium and Welfare in Markets with Financially
Constrained Arbitrageurs,” Journal of Financial Economics, 66, 361—407.
Grossman, S. J., and Z. Zhou (1996): “Equilibrium Analysis of Portfolio Insurance,” Journal
of Finance, 51(4), 1379—1403.
Hart, O., and J. Moore (1998): “Default and Renegotiation: A Dynamic Model of Debt,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1), 1—41.
Jensen, M. C., and W. H. Meckling (1976): “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,
Agency Costs and Ownership Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, 3(4), p305 — 360.
Kaminsky, G. L., and C. M. Reinhart (2001): “Bank Lending and Contagion: Evidence From
the Asian Crisis,” in Takatoshi Ito and Anne Krueger, eds. Regional and Global Capital Flows:
Macroeconomic Causes and Consequences (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), 73-99.
Karatzas, I., and S. E. Shreve (1991): Brownian motion and stochastic calculus, vol. 113.
Springer-Verlag.
Leland, H. E. (1994): “Corporate Debt Value, Bond Covenants, and Optimal Capital Structure,”
Journal of Finance, 49(4), 1213—1252.
(1998): “Agency Costs, Risk Management, and Capital Structure,” Journal of Finance,
53(4), 1213 — 1243.
Leland, H. E., and K. B. Toft (1996): “Optimal Capital Structure, Endogenous Bankruptcy,
and the Term Structure of Credit Spreads,” Journal of Finance, 51(3), 987—1019.

51

Leonard, D., and N. Van Long (1992): Optimal Control Theory and Static Optimization in
Economics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Lucas, D., and R. McDonald (2005): “An Options-Based Approach to Evaluating the Risk of
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac,” Working Paper, Northwestern University (Kellogg).
Merton, R. C. (1974): “On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of Interest Rates,”
Journal of Finance, 29(2), 449—470.
Øksendal, B. (2003): Stochastic diﬀerential equations. Springer-Verlag.
Panageas, S., and M. Westerfield (2005): “High Water Marks, High Risk Appetites? Convex
Compensation, Long Horizons and Portfolio Choice,” forthcoming, Journal of Finance.
Pavlova, A., and R. Rigobon (2005): “Wealth Transfers, Contagion and Portfolio Constraints,”
C.E.P.R. Discussion Paper 5117.
Pennacchi, G., and C. Lewis (1994): “The Value of Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation
Insurance,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 26(3).
Ritchken, P., J. Thompson, R. DeGennaro, and A. Li (1993): “On Flexibility, Capital
Structure and Investment Decisions for the Insured Bank,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 17,
1133—1146.
Ronn, E. I., and A. K. Verma (1986): “Pricing Risk-Adjusted Deposit Insurance: An OptionBased Model,” Journal of Finance, 41(4), 871—895.
Schneider, M., and A. Tornell (2004): “Balance Sheet Eﬀects, Bailout Guarantees and Financial Crises,” Review of Economic Studies, 71(3), 883—913.
Sundaresan, S., and N. Wang (2007): “Investment under Uncertainty with Strategic Debt
Service,” American Economic Review, 97(2), 256—261.

52

