NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE QUALITY OF MEDICAL CARE, BEHAVIORAL RISK FACTORS, AND LONGEVITY
GROWTH
Frank R. Lichtenberg
Working Paper 15068
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15068

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2009

This research was supported by the Centre for Strategic Economic Studies, Victoria University (Melbourne,
Australia), the Manhattan Institute for Policy Research, and Siemens AG. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Frank R. Lichtenberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Quality of Medical Care, Behavioral Risk Factors, and Longevity Growth
Frank R. Lichtenberg
NBER Working Paper No. 15068
June 2009
JEL No. I1,J1,O3
ABSTRACT
The rate of increase of longevity has varied considerably across U.S. states since 1991. This paper
examines the effect of the quality of medical care, behavioral risk factors (obesity, smoking, and AIDS
incidence), and other variables (education, income, and health insurance coverage) on life expectancy
and medical expenditure using longitudinal state-level data. We examine the effects of three different
measures of the quality of medical care. The first is the average quality of diagnostic imaging procedures,
defined as the fraction of procedures that are advanced procedures. The second is the average quality
of practicing physicians, defined as the fraction of physicians that were trained at top-ranked medical
schools. The third is the mean vintage (FDA approval year) of outpatient and inpatient prescription
drugs. Life expectancy increased more rapidly in states where (1) the fraction of Medicare diagnostic
imaging procedures that were advanced procedures increased more rapidly; (2) the vintage of selfand provider-administered drugs increased more rapidly; and (3) the quality of medical schools previously
attended by physicians increased more rapidly. States with larger increases in the quality of diagnostic
procedures, drugs, and physicians did not have larger increases in per capita medical expenditure.

Frank R. Lichtenberg
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, 614 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
frank.lichtenberg@columbia.edu

During the twentieth century, U.S. life expectancy at birth increased by almost 30
years (63%), from 47.3 years in 1900 to 77.0 years in 2000. Nordhaus (2002) estimated
that, “to a first approximation, the economic value of increases in longevity over the
twentieth century is about as large as the value of measured growth in non-health goods
and services” (p. 17). Murphy and Topel (2005) observed that “the historical gains from
increased longevity have been enormous. Over the 20th century, cumulative gains in life
expectancy were worth over $1.2 million per person for both men and women. Between
1970 and 2000 increased longevity added about $3.2 trillion per year to national wealth,
an uncounted value equal to about half of average annual GDP over the period.”
The rate of increase in longevity has varied considerably across states. Figure 1
shows the increase in life expectancy at birth during the period 1991-2004,1 by state. In
the eight states with the smallest increase, life expectancy increased by only 0.31-1.16
years. In the eight states with the largest increase, life expectancy increased by 2.5-4.3
years. This paper seeks to help answer the question, why has longevity increased faster
in some states than other states?
Longevity is likely to depend on a number of factors, including the quality of
medical care, exogenous changes in disease incidence (e.g. the appearance of new
diseases such as HIV/AIDS), income, education, and behavioral risk factors (e.g., obesity
and smoking). By analyzing longitudinal state-level data, we can measure and control for
many of these factors. We can also control for the effects of unobserved factors that vary
across states but are relatively stable over time (e.g. climate and environmental quality),
and unobserved factors that change over time but are invariant across states (e.g. changes
in Federal government policies). In addition to interstate variation in longevity growth,
we will analyze the growth of per capita medical expenditure.
The overall conceptual framework of the paper is depicted in Figure 2.

1

Due to limitations on available data, this paper will analyze changes in longevity during the period 19912004.

2

Figure 2
Conceptual framework
•

•

Indicators of the quality of medical care
o Use of advanced diagnostic imaging
technology
o Quality of physicians
o Vintage of outpatient and inpatient
prescription drugs
Behavioral risk factors
o
o
o

•
•
•
•
•

AIDS incidence
BMI
Smoking

•
•

Life expectancy at
birth
Per capita medical
expenditure

Health insurance coverage
Per capita income
Educational attainment
State fixed effects
Year fixed effects

Previous literature suggests that technological innovation in general, and new goods in
particular, play a key role in economic growth. In Section I, we describe our indicators
of the quality of medical care. Section II describes the econometric models we will
estimate. Section III describes the data sources and presents some descriptive statistics.
Empirical results are presented in Section IV. Some additional evidence (based on
Australian data) about the impact of advanced imaging technology on mortality is
presented in Section V. The final section presents a summary and conclusions.
I. Indicators of the quality of medical care
We will examine the effects of three different measures of the quality of medical
care. The first is the average quality of diagnostic imaging procedures, defined as the
fraction of procedures that are advanced procedures. The second is the average quality of
practicing physicians, defined as the fraction of physicians that were trained at top-ranked
medical schools. The third is the mean vintage (FDA approval year) of outpatient and
impatient prescription drugs.
Some of the indicators of the quality of medical care we examine measure the
relative utilization of new vs. old medical goods and services, or the degree of influence
of medical research. Economists believe that new goods and services, which are

3
generated by public and private investment in research and development, are the main
reason why people are better off today than they were several generations ago. Grossman
and Helpman (1993) argued that “innovative goods are better than older products simply
because they provide more ‘product services’ in relation to their cost of production.”
Bresnahan and Gordon (1996) stated simply that “new goods are at the heart of economic
progress.” Jones (1998) argues that “technological progress [is] the ultimate driving force
behind sustained economic growth” (p.2), and that “technological progress is driven by
research and development (R&D) in the advanced world” (p. 89). Bils (2004) makes the
case that “much of economic growth occurs through growth in quality as new models of
consumer goods replace older, sometimes inferior, models.”
One way to measure utilization of medical innovations is to measure the mean
vintage of medical goods and services used. The vintage of a good is the year in which
the good was first used. For example, the vintage of the drug atorvastatin (Lipitor) is
1997—the year the drug was approved by the FDA. We seek to test the hypothesis that,
ceteris paribus, people using newer, or later vintage, medical goods and services will be
in better health, and will therefore live longer. This hypothesis is predicated on the idea
that these goods and services, like other R&D intensive products, are characterized by
embodied technological progress.2
A number of econometric studies (Bahk and Gort (1993), Hulten (1992),
Sakellaris and Wilson (2001, 2004)) have investigated the hypothesis that capital
equipment employed by U.S. manufacturing firms embodies technological change, i.e.
that each successive vintage of investment is more productive than the last. Equipment is
expected to embody significant technical progress due to the relatively high R&Dintensity of equipment manufacturers. The method that has been used to test the
equipment-embodied technical change hypothesis is to estimate manufacturing
production functions, including (mean) vintage of equipment as well as quantities of

2

Solow (1960, p 91): argued that “many if not most innovations need to be embodied in new kinds of
durable equipment before they can be made effective. Improvements in technology affect output only to
the extent that they are carried into practice either by net capital formation or by the replacement of oldfashioned equipment by the latest models…” We hypothesize that innovations may be embodied in
nondurable goods (e.g. drugs) and services as well as in durable equipment.

4
capital and labor. These studies have concluded that technical progress embodied in
equipment is a major source of manufacturing productivity growth.
Although most previous empirical studies of embodied technical progress have
focused on equipment used in manufacturing, embodied technical progress may also be
an important source of economic growth in health care. According to the National
Science Foundation, in 1997, “medical substances and devices firms had by far the
highest combined R&D intensity at 11.8 percent,…well above the 4.2-percent average for
all 500 top 1997 R&D spenders combined. The information and electronics sector ranked
second in intensity at 7.0 percent.”3

A. Quality of diagnostic imaging procedures
Our measure of the quality of diagnostic imaging procedures is defined as
follows:
ADV_IMAGE%st = N_ADV_IMAGEst / (N_ADV_IMAGEst + N_STD_IMAGEst)
where
ADV_IMAGE%st = the fraction of standard or advanced Medicare imaging
procedures performed in state s in year t that were advanced
procedures
N_ADV_IMAGEst = the number of advanced Medicare imaging procedures performed
in state s in year t
N_STD_IMAGEst = the number of standard Medicare imaging procedures performed
in state s in year t
Data on the number of procedures (submitted services), by Healthcare Common
Procedure Coding System (HCPCS) code,4 carrier,5 and year, where obtained from the
1991-2004 Physician/Supplier Procedure Summary Master Files.6 These files are 100%

3

National Science Foundation, U.S. Corporate R&D: Volume 1: Top 500 Firms in R&D by Industry
Category, http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/nsf00301/expendit.htm. The pattern of 1997 R&D spending per
employee is similar to that for R&D intensity, with medical substances and devices again the highest at
$29,095 per employee. Information and electronics is second at $16,381. Combined, the top 500 1997
R&D firms spent $10,457 per employee.
4
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Healthcare_Common_Procedure_Coding_System
5
In most cases, there is a one-to-one correspondence between a Medicare carrier and a state.
6

http://www.cms.hhs.gov/NonIdentifiableDataFiles/06_PhysicianSupplierProcedureSummaryMasterFile.asp

5
summaries of all Part B Carrier and DMERC Claims processed through the Common
Working File and stored in the National Claims History Repository.
We used Berenson-Eggers Type of Service (BETOS) codes developed by CMS to
distinguish between standard and advanced imaging procedures. The BETOS coding
system was developed primarily for analyzing the growth in Medicare expenditures.
The coding system covers all HCPCS codes; assigns a HCPCS code to only one BETOS
code; consists of readily understood clinical categories (as opposed to statistical or
financial categories); consists of categories that permit objective assignment; is stable
over time; and is relatively immune to minor changes in technology or practice patterns.7
Advanced imaging procedures (with a BETOS code beginning with I2) involve either a
computed tomography (CT) scan8 or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).9 Standard
imaging procedures have BETOS codes beginning with I1.
According to the 2006 BETOS Public Use File, 544 HCPCS codes correspond to
standard imaging procedures, and 152 HCPCS codes correspond to advanced imaging
procedures. For example, code 71010 (Radiologic examination, chest; single view,
frontal) is a standard imaging procedure, and code 70450 (Computed tomography, head
or brain; without contrast material) is an advanced imaging procedure.
As shown in Figure 3, nationwide the fraction of imaging procedures that were
advanced increased from 9.3% in 1991 to 18.8% in 2004. As shown in Figure 4, the
fraction of imaging procedures that were advanced in 2004 was 16-17% in the lowest six
states, and 20-24% in the highest six states.

B. Physician quality
Our measure of the quality of practicing physicians is the fraction of physicians
practicing in a state that graduated from a top-ranked medical school. Data on the
number of practicing physicians, by state, medical school attended, and year, were
7

http://www.cms.hhs.gov/HCPCSReleaseCodeSets/20_BETOS.asp#TopOfPage
A computed tomography scan is a study that uses a series of X-Rays to create image "slices" of the body.
9
MRI is a medical imaging technique most commonly used in radiology to visualize the structure and
function of the body. It provides detailed images of the body in any plane. MRI provides much greater
contrast between the different soft tissues of the body than CT does, making it especially useful in
neurological (brain), musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, and oncological (cancer) imaging.
8

6
obtained from the American Medical Association. Medical school rankings in terms of
research and primary care were obtained from the US News and World Report survey of
U.S. medical schools conducted in Fall 2007. The medical school research ranking is
based on a weighted average of eight indicators, and the primary-care ranking is based on
seven indicators. Both rankings are based on a weighted average of indicators; four of the
data indicators are used in both the research and primary-care ranking model. The
research ranking factors in research activity; the primary-care ranking adds a measure of
the proportion of graduates entering primary-care specialties. The methodology
underlying the rankings is described in Appendix A. As shown in Table 1, research rank
and primary care rank are not highly correlated.
We constructed two measures of physician quality:
MD_RESEARCH_QUALst = ∑m (TOP_RESEARCHm N_MDmst) / ∑m N_MDmst
MD_PRIMCARE_QUALst = ∑m (TOP_PRIMCAREm N_MDmst) / ∑m N_MDmst
where
MD_RESEARCH_QUALst = the fraction of physicians practicing in state s in year t
who were graduates from the top 60 medical schools
ranked in terms of research
MD_PRIMCARE_QUALst = the fraction of physicians practicing in state s in year t
who were graduates from the top 60 medical schools
ranked in terms of primary care
TOP_RESEARCHm = 1 if medical school m was one of the top 60 medical
schools ranked in terms of research
= 0 otherwise
TOP_PRIMCAREm = 1 if medical school m was one of the top 60 medical
schools ranked in terms of primary care
= 0 otherwise
N_MDmst = the number of physicians who were graduates from
medical school m and who are practicing in state s in year t
As shown in Table 2, the mean values of both measures of physician quality
declined slightly during the period 1991-2004. The fraction of practicing physicians who
graduated from the top 60 medical schools ranked in terms of research declined from
45.2% to 41.0%, and the fraction of physicians who graduated from the top 60 medical
schools ranked in terms of primary care declined from 40.0% to 37.5%. As shown in
Figures 5 and 6, in 2004 both measures of physician quality exhibited significant
interstate variation.

7
C. Quality of outpatient and inpatient prescription drugs
The general definition of vintage we will use is:

where

vintit = Σp freqpit vintp
Σa freqpit

vintit = the mean vintage of products and services used in state i in year t
freqpit = the frequency of use of product or service p in state i in year t
vintp = the vintage (year of first use) of product or service p
We will measure the mean vintage of outpatient prescription drugs paid for by the
state’s Medicaid program, and the mean vintage of drugs administered by providers (e.g.,
chemotherapy) to Medicare beneficiaries. The number of prescriptions paid for by
Medicaid is very large: according to the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey, in 1997,
Medicaid paid for about 201 million prescriptions—11% of all U.S. prescriptions.
Moreover, we show in Appendix B that the extent of utilization of new drugs in the
Medicaid program is strongly correlated with the extent of utilization of new drugs in
general: the vintage of non-Medicaid (and all) rx’s tended to increase more in states with
larger increases in the vintage of Medicaid rx’s.
Drugs administered by providers are quite different from self-administered drugs,
and Medicare pays for a substantial fraction of the former. In 2004, Medicare paid
providers $7.6 billion for performing 522 million pharmaceutical procedures.10

D. Adjusting for state-specific changes in the distribution of disease
If there have been state-specific changes in the distribution of disease, and drug
vintage is correlated with disease severity (e.g., newer drugs tend to be for less severe
diseases), the coefficient on drug vintage could be biased. However, we can eliminate
any potential bias by constructing an alternative (fixed-weighted) index of drug vintage.
Consider the following simplified model of life expectancy:
LE = β1 V + β2 S
10

Source: CMS, Medicare Part B Physician/Supplier Data by BETOS, Calendar Year 2004,
http://www.cms.hhs.gov/MedicareFeeforSvcPartsAB/Downloads/BETOS04.pdf.

8
where LE = life expectancy, V = drug vintage, and S = (mean) disease severity. Hence
ΔLE = β1 ΔV + β2 ΔS
Suppose that β1 > 0 and that β2 < 0. For simplicity, suppose that there are just 2 diseases:
a high-severity disease and a low-severity disease. Mean disease severity depends on the
proportions of patients with each disease:
S = high% SH + (1 – high%) SL = SL + (SH – SL) high%
where high% = the percent of patients with the high-severity disease, SH = severity of the
high-severity disease, SL = severity of the low-severity disease, and SH > SL. Assuming
that SH and SL are constant, ΔS = (SH – SL) Δhigh%, and
ΔLE = β1 ΔV + β2 (SH – SL) Δhigh%
The change in life expectancy is directly related to the change in drug vintage and
inversely related to the change in the percent of patients with the high-severity disease.
Suppose that drugs for the low-severity disease (nervous system disorders) tend to
be newer than drugs for the high-severity disease (cardiovascular disease), so that there is
an inverse correlation across states between ΔV and Δhigh%: states with smaller
increases in mean severity will have larger increases in drug vintage. In this case, failure
to control for changes in severity (Δhigh%) will result in overestimation of the effect of
drug vintage on life expectancy.
We will control for the incidence of one highly severe disease—AIDS—but
unfortunately data on the incidence of other diseases, by state and year, are not available.
Therefore direct measurement of mean disease severity (or the percent of patients with
high-severity diseases) by state and year is not feasible. However, provided that the
distribution of drugs utilized, by therapeutic class, is closely related to the distribution of
patients, by disease, we can eliminate any potential bias in the vintage coefficient by
using the following fixed-weighted index of drug vintage:
V’it = Σc class%ci. Vcit
where Vcit = the mean vintage of prescriptions in therapeutic class c in state i in year t,
and class%ci. = the mean fraction of prescriptions in therapeutic class c in state i during
the entire sample period, i.e. class%ci. = (1 / T) Σt class%cit, where class%cit = the fraction
of prescriptions in therapeutic class c in state i in year t.

9
Changes over time in the fixed-weighted index V’ are entirely due to withintherapeutic class changes in drug vintage, not at all to between-class changes, i.e. shifts in
the distribution of drugs by therapeutic class. In contrast, changes in the standard vintage
index (Vit = Σc class%cit Vcit) are due to between- as well as within-class changes in
vintage.
We will construct fixed-weighted indices of drug vintage using data from the
Veterans Administration’s National Drug File (U.S. Dept. of Veterans Affairs (2007)) on
the therapeutic class of each product. The VA drug classification is hierarchical, and has
over 500 classes and subclasses. We will classify drugs at the highest level of the VA
classification system, which has 32 classes. Table 3 shows data on the distribution and
vintage of Medicaid prescriptions in 1991 and 2004, by major VA therapeutic class. In
2004, two classes of drugs (central nervous system medications and cardiovascular
medications) accounted for half of Medicaid prescriptions. The share of Medicaid
prescriptions that were central nervous system medications increased from 19% in 1991
to 29% in 2004. The mean vintage of central nervous system medications increased
much more than the mean vintage of cardiovascular medications (16.5 years vs. 6.5
years). However for the nation as a whole, the fixed-weighted vintage index increased
more during 1991-2004 than the standard index (11.4 years vs. 9.4 years).
We will estimate models using both the standard index and the fixed-weighted
index of drug vintage. Performing this sensitivity analysis is useful, but eliminating the
effects of shifts in the distribution of drugs by therapeutic class on vintage is not
necessarily appropriate. If the rate of innovation varies across diseases/drug classes,
states may benefit from innovation by changing the distribution of drugs consumed, by
class, as well as by using newer drugs within drug classes.

E. Potential reasons for variation in the rate of increase of drug vintage
The rate of increase in drug vintage may vary across states due to both interstate
differences in the types of diseases afflicting the population, and differences in the drugs
used to treat given diseases. Suppose that
ΔVi = Σd sharedi ΔVd

10
where
ΔVi = the increase in the mean vintage of drugs in state i
sharedi = the fraction of state i’s residents who have disease d
ΔVd = the increase in the mean vintage of drugs to treat disease d
Even if the increase in the mean vintage of drugs to treat each disease is the same in
every state, differences in the fractions of state residents who have various diseases
(sharedi) will result in interstate variation in the increase in the mean vintage of drugs.11
The relative incidence of various diseases does vary across states. This is
illustrated by Figure 7, which plots the state-level incidence rate (cases per 100,000) of
colon & rectum cancer against the incidence rate of prostate cancer for males in 2002.
The correlation across states between these two incidence rates is not significantly
different from zero (p-value = 0.61).
Moreover, due to medical practice variation, the increase in the mean vintage of
drugs to treat any given disease is likely to vary across states. Medical practice variation
is a well-documented phenomenon: there are 2514 citations for this term in the PubMed
database. The Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care Project (Wennberg (2006)) has
demonstrated “glaring variations in how health care is delivered across the United
States.”
Skinner and Staiger (2005) argue that medical practice variation may be partly
due to variation in the frequency and likelihood of informational exchanges through
networks or other social activities, which may in turn be related to both average
educational attainment and other measures of social capital. They compared the adoption
of several important innovations during the 20th century, ranging from advances at midcentury in hybrid corn and tractors, to medical innovations in the treatment of heart
attacks at the end of the century. They found a very strong state-level correlation with
regard to the adoption of new and effective technology, and this correlation held across a
variety of industries and time periods. These results are suggestive of state-level factors
associated with barriers to adoption. These barriers may be related to information or
network flows, given that farmers, physicians, and individual computer users conduct
11

Our econometric model will control (via state fixed effects) for the effects of permanent, or relatively
stable, differences between states in the relative incidence of various diseases.

11
their business in often small and isolated groups, and therefore are most vulnerable to
potential information asymmetries.
Interstate differences in government health care policy also contribute to practice
variation. In the last few years, some state Medicaid programs and private managed care
plans have restricted access to certain drugs, especially newer, more expensive drugs.
One important type of restriction is a “prior authorization” requirement: a prescription
will not be dispensed without prior authorization by program officials. Lichtenberg
(2005d) examined the effect of access restrictions on the vintage of drugs used by
Medicaid enrollees. The sample included 50 brand name drugs in six important
therapeutic classes: antidepressants, antihypertensives, cholesterol-lowering drugs,
diabetic drugs, osteoporosis/menopause drugs, and pain management medications. The
extent of access restrictions varied considerably across states. Twelve states did not
restrict any of the 50 drugs. Five states restricted over 47% of the drugs, and one—
Vermont—restricted 43 of the 50 drugs. The vintage of Medicaid prescriptions increased
more slowly in states that imposed more access restrictions.12

II. Econometric model
We will investigate the effects of indicators of the quality of medical care,
behavioral risk factors, and other variables on life expectancy and medical expenditure by
estimating models of the following form:
Yst = β Xst + αs + δt + εst

(s = 1,…,50;13 t = 1991,…,2004)

(1)

where Y is one of the following variables:
LEst = life expectancy at birth in state s in year t
expendst = the log of per capita medical expenditure in state s in year t
and X includes a subset of the following variables:

12

Lichtenberg (2006) presents a theoretical argument that the vintage of drugs is also likely to depend on
the extent of prescription drug coverage, and empirical evidence that supports this argument.
13
Arizona is excluded from the sample because it does not participate in the Medicaid Drug Rebate
Program.

12
adv_image%st = the fraction of standard or advanced Medicare imaging
procedures performed in state s in year t that were advanced
procedures
vint_medicaid_rxst = the mean vintage of Medicaid prescriptions in state s in year
t
vint_medicaid_rx_fixedst = a fixed-weight index of the mean vintage of Medicaid
prescriptions in state s in year t
vint_medicare_rxst = the mean vintage of Medicare drug treatments in state s in
year t
md_research_qualst = the fraction of physicians practicing in state s in year t who
graduated from the top 60 medical schools ranked in terms of
research
md_primcare_qualst = the fraction of physicians practicing in state s in year t who
graduated from the top 60 medical schools ranked in terms of
primary care
incomest = the log of per capita personal income in state s in year t
edust = an index of mean educational attainment of residents of
state s in year t
health_covst = the % of residents covered by health insurance in state s in
year t
bmi_gt25st = the % of residents with BMI > 25 in state s in year t
now_smokest = the % of residents who are current smokers in state s in year
t
aidsst-2 = the number of AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency
Syndrome) cases reported per 100,000 population in state s in
year t-2
αs and δt represent state fixed effects and year fixed effects, respectively. Eq. (1) will be
estimated by weighted least squares (WLS), weighting by popit, state i’s population in
year t.
In principle, there is some risk of feedback, or reverse causality, from life
expectancy to some of the explanatory variables, especially mean income and education.
Ceteris paribus, increases in life expectancy lead to an increase in the fraction of the
population that is elderly. As shown in Figure 8, mean income and education of elderly
people is significantly lower than that of non-elderly people. Hence unobserved shocks
that increase a state’s longevity could reduce its mean income and education, causing a
downward bias in the coefficients of these variables. However, the share of the
population that is elderly need not be increasing faster in states with larger increase in life
expectancy; these states could have higher birth and/or net immigration rates.

13
In practice, the share of the population that is elderly is increasing faster in states
with larger increase in life expectancy, but the relationship is not very strong. By using
estimates of this relationship and the age profiles shown in Figure 8, we obtained
estimates of the feedback effect of life expectancy on income and education, via
population age structure. These calculations indicated that the downward biases in the
income and education coefficients in the longevity equations would be extremely small.

III. Data sources and descriptive statistics
Life expectancy. The government does not publish data on life expectancy, by state, so
we constructed estimates using data on the number of deaths by age group, year, and state
of residence from the Multiple Cause-of-Death Mortality Data from the National Vital
Statistics System of the National Center for Health Statistics.14 Each record in the
microdata is based on information abstracted from death certificates filed in vital
statistics offices of each State and District of Columbia. The average number of records
(deaths) per year is about 2.3 million. We also used population data from CDC Wonder
Bridged-Race Population Estimates (Vintage 2004, http://wonder.cdc.gov/Bridged-Racev2004.HTML).15 As shown in Figure 9, the population-weighted means of my state
estimates of LE are quite similar to the NCHS national estimates.
Per capita income. These data were obtained from the Bureau of Economic Analysis
State Annual Personal Income database (http://www.bea.gov/regional/spi/).
Per capita medical expenditure. The CMS Health Accounts by State database provides
data on the following categories of personal health care expenditure, by state and year
(1980-2004).
Vintage of Medicaid prescriptions. The mean vintage of Medicaid prescriptions is
defined as follows:
vint_medicaid_rxit = Σa n_medicaid_ingredait vinta
Σa n_medicaid_ingredait
14

Murray et al (2006) also computed state and local estimates of life expectancy.
We computed life expectancy using the following age classification: under 1 year, 1-4 years, 5-9 years,
10-14 years, 15-19 years, 20-24 years, 25-29 years, 30-34 years, 35-39 years, 40-44 years, 45-49 years, 5054 years, 55-59 years, 60-64 years, 65-69 years, 70-74 years, 75-79 years, 80-84 years, 85 years and over.
15

14

where
n_medicaid_ingredait = the number of Medicaid prescriptions containing active
ingredient a in state i in year t
vinta = the vintage (year of initial FDA approval) of active ingredient a.
The first of these variables is constructed as follows:
n_medicaid_ingredait = Σp n_medicaid_prodpit dpa
where
n_medicaid_prodpit = the number of Medicaid prescriptions for product p in state i in
year t
dpa = 1 if product p contains active ingredient a
= 0 if product p does not contain active ingredient a
Σa dpa = 1 if product p is a single-ingredient product; Σa dpa > 1 if it is a combination
product. Data on n_medicaid_prodpit were obtained from CMS’ Medicaid State Drug
Utilization files (http://www.cms.hhs.gov/MedicaidDrugRebateProgram/SDUD/list.asp),
which cover outpatient drugs paid for by State Medicaid agencies since the inception of
the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program. Forty nine states (Arizona is excluded) and the
District of Columbia cover drugs under the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program. The
Medicaid data disclose the number of prescriptions, by product (NDC code), state, and
year. There are currently over 37,000 products in the Medicaid Drug Product Data file
(http://www.cms.hhs.gov/MedicaidDrugRebateProgram/09_DrugProdData.asp).
Data on dpa were obtained from the ndc_denorm table in the Multum Lexicon
database (http://www.multum.com/Lexicon.htm). There are currently over 2100 active
ingredients in this database. Table 4 shows the top 25 active ingredients contained in
2004 Medicaid prescriptions, ranked by number of prescriptions.
Data on vinta were obtained from the Drugs@FDA database, produced by the
FDA Center for Drug Evaluation and Research
(http://www.fda.gov/cder/drugsatfda/datafiles/default.htm). This database includes
several tables. The product table enumerates properties of the products included in each
application, including their active ingredient(s). The supplements table provides the
approval history for each application, including dates of approval. We define vinta as the
earliest approval date of any product that contains active ingredient a.

15
Vintage of Medicare drug treatments. Medicare is a health insurance program for people
age 65 or older, people under age 65 with certain disabilities, and people of all ages with
End-Stage Renal Disease (permanent kidney failure requiring dialysis or a kidney
transplant). All Medicare enrollees are covered by Medicare Part A (Hospital Insurance).
Most Medicare enrollees elect to pay a monthly premium for Part B. Medicare Part B
helps cover doctors’ services and outpatient care. It also covers some other medical
services that Part A doesn’t cover, such as some of the services of physical and
occupational therapists, and some home health care. Part B helps pay for these covered
services and supplies when they are medically necessary. In 2004, about 39 million
Americans were enrolled in Medicare Part B.
Prior to January 1, 2006, when Medicare Part D was established, Medicare did not
pay for most outpatient drugs, but the Medicare Part B (Medical Insurance) program did
pay for drugs administered by health care providers, e.g. chemotherapy.
The Medicare drug vintage measure is similar to the Medicaid drug vintage
measure, with one exception. For reasons discussed below, the Medicare index is
expenditure-weighted, rather than quantity weighted:

where

vint_medicare_rxit = Σa expend_medicare_ingredait vinta
Σa expend_medicare_ingredait
expend_medicare_ingredait = expenditure on Medicare drug treatments containing
active ingredient a in state i in year t

This variable is defined as follows:
expend_medicare_ingredait = Σd expend_medicare_drugdit eda
where
expend_medicare_drugdit
eda

= expenditure on Medicare drug treatment d in state i in year t
= 1 if Medicare drug treatment d contains active ingredient a
= 0 if Medicare drug treatment d does not contain active
ingredient a

Data on expend_medicare_drugdit were obtained from annual Physician/Supplier
Procedure Summary (PSPS) Master Files produced by CMS for each of the years 1991-

16
2004. Each file is a 100% summary of all Part B Carrier and DMERC Claims processed
through the Common Working File and stored in the National Claims History Repository.
The files are large; the 2004 file has over 12 million records. The file enables us to
compute total submitted services and charges, total allowed services and charges, total
denied services and charges, and total payment amounts, by Medicare carrier and
procedure. In most cases there is a one-to-one correspondence between a carrier and a
state, so we can measure utilization and expenditure, by procedure and state.
As discussed in the technical documentation for the PSPS Master Files, Medicare
carriers often make erroneous reports of service counts, but not of expenditures:
Service counts for drugs should be reported using pricing units, e.g. J0120:
Injection, Tetracycline up to 250 mg. In this example, 250 mg = 1 pricing unit or
service. If the injection were for 500 mg then the pricing unit or service would be
equal to 2, i.e. 500mg / 250mg = 2 pricing units or services. Many carriers are
reporting the milligrams in the service count and MTUS Fields, e.g. 250 mg
instead of 1 pricing unit. As a result the number of services are inflated, thereby
deflating the average allowed charge.16
These reporting errors appear to cause spurious fluctuations in aggregate Medicare drug
treatment service counts, but not in expenditures. Therefore, while we believe that a
quantity-weighted vintage index is preferable to an expenditure-weighted index, due to
errors in reporting service counts we will use an expenditure-weighted index of Medicare
drug treatments.
Data on eda were obtained from the ndc_denorm table in the Multum Lexicon
database.
Table 5 shows the top 25 active ingredients contained in 2004 Medicare drug
treatments, ranked by total services count. Comparison of Tables 4 and 5 indicates that
the drugs administered by providers to Medicare beneficiaries are quite different from
outpatient drugs used by Medicaid beneficiaries.
Demographic characteristics and behavioral risk factors. Data on body mass index
(BMI), current smoking participation, health insurance coverage, and educational
attainment were obtained from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS),
which is the world’s largest telephone survey. The BRFSS was established by the CDC

16

Source: CMS, “2004 Limitations for the Physician/Supplier Procedure Summary Master File.”

17
in 1984, and was designed to collect state-level data. By 1994, all states, the District of
Columbia, and three territories were participating in the BRFSS.
Data on the incidence of AIDS (the number of AIDS cases reported by state and
local health departments) were obtained from the CDC’s AIDS Public Information Data
Set (http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/software/apids.htm). This data set contains counts of AIDS,
by demographics; location (region and selected metropolitan areas); case-definition;
month/year and quarter-year of diagnosis, report, and death (if applicable); and HIV
exposure group (risk factors for AIDS). The data set covers the period 1981-2002. As
noted above, the measure of aids incidence we will include in our model of life
expectancy will be the number of AIDS cases reported per 100,000 population lagged
two years. Using this measure allows us to have the sample period end in 2004 rather
than 2002. Also, Lichtenberg (2006) provides evidence that even before highly-active
retroviral therapy was introduced in the mid-1990s, life expectancy of AIDS patients at
time of diagnosis was 3.7 years, so overall life expectancy may depend on lagged AIDS
incidence more than it depends on contemporaneous AIDS incidence.17
Table 6 shows population-weighted sample means of the variables included in eq.
(1), by year. Figure 10 shows the increase in the fixed-weighted drug vintage index
1991-2004, by state

IV. Empirical results

A. Life expectancy
Estimates of models of life expectancy at birth are shown in the top half of Table
7. The dependent variable in models 1-3 is life expectancy at birth.18 The three models
include different sets of indicators of the quality of medical care. Model 1 includes the
basic Medicaid drug vintage measure vint_medicaid_rx (with changing therapeutic-class
weights) and both measures of physician quality (md_primcare_qual and
md_research_qual). Model 2 includes the fixed-weight Medicaid drug vintage measure
17

By 2001, life expectancy of AIDS patients at time of diagnosis is estimated to have increased to about 26
years.
18
Estimates of models of the log of life expectancy at birth are quite consistent with these estimates.

18
vint_medicaid_rx_fixed (with fixed therapeutic-class weights) and both measures of
physician quality (md_primcare_qual and md_research_qual). Model 3 includes the
fixed-weight Medicaid drug vintage measure and just the primary-care measure of
physician quality.
With only one exception, all of the indicators of the quality of medical care have
positive and statistically significant effects on life expectancy in all three models.19 In all
three models, the advanced imaging coefficient is positive and highly significant (p-value
< .003). This signifies that life expectancy increased more rapidly (and that the agestandardized mortality rate declined more rapidly) in states in which the fraction of
Medicare imaging procedures that were advanced procedures increased more rapidly.
Below we will discuss the magnitude of the estimated effect of the increased relative
utilization of advanced imaging procedures on life expectancy. But first we will review
the signs and significance of the other variables included in models 1-3.
The coefficients on both the basic Medicaid drug vintage measure (in model 1)
and the fixed-weight Medicaid drug vintage measure (in models 2 and 3) are positive and
highly significant. The vintage of Medicare drug treatments also has a positive and
highly significant effect. Since expenditure on self-administered drugs is much larger
than expenditure on provider-administered drugs, it is not surprising that the coefficients
on Medicare drug vintage are much smaller than the coefficients on Medicaid drug
vintage.
Although the research-quality of medical schools attended by physicians is
insignificant in model 1 and only marginally significant in model 2, the primary-carequality of medical schools attended by physicians is positive and significant in all three
models. Almost three fourths of the medical school primary care quality ranking is based
on the following criteria: peer assessment score, assessment score by residency directors,
student selectivity, faculty resources, mean MCAT score, mean undergraduate GPA, and
acceptance rate. States in which the primary-care-quality of medical schools attended by
physicians declined more slowly had larger increases in life expectancy.

19

The exception is the research-quality of the medical schools attended by physicians. Since U.S. News
and World Report uses some of the same data to assess research quality as it does to assess primary-care
quality, failure to detect an independent effect of research quality is not too surprising.

19
Now let’s consider the effects of three behavioral risk factors—obesity, AIDS,
and smoking—on life expectancy. As one would expect, the coefficient on the fraction
of the population with a BMI greater than 25 and the coefficient on the AIDS incidence
rate are negative and highly significant in models 1-3. States with below-average
increases in overweight/obesity prevalence and above-average declines in AIDS
incidence had above-average increases in life expectancy during the period 1991-2004.
Although the coefficient on smoking has the expected negative sign in all three models, it
is insignificant in models 1 and 2 and only marginally significant (p-value=.09) in model
3.
Models 1-3 include three additional variables—health insurance coverage,
educational attainment, and per capita income—that might be expected to affect life
expectancy. At the state level, long-term changes in life expectancy seem to be
uncorrelated with changes in both health insurance coverage and educational
attainment.20 The life expectancy of a state’s residents appears to depend on education,
but it is the quality of its physicians’ medical education, not the number of years of
schooling of state residents that matters. The coefficient on per capita income is negative
and significant: states with high income growth had smaller longevity increases, ceteris
paribus. Some previous investigators have also found evidence of a non-monotonic or
even inverse relationship between income and longevity. Uchida et al (1992) found that
“for [Japanese] females high income was the factor significantly decreasing life
expectancy at 65 years of age in 1980.” Hupfeld (2008) theoretically derived a non–
monotonic relationship between income and longevity, based on heterogeneous
elasticities of labor supply and otherwise standard assumptions. He analyzed this
relationship empirically for pensioners in the public pension system in Germany, and find
that “the relationship between income and life expectancy is indeed non–monotonic for
major sub–groups in the data.” And Ruhm (2004) argued that “although health is
conventionally believed to deteriorate during macroeconomic downturns, the empirical
20

The nature of the effect of health insurance coverage on life expectancy is not entirely clear on
theoretical grounds. Some analysts argue that people without health insurance receive necessary medical
care, but that medical care is provided to them in an inefficient manner, e.g. in emergency rooms. Also,
low health insurance coverage could be partly due to decisions by young, healthy people not to enroll in
health plans. In that case, increases in coverage could be inversely correlated with increases in life
expectancy.

20
evidence supporting this view is quite weak and comes from studies containing
methodological shortcomings that are difficult to remedy. Recent research that better
controls for many sources of omitted variables bias instead suggests that mortality
decreases and physical health improves when the economy temporarily weakens. This
partially reflects reductions in external sources of death, such as traffic fatalities and other
accidents, but changes in lifestyles and health behaviors are also likely to play a role.”
Now we will use the estimates of the parameters of models 1-3 to estimate the
1991-2004 change in life expectancy that was attributable to each of the factors included
in the models. The change attributable to a factor X is calculated as follows: β (X2004 –
X1991), where β is the coefficient on that factor, and X2004 and X1991 are the populationweighted mean values of X in 2004 and 1991, respectively. These calculations are shown
in Table 8. Between 1991 and 2004, life expectancy at birth increased 2.37 years.21 The
estimates imply that the increased use of advanced imaging technology increased life
expectancy by 0.62-0.71 years during this period. The coefficient on the basic Medicaid
drug vintage measure (vint_medicaid_rx) in model 1 implies that use of newer outpatient
prescription drugs increased life expectancy by 1.26 years. The coefficient on the fixedweight Medicaid drug vintage measure (vint_medicaid_rx_fixed) in models 2 and 3
implies that the increase in life expectancy attributable to use of newer outpatient
prescription drugs was about 20% smaller: 0.96-1.08 years. The vint_medicare_rx
coefficients imply that use of newer provider-administered drugs increased life
expectancy by 0.48-0.54 years. Overall, therefore, use of newer self- and provideradministered drugs increased life expectancy by about 1.5 years.
Although the average values of the first two indicators of the quality of medical
care increased during the period 1991-2004, the average value of the quality of medical
schools attended by practicing physicians declined. Model 2 implies that the decline in
both primary-care and research quality reduced life expectancy by 0.47 years; Model 3,
which includes only the primary-care quality measure (the research quality measure is
only marginally significant in model 2) implies that the decline in primary-care quality
reduced life expectancy by 0.28 years.
21

Since the models include year fixed effects, the sum of the changes in life expectancy attributable to each
of the factors need not be equal to the actual change in life expectancy.

21
Another factor that apparently reduced longevity growth during the period 19912004 was the rise from 44% to 59% in the fraction of the population that was overweight
or obese. The estimates imply that this trend reduced the increase in life expectancy by
.58-.68 years. The increase in this risk factor was partly offset by a decline in another
risk factor—the incidence of AIDS, which is estimated to have increased life expectancy
by .18-.20 years. The estimates also suggest that the small decline in smoking prevalence
may have increased life expectancy by about 0.10 years.
During the period 1991-2004, real per capita income (in 2006 dollars) increased
from $21,102 to $25,465.22 The estimates imply that this 19% increase in income
reduced life expectancy by .34-.43 years. The sum of the contributions of all of the
factors to the increase in life expectancy is in the 0.85-1.32 year range. Consequently,
between 1.05 and 1.52 years of the 2.37-year increase in life expectancy is unexplained
(i.e., captured by the year fixed effects).

B. Per capita medical expenditure
Estimates of models of (the log of) per capita personal health care expenditure are
shown in the bottom half of Table 7. These models include the same regressors as the
life expectancy models in the top of the table. None of the coefficients on advanced
imaging, drug vintage, or physician quality are statistically significant. This indicates
that, although states with larger increases in the quality of diagnostic procedures, drugs,
and physicians had larger increases in life expectancy, they did not have larger increases
in per capita medical expenditure. This may be the case because, while newer diagnostic
procedures and drugs are more expensive than their older counterparts, they may reduce
the need for costly additional medical treatment. The absence of a correlation across
states between medical innovation and expenditure growth is inconsistent with the view

22

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Historical Income Tables – People, Table P-1. CPS Population and Per
Capita, Money Income, All Races: 1967 to 2006,
http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/income/histinc/p01ar.html

22
expressed by the Kaiser Family Foundation (2007), citing Rettig (1994), that “advances
in medical technology have contributed to rising overall U.S. health care spending.”
The prevalence of obesity and smoking do not appear to affect per capita medical
expenditure, but the incidence of AIDS has a significant positive effect. This is to be
expected, since Duggan and Evans (2008) estimated that in California during the period
1994-2003, average annual Medicaid medical expenditure (the sum of pharmaceutical,
outpatient and inpatient expenditure) per AIDS patient was about $18,800.
Increased health insurance coverage is associated with lower growth in per capita
medical expenditure. One possible explanation is that lack of employer-based health
insurance (which may result from employment in high-turnover industries) causes underinvestment in the health of workers and higher medical expenditure in retirement. Fang
and Gavazza (2007) found that employers in industries with high turnover rates are much
less likely to offer health insurance to their workers, and that individuals who were
employed in high turnover industries have higher medical expenditure when retired.
Growth in per capita medical expenditure is also positively correlated with growth
in educational attainment and (more weakly) with income growth. Many previous
studies have shown that medical care is a normal good (income elasticity greater than
zero); some studies (Gerdtham and Jonsson (2000)) suggest that it is a luxury good
(income elasticity greater than one).

V. Some additional evidence (based on Australian data) about the impact of
advanced imaging technology on mortality
The availability of data from Australia’s universal health care system, Medicare
Australia, allows us to provide some additional evidence about the impact of advanced
imaging technology on mortality. Medicare Australia was introduced in 1984 to provide
eligible Australian residents with affordable, accessible and high-quality health care.
Medicare was established based on the understanding that all Australians should
contribute to the cost of health care according to their ability to pay. It is financed
through progressive income tax and an income-related Medicare levy. Medicare provides
access to free treatment as a public (Medicare) patient in a public hospital, and free or

23
subsidized treatment by medical practitioners including general practitioners, specialists,
participating optometrists or dentists (for specified services only).
On its website, Medicare Australia publishes data on the number of services
provided, by category (e.g. Category 5: Diagnostic Imaging Services), group (e.g. Group
I2: Computerised Tomography), state, gender, age group (10 age groups: 0-4 years, 5-14
years, 15-24 years, etc.), and year (1995-2008).23 Hence, we can compute the number of
advanced imaging (computerised tomography and magnetic resonance imaging)
procedures and the number of standard imaging procedures (all other diagnostic imaging
procedures) performed, by demographic group (gender/age group), region,24 and year.25
The GRIM (General Record of Incidence of Mortality) books26 published by the
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare contain data on population and number of
deaths, by demographic group (gender/age group), region, and year. Hence, we can
computer the following variables, for 20 gender-age groups, 5 regions, and 10 years:
N_ADV_IMAGEgrt = the number of advanced imaging procedures performed on
members of gender-age group g in region r in year t
N_STD_IMAGEgrt = the number of standard imaging procedures performed on
members of gender-age group g in region r in year t
POPgrt = the population of gender-age group g in state s in year t
N_DEATHSgrt = the number of deaths in gender-age group g in region r in year t
These data enable us to estimate difference-in-difference models of the effect of
advanced imaging innovation on age-specific mortality rates. We will estimate several
different model specifications. The first two will be estimated at the national level, by
aggregating the regional data. The first specification is:
log (MORT_RATEg.t / (1 - MORT_RATEg.t)) = β ADV_IMAGE%g.t + αg + δt + εg.t
where

23

https://www.medicareaustralia.gov.au/statistics/mbs_group.shtml
Australia consists of eight states, and the MRI procedure data are aggregated to five regions.
25
Medicare Australia also publishes data on prescription drug utilization by state and year, but not by
demographic group.
26
http://www.aihw.gov.au/mortality/data/grim_books.cfm
24

(2)

24
MORT_RATEg.t = ∑r N_DEATHSgrt / ∑r POPgrt = the mortality rate of group g in
year t
ADV_IMAGE%g.t = ∑r N_ADV_IMAGEgrt / (∑r N_ADV_IMAGEgrt +
∑r N_STD_IMAGEgrt) = the fraction of imaging procedures
performed on members of demographic group g in year t that were
advanced procedures
In this specification, diagnostic imaging innovation is measured in the same way as it was
measured in our models of U.S. life expectancy and per capita medical expenditure.
This specification may be less appropriate when analyzing data on a panel of
demographic groups than when analyzing data on a panel of regions. The effect on the
mortality rate of an increase in the fraction of procedures that are advanced procedures is
likely to be greater, the larger the number of procedures per capita. As shown in Figure
11, there is enormous variation across age groups in the number of diagnostic imaging
services performed per 100,000 population.27 In light of this, a more appropriate
specification is likely to be:
log (MORT_RATEg.t / (1 - MORT_RATEg.t)) = βA (∑r N_ADV_IMAGEgrt / ∑r POPgrt)
+ βS (∑r N_STD_IMAGEgrt / ∑r POPgrt) + αg + δt + εg.t

(3)

We will also estimate analogous models using data by demographic group, region, and
year, including fixed region-year interaction effects as well as fixed demographic group
effects:
log (MORT_RATEgrt / (1 - MORT_RATEgrt)) = β ADV_IMAGE%grt + αg + δrt + εgrt (4)
log (MORT_RATEgrt / (1 - MORT_RATEgrt)) = βA (N_ADV_IMAGEgrt / POPgrt)
+ βS (N_STD_IMAGEgrt / POPgrt) + αg + δrt + εgrt

(5)

Estimates of the parameters of eqs. _-_ are shown in Table 9. Line 1 shows the
estimate of the ADV_IMAGE% coefficient based on nation-level data. It has the
expected negative sign but is not statistically significant. Lines 2-3 show the estimates of
the coefficients of eq. ( ). The coefficient on the number of advanced imaging procedures
27

There is much less variation in procedure intensity across regions.

25
per capita is negative and significant, while the coefficient on the number of standard
imaging procedures per capita is insignificant. This indicates that demographic groups
that had above-average increases in the number of advanced imaging procedures per
capita had above-average declines in mortality rates, but that changes in mortality rates
were uncorrelated across demographic groups with changes in the number of standard
imaging procedures per capita.
Figure 12 illustrates the relationship across demographic groups between the
1995-2004 increase in the number of advanced imaging procedures per capita and the
1995-2004 reduction in the log of the mortality rate. Groups below age 35 are excluded;
these jointly accounted for less than 5% of deaths in 2004. For both genders, the age
profiles of the increase in the number of advanced imaging procedures per capita and the
reduction in the log of the mortality rate have inverted-U shapes, and are at a maximum
in the 65-74 year age group.
The estimate of the coefficient of (N_ADV_IMAGE / POP) in line 2 implies that
the increase in the number of advanced imaging procedures per capita accounted for
about 46% of the decline in the age-adjusted Australian mortality rate during the period
1995-2005. Due to data limitations, we are unable to control for other potential
determinants of mortality, such as drug vintage, physician quality, and behavioral risk
factors. Since these data are available for the U.S., we can calculate the effect of
controlling for these other variables on the estimate of the effect of diagnostic imaging
innovation on longevity. As shown in Table 7, the coefficient on adv_image% in Model
1, controlling for the other included variables, is 6.463. This implies that increased use of
diagnostic imaging innovation increased U.S. life expectancy by 0.62 years during 19912004: 26% of the total increase. If we estimate Model 1 excluding variables other than
adv_image%, the coefficient on this variable is 11.102 (Z = 2.88; p-value = 0.0040).
This would imply that increased use of diagnostic imaging innovation increased U.S. life
expectancy by 1.06 years during 1991-2004: 45% of the total increase. The latter is
almost identical to our estimate based on Australian data. Therefore it seems reasonable
to conclude that controlling for the other variables included in the model of U.S. life
expectancy would reduce the estimate of the coefficient of (N_ADV_IMAGE / POP) by
about 40%, which would imply that increased use of diagnostic imaging innovation

26
accounted for 26% of the total increase in Australian life expectancy during the period
1995-2004.28
The estimates based on region-level data, shown in lines 4-6 of Table 9, are
similar to the estimates based on nation-level data. The region-level estimate of the
ADV_IMAGE% coefficient (line 4) is also insignificant. The region-level coefficient on
the number of advanced imaging procedures per capita (line 5) is negative and
significant, and its magnitude is close to the nation-level estimate (line 2). The regionlevel coefficient on the number of standard imaging procedures per capita is positive and
significant. This indicates that demographic groups that had above-average increases in
the number of standard imaging procedures per capita had below-average declines in
mortality rates. Groups that had above-average increases in the number of standard
imaging procedures per capita may have experienced unobserved negative health shocks.

VI. Summary
The rate of increase of longevity has varied considerably across U.S. states since
1991. This paper has examined the effect of the quality of medical care, behavioral risk
factors, and other variables on life expectancy and medical expenditure using longitudinal
state-level data.
We examined the effects of three different measures of the quality of medical
care. The first is the average quality of diagnostic imaging procedures, defined as the
fraction of procedures that are advanced procedures. The second is the average quality of
practicing physicians, defined as the fraction of physicians that were trained at top-ranked
medical schools. The third is the mean vintage (FDA approval year) of outpatient and
inpatient prescription drugs.
We also examined the effects on longevity of three important behavioral risk
factors—obesity, smoking, and AIDS incidence—and other variables—education,
income, and health insurance coverage—that might be expected to influence longevity
growth. Our econometric approach controlled for the effects of unobserved factors that
28

Australian life expectancy has been increasing faster than U.S. life expectancy. Between 1995 and 2003,
Australian life expectancy increased 2.4 years, from 77.9 to 80.3 years, while U.S. life expectancy
increased 1.8 years, from 75.7 to 77.5 years. Source: OECD Health Database.

27
vary across states but are relatively stable over time (e.g. climate and environmental
quality), and unobserved factors that change over time but are invariant across states (e.g.
changes in Federal government policies).
Our indicators of the quality of diagnostic imaging procedures, drugs, and
physicians almost always had positive and statistically significant effects on life
expectancy. Life expectancy increased more rapidly in states where (1) the fraction of
Medicare diagnostic imaging procedures that were advanced procedures increased more
rapidly; (2) the vintage of self- and provider-administered drugs increased more rapidly;
and (3) the quality of medical schools previously attended by physicians increased more
rapidly.
Between 1991 and 2004, life expectancy at birth increased 2.37 years. The
estimates imply that, during this period, the increased use of advanced imaging
technology increased life expectancy by 0.62-0.71 years, use of newer outpatient
prescription drugs increased life expectancy by 0.96-1.26 years, and use of newer
provider-administered drugs increased life expectancy by 0.48-0.54 years. The decline in
the average quality of medical schools previously attended by physicians reduced life
expectancy by 0.28-0.47 years.
The rise from 44% to 59% in the fraction of the population that was overweight or
obese reduced the increase in life expectancy by .58-.68 years. The decline in the
incidence of AIDS is estimated to have increased life expectancy by .18-.20 years. The
small decline in smoking prevalence may have increased life expectancy by about 0.10
years.
Growth in life expectancy was uncorrelated across states with health insurance
coverage and education, and inversely correlated with per capita income growth. The
19% increase in real per capita income is estimated to have reduced life expectancy by
.34-.43 years. The sum of the contributions of all of the factors to the increase in life
expectancy is in the 0.85-1.32 year range. Consequently, between 1.05 and 1.52 years of
the 2.37-year increase in life expectancy is unexplained.
Although states with larger increases in the quality of diagnostic procedures,
drugs, and physicians had larger increases in life expectancy, they did not have larger
increases in per capita medical expenditure. This may be the case because, while newer

28
diagnostic procedures and drugs are more expensive than their older counterparts, they
may reduce the need for costly additional medical treatment. The absence of a
correlation across states between medical innovation and expenditure growth is
inconsistent with the view that advances in medical technology have contributed to rising
overall U.S. health care spending. Increased health insurance coverage is associated with
lower growth in per capita medical expenditure.
The availability of data from Australia’s universal health care system, Medicare
Australia, allowed us to provide some additional evidence about the impact of advanced
imaging technology on mortality. We estimated difference-in-difference models of the
effect of advanced imaging innovation on age-specific mortality rates. Demographic
groups that had above-average increases in the number of advanced imaging procedures
per capita had above-average declines in mortality rates, but changes in mortality rates
were uncorrelated across demographic groups with changes in the number of standard
imaging procedures per capita. Estimates of the effect of diagnostic imaging innovation
on longevity based on Australian data are quite consistent with estimates based on U.S.
data.

29
References
Arias E. (2006), United States life tables, 2003. National vital statistics reports; vol 54 no
14. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics.
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr54/nvsr54_14.pdf
Bahk, Byong-Hyong and Michael Gort (1993), “Decomposing Learning by Doing in
New Plants,” Journal of Political Economy, 101, 561-583.
Baltagi, Badi H. & Rich, Daniel P. (2005), "Skill-biased technical change in US
manufacturing: a general index approach," Journal of Econometrics 126(2), pages 549570, June.
Bartel, Ann P., and Frank R. Lichtenberg (1987), "The Comparative Advantage of
Educated Workers in Implementing New Technology," Review of Economics and
Statistics 69(1), Feb., 1-11.
Bils, Mark (2004), “Measuring the Growth from Better and Better Goods,” NBER
working paper no. 10606, July, http://www.nber.org/papers/w10606.
Boucekkine, Raouf, David de la Croix, and Omar Licandro, “Vintage Capital,”
Department of Economics, European University Institute, Eco No. 2006/08
http://cadmus.iue.it/dspace/bitstream/1814/4346/1/ECO2006-8.pdf
Bresnahan, Timothy F., and Robert J. Gordon (1996), The Economics of New Goods
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Duggan, Mark G., and William N. Evans (2008) "Estimating the Impact of Medical
Innovation: A Case Study of HIV Antiretroviral Treatments," Forum for Health
Economics & Policy: Vol. 11: Iss. 2 (Economics of the HIV Epidemic), Article 1.
http://www.bepress.com/fhep/11/2/1
Fang, Hanming, and Alessandro Gavazza (2007), "Dynamic Inefficiencies in
Employment-Based Health Insurance System Theory and Evidence",
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 13371, September,
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13371
Gerdtham, Ulf-G, and Bengt Jonsson (2000), “International comparisons of health
expenditure: theory, data and econometric analysis,” in Handbook of Health Economics
vol. 1, ed. by A. J. Culyer and J. P. Newhouse, pp. 11-53.
Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman (1993), Innovation and Growth in the Global
Economy (Cambridge: MIT Press).
Hulten, Charles R. (1992), “Growth accounting when technical change is embodied in
capital,” The American Economic Review, Vol. 82, No. 4. (Sep., 1992), pp. 964-980.

30
Hupfeld, Stefan (2008), “Non–Monotonicity in the Longevity–Income–Relationship,”
working paper, Department of Economics, University of Konstanz, Germany, August 14,
http://wipol.wiwi.uni-konstanz.de/lehrstuhl/personen/hupfeld_non_monotinicity.pdf
Jones, Charles (1998), Introduction to Economic Growth (New York: Norton).
Kaiser Family Foundation, “How Changes in Medical Technology Affect Health Care
Costs,” March 2007, http://www.kff.org/insurance/snapshot/chcm030807oth.cfm#front5
Kopp, Raymond J., and V. Kerry Smith (1985), “The Measurement of Non-Neutral
Technological Change,” International Economic Review, Vol. 26, No. 1 (Feb.), pp. 135159.
Lai, D.J., P.M. Tarwatera, and R.J. Hardy (2006), “Measuring the impact of HIV/AIDS,
heart disease and malignant neoplasms on life expectancy in the USA from 1987 to
2000,” Public Health 120, 486–492.
Lichtenberg, Frank (2005a), “Pharmaceutical knowledge-capital accumulation and
longevity,” in Measuring capital in the new economy, ed. by Carol Corrado, John
Haltiwanger, and Dan Sichel, 237-269 (University of Chicago Press).
Lichtenberg, Frank (2005b), The impact of new drug launches on longevity: evidence
from longitudinal disease-level data from 52 countries, 1982-2001, International Journal
of Health Care Finance and Economics 5, 47-73.
Lichtenberg, Frank (2005c), "Availability of new drugs and Americans' ability to work,"
Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine 47 (4), April, 373-380.
Lichtenberg, Frank (2005d), “The Effect of Access Restrictions on the Vintage of Drugs
Used by Medicaid Enrollees,” American Journal of Managed Care 11, Special Issue,
SP7-SP13.
Lichtenberg, Frank (2006), “The effect of using newer drugs on admissions of elderly
Americans to hospitals and nursing homes: state-level evidence from 1997-2003,”
Pharmacoeconomics, ___.
Miller, Richard D., and H. E. Frech (1999), The Productivity of Health Care and
Pharmaceuticals: an International Comparison, (Washington, DC: American Enterprise
Institute).
Murray CJL, Kulkarni SC, Michaud C, Tomijima N, Bulzacchelli MT, et al. (2006),
“Eight Americas: Investigating mortality disparities across races, counties, and race
counties in the United States,” PLoS Med 3(9): e260.
Murphy, Kevin M., and Robert H. Topel (2005), “The Value of Health and Longevity,”
June, NBER Working Paper No. W11405.

31
National Science Foundation, U.S. Corporate R&D: Volume 1: Top 500 Firms in R&D
by Industry Category, http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/nsf00301/expendit.htm.
Nordhaus, William D., "The Health of Nations: The Contribution of Improved Health to
Living Standards" (March 2002). NBER Working Paper No. W8818. Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=302579
Rettig, Richard A., “Medical Innovation Duels Cost Containment,” Health Affairs
(Summer 1994): 15.
Ruhm, Christopher J. (2004), “Macroeconomic Conditions, Health and Mortality,”
NBER Working Paper No. W11007, December, http://www.nber.org/papers/w11007
Sakellaris, Plutarchos and Dan Wilson (2001), The production-side approach to
estimating embodied technological change. Finance and Economics Discussion Series
2001-20, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Sakellaris, Plutarchos and Dan Wilson (2004), “Quantifying Embodied Technological
Change,” Review of Economic Dynamics 7(1), pp. 1-26.
Skinner, Jonathan, and Douglas Staiger (2005), “Technology adoption from hybrid corn
to beta blockers,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 11251,
March http://www.nber.org/papers/w11251.
Solow R. (1960), “Investment and technological progress,” in K. Arrow, S. Karlin and P.
Suppes (eds.), Mathematical Methods in Social Sciences 1959, 89.104. Stanford
University Press.
Uchida, Eiichi, Shunichi Araki and Katsuyuki Murata (1992), “Socioeconomic factors
affecting the longevity of the Japanese population: a study for 1980 and 1985,” Journal
of Biosocial Science 24, 497-504.
U.S. Dept. of Veterans Affairs (2007), Pharmacy Benefits Management Strategic
Healthcare Group, National Drug File, http://www.pbm.va.gov/NationalFormulary.aspx
Wennberg, John (2006), The Care of Patients with Severe Chronic Illness: A Report on
the Medicare Program, The Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care 2006 (Hanover, NH:
Dartmouth Medical School Center for the Evaluative Clinical Sciences),
http://www.dartmouthatlas.org/atlases/2006_Chronic_Care_Atlas.pdf

Table 1
Research ranking and primary care ranking of top 20 medical schools,
ranked by research ranking
School

Harvard University (MA)
Johns Hopkins University (MD)
University of Pennsylvania
Washington University in St. Louis
University of California–San Francisco
University of Washington
Stanford University (CA)
Duke University (NC)
Yale University (CT)
Baylor College of Medicine (TX)
University of Michigan–Ann Arbor
Columbia U. College of Physicians and Surgeons (NY)
University of California–Los Angeles (Geffen)
University of California–San Diego
University of Pittsburgh
University of Chicago (Pritzker)
Cornell University (Weill) (NY)
Vanderbilt University (TN)
U. of Texas Southwestern Medical Center–Dallas
University of North Carolina–Chapel Hill
Source: U.S. News and World Report

research primary
rank
care
rank
1
13
2
28
3
16
4
38
5
8
6
1
7.
8
34
8.
10
11
10
45
10
57
13
18
14
38
15
18
15
53
15 .
18
30
19
18
20
2

Table 2

Percent of physicians who were graduates of top-ranked medical schools, 1991-2004
Year

1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004

Number of
physicians

582,910
596,337
590,583
640,044
647,064
664,096
681,343
713,856
743,261
756,868
771,381
791,496
810,648
818,732

% of physicians who were
graduates from top 60
medical schools ranked in
terms of research
45.2%
44.7%
44.7%
44.1%
43.7%
43.6%
43.5%
42.9%
42.4%
42.5%
42.1%
41.6%
41.4%
41.0%

% of physicians who were
graduates from top 60
medical schools ranked in
terms of primary care
40.0%
39.7%
40.0%
39.5%
39.3%
39.2%
39.2%
38.8%
38.4%
38.6%
38.3%
38.0%
37.8%
37.5%

Table 3
Distribution and vintage of Medicaid prescriptions in 1991 and 2004, by major therapeutic
class
Major therapeutic class

central nervous system medications
cardiovascular medications
antimicrobials
hormones/synthetics/modifiers
gastrointestinal medications
respiratory tract medications
musculoskeletal medications
antihistamines
dermatological agents
blood products/modifiers/volume expanders
ophthalmic agents
nasal and throat agents,topical
autonomic medications
therapeutic nutrients/minerals/electrolytes
genitourinary medications
vitamins
antineoplastics
immunological agents
dental and oral agents,topical
antiparasitics
antidotes,deterrents and poison control
pharmaceutical aids/reagents
irrigation/dialysis solutions
otic agents
rectal,local
miscellaneous agents
diagnostic agents
prosthetics/supplies/devices
Note: therapeutic classes are ranked by share of Rx's in 2004.

share of rx's Mean vintage
1991 2004 1991 2004
19%
21%
16%
7%
5%
7%
7%
3%
5%
1%
2%
1%
2%
2%
1%
0%
0%
0%
0%
1%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

29%
21%
9%
8%
6%
6%
4%
3%
3%
2%
2%
2%
1%
1%
1%
1%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

1967.6
1975.6
1970.4
1971.6
1978.4
1976.6
1975.6
1953.7
1968.7
1956.3
1972.3
1974.1
1961.0
1971.2
1977.4
1952.1
1969.8
1976.0
1962.6
1976.2
1967.5
1972.1
1968.9
1958.8
1959.1
1950.0
1957.5
1985.0

1984.1
1982.1
1982.2
1978.2
1993.8
1986.6
1987.5
1976.4
1972.8
1986.7
1988.6
1984.7
1974.3
1972.4
1980.9
1962.3
1976.3
1992.0
1972.3
1972.7
1975.6
1971.5
1969.2
1988.5
1976.2
1993.9
1957.1
1985.0

Table 4
Top 25 active ingredients contained in 2004 Medicaid prescriptions, ranked by
number of prescriptions
active_ingredient
acetaminophen
hydrochlorothiazide
risperidone
levothyroxine sodium
amoxicillin (as trihydrate)
hydrocodone bitartrate
clonazepam
ethinyl estradiol
clavulanate potassium
fluticasone propionate
clarithromycin
lisinopril
verapamil hydrochloride
amitriptyline hydrochloride
erythromycin ethylsuccinate
trandolapril
ranitidine hydrochloride
fluoxetine hydrochloride
metformin hydrochloride
furosemide
levofloxacin
ibuprofen
potassium chloride
divalproex sodium
paroxetine hydrochloride

number of prescriptions
48,661,138
35,027,596
31,534,553
29,278,356
26,065,616
25,832,307
16,976,543
16,452,694
16,295,635
15,435,753
13,826,324
13,678,282
13,241,735
12,650,203
11,849,113
11,730,763
11,421,621
11,394,072
11,328,717
10,908,503
10,834,964
10,791,720
10,568,663
10,313,345
9,947,294

Table 5
Top 25 active ingredients contained in 2004 Medicare drug treatments,
ranked by total services count
active_ingredient
sodium chloride
mycophenolate mofetil
tacrolimus
heparin
oxaliplatin
cyclosporine
dexamethasone sodium phosphate
botulinum toxin type A
prednisone
infliximab
imiglucerase
triamcinolone acetonide
alpha-1 proteinase inhibitor
dolasetron mesylate
dextrose
sirolimus
bacteriostats
granisetron hydrochloride
cyanocobalamin
ondansetron hydrochloride
Rh0 (d) immune globulin human
methylprednisolone acetate
iron sucrose
morphine sulfate
leucovorin calcium

TOTAL_SERVICES_COUNT
55,426,498
47,917,499
43,062,403
36,659,665
27,314,244
21,892,673
19,764,089
14,661,255
10,913,119
9,943,030
9,010,483
7,856,756
6,631,202
6,215,073
6,185,437
5,822,688
5,507,020
5,324,628
5,247,190
5,223,916
4,845,732
4,543,014
4,454,117
4,042,780
3,787,017

Table 6

Year

Life expectancy at birth

adv_image%

vint_medicaid_rx

vint_medicaid_rx_fixed

vint_medicare_rx

md_research_qual

md_primcare_qual

per capita personal income (nominal)

health_cov

index of educational attainment

now_smoke

bmi_gt25

aids

per capita health expenditure (nominal)

population (millions)

Population-weighted means of key variables, by year

1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004

75.5
75.8
75.6
75.8
75.9
76.3
76.6
76.8
76.8
77.0
77.1
77.2
77.4
77.9

9.3%
9.5%
9.6%
9.6%
9.8%
10.4%
11.3%
11.9%
12.8%
13.8%
15.1%
16.0%
16.7%
18.8%

1971.4
1971.7
1972.1
1972.6
1973.2
1974.1
1975.1
1976.1
1977.1
1978.2
1978.9
1979.7
1980.3
1980.7

1971.2
1971.6
1972.2
1972.9
1973.6
1974.6
1975.9
1977.1
1978.4
1979.8
1980.7
1981.6
1982.4
1982.6

1973.6
1975.2
1976.6
1980.1
1981.5
1982.8
1983.4
1985.0
1986.1
1987.2
1988.3
1989.3
1990.7
1992.2

45.5%
44.9%
44.9%
44.4%
44.1%
44.0%
43.9%
43.4%
42.8%
42.8%
42.3%
41.9%
41.5%
41.0%

41.4%
41.1%
41.4%
40.9%
40.7%
40.7%
40.6%
40.2%
39.9%
39.9%
39.5%
39.2%
38.9%
38.5%

$19,743
$20,715
$21,216
$22,074
$23,012
$24,111
$25,273
$26,815
$27,794
$29,663
$30,407
$30,661
$31,340
$32,888

86.1%
85.8%
87.1%
86.9%
87.7%
86.7%
86.9%
86.8%
86.9%
87.3%
87.5%
87.0%
86.9%
86.7%

4.53
4.55
4.58
4.52
4.57
4.64
4.65
4.66
4.66
4.71
4.73
4.75
4.76
4.76

23.8%
23.1%
22.6%
22.4%
22.2%
23.2%
22.7%
22.8%
22.6%
22.5%
22.7%
21.6%
21.2%
20.0%

44.5%
46.4%
47.3%
48.4%
49.4%
50.3%
51.3%
52.9%
54.2%
55.2%
56.7%
57.2%
58.4%
59.4%

16.9
18.9
23.1
29.7
29.7
27.1
25.4
21.9
17.4
14.7
13.7
13.1
12.1
8.4

$2,634
$2,819
$2,942
$3,080
$3,225
$3,360
$3,502
$3,645
$3,815
$4,027
$4,332
$4,643
$4,954
$5,293

241.8
245.0
241.3
256.4
254.0
256.9
259.9
264.7
273.3
276.3
279.0
281.7
284.4
287.1

Table 7
Estimates of models of life expectancy and per capita personal health care expenditure

Independent variable Estimate
adv_image%
6.463
vint_medicaid_rx
0.135
vint_medicaid_rx_fixweight
vint_medicare_rx
0.029
md_primcare_qual
6.828
md_research_qual
5.086
bmi_gt25
-3.869
aids_pop
-0.021
now_smoke
-1.618
health_cov
0.645
edu
-0.004
income
-1.834

Independent variable Estimate
adv_image%
0.377
vint_medicaid_rx
-0.003
vint_medicaid_rx_fixweight
vint_medicare_rx
-0.001
md_primcare_qual
-0.420
md_research_qual
0.209
bmi_gt25
0.078
aids_pop
0.002
now_smoke
0.261
health_cov
-0.403
edu
0.101
income
0.256

Model 1
Z
2.951
3.965

ProbZ
0.003
0.000

2.906
2.458
1.381
-2.521
-5.136
-1.074
0.483
-0.015
-1.879

0.004
0.014
0.167
0.012
0.000
0.283
0.629
0.988
0.060

Model 4
Z
1.413
-0.458
-1.136
-0.939
0.424
0.658
2.048
1.200
-2.042
2.344
1.692

Dependent variable: life expectancy at birth
Model 2
Estimate
Z
ProbZ
6.825
3.176
0.001
0.085
0.026
7.013
6.219
-4.465
-0.021
-2.181
1.356
0.011
-2.070

2.806
2.658
2.562
1.839
-2.823
-4.504
-1.467
1.013
0.046
-2.223

0.005
0.008
0.010
0.066
0.005
0.000
0.142
0.311
0.963
0.026

Estimate
7.446

Model 3
Z
3.277

ProbZ
0.001

0.095
0.026
9.709

2.992
2.415
3.085

0.003
0.016
0.002

-4.532
-0.023
-2.570
1.502
-0.039
-2.272

-2.885
-5.924
-1.716
1.135
-0.156
-2.221

0.004
0.000
0.086
0.257
0.876
0.026

Model 6
Z
1.345

ProbZ
0.179

-1.197
-1.070

0.231
0.285

0.097
0.823
2.080
1.320
-1.984
2.484
1.761

0.923
0.410
0.038
0.187
0.047
0.013
0.078

Dependent variable: log of per capita personal health care expenditure
Model 5
ProbZ
Estimate
Z
ProbZ
Estimate
0.158
0.379
1.411
0.158
0.336
0.647
-0.004
-0.972
0.331
-0.005
0.256
-0.001
-1.071
0.284
-0.001
0.348
-0.436
-0.994
0.320
0.672
0.232
0.468
0.640
0.043
0.510
0.095
0.774
0.439
0.100
0.041
0.002
2.005
0.045
0.002
0.230
0.272
1.187
0.235
0.300
0.041
-0.397
-1.864
0.062
-0.407
0.019
0.103
2.408
0.016
0.106
0.091
0.252
1.650
0.099
0.267

The estimates are weighted least-squares estimates, weighting by state population. All equations include fixed state effects and fixed year effects. Standard errors
are clustered within states.

Table 8
Calculation of the 1991-2004 change in life expectancy that was attributable to
various factors
Estimated effect of change on
1991-2004 change in life
expectancy
change, 1991-2004 Model 1 Model 2 Model 3
life expectancy at birth

2.37

adv_image%
vint_medicaid_rx
vint_medicaid_rx_fixweight
vint_medicare_rx
md_primcare_qual
md_research_qual
bmi_gt25
aids_pop
now_smoke
health_cov
edu
income
total

0.10
9.34
11.37
18.56
-0.03
-0.04
0.15
-8.49
-0.04
0.01
0.23
0.19

unexplained

0.62
1.26

0.65

0.71

0.54
-0.19
-0.22
-0.58
0.18
0.06
0.00
0.00
-0.34
1.32

0.96
0.49
-0.20
-0.27
-0.67
0.18
0.08
0.01
0.00
-0.39
0.85

1.08
0.48
-0.28
-0.68
0.20
0.10
0.01
-0.01
-0.43
1.18

1.05

1.52

1.19

Table 9
Estimates of the effect of medical imaging innovation on Australian age-specific
mortality rates
Line

Equation

Parameter

Estimate

Z

Pr > |Z|

National level (N = 240)
1

2

ADV_IMAGE%

-1.411

-1.180

0.237

2
3

3
3

N_ADV_IMAGE / POP
N_STD_IMAGE / POP

-1.592
0.130

-2.000
0.680

0.046
0.494

Regional level (N = 1100)
4

4

ADV_IMAGE%

-0.470

-1.170

0.241

5
6

5
5

N_ADV_IMAGE / POP
N_STD_IMAGE / POP

-1.493
0.225

-3.190
2.770

0.001
0.006

Equations _ and _ include fixed demographic-group effects and fixed year effects. Equations
_ and _ include fixed demographic-group effects and fixed region-year interaction effects.
Standard errors are clustered within demographic groups.

34

Figure 1
Increase in life expectancy at birth 1991-2004, by state

Figure 3
Number of advanced imaging procedures as % of
number of standard + advanced procedures, U.S., 1991-2004
20%
18%
16%
14%
12%
10%
8%
6%
4%
2%
0%
1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

35
Figure 4
Number of advanced imaging procedures in 2004 as
% of number of standard + advanced procedures in 2004

advanced

16%- 17%
19%- 19%

17%- 18%
19%- 20%

18%- 19%
20%- 24%

36
Figure 5
Fraction of practicing physicians who graduated from the
top 60 medical schools ranked in terms of research, by state, 2004

r esear ch12

2%- 23%
38%- 48%

23%- 30%
49%- 58%

33%- 38%
58%- 67%

37
Figure 6
Fraction of practicing physicians who graduated from the
top 60 medical schools ranked in terms of primary care, by state, 2004

pr i m
ar y12

1%- 24%
41%- 49%

26%- 32%
50%- 58%

33%- 39%
59%- 64%

Figure 7
Annual incidence rates (cases per 100,000) of
prostate and colon & rectum cancer, males, 2002, by state
80

Colon & Rectum, Male

75

70

65

60

55

50

45
100

120

140

160

Prostate, Male

http://statecancerprofiles.cancer.gov/incidencerates/incidencerates.html

180

200

220

Figure 8
Age-income and age-education profiles

Mean income in 2005
$60,000
$50,000

$43,570

$40,000

$47,795
$43,263

$32,997

$29,637

$30,000
$20,000

$21,509
$13,231

$10,000
$0
15-24

25-34

35-44

45-54

55-64

65-74

75+

age

Educational Attainment in 2004

100%
80%
60%

High school graduate or more
Bachelor's degree or more

40%
20%
0%
25-29 30-34 35-39 40-44 45-49 50-54 55-59 60-64 65-69 70-74

age

75 +

Figure 9
Comparison of population-weighted mean of
my state-level estimates of life expectancy at birth to NCHS national estimate
78.5

78.0

77.5

77.0

76.5

76.0

NCHS national estimate
Population-weighted mean of my state-level estimates

75.5

75.0
1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

38
Figure 10
Increase in fixed-weighted drug vintage index 1991-2004, by state

Figure 11
Diagnostic Imaging Services per 100,000 population, by age group, 2008
200,000
181,475
180,000

171,907

160,000

140,000
122,564
115,470

120,000

100,000
87,600
80,000

69,472
63,538

60,000
47,184
40,000

20,000

31,486
19,253

0
0-4

5-14

15-24

25-34

35-44

45-54

55-64

65-74

75-84

>=85

Figure 12
The relationship across demographic groups between the 1995-2004 increase in the
number of advanced imaging procedures per capita and the 1995-2004 reduction in the
log of the mortality rate
Female
0.18

0.45

0.16

0.4

0.14

0.35

0.12

0.3

0.1

0.25

0.08

0.2

0.06

0.15

0.04

1995-2004 increase in advanced imaging procedures per person
1995-2004 reduction in log of mortality rate

0.02
0

0.1
0.05
0

35-44

45-54

55-64

65-74

75-84

>=85

Male
0.18

0.5

0.16

0.45

0.14

0.4
0.35

0.12

0.3

0.1

0.25
0.08

0.2

0.06

0.15

0.04

0.1
1995-2004 increase in advanced imaging procedures per person

0.02

1995-2004 reduction in log of mortality rate
0

0.05
0

35-44

45-54

55-64

65-74

75-84

>=85

39
Appendix A
Medicine Methodology - US News and World Report
The 125 medical schools fully accredited by the Liaison Committee on Medical
Education plus the 20 schools of osteopathic medicine fully accredited by the American
Osteopathic Association were surveyed in the fall 2007 and early 2008. In order to
determine the ranking of research medical schools; 126 schools responded to the survey.
Of these schools, 126 provided the data needed to calculate the research rankings based
on the indicators used in the research model. The same medical and osteopathic schools
were surveyed for the primary-care ranking; 126 schools provided the data needed to
calculate the primary-care ranking. The medical school research model is based on a
weighted average of eight indicators, and the primary-care model is based on seven
indicators. Both rankings are based on a weighted average of indicators, four of
the data indicators are used in both the research and primary-care ranking model. The
research model factors in research activity; the primary-care model adds a measure of the
proportion of graduates entering primary-care specialties.
Quality Assessment (weighted by .40)
Peer Assessment Score (.20 for the research medical school model, .25 for the
primary-care medical school model) In the fall of 2007, medical and osteopathic school
deans, deans of academic affairs, and heads of internal medicine or the directors of
admissions were asked to rate programs on a scale from "marginal" (1) to "outstanding"
(5). Survey populations were asked to rate program quality for both research and
primary-care programs
separately on a single survey instrument. Those individuals who did not know enough
about a school to evaluate it fairly were asked to mark "don't know." A school's score is
the average of all the respondents who rated it. Responses of "don't know" counted
neither for nor against a school. About 48 percent of those surveyed responded.
Assessment Score by Residency Directors (.20 for the research medical school
model, .15 for the primary-care medical school model) In the fall of 2007, residency
program directors were asked to rate programs on two separate survey instruments. One
survey dealt with research and was sent to a sample of residency program directors in
fields outside primary care, including surgery, psychiatry, and radiology. The other
survey involved primary care and was sent to residency directors in the fields of family
practice, pediatrics, and internal medicine. Survey recipients were asked to rate programs
on a scale from "marginal" (1) to "outstanding" (5). Those individuals who did not know
enough about a program to evaluate it fairly were asked to mark "don't know." A school's
score is the average of all the respondents who rated it. Responses of "don't know"
counted neither for nor against a school. About 25 percent of those surveyed for research
medical schools responded; eighteen percent responded for primary-care. The source for
the names for both of the residency directors surveys was the Graduate Medical
Education Directory 2006-2007 edition, published by the American Medical Association.
The peer scores from the America's Best Graduate Schools 2008 edition's residency
directors' survey in non-primary care fields were used again for all schools in the research

40
medical school model because of a printing error on the survey instrument mailed out in
fall 2007. Assessment data collected by Synovate.
Research Activity (weighted by .30 in the research medical school model only)
Total Research Activity (.20) Measured by the total dollar amount of National Institutes
of Health research grants awarded to the medical school and its affiliated hospitals,
averaged for 2006 and 2007. An asterisk indicates schools that reported only research
grants to their medical school in 2007.
Average Research Activity Per Faculty Member (.10) Measured by the dollar amount
of National Institutes of Health research grants awarded to the medical school and its
affiliated hospitals per full-time faculty member, averaged over 2006 and 2007. Both fulltime basic sciences and clinical faculty were used in the faculty count. An asterisk
indicates schools that reported research grants only to their medical school in 2007.
Primary-Care Rate (.30 in the primary-care medical school model only) The
percentage of M.D. or D.O. school graduates entering primary-care residencies in the
fields of family practice, pediatrics, and internal medicine was averaged over 2005, 2006,
and 2007.
Student Selectivity (.20 in the research medical school model, .15 in the primarycare medical school model)
Mean MCAT Score (.13 in the research medical school model, .0975 in the primarycare medical school model) The mean composite Medical College Admission Test score
of the 2007 entering class.
Mean Undergraduate GPA (.06 in the research medical school model, .045 in the
primary-care medical school model) The mean undergraduate grade-point average of
the 2007 entering class.
Acceptance Rate (.01 in the research medical school model, .0075 in the primarycare medical school model) The proportion of applicants to the 2007 entering class who
were offered admission.
Faculty Resources (.10 in the research medical school model, .15 in the primary-care
medical school model) Faculty Resources were measured as the ratio of full-time science
and full-time clinical faculty to full-time M.D. or D.O. students in 2007.
Overall Rank: Indicators were standardized about their means, and standardized scores
were weighted, totaled, and rescaled so that the top school received 100; other schools
received their percentage of the top score.
Specialty Rankings: The rankings are based solely on ratings by medical school deans
and senior faculty from the list of schools surveyed. They each identified up to 10 schools
offering the best programs in each specialty area. Those receiving the most nominations
appear here.

41
Appendix B
Correlation across states between changes in the vintage of Medicaid and nonMedicaid prescriptions
This appendix describes a test of the hypothesis that the extent of utilization of
new drugs in the Medicaid program is strongly correlated with the extent of utilization of
new drugs in general. We had access to data from a private company, NDCHealth, on
the number of prescriptions, by NDC code, state (and five U.S. territories), month
(January 2001-December 2003), and payer (Medicaid, other third party, and cash), for six
important therapeutic classes of drugs: antidepressants, antihypertensives, cholesterollowering drugs, diabetic drugs, osteoporosis/menopause drugs, and pain management
medications. Here are some summary statistics:
N

Medicaid
Other
Total

mean
std dev.
min
FDA approval year
252,469,702 1986.44 1.51474 1961.22
2,244,589,497 1986.59 1.19334 1980.47
2,497,059,199 1986.58 1.18352 1980.85

max

Medicaid
Other
Total

share of Rx's for drugs approved after 1980
252,469,702 0.81739 0.04221
0
2,244,589,497 0.80292 0.02936
0.5
2,497,059,199 0.80438
0.0297
0.5

2002
1999
1999
1
1
1

These data were used to estimate the following equation:29
where

Yit = π VINT_MEDICAIDit + αi + δt + εit

(2)

VINT_MEDICAIDit = the mean vintage (FDA approval year) of Medicaid rx’s in state i
in month t
Yit = the mean vintage of all rx’s or of non-Medicaid (third-party and
cash) rx’s in state i in month t
αi = a fixed effect for state i
δt = a fixed effect for year t
εit = a disturbance

29

This equation was estimated by weighted least-squares, weighting by the total number of rx’s, or the
number of non-Medicaid rx’s, in state i in month t.

42
Two alternative measures of vintage were used: the mean FDA approval year, and the
share of prescriptions containing active ingredients approved after 1980. Estimates of eq.
(1) are shown in Table 1. In all four equations, the estimate of π is positive and highly
statistically significant (p-value <.0001). This indicates that the extent of utilization of
new drugs in the Medicaid program is strongly correlated with the extent of utilization of
new drugs in general. The vintage of non-Medicaid (and all) rx’s tended to increase more
in states with larger increases in the vintage of Medicaid rx’s.

Appendix Table 1
The relationship between the vintage of Medicaid rx's and the vintage of other (or all) rx's
Model

Dependent
Variable

Regressor
Weight
π
std. err.
t-stat
p-value

1a

1b

2a

2b

share of all rx's
share of third-party &
containing active
mean FDA approval cash rx's containing
mean FDA approval ingredients approved year of third-party &
active ingredients
year of all rx's
after 1980
cash rx's
approved after 1980
share of rx's
share of Medicaid
rx's containing active
mean FDA approval containing active
year of Medicaid ingredients approved mean FDA approval ingredients approved
rx's
after 1980
year of Medicaid rx's
after 1980
number of third-party number of third-party
total number of rx's total number of rx's
+ cash rx's
+ cash rx's
0.291
0.012
25.19
<.0001

0.316
0.013
23.98
<.0001

0.237
0.013
18.98
<.0001

0.253
0.014
17.75
<.0001

