NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LEARNING BY DRILLING:
INTER-FIRM LEARNING AND RELATIONSHIP PERSISTENCE IN THE TEXAS OILPATCH
Ryan Kellogg
Working Paper 15060
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15060

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2009

I am grateful for financial support from the OpenLink Fund at the Coleman Fung Risk Management
Center. This paper has benefited from discussions with Maximilian Auffhammer, Severin Borenstein,
Jennifer Brown, Meghan Busse, Michael Greenstone, Jun Ishii, Kai-Uwe Kühn, Jeffrey Perloff, and
numerous seminar participants. Tay Feder provided excellent research assistance. I am particularly
grateful to Richard Mason of RigData and Turner Williamson of the Texas Railroad Commission for
many illuminating conversations about the onshore Texas drilling industry. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Ryan Kellogg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Learning by Drilling: Inter-Firm Learning and Relationship Persistence in the Texas Oilpatch
Ryan Kellogg
NBER Working Paper No. 15060
June 2009
JEL No. D24,L14,L71,Q40
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the importance of learning-by-doing that is specific not just to individual firms,
but to pairs of firms working together in a contracting relationship. Using new, detailed data from
the oil and gas industry, I find that the joint productivity of an oil production company and its drilling
contractor is enhanced significantly as they accumulate experience working together. This learning
is relationship-specific: drilling rigs generally cannot fully appropriate the productivity gains acquired
through experience with one production company to their work for another. This result is robust to
other ex ante match specificities.
Relationship-specific learning is consequential because it implies that relationship stability is important
to productivity. When two firms accumulate experience working together, relationship-specific intellectual
capital is created that cannot be appropriated to pairings with other firms. If the relationship is broken,
this capital is destroyed and productivity decreases, thereby giving firms an incentive to maintain long-term
relationships. Accordingly, the data indicate that production companies prefer to work with drilling
rigs which they have accumulated considerable experience rather than those with which they have
worked relatively little. I demonstrate that this contracting pattern is difficult to explain with switching
costs or ex ante match specificities alone.

Ryan Kellogg
University of Michigan
Department of Economics
238 Lorch Hall
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
kelloggr@umich.edu

1. Introduction
The economic consequences of learning-by-doing, the hypothesis that unit costs decrease
with cumulative production, are well-known. In industrial organization, learning-by-doing can
rationalize pricing below short-run marginal cost and lead to increases in industry concentration
through the emergence of a low-cost dominant firm (Spence 1981, Cabral and Riordan 1994,
Benkard 2004, Besanko et al. 2007). In macroeconomics, on-the-job learning and knowledge
spillovers are widely believed to play important roles in driving endogenous economic growth
(Arrow 1962, Lucas 1988, Stokey 1988, Parente 1994, Jovanovic and Nyarko 1996). This paper
uses a new dataset to document a form of learning that has thus far received little attention:
relationship-specific learning. Learning-by-doing can be relationship-specific when the
productivity improvements associated with the accumulation of experience are specific to not
just an individual firm but to pairs of firms working together in a contracting relationship. For
example, a contract accounting firm may improve the speed with which it prepares a client’s
quarterly reports as its employees become familiar with the client’s personnel and accounts.
Relationship-specific learning is consequential because it implies that relationship
stability is important to productivity. When two firms accumulate experience working together,
relationship-specific intellectual capital is created that cannot be appropriated to pairings with
other firms. If the relationship is broken, this capital is destroyed and productivity decreases.
Relationship-specific learning therefore gives firms an incentive to work with contractors with
which they have substantial experience rather than those with which they have worked relatively
little. This learning may also be a mechanism behind recent documentation of forgetting effects.
Argote, Beckman, and Epple (1990), Benkard (2000), and Thompson (2003) find evidence that a
firm’s recent production experience has a stronger impact on productivity than does older
experience. Some of this experience depreciation may reflect an unobserved change in the firm’s
contracting relationships and a commensurate loss of relationship-specific capital. Finally, like
forgetting, relationship-specific learning may be important at the macroeconomic level:
recessions that disrupt production and fracture relationships may result in a productivity decrease
that persists beyond the rebound in output during the recovery.
Are relationship-specific learning effects sufficiently large that they plausibly play a role
in firms’ contracting or are a determinant of economic productivity? The literature is largely
silent on this question. This paper therefore empirically evaluates the importance of relationshipspecific learning using a new dataset from the U.S. onshore oil and gas drilling industry. I ask
two questions. First, when production requires coordinated inputs from multiple firms, to what

1

extent is productivity a function of not just each firm’s individual experience but also the firms’
joint experience? And second, do firms prefer to maintain long-term relationships rather than
regularly switch contracting partners, consistent with a desire to maximize relationship-specific
learning’s productivity benefits?
The U.S. onshore drilling industry is well-suited to this investigation for several reasons.
First, drilling requires inputs from two types of firms: production companies (“producers”) and
drilling companies. Producers—for example, ExxonMobil and Chevron—are responsible for the
technical design and planning of wells to be drilled but do not actually drill wells themselves.
Drilling is instead outsourced to drilling companies that own and staff drilling rigs. Second,
learning is an important source of productivity growth in this industry. Drilling cost-efficiency
requires the technical optimization of drilling procedures as well as teamwork between producer
personnel and the rig crew—skills that may be acquired through experience. Third, I have
collected excellent data on both drilling contracting and performance, covering nearly 20,000
wells drilled over 1991-2005, with which I can track drilling efficiency for producers, rigs, and
producer-rig pairs.
My primary finding is that not only do producers and rigs learn from their own
experience, they also benefit from relationship-specific learning. Specifically, a rig that works
with only one producer will, on average, benefit from productivity improvements more than
twice as large as those of a rig that frequently changes producers. Because I observe multiple
wells drilled per producer-rig pair, I am able to distinguish this learning effect from any ex ante
match specificities that might cause certain firm pairs to drill more effectively and more
frequently than others.
For the average well in my dataset, I estimate that relationship-specific learning improves
drilling productivity by 3.8%, yielding cost savings of about $9,700 per well. These savings give
firms an incentive to maintain long-term relationships. Accordingly, the data indicate that
producers prefer to work with rigs which they have accumulated considerable experience rather
than those with which they have worked relatively little. I demonstrate that this contracting
pattern is difficult to explain with switching costs or ex ante match specificities alone.
Beyond these primary results, I also test for the presence of learning spillovers in the
drilling industry. While I find that oil and gas producers are able to transfer knowledge obtained
from experience in one oilfield to the drilling of another, I do not find evidence supporting
learning spillovers across producers working side-by-side in the same field. This result stands in
contrast to other studies that identify modest cross-firm learning spillovers in semiconductor
manufacturing and shipbuilding (Irwin and Klenow 1994, Thornton and Thompson 2001).
2

While this paper focuses on the oil and gas drilling industry, it seems likely that the
prevalence of relationship-specific learning extends well beyond the oilpatch. Construction and
large manufacturing projects, for example, regularly involve multiple contractors and subcontractors working under a lead, general contractor. Consider Boeing’s recent launch of the 787
Dreamliner passenger jet, which involved nearly 30 firms contracted directly with Boeing as well
as countless additional subcontractors and suppliers. Collaboration amongst these firms has been
central to the jet’s development and production—one manager commented that “interpersonal
communication skills and building relationships have become more important than ever”
(Managing Automation 2007).
Finally, while I focus on relationship-specific learning as a phenomenon that occurs
between firms, learning specificities are likely to be important within firms as well: workers may
develop skills that are specific to their particular employer. For example, Huckman and Pisano
(2006) find evidence suggesting that doctors’ surgical outcomes depend more on their hospitalspecific experience than on their general experience. Becker (1964), Prendergast (1993), and
Gibbons and Waldman (1999, 2004) discuss the implications of job-specific learning for
equilibrium wage and promotion paths, explaining why, for example, wages increase with age at
a decreasing rate.1 These theories could in principle be translated to the pricing of service
contracts between firms when learning is relationship-specific.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: section 2 provides background
information on the oil and gas drilling industry, and section 3 discusses industry mechanisms for
learning-by-doing. Section 4 describes the data used in this study. Section 5 presents the
empirical framework and estimation results for learning-by-doing by production companies,
omitting the influence of the rigs they hire. This analysis provides a baseline for section 6, which
presents evidence of relationship-specific learning. Section 7 discusses relationship persistence
between producers and rigs, and section 8 offers concluding comments.

1

For an example and survey of the empirical literature on wage dynamics, see Poletaev and Robinson (2008).

3

2. The Onshore Oil and Gas Drilling Industry
2.1 Production companies and the drilling problem
Oil and gas reserves are found in geologic formations known as fields that lie beneath the
earth’s surface. The mission of a production company is to extract these reserves for processing
and sale. To operate in any given field, a producer must first obtain leases from the holders of
that field’s mineral rights.2 A lease typically grants a right to operate in only a small part of a
field, and most fields are operated and drilled by several distinct producers holding different
leases.3
A field’s reserves are typically buried under many layers of rock that do not contain oil or
gas. The objective of drilling a well is to penetrate these overlying rock layers to reach the oil
and gas in the field. Once a well is drilled to its target depth, the drilling rig is no longer needed
and the well, if successful, will produce oil and/or gas for a period of several years.
Typically, there is significant variation in geology across fields, particularly with regards
to the depth at which they are buried. Some fields are found as shallow as 3,000 feet and can be
drilled in a few days, while others are more than 20,000 feet deep and can require several months
of drilling. The types of rock that must be drilled through also vary considerably: the layers of
sandstone, shale, and limestone that may be encountered in one area will generally not be the
same as those found elsewhere.
Wells fall into two broad categories. “Wildcats” are those that are drilled into a
previously unexplored field, and their goal is to assess whether the field will actually be
productive. “Development” wells, on the other hand, are drilled into fields in which previously
drilled wells already exist, and their goal is to enhance field production. Most wells are vertical
holes; however, horizontal and directional wells are sometimes drilled when surface features
make a vertical well impossible or when doing so will improve the well’s oil and gas production.
Even though producers do not physically drill their own wells, they do design wells and
write drilling procedures. This arrangement is a response to the fact that the optimal drilling
program for any well is a function of the specific geologic features of the field in which it is
drilled. Producers typically have more geologic information than do drillers, due to their
2

Onshore leasing differs from the federal offshore leasing studied by Hendricks and Porter (1988) in that there is no
centralized process in Texas by which producers obtain leases. Instead, producers proactively approach the holders
of mineral rights, who may then negotiate lease terms or organize a competitive bidding process.
3
Leaseholding producers within a field may sometimes “unitize” their holdings by pooling them together, agreeing
on ownership shares in the pooled unit, and naming one of the producers as the unit operator. See Wiggins and
Libecap (1985) for a discussion of the economics of unitization.

4

knowledge from seismic imaging and previously drilled wells, and are therefore better placed to
make these engineering decisions.4

2.2 Rigs and contracting
The actual drilling of wells is conducted by drilling companies, which own drilling rigs
and employ drilling crews. A typical onshore drilling rig is pictured in figure 1. Its primary
features are a tall derrick, which allows pipe to be drawn in and out of the well, and a motor that
spins the drill pipe and drill bit during drilling. The size of this equipment determines a rig’s
“depth rating,” the depth to which the rig is recommended to drill. Apart from this depth rating,
rigs generally do not have field or producer-specific characteristics. The exceptions to this rule
are recently-built or refurbished rigs carrying equipment that eases the drilling of horizontal and
directional wells.
Rigs are mobile and can easily change locations within a field; however, moves of more
than 50 miles typically require several days and result in the charging of fees to the producer
requesting the move. When under contract, rigs operate 24 hours per day and 7 days per week,
rotating crews in three 8-hour shifts. My interviews with industry participants have indicated
that, while the average employment tenure of a rig crewman is approximately one year, the rig
foreman usually stays with a rig for much longer, and tenures longer than five years are not
uncommon.
It is natural to ask why this industry is vertically separated, particularly given the
relationship-specific learning effects identified in this paper. The answer lies in the spatial and
temporal variation with which producers drill wells. The drilling activity of any producer
fluctuates with oil production outcomes from recently drilled wells and the firm’s success in
finding new fields. Successful wildcats and development wells often lead to additional drilling,
while “dry” unproductive holes do not. The mobility and non-specificity of rigs allow them to
smooth these fluctuations in drilling requirements across producers. This smoothing minimizes
overall rig capacity requirements, as well as rig transportation and mobilization costs, without
requiring the producers to contract directly with each other.
Producers typically contract with rigs for the drilling of one well at a time since they are
generally reluctant to commit to a long-term contract when the total number of wells they will
drill is unknown and contingent on oil production from the first several wells drilled. For

4

Very small producers, which drill infrequently and may not have engineering resources, sometimes outsource the
planning and design function to the driller, particularly if the driller has experience in the same field.

5

example, if a drilled well turns out to be a dry hole, the producer will usually not want to followup with additional drilling in the field. Long-term relationships are therefore generally
maintained through repeat contracting rather than formal long-term contracts.5 To the extent that
relationship-specific learning is important, this repeat contracting creates rents that can be
bargained over at each renewal. However, unlike classic examples of relationship-specific
investments from the transactions cost literature (Williamson 1975, 1985 and Klein et al. 1978),
relationship-specific learning does not generally require costly up-front investment so that the
lack of a long-term contract does not create an inefficiency.6
Producers initiate the contracting process by issuing a request for quotation (RFQ) from
drilling companies with rigs in the vicinity of the proposed well. The RFQ contains detailed
technical specifications regarding the well to be drilled, including for instance the well’s total
depth and the density of the “drilling mud” to be pumped through the borehole during drilling.
The driller then includes in its bid, along with price, the identities of the rig and crew it proposes
to drill the well. In cases where a producer is following-up an initial well with further drilling
and wishes to retain its current rig, it will generally renew its current contract rather than hold
another auction.
The RFQ will specify which of two standard contract types will be used: “dayrate” or
“footage.” In a dayrate contract, the drilling company provides a rig and crew to drill the well
under the producer’s direction, charging it a daily payment for the rig’s services. The producer is
represented on the rig by one of its personnel, known as the “company man,” who directs the
rig’s operations, typically in consultation with the rig’s foreman. In a footage contract, the rig is
compensated at a rate set in dollars per foot drilled. This contract type is equivalent to a fixedprice contract since the well’s depth is specified in advance in the RFQ. The producer may or
may not place a company man on the rig. If present, he may monitor the rig’s activities and
consult with the rig foreman on drilling decisions but has no direct contractual authority.
Direct performance incentives clearly vary with the choice of contractual form. Under a
dayrate contract, which is essentially cost-plus, the producer will have a direct incentive to
design an efficient drilling program but the rig will not be directly incented to exert a high level
5

Exceptions to single-well contracting tend to occur in large well-established fields where geologic uncertainty is
low. For example, trade publications and interviews with industry participants have indicated that, in the large
Barnett Shale gas field in East Texas, development wells are virtually guaranteed to find gas and producers there
regularly sign long-term contracts with their rigs. See, for example, RigZone (2006).
6
An inefficiency may arise if firms are capable of enhancing relationship-specific learning through costly
investments such as job training. In the absence of a long-term contract, firms may under-invest. Such an
inefficiency may explain why some production companies and rigs use long-term contracts in fields such as the
Barnett Shale where geologic uncertainty is low.

6

of effort. A footage contract, in contrast, places the full direct incentive on the rig. However,
indirect performance incentives are important under both contract types. In the case of footage
contracts, producers can use efficient well designs, backed by historically low drilling times, to
obtain lower bids from drillers. As for dayrate contracts, interviews with industry participants
have revealed that rig reputations are well-known by producers and that rigs known to have
effective, experienced crews can command a dayrate premium over other rigs. Also, because the
producer’s company man is present on the rig on a dayrate contract, he can observe the efforts of
the rig foreman and crew. In an environment in which repeat contracting is common, this
observability of effort can generate implicit performance incentives for the contractor (Corts
2007).7

2.3 Productivity and drilling time
This paper uses the time necessary to drill a well as the measure of drilling productivity.
While this approach is necessitated by the fact that I lack well-level cost data, it parallels the way
producers and engineers actually view drilling efficiency and is arguably superior to using cost
data were such information available. In practice, drilling engineers achieve cost savings almost
entirely by reducing the time necessary to drill wells. Given dayrates that typically exceed
$10,000 per day, saving a day’s worth of rig time is well worth the efforts of producers’
engineering teams. In addition, given a particular well and rig, there is little scope for
substitution between drilling time and labor or capital. Rigs always work 24 hours per day and 7
days per week, and adding crew members cannot make the drill bit turn more quickly. Most
capital drilling inputs, such as the casing and tubing that are installed in the well, are fixed
functions of the well’s depth. For these reasons, learning curve case studies in the petroleum
engineering literature use drilling time as their performance metric, even though the authors
typically have access to detailed cost data. Brett and Millheim (1986) argue that the drilling time
metric is actually superior to a cost metric, since cost data are polluted by inconsistent
accounting methods and variations in materials prices and rig rates. Moreover, rig rates are likely
to be endogenous in my empirical model: the prices charged by rigs rise during periods of high
drilling activity, which will create spurious correlation between drilling cost and experience.

7

Corts and Singh (2004) assess the determinants of contract type in the offshore drilling industry, and the onshore
data I use here support his conclusions. In section 6.5, I address the possibility that the learning analysis presented in
this paper is confounded by changes in firms’ choice of contractual form.

7

3. Firm-Specific and Relationship-Specific Learning
This paper considers learning that is both firm and relationship-specific. Firm-specific
learning refers to improvements in a firm’s productivity that are associated with increases in the
firm’s experience. This “standard” learning-by-doing effect has been widely documented in the
empirical literature, beginning with Wright’s (1936) and Alchian’s (1963) studies of aircraft
manufacturing. Relationship-specific learning, on the other hand, refers to productivity increases
that depend not only on a firm’s general experience but also its joint experience with the
particular firms with which it works. These joint experience effects have received little attention,
though McCabe (1996) finds evidence suggestive of relationship-specific learning in the
construction of nuclear power plants: the productivity of primary construction contractors
engaged in brief relationships with their utilities was lower than that of contractors in long-term
relationships.8
In the drilling industry, mechanisms exist for learning along three dimensions: (1)
producer-level firm-specific learning; (2) rig-level firm-specific learning; and (3) relationshipspecific learning between producers and rigs working together. Producer-specific learning occurs
because every well drilled into a field yields information regarding both the field’s geology and
which drilling procedures work well in that geology. For example, the optimal selection of
drilling bits and drilling mud depends critically on the types of rock encountered. Producers’
learning is therefore technical in nature and tends to be field-specific. This learning is wellrecognized within the drilling industry, and several engineering case studies have documented
how producers use past experience to reduce drilling times. See, for example, Brett and Millheim
(1986) and Adeleye et al. (2004).
Because rigs are usually not involved in well design and planning, rig-specific learning is
less technical in nature than is producer-level learning. Instead, rigs’ learning comes from
improved teamwork and developments in crew members’ skills. For example, crews become
more efficient at lowering drilling pipe into a hole, 90 feet at a time, after carrying out this same
task on numerous wells in the past.
Finally, several mechanisms of relationship-specific learning are possible. The rig’s crew
may become familiar with the producer’s particular drilling procedures, or the producer’s
company man may improve his knowledge of the capabilities of the rig and its crew. In addition,
the ability to rapidly solve drilling problems—for example, a loss in the circulation of drilling
8

McCabe (1996) does not discern, however, whether the productivity differences in the data are driven by
relationship-specific learning or by other utility-specific or relationship-specific heterogeneities.

8

mud or the sticking of pipe in the wellbore—is an important determinant of drilling efficiency.
Industry participants have indicated that these problems are more easily solved if the company
man and rig foreman have developed a working relationship that allows them to collaborate
effectively, particularly if they have dealt with drilling problems together in the past.9
The intuition behind relationship-specific learning has a parallel in recent theoretical
work. Ellison and Holden (2008) develop a model in which a principal hires an agent to
repeatedly take an action. The optimal action in each period is state-dependent, but the principal
cannot communicate a complete contingent plan to the agent. Thus, in some states of the world,
the agent may not take the optimal action. However, once a state has been realized and acted
upon, the principal gains the ability to communicate the optimal action for that state, so that the
agent can take that action when the state occurs again. In this way, the firms’ performance
improves as they accumulate experience working together.

4. Data
The central empirical challenge of this paper is to separate the impact of relationshipspecific learning from that of firm-specific learning. My approach uses two datasets of drilling
activity in Texas. I obtained the first of these from the Texas Railroad Commission (TRRC),
Texas’s oil and gas industry regulator. These data consist of well-level records of every well
drilled in the state from 1977-2005. Each observation identifies the field and county in which the
well was drilled and the identity of the producer that drilled the well. I take the number of days
required to drill each well as the difference between the well’s completion date and the date
drilling began. This latter date was not regularly recorded until 1991: only 67.7% of observations
have a drilling time prior to this date, compared to 89.8% afterwards. I therefore focus my
analysis on 1991-2005, during which there exist 106,946 TRRC observations with a recorded
drilling time.10

9

These mechanisms suggest that relationship-specific learning occurs between the producer’s company man and the
rig’s foreman and crew rather than the producer and the physical rig itself. The ideal empirical analysis would
therefore use data on the duration of relationships between producer and rig personnel (the rig foreman in
particular). However, I only possess data on relationships between producers and rigs, not personnel, so am
measuring the true relationship of interest with error. This error may not be too severe given that rig foremen
typically have multi-year spells with a single rig, but will nonetheless attenuate estimates of relationship-specific
learning.
10
While the TRRC asks producers to report the date drilling began for all their wells, this reporting is not rigorously
enforced. Beyond the missing data, 2.7% of the observations from 1991-2005 have drilling times that are clearly
erroneous or technically infeasible. I drop wells with drilling times that are negative, wells with drilling times
greater than 180 days, and wells that are more than 3,000 feet deep and implausibly reported to have been drilled in

9

The TRRC data do not include the identities of the drilling rigs that drilled each well. I
therefore obtained information on rig activity from Smith Bits (SB). Smith Bits is a manufacturer
of drilling bits, and its field sales force issues weekly reports on all onshore rig activity in North
America. These reports give each rig’s location, by county, on every Friday from 1989 to 2005
and also provide the identity of the production company to which the rig is contracted.11 Unlike
the TRRC data, the unit of observation in the SB data is a rig-week, and I do not observe
individual wells. Thus, if the SB data indicate that a particular rig spends three consecutive
weeks working for the same producer in the same county, I cannot discern, without additional
information, whether that rig has drilled three very quick wells or one long well.
The empirical analysis requires a well-level dataset in which each observation reports the
well’s drilling time, location, producer, and drilling rig. I construct this dataset by merging the
SB rig location data into the TRRC’s well-level drilling records. Unfortunately, a large fraction
of wells in the TRRC data cannot be matched to rig information in the SB data. Match failures
occur for four reasons. First, some wells in shallow fields are drilled in less than one week and
may therefore not be drilled on a Friday. Such wells, comprising 6.1% of the TRRC dataset, have
no corresponding record in the SB data and are therefore impossible to match. In section 6.5, I
verify that the selective removal of these wells does not substantially impact the empirical
analysis.
Second, 14.8% of the TRRC wells do not match because the producer names in the
TRRC data do not always agree with the producer names in the SB data. Often, two names are
similar only in part, and it is difficult to discern whether the two names do in fact point to the
same firm. I use information on firm addresses, officer names, and drilling frequency to carefully
match some similar names; however, I leave ambiguous cases unmatched to avoid the risk of
matching firms that are, in fact, distinct.
Third, 27.7% of the TRRC wells do not have a match because the SB data are not as
comprehensive as the TRRC data: SB records 23.3% fewer drilling-weeks than does the TRRC.
These match failures do not appear to be systematic; in particular, their incidence is not
significantly correlated with wells’ drilling times, the primary dependent variable of the
analysis.12 Finally, some non-unique matches occur when a producer employs multiple drilling
a single day. The incidence of these observations and those with missing drilling times is not correlated with the
experience variables that I ultimately use in my analysis.
11
Unfortunately, I do not observe the price charged or whether the rig is on a one-well or multi-well contract.
12
Specifically, I regress a flag for whether each TRRC observation matched at least one SB observation on the log
of the well’s drilling time and a set of field X producer fixed effects. The point estimate on the log of drilling time is
-0.0085—small in magnitude—with a standard error of 0.0060.

10

rigs simultaneously in the same county. Because the SB data do not contain field or well
information, I am unable to distinguish which rig is drilling which well in such cases. While I am
able to use information on well depth and well type to match some of these wells to their rigs,
there are other cases in which there is no way to confidently match the data. Rather than guess, I
drop all wells that cannot be matched uniquely, reducing the dataset by a further 20.4% of the
original TRRC well count.
This matching process yields a dataset with 33,125 observations for which the producer
and drilling rig are known. Of these wells, 7.7% are exploratory wildcats and are dropped
because the field location is not recorded. In addition, because horizontal and directional wells
are typically best-drilled with specialized rigs, I omit these wells, comprising 20.2% of the data,
from my analysis. I also drop dry holes, comprising 14.3% of the remaining observations,
because their drilling times can be artificially inflated if the producer keeps the rig on-site while
it attempts to coax the well to flow.13
Finally, I drop all fields, producers, and rigs for which there is only one observation since
tracking learning for such entities is not possible. The final matched dataset consists of 19,059
wells, spread over 1,354 fields, 704 producers, and 1,339 rigs. As indicated in table 1, there is a
large variance in drilling activity across these entities. For example, in some fields I observe only
two wells while in others I observe hundreds. Table 1 also indicates variance in the number of
producers working within any field: some fields are drilled by only one producer and others are
drilled by more than ten.
Figure 2 illustrates the relation between drilling time and depth in the sample. Very
shallow wells that are a few thousand feet deep may be drilled in less than a week, whereas wells
deeper than 15,000 feet can require several months of drilling. The sample average drilling time
is 23.0 days, the average well depth is 9,036 feet, and 90% of the data lie between 4,650 feet and
13,800 feet. Summary statistics for depth, drilling time, and well type are presented in table 2.

5. Empirical Analysis: Learning by Field Producers
I begin the empirical analysis by examining the effect of producers’ experience on their
drilling productivity, omitting the influence of their relationships with rigs. This analysis follows
existing learning-by-doing studies that investigate lead firm productivity but do not incorporate

13

While horizontal, directional, and dry holes are not used in the final dataset, I still “count” the fact that they were
drilled when I calculate the experience variables for the associated field, producer, and rig. Although the field
locations of wildcats are unknown, their drilling is included in the experience of the associated producer and rig.

11

contractor relationships into the analysis. In section 6, I examine how the results presented here
are affected by taking relationship-specific learning into account.

5.1 Empirical framework
This paper follows the learning-by-doing literature by estimating a production function in
which firms’ past experience is the measure of human capital accumulation. The typical
specification in the literature has the Cobb-Douglas form given by
yfpt = (Efpt)α(Kfpt)β(Lfpt)γνfpt

(1)

where yfpt measures the productivity (inverse drilling time) with which a well is drilled by
producer p in field f at date t. Efpt represents the producer’s experience in field f at t,14 Kfpt and Lfpt
represent capital and labor inputs, and νfpt represents factors unobserved to the econometrician;
for example, geologic characteristics of field f. The magnitude of the coefficient α indicates the
importance of learning-by-doing.
The capital and labor inputs to any given well are primarily determined by the well’s
drilling rig and its crew. While the analysis of section 6 will control for rig heterogeneity, the
present analysis will instead assume that capital and labor inputs are constant within each
producer and field. That is, I will ignore for now any changes in the identities of the rigs with
which each producer contracts as well as any rig-level learning. The impact of these omissions
on the estimated learning rates of field producers will be assessed in section 6.
Taking logs of (1) and rearranging to include field and producer fixed effects, the
reference case specification for estimating producer-level learning is given by (2) below:
log(DTfpt) = f(Efpt) + γf + δp + ηt + φXfpt + εfpt

(2)

The dependent variable for each well is the logarithm of its drilling time DTfpt, and the
explanatory variable of primary interest is producer p’s experience in field f at time t, denoted by
Efpt. Field and producer-specific capital and labor inputs have been subsumed into field and
producer fixed effects γf and δp. The field fixed effects also play an important role in controlling
for the substantial geologic heterogeneity in drilling conditions across fields. Were producers to

14

This measure of experience will later be expanded to include measures of spillovers: experience by producer p in
fields other than f and the experience of other producers in field f.

12

drill more frequently in fields that are “easier” to drill, the estimated learning effect would be
biased downwards in the absence of these fixed effects.
Specification (2) also includes year fixed effects ηt to control for industry-wide
technological change.15 I include variables Xfpt for well type (oil vs. gas vs. both) and well depth
to control for within-field heterogeneity.16 Xfpt also includes month-of-year fixed effects to
control for seasonal variations in drilling time that may arise from changes in weather. The
disturbance εfpt represents the presence or lack of drilling problems on each well and is presumed
to be heteroskedastic and correlated across wells drilled within the same field.
Given these fixed effects and controls, the effect of experience on drilling time is
identified through variations in each producer’s drilling activity within a field. There exist
numerous sources of such variation, including changes in oil and gas prices, discovery of new
fields, and the identification of unexploited reserves in existing fields (through seismic imaging
technology, for example). The identification assumption implicit in (2) is that producers do not
drill wells more frequently in fields in which they have, for reasons unrelated to learning,
specific skills or knowledge that make them more productive drillers. If this assumption is false,
the estimate of (2) will be biased, yielding an inflated estimate of the learning effect. In practice,
violations of this assumption seems unlikely to be substantial, given the numerous other factors
that determine when and where a producer drills, such as its expectations about fields’ future oil
and gas production. Nonetheless, I test the validity of this assumption by estimating a variant of
(2) that includes fixed effects for field-producer interactions. While this specification will still be
subject to biases arising from the omission of rig identities and rig-level learning, it will be
robust to unobserved field-specific heterogeneity in producers’ drilling productivity.

5.2 Calculation of experience
I define Efpt as the number of wells drilled by producer p in field f during the two years
prior to date t, including the well completed at t.17 I calculate this variable using the original
TRRC dataset rather than the smaller dataset generated by the match of the TRRC data to the SB
15

In alternative specifications, I use a polynomial function of time to control for technological change. Doing so
does not substantially affect the estimated results.
16
Geologic heterogeneity is predominantly cross-field rather than within field. For example, regressing well depth
on a full set of field fixed effects yields an R2 of 0.88. Moreover, within-field depth variation is not correlated with
producer-specific, rig-specific, or relationship-specific experience. For example, regressing the log of well depth on
the log of each producer’s field-specific experience and a set of fixed effects for producer-field interactions yields an
estimated coefficient on experience of -0.0024 with a standard error of 0.0020.
17
The inclusion of the well completed at t implies that all wells in the dataset have at least one unit of experience
and avoids taking a logarithm of zero in a log-log specification of learning.

13

data. Were I to instead use this smaller dataset, I would understate each producer’s experience,
and variations in the retention of data across fields and producers would add noise to the
calculation, causing attenuation bias in the estimation of (2).
I measure experience using the number of wells drilled within the past two years rather
than the total cumulative number of wells drilled because the majority of the fields in the dataset
were discovered prior to the start of the sample.18 I therefore have no means to calculate a
cumulative experience measure. Even so, it is not clear that experience gained many years before
time t is relevant to a producer’s expertise at t. Studies by Argote et al. (1990), Benkard (2000),
and Thompson (2003) have demonstrated that experience effects decay with time as learning is
“forgotten,” supporting the importance of recent experience in determining productivity. In
section 6.4, I discuss evidence of forgetting effects in the drilling industry.
As an alternative to measuring experience with Efpt, the number of recently drilled wells,
I have also calculated Ê fpt : the number of days of active drilling during the two years prior to t. It
is not obvious which of these two variables is the more appropriate measure of experience. The
intuition behind Efpt is that learning by producers is technical and driven by the geologic
information gained with each penetration rather than the accumulation of days of experience.
However, if firms tend to learn more from mistakes than from successes, measuring experience
in terms of time spent drilling, per Ê fpt , may be more appropriate. In the exposition of the
estimation results, I will focus on those using Efpt for two reasons: (1) this measure is used more
frequently in the petroleum engineering literature; and (2) it ultimately yields more conservative
estimates of the relationship-specific learning effect.
Measuring experience as the number of wells drilled within the past two years does,
however, create potential for simultaneity bias that will cause an estimate of (2) to exaggerate the
learning effect. Frequently, a rig will drill a series of wells for a producer one right after another.
In such cases, the number of wells drilled within any fixed time period will be inversely related
to the number of days required to drill each well. For example, a producer that can drill a well in
20 days will drill 36 wells over two years, whereas a producer that requires only 15 days to drill
a well will drill 49 wells over two years. Thus, decreases in drilling time due to learning may
actually cause an increase in the number of wells recently drilled. This simultaneity will cause a
spurious negative correlation between drilling time and Efpt in (2), exaggerating the estimated
learning effect. I address this problem by instrumenting for Efpt with Ê fpt . Ê fpt is not subject to
the simultaneity problem: when wells are drilled back-to-back over two years or more, Ê fpt will
18

The choice of two years is a compromise between capturing the tenures of rig crews and rig foremen. I discuss the
results’ robustness to measurements of experience using periods shorter or longer than two years in section 6.5.

14

remain roughly constant as the drilling time per well decreases and the number of wells drilled
increases.
To capture learning spillovers, both across fields and across producers, an alternative
specification of (2) includes two new variables, E-fpt and Ef-pt. These tally, respectively, the
number of wells recently drilled by producer p in fields other than f and the number of wells
recently drilled in field f by producers other than p. These variables are similar to those used by
Thornton and Thompson (2001) in their study of learning spillovers in wartime shipbuilding, and
summary statistics are presented in the upper section of table 3.19

5.3 Estimation results
To begin, I estimate (2) as written, without allowing for cross-field or cross-producer
learning spillovers. Most studies of learning-by-doing model learning curves with a log-log
(Cobb-Douglas) functional form, which in this setting implies that f(Efpt) = β·log(Efpt). Before
taking this approach, I estimate (2) flexibly by fitting a cubic spline to f(Efpt), instrumenting with
a spline on Ê fpt . The results are plotted in figure 3. Drilling times are estimated to decrease by
about 15% over the first 20 wells drilled by a field producer and then stay relatively constant
over the remaining wells.
Figure 3 also plots the estimate of the log-log functional form. The point estimate of β is
equal to -0.042 with a clustered standard error of 0.005.20 This specification offers a reasonable
fit to the spline, remaining within the 95% confidence interval of the spline estimate for the vast
majority of observations. Most of the estimates reported in this paper are therefore of a log-log
specification, though the results of estimating more flexible functional forms are also presented
as robustness tests.
Table 4 displays the full set of estimated coefficients for the log-log specification plotted
in figure 3, which I now refer to as the reference case. The estimated coefficients on the control
variables generally agree with intuition. Deeper wells require more drilling time than shallow
wells. Gas wells require more time to drill than oil wells, reflecting the heightened difficulty of
managing wellbore pressures in the presence of gas. The year fixed effects indicate the presence

19

The logic behind instrumenting for Efpt does not apply to the spillover variables because decreases in the drilling
times of producer p in field f do not increase the number of wells that can be drilled in a two-year window by other
producers in field f or in fields other than f.
20
All standard errors presented in this section and in section 6 use a robust variance estimator that is clustered at the
field level (Arellano 1987, Wooldridge 2003). This estimator allows for both heteroskedasticity and within-field
correlation in the disturbance εfpt. Clustering on producer or on rig yields nearly identical results.

15

of some industry-wide technological improvement over the sample period, as drilling times
decrease by approximately 20% from 1991 to 2005.
The second column of table 5 reports the results of estimating (1) without instrumenting
for experience. These results agree with the anticipated direction of bias: the uninstrumented
learning rate is larger than that of the reference case, though not substantially so. Column III
replaces Efpt with Ê fpt in (2), so that experience is measured as the number of days of drilling
rather than the number of wells drilled. Here, the estimated learning effect is lower than that of
the reference case: the point estimate of β is -0.020 rather than -0.042 and is estimated quite
precisely with a standard error of 0.002. The source of this discrepancy may be that, if Efpt is a
better reflection of the process by which human capital is accumulated, then Ê fpt measures
experience with error and the point estimate in column III reflects attenuation bias.
Column IV of table 5 addresses the possibility that producers drill wells more frequently
in those fields that they are particularly good at drilling (for reasons other than learning) by
including fixed effects for field-producer interactions. The estimated learning coefficient is 0.050, similar to the reference case estimate of -0.042. This result indicates that the observed
experience effects are driven by learning rather than the matching of producers to fields for
which they have specific drilling expertise.
Regression V examines the importance of learning spillovers. Producers’ experience in
other fields appears to improve their productivity, though the magnitude of this effect is
approximately one-half that associated with producers’ field-specific learning. On the other
hand, the estimate of cross-firm learning spillovers is small and statistically insignificant. This
result contrasts with those of Irwin and Klenow (1994) and Thornton and Thompson (2001), who
identify modest cross-firm spillovers in the semiconductor and shipbuilding industries,
respectively. Drilling industry participants have indicated that the lack of spillovers may be due
to the competitive nature of common pool resource extraction. When multiple producers operate
in the same field, an increase in production by one firm may deplete the resource in a way that
adversely affects the production of the other firms. Thus, producers may be unwilling to aid each
other by sharing their drilling procedures.21

21

Conversations with industry participants have indicated that producers will sometimes include confidentiality
clauses in their drilling contracts to prevent rig crews from sharing field-specific knowledge across producers.

16

6. Empirical Analysis: Rigs and Relationship-Specific Learning
The analysis presented thus far has followed traditional learning-by-doing studies in that
it has omitted the impact of relationship-specificities on the learning process. The learning
estimates presented in tables 4 and 5 attribute all learning effects to producers without allowing
for the possibility that a share of this learning could be driven by rig or relationship-specific
experience. This section takes advantage of producer-rig contracting data to examine rig and
relationship-specific learning and assess the degree to which the previous section’s results
misattributed learning effects solely to producers.

6.1 Empirical framework
I augment specification (2) with variables that track rig and relationship-specific
experience and with rig fixed effects that control for rig heterogeneity. The new reference case
specification is given by (3) below.
log(DTfprt) = f(Efprt) + γf + δp + ηt + υr + φXfpt + εfprt

(3)

In (3), each well’s field, producer, rig, and date are indexed by the subscripts f, p, r, and t,
respectively. Rig fixed effects are denoted by υr, while γf, δp, and ηt denote field, producer, and
year fixed effects as in (2). Efprt is now a vector of experience variables, and the reference case
expands f(Efprt) per (4) below.22
f(Efprt) = β1·log(Efpt) + β2·log(E-fpt) + β3·log(Ef-pt) + β4·log(E-prt) + β5·log(Eprt)

(4)

The first three terms of the expansion denote the three dimensions of experience
examined in section 5: the experience of producer p in field f, the experience of producer p in
other fields, and the experience of other producers in field f. As was the case in section 5, each of
these three variables is taken as the number of wells drilled within the past two years, and Efpt is
instrumented with Ê fpt , the number of drilling days accumulated by producer p in field f within
the past two years.
The fourth term in (4) represents the experience of rig r with producers other than p, and
the fifth term captures relationship-specific learning by measuring the experience of rig r with
producer p. I calculate these two variables using the SB dataset before it is matched to the TRRC
22

The estimation of alternative functional forms for f(Efprt), for example a CES function, is discussed in section 6.5.

17

data as this avoids understating each rig’s experience. I define Eprt to be the number of weeks rig
r was actively drilling for p within the two years prior to t and define E-prt similarly. Each rig’s
experience is measured in units of time rather than wells because rig-level learning occurs
through the repetition of tasks and the accumulation of interactions with the producer, both of
which should be functions of time. Moreover, this calculation is necessitated by the data, since
Smith Bits tracks drilling activity in rig-weeks rather than well-by-well. Summary statistics for
E-prt and Eprt are indicated in the lower section of table 3.
Relationship-specific learning is important to the extent that β5 is more negative than β4.
These coefficients are identified through two sources of variation: (1) changes in the producer to
which a given rig is contracted; and (2) the employment of multiple rigs (either simultaneously
or in series) by a producer. If rigs have producer-specific characteristics (independently of
human capital acquired through learning) and are likely to have longer relationships with
producers to which they match well than those to which they do not, then this variation will not
be exogenous and the estimate of β5, the coefficient on relationship-specific learning, will be
biased downwards. Two institutional features of the drilling industry, however, suggest that
match specificities are unlikely to be a serious concern. First, as noted in section 2.2, the rig
equipment itself is generally not field or producer-specific, apart from the rig’s depth rating.
Second, most producer-rig contract terminations in the data appear to be driven by a lack of
additional drilling by the producer, with any rig, rather than by poor performance. When a
producer releases a rig, it is rare that the rig is replaced with a new rig; instead, the producer
simply ceases drilling, indicating that the relationship ended because the producer had no
additional work to offer the rig. Specifically, only 12.8% of terminations are followed by the
hiring of another rig by the producer within four weeks. These facts suggest that performance is
unlikely to drive tenure, at least on average, in this setting. Nonetheless, I examine whether
producer-rig specificities drive the estimate of (3) by adding fixed effects for producer-rig pairs
to the specification. With the inclusion of these fixed effects, identification of relationshipspecific learning comes only from variations in joint experience within each rig-producer pair.23

23

Even when rig-producer fixed effects are included in the specification, I am, strictly speaking, only estimating a
relationship-specific learning rate for those rig-producer pairs that I actually observe in the data. If producers are
more likely to work with rigs with which they anticipate having steep learning curves, then hypothetical learning
rates for the rig-producer pairs that I don’t observe could be lower than the learning rate I estimate here. Short of
being able to run a randomized experiment, there exist no plausible means to estimate an “average” learning rate
over all possible rig-producer pairs. However, it is not clear that such a learning rate is actually a parameter of
greater economic interest than the learning rate for relationships that actually occur in the industry.

18

6.2 Primary estimation results
Column I of table 6 reports the results of estimating relationship-specific learning per
equations (3) and (4). The estimated coefficient on log(Eprt)—joint experience between a rig and
a producer—is -0.025, statistically significant at the 1% level. This result implies that a rig that
works with the same producer over one year can expect to decrease its drilling times by 10%.
However, the estimated coefficient on log(E-prt) is only -0.010, implying that a rig that frequently
changes producers during a year can expect to decrease its drilling times by only 3.9%. Thus, on
average, rigs with stable contracting relationships improve their productivity more than twice as
quickly as rigs that frequently change contracting partners. Moreover, the difference between the
coefficients on log(Eprt) and log(E-prt) driving this result is statistically significant: an F-test
rejects pooling with a p-value of 0.003.
In addition, the point estimate corresponding to learning by field producers is only -0.030
in this specification. This point estimate is lower in magnitude than was reported in column V of
table 5, when the impact of producers’ relationships with rigs was not considered in the
regression. Thus, investigating learning using only the experience of producers overestimates the
contribution of their stand-alone experience to observed productivity improvements.
Column II of table 6 adds fixed effects for producer-rig pairs to the specification and also
removes from the data all pairs for which there is one observation. The estimate of relationshipspecific learning is not significantly affected by the addition of these fixed effects: the new point
estimate on log(Eprt) is -0.023 rather than -0.025. The difference between the coefficients on
log(Eprt) and log(E-prt) is still statistically significant with a p-value of 0.026.24 This result is
consistent with a limited effect of producer-rig match specificities on relationship durations.
I use the estimated coefficients to obtain an estimate of the cost savings obtained through
relationship-specific learning. In a counterfactual in which joint experience yields the same
productivity benefit as stand-alone experience (that is, β5 equals β4 in (4)), the average drilling
time in my sample would be increased by 3.8%, equal to 0.88 days at the sample average drilling
time of 23.0 days. This efficiency gain is of comparable magnitude to that obtained on average
from producers’ stand-alone learning: 6.4% (1.5 days).25

24

The coefficient on log(E-prt) is still identified in the presence of producer-rig fixed effects because rigs sometimes
have multiple employment “spells” with a single producer, and E-prt will be different in each spell.
25
The 3.8% figure is equal to the sample average of exp((β4 – β5)·log(Eprt)) - 1, and 6.4% is the sample average of
exp(– β1·log(Efpt)) – 1.

19

At the 2005 rig dayrate of approximately $11,000 per day for a well of average depth, the
0.88 day efficiency gain attributed to relationship-specific learning translates to an average
reduction in rig rental cost of $9,700 per well. Is this magnitude sufficient to drive firms to try to
maintain long-term relationships? The data indicate that it is rare for a producer to switch rigs in
the middle of a drilling program—the vast majority of contract terminations appear to be caused
by a lack of new drilling work rather than a desire to change contractors. Section 7 investigates
this pattern in the data more carefully in an effort to distinguish whether this contracting pattern
is driven by relationship-specific learning or by other explanations such as switching costs or ex
ante match specificities.

6.3 Mechanisms behind relationship-specific learning
This section examines more closely the mechanisms behind the observed relationshipspecific learning. Is this learning driven by rigs’ increasing familiarity with the characteristics of
the fields that are drilled by their producers, familiarity with the particular procedures and
personnel used by their producers, or both? I attempt to disentangle these mechanisms by
decomposing each rig’s experience into the following field-specific and non-field-specific
components:26
(1) E-f-prt: experience with producers other than p in fields other than f
(2) Ef-prt: experience with producers other than p in field f
(3) E-fprt: experience with producer p in fields other than f
(4) Efprt: experience with producer p in field f
I use these variables to test whether a rig’s experience specific to both its current field
and current producer has a greater effect on drilling time than does its experience specific only to
its current field and report the results in the third column of table 6. The estimated coefficients
suggest that both field-specific and producer-specific experience are important determinants of
rigs’ drilling productivity. The estimated coefficient on log(Efprt) is more than twice that on any
of E-f-prt, Ef-prt, or E-fprt and is statistically distinct from each at the 5% level. The point estimates
26

This decomposition of experience is complicated by the fact that the SB data do not contain field identifiers. Thus,
even though I can identify each rig’s field location for each matched observation, I cannot do so for every week in
which a rig is active. I therefore estimate each rig’s field-specific experience using a two-step procedure. First,
within the matched data, I find the fraction of wells drilled by each rig within the past two years that were in the
same field as the rig’s current field. I then multiply this fraction by the total number of weeks the rig has been active
during the past two years, taken from the SB data.

20

imply that a rig that works for the same producer in the same field for a year can expect a 10%
increase in drilling productivity. However, were the rig to then switch producers (or fields), its
productivity would on average be only 3% (or 4%) larger than that of a rig with no experience at
all.
In column IV of table 6, I repeat the specification of column III but include fixed effects
for the triple interaction of field, producer, and rig identifiers. Similar to the producer-rig fixed
effects applied in columns I and II, these terms address the possibility that the column III results
are driven by match-specificities between fields, producers, and rigs. Including these fixed
effects removes from the sample nearly 5000 observations that are associated with a fieldproducer-rig for which I observe only one well and requires 3,299 fixed effects. This reduction in
degrees of freedom hinders inference, as evidenced by the increase in the standard errors of the
estimated coefficients. While the magnitudes of the coefficients in column IV fall roughly in line
with those in column III, the coefficient on log(Efprt) is no longer statistically distinguishable
from those of E-f-prt, Ef-prt, or E-fprt.
Thus, while conclusions drawn from this set of results must be tempered, they do provide
some suggestive evidence that knowledge acquired through work in a field with one producer is
not fully portable to other producers in the same field. This result is consistent with the views
expressed to me by industry participants that the building of a personal relationship between
producer and rig personnel is important, and with the evidence presented in section 5 indicating
that cross-producer learning spillovers are, at best, small. In addition, the lessons learned by a rig
in one field do not appear to be completely transferable to a different field, even if the rig
continues to work for the same producer. This result seems likely to be driven by variations in
producers’ drilling procedures or personnel across fields.

6.4 Forgetting effects
This section investigates whether experience effects in the drilling industry decay over
time, consistent with institutional “forgetting” of knowledge. Specifically, I ask whether
experience from the distant past has a smaller effect on current productivity than does recent
experience. This inquiry relates to research by Argote et al. (1990), Benkard (2000), and
Thompson (2003) that identified forgetting effects in aircraft manufacturing and shipbuilding. I
first examine producers’ forgetting in the setting of section 5, in which rig and relationshipspecific learning are not considered, paralleling this literature. I then evaluate producers’

21

forgetting within the full model of sections 6.1 and 6.2 to investigate the extent to which
forgetting effects can be explained by relationship-specific learning.
Thus far, I have defined Efpt—the experience of producer p in field f at date t—as the
number of wells drilled by producer p in field f during the two years prior to t. Here, I define Efpt
as a function of a decay parameter δ, per expression (5) below, in which Nfpτ denotes the number
of wells drilled by producer p in field f on date τ.

E fpt (δ ) =

t

eδ
∑
τ

( t −τ ) / 365

= t − 730

⋅ N fpτ

(5)

For negative values of δ, wells drilled on dates long before t carry less weight in Efpt(δ)
than do wells drilled near date t. I estimate δ by inserting (5) into learning specification (2),
which does not allow for rig or relationship-specific learning, yielding expression (6) below.
log(DTfpt) = β·log(Efpt(δ)) + γf + δp + ηt + φXfpt + εfpt

(6)

I estimate (6) using nonlinear least squares. As in section 5, I instrument for experience
using the number of days producer p actively drilled in field f during the two years prior to date
t.27 I obtain a point estimate of δ equal to -0.813 with a clustered standard error of 0.420,
consistent with the presence of forgetting. While this result suggests, at first glance, that δˆ is
statistically significant (with a p-value of 0.053), the proper statistical test for forgetting must
take into account the negative correlation between δˆ and βˆ . The point estimate of β is -0.051,

larger in magnitude than in the reference case results without relationship-specific learning (table
5, column I). This increase in magnitude occurs because learning is now a function of
depreciated experience rather than total experience. Because the estimates of δ and β are linked, I
test for forgetting by testing whether these estimates are jointly different from those reported in
the reference case, in which δ = 0 and β = -0.042. I find that the null hypothesis of no forgetting
can be rejected with only a p-value of 0.149, rather than at nearly the 5% level.
The estimated rate of experience depreciation is somewhat large: the point estimate of δ
implies that a well drilled one year ago makes a contribution to experience that is only 44% of
that made by a well drilled one day ago. This depreciation rate is not as great as that estimated by
Argote et al. (1990) in shipbuilding (for which the corresponding figure is 3.2%), though greater
than that estimated by Benkard (2000) in aircraft manufacturing (61%). While this result could
27

The estimation also instruments for the derivative of experience with respect to δ using the derivative of drilling
time-based experience with respect to δ.

22

reflect literal human forgetting of knowledge or turnover amongst producers’ personnel, it may
also reflect losses of intellectual capital associated with changes in producers’ drilling rigs. I
investigate this possibility by augmenting (6) with rig fixed effects and variables measuring rig
and relationship-specific experience, per equations (3) and (4). While the new point estimate of δ
from this specification is still negative and quite large in magnitude at -1.43, it is estimated quite
imprecisely: testing against a null hypothesis of no forgetting yields a p-value of only 0.282.28
This result suggests that losses of relationship-specific capital between lead firms and contractors
may be one of the mechanisms behind forgetting effects documented by other studies.

6.5 Alternative specifications and robustness
Functional form: Table 7 presents the results of estimating functional forms that are alternatives

to the Cobb-Douglas specification given by equations (3) and (4). One such form that nests
Cobb-Douglas as a special case is the constant elasticity of substitution (CES) relation (7):
ρ
f(Efprt) = β1·log(Efpt) + β2·log(E-fpt) + β3·log(Ef-pt) + (δ/ρ)·log((1-α) E -ρprt + α E prt
)

(7)

In (7), the importance of relationship-specific learning is evaluated by testing whether α
is greater than ½. The Cobb-Douglas case that has been considered thus far is equivalent to the
limit of (7) as ρ approaches zero. As an alternative to Cobb-Douglas, I first consider in column II
of table 7 another special case of (7) in which ρ is fixed at unity: perfect substitution. Using
nonlinear least squares, I find that the point estimate of α under perfect substitution is 0.928 and
statistically distinct from 0.5 with a standard error of 0.082, implying a strong relationshipspecific learning effect. Together with the point estimate of δ of -0.033, this result implies that a
rig that works for a single producer over the course of a year will improve its productivity by
13% on average, relative to a 5.2% improvement for a rig that frequently changes producers.
That is, after a year, relationship-specific learning drives a productivity improvement 2.5 times
as great as that driven by general learning, nearly the same ratio that was estimated in the CobbDouglas specification.
Column III of table 7 reports the results of estimating (7) without any restrictions on ρ.
The point estimate of ρ is 0.263 with a standard error of 0.432, clearly failing to reject CobbDouglas but rejecting perfect substitution at the 10% level. The point estimate of α is 0.712 and

28

When allowing for forgetting, the importance of rig’s producer-specific experience is still statistically distinct
from that of rig’s stand-alone experience at the 1% level.

23

statistically distinct from 0.5 at the 10% level, again supportive of relationship-specific learning
effects.
In column IV, I estimate a flexible functional form in which Efpt, E-fpt, and Ef-pt enter the
specification as cubic splines, while leaving the variables tied to rig experience, E-prt and Eprt, in
a parameterized Cobb-Douglas form. That is, I model:
f(Experiencefprt) = s1(Efpt) + s2(E-fpt) + s3(Ef-pt) + β4·log(E-prt) + β5·log(Eprt)

(8)

The estimates of β4 and β5 from (8), presented in column IV, are similar to those of the
reference case, indicating that the relationship-specific learning result is not driven by the
parameterization in (4). Going a step further, I also estimate a version of (8) in which all five
forms of experience enter through splines. The estimated functions s4(E-prt) and s5(Eprt) are
plotted in figure 4, which shows that relationship-specific experience has a stronger effect on
performance than does general experience across the full domain of data. Moreover, the two
curves are point-wise statistically distinct at the 5% level for experience values between 1 and 86
weeks, beyond which point the sample size becomes too small to separate them.
Finally, in column V of table 7, I replace the fourth term in (4), β4·log(E-prt), with
β4·log(Ert): the total experience of rig r in the two years prior to date t. In this case, relationship-

specific learning is no longer measured by the difference between β4 and β5 but by the difference
between β5 and zero. I find that the point estimates of both β4 and β5 are equal to -0.018 and that
both are significantly different from zero at the 1% level. This result accords well with the
reference case specification, as it implies that a rig that maintains a stable relationship will
improve its performance twice as quickly as a rig that frequently changes producers.
Contract type: Could the decreases in drilling times I observe for producer-rig pairs could be

driven by changes in contract type as producers and rigs accumulate experience together? The
analysis to this point has not taken the firms’ choice of dayrate or footage contract into account.
If firms tend to switch from dayrate to footage contracts (or vice-versa) over the course of a
relationship, the performance improvements that I observe may be driven by changes in
incentives rather than learning.
I address the potential impact of changes in contract type by taking advantage of the fact
that most producer-rig pairs do not change contractual form during the sample period. 76.4% of
all observations are associated with a producer-rig pair that either always uses a dayrate contract
or always uses a footage contract. I remove from the sample those producer-rig pairs that switch

24

contracts and test for relationship-specific learning in the sub-sample of pairs with stable contract
types. I include fixed effects for rig-producer interactions in this test to ensure that I do not
identify learning effects from cross-pair comparisons, for which contract type may vary. The
results of this regression are reported in column II of table 8. I still find a strong and statistically
significant effect of joint experience on drilling time. The coefficient on log(Eprt) is -0.022, very
similar to that found when the same regression was run on the full sample (column II of table 6).
The joint experience effects evident in the data do not appear to be driven by changes in contract
type.29
Measurement and data issues: As part of the merge process, some wells that were drilled in

less than one week were dropped from the sample because they could not be matched to records
in the Smith Bits data. Although these wells constitute only 6% of the overall population, it is
possible that this selection on the dependent variable may bias the results. I address this concern
by estimating (3) and (4) with data only for wells that are at least 8000 feet deep (12,581
observations). Such wells are essentially impossible to drill in less than one week, and estimation
with this sub-sample neutralizes the potential selection problem. Results, presented in column III
of table 8, are very similar to those obtained from the full sample, shown in column I. The
difference between the coefficients on log(E-prt) and log(Eprt) is statistically significant with a pvalue of 0.022.
The results reported thus far measure Efpt, E-fpt, and Ef-pt as the number of wells drilled
within two years of date t. Table 8, column IV presents the results of estimating an alternative
specification in which each of these variables is measured as the number of days of drilling
within two years of date t. In this specification, the importance of the producer’s experience, both
within and outside of its current field, is diminished relative to the reference case model in
column I. This decrease in the learning estimates parallels that discussed in section 5.3. Here, the
alternative specification also slightly strengthens the estimated relationship-specific learning
effect: the estimated coefficients on log(E-prt) and log(Eprt) are -0.009 and -0.027, respectively, as
compared to -0.010 and -0.025 in the reference case. Column V indicates that these results are
robust to the inclusion of fixed effects for producer-rig interactions to the specification.

29

I have run a related regression in which I parse the effect of joint experience into that for producer-rig pairs using
dayrate contracts and that for pairs using footage contracts. I find that learning rates are larger for dayrate contracts
than for turnkey contracts. However, the endogeneity of contract choice suggests that this is not a causal result. In
particular, it may be that learning rates are faster for the types of wells that are amenable to dayrate contracting—
these wells tend to be more geologically challenging than those drilled under footage contracts and likely present
greater scope for learning.

25

Finally, I verify that the results are robust to changes in the length of time over which I
calculate the experience variables. The results in columns II, III, and IV of table 9 calculate
experience over one, three, and five years, respectively, rather than the reference case of two
years. In all three formulations, the coefficients on rigs’ general and producer-specific experience
change little and remain statistically distinct at at least the 5% level. These estimates remain
precise despite the fact that, at longer windows of experience, the early years of the data must be
dropped because the Smith Bits data only exist back to 1989.

7. Empirical Analysis: Relationship Persistence
In this section, I empirically examine whether the pattern by which producer-rig
relationships are formed and broken is consistent with firms’ recognition of relationship-specific
learning. Specifically, do producers prefer to use rigs with which they have substantial prior
experience? If so, is this preference driven by learning or by other factors?
It is clear from the data that firms do generally maintain their relationships. Producers
rarely change rigs in the middle of a drilling program: relationships tend to end only when a
producer runs out of work. This fact alone, however, can be supported by explanations other than
learning and in particular by the presence of switching costs. I therefore test for relationship
persistence by focusing on instances in which a producer has two rigs drilling for it in the same
county. When the producer releases one of these two rigs, I ask whether the rig that is released is
that with the least producer-specific experience. This last in-first out (LIFO) pattern would be
consistent with firms’ maximization of the benefits of relationship-specific learning and would
also be difficult to explain using switching costs alone since the test is conditioned on a
switching cost being paid.30 This pattern may, however, be consistent with the presence of other
ex ante match specificities as discussed below.

I execute this analysis using the original SB dataset, prior to its match with the TRRC
data. There are 323,730 rig-week observations in this dataset, and for each I observe the county
in which the rig is located and the producer for which the rig is drilling. Week-to-week, rigs
maintain their relationship with their producer 89.5% of the time. Rigs change producers in 7.4%
of the observations, implying that a switch occurs every 13 weeks, on average. Rigs also
occasionally exit the market on a temporary or permanent basis; such exits together constitute
3.1% of the data.

30

A LIFO pattern may result if switching costs are heterogeneous, a possibility I examine below.

26

I define all instances in which a producer has two rigs drilling for it in the same county as
a “pair” and use these pairs as the unit of observation in my analysis.31 There are 907 unique
pairs in the data, and with two rigs per pair, there exist 1,814 total observations, spread over 821
unique rigs and 531 unique county-producer combinations.
Within each pair, I determine which rig leaves the pair first to work for an alternate
producer. I then capture this rig’s exit date and calculate the producer-specific experience of both
rigs at that date. I calculate this experience in exactly the same manner as was done for the
relationship-specific learning analysis of section 6. I then test for a systematic relationship
between each rig’s experience and the identity of the rig that is released first: as the difference in
producer-specific experience between the two rigs grows, does it become more likely that the
less-experienced rig is released first?
Figure 5 illustrates the evidence of relationship persistence in this sample. The horizontal
axis plots the absolute value of the difference (in logs) of producer-specific experience between
the two rigs in each pair. Thus, points plotted on the right side of the graph represent
observations in which the two rigs have very different levels of producer-specific experience. All
observations are grouped into bins of width 0.2, and the vertical bars indicate the number of pairs
in each bin. Each data point indicates the percentage of pairs within each bin for which the lessexperienced rig was the first to exit. There exists a clear systematic pattern in the data: as the
difference in specific experience between the two rigs in each pair grows larger, it becomes more
and more likely that the less-experienced rig will exit first. This pattern is consistent with firms’
recognition of relationship-specific learning’s benefits.
Regression analysis confirms these graphical results. I use a conditional logit model to
estimate the effect of a rig’s producer-specific experience on its probability of being the first to
exit its pair. Specifically, I estimate equation (9) below, in which Experiencei1 denotes the
producer-specific experience of rig 1 in pair i.
Pr( ExitFirst Pair i , Rig 1 ) =

exp( β ⋅ log( Experience i1 ))
exp( β ⋅ log( Experience i1 )) + exp( β ⋅ log( Experience i 2 ))

(9)

The results of this regression are reported in column I of table 10: rigs with more
producer-specific experience are significantly less likely to exit first. The estimated marginal
effect of -0.061 implies that, in a pair consisting of a rig with 12 months of experience and a rig
31

I exclude pairs in which both rigs change producers during the same week. I also exclude all pairs in which one or
both rigs leave its producer in order to exit the market rather than to work for another firm. This restriction implies
that the rig movements I study in my analysis are not driven by a rig’s need for maintenance or repairs, or by poor
data tracking by Smith Bits.

27

with 1 month of experience, the less experienced rig has a 63.7% probability of being the first to
exit.
Column II of table 10 presents the results of estimating (9) when each rig’s total
experience is used as the explanatory variable. In this case, there is no significant relationship
between experience and movements of rigs between producers. This result reflects the fact that
the general experience of a rig does not provide productivity benefits that are producer-specific.
While a highly experienced rig may be more productive than other rigs, its productivity when
working for other producers will also be higher, and it is therefore likely to command a higher
price in the market.
Of course, there exist alternative explanations behind the LIFO pattern exhibited in figure
5 and column I of table 10. First, it may be that some rigs have lower switching costs than others
and therefore change jobs frequently. A rig market in which some rigs are “switchers” and others
are “stayers” would generate a LIFO pattern even without a relationship-specific learning effect.
Second, ex ante match specificities would cause producers to first hire those rigs to which they
match best and to release those rigs last.
To rule out heterogeneity in rig switching costs, I re-estimate (9) while including a set of
rig fixed effects. I do so using a linear probability model, since including rig fixed effects in a
conditional logit is likely to lead to an incidental parameters problem that will cause the estimate
of β to be inconsistent (Neyman and Scott 1948, Lancaster 2000). Fortunately, the baseline
results do not appear to be sensitive to model choice: as indicated in column III of table 10,
estimating a linear probability model with the log of producer-specific experience and group
fixed effects as covariates yields a marginal effect very close to that of the conditional logit.
When rig fixed effects are added to the specification, I still find a strong systematic LIFO effect.
As shown in column IV, the marginal effect is -0.067, compared to -0.059 in column III, and still
statistically significant at the 5% level. Rig heterogeneity is not driving the LIFO result.
Taking a step further and adding fixed effects for producer-rig interactions would
eliminate the influence of match specificities on this result. Unfortunately, within the 1814
observations in the sample there are 1,488 unique producer-rig combinations. The limited sample
variation remaining after including these fixed effects precludes inference, as indicated in
column V of table 10. The standard error of the estimated marginal effect nearly triples, relative
to column IV, and this regression provides no evidence either for or against the LIFO pattern.
Supplemental evidence, however, supports the hypothesis that the relationship
persistence is not driven by matching. First, I use information on rig depth ratings and well
depths to assess how the matching of rigs’ attributes to producers’ wells affects producers’
28

hiring. For each rig in each pair, I calculate the absolute difference between the rig’s depth rating
and the average depth of the wells it drills.32 Across pairs, I find that the distribution of this
“depth difference” for the first rig to enter each pair is very similar to that of the rig that enters
last: a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for the equality of these distributions fails to reject equality
with a p-value of 0.582. This result indicates that the two rigs in each pair are equally wellmatched in depth rating to their wells.
Further, I investigate pre-existing performance differences between the rigs in each pair
by comparing the drilling times of the first well drilled by each rig within that pair. As with the
depth differences, the data fail to reject equality of the initial performance of the rig that enters
first with that of the rig that enters second: the Kolmogorov-Smirnov p-value is 0.886.33 This
similarity between both the initial performance and the depth rating of the two rigs in each pair
suggests that the LIFO pattern in the data is not driven by pre-existing match specificities
between producers and rigs.
The evidence is therefore consistent with a recognition by producers that maintaining
long-term relationships helps to maximize the productivity benefits of relationship-specific
learning. I cannot, however, rule out the possibility that these results are purely driven by
friendships formed between the personnel of each firm. Personal relationships are important in
the Texas drilling industry, and friendships may develop over the course of a long business
relationship that neither party would want to break. Of course, friendship is likely to play a role
in driving relationship-specific learning in the first place, by facilitating communication between
producers and rigs. The value of empirically differentiating the learning and friendship stories is
therefore not obvious, even if the necessary data were available.

8. Conclusions
This paper demonstrates that relationship-specific learning can be an important driver of
productivity improvement and play a role in firms’ contracting decisions. I find that a drilling rig
that accumulates experience with one producer improves its productivity more than twice as
quickly as a rig that frequently changes contracting partners. As a consequence, producers and
rigs have a strong incentive to maintain their relationships, and the data demonstrate that
32

The average depth difference is 2,898 feet, with a standard deviation of 2,675 feet.
On average, the first-well drilling time of the first rig to enter is actually 4.8% higher than that of the second rig
(this difference is not statistically significant). This fact likely reflects producer-specific learning: by the time the
second rig enters, the producer has learned from the wells it drilled with the first rig and improved its drilling times
accordingly.

33

29

producers are more likely to work with rigs with which they have substantial prior experience
than those with which they have worked relatively little.
These results seem likely to generalize to other industries in which outsourcing is
common. For example, construction contractors or management consulting firms may develop
relationship-specific intellectual capital through joint work experience with their clients. The
importance of relationship-specific learning presumably varies with industry and firm
characteristics. For example, greater technical complexity in an industry’s production process
could drive steeper learning curves than those documented in this paper.
Firms may also be able to take actions that influence their rate of relationship-specific
learning. A lead firm might embed some of its employees within the organizations of its
contracting partners, or a contractor might set up offices near its clients. While such investments
plausibly increase the rate of learning, the accumulated knowledge that results is also a form of
relationship-specific capital. Thus, when learning rates may be enhanced through costly actions,
it may be in firms’ interests to develop contracting arrangements that alleviate ex post bargaining
problems and promote efficient investment. Relationship-specific learning may therefore play a
role in promoting long-term contracts and vertical integration.
Finally, I find that horizontal learning spillovers are unlikely to be important in oil and
gas drilling. Given prior findings of spillover effects in semiconductor manufacturing and
shipbuilding, this result suggests that the importance of spillovers varies with industry
characteristics. For example, the lack of spillovers in drilling may be related to the competitive
nature of production from a common pool resource. Further study with richer data may be
fruitful in illuminating the drivers of learning spillovers and in assessing the importance of their
macroeconomic effects.

30

References
Adeleye, A.R., B.K. Virginillo, A.W. Iyoho, K. Parenteau, and Henry Licis, “Improving Drilling
Performance Through Systematic Analysis of Historical Data: Case Study of a Canadian
Field,” Society of Petroleum Engineers paper 87177 (Mar., 2004).
Alchian, Armen, “Reliability of Progress Curves in Airframe Production,” Econometrica 31
(Oct., 1963), 679-694.
Arellano, Manuel, “Computing Robust Standard Errors for Within-Groups Estimators,” Oxford
Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 49 (Nov., 1987), 431-434.

Argote, Linda, Sara L. Beckman, and Dennis Epple, “The Persistence and Transfer of Learning
in Industrial Settings,” Management Science 36 (Feb., 1990), 140-154.
Arrow, Kenneth J., “The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing,” Review of Economic
Studies 29 (Jun., 1962), 155-173.

Becker, Gary S., Human Capital; a Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special Reference
to Education, New York: Columbia University Press (1964).

Benkard, C. Lanier, “Learning and Forgetting: The Dynamics of Aircraft Production,” American
Economic Review 90 (Sep., 2000), 1034-1054.

Benkard, C. Lanier, “A Dynamic Analysis of the Market for Wide-Bodied Commercial
Aircraft,” Review of Economic Studies 71 (2004), 581-611.
Besanko, David, Ulrich Doraszelski, Yaroslav Kryukov, and Mark Satterthwaite, “Learning-byDoing, Organizational Forgetting, and Industry Dynamics,” Harvard Institute of
Economic Research Discussion Paper Number 2128 (Feb., 2007).
Brett, J.F. and K.K. Millheim, “The Drilling Performance Curve: A Yardstick for Judging
Drilling Performance,” Society of Petroleum Engineers paper 15362 (Oct., 1986).
Cabral, Luis M.B. and Michael H. Riordan, “The Learning Curve, Market Dominance, and
Predatory Pricing,” Econometrica 62 (Sep., 1994), 1115-1140.
Corts, Kenneth S. “The Interaction of Implicit and Explicit Contracts in Construction and
Procurement Contracting,” University of Toronto working paper (Jun., 2007).
Corts, Kenneth S. and Jasjit Singh. “The Effect of Repeated Interaction on Contract Choice:
Evidence from Offshore Drilling,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 20
(2004), 230-260.

31

Ellison, Glenn and Richard Holden, “A Theory of Rule Development,” MIT working paper
(Feb., 2008).
Gibbons, Robert and Michael Waldman, “A Theory of Wage and Promotion Dynamics Inside
Firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (Nov., 1999), 1321-1358.
Gibbons, Robert and Michael Waldman, “Task-Specific Human Capital,” American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings 94 (May, 2004), 203-207.

Hendricks, Kenneth and Robert H. Porter, “An Empirical Study of an Auction with Asymmetric
Information,” American Economic Review 78 (Dec., 1988), 865-883.
Huckman, Robert S. and Gary P. Pisano, “The Firm Specificity of Individual Performance:
Evidence from Cardiac Surgery,” Management Science 52 (Apr., 2006), 473-488.
Irwin, Douglas A. and Peter J. Klenow, “Learning-by-Doing Spillovers in the Semiconductor
Industry,” Journal of Political Economy 102 (Dec., 1994), 1200-1227.
Jovanovic, Boyan and Yaw Nyarko, “Learning by Doing and the Choice of Technology,”
Econometrica 64 (Nov. 1996), 1299-1310.

Klein, Benjamin, Robert G. Crawford, and Armen A. Alchian, “Vertical Integration,
Appropriable Rents, and the Competitive Contracting Process,” Journal of Law and
Economics 21 (Oct., 1978), 297-326.

Lancaster, Tony, “The Incidental Parameter Problem Since 1948,” Journal of Econometrics 95
(2000), 391-413.
Lucas, Robert E., “On the Mechanics of Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 22 (1988), 3-42.
Managing Automation, “Boeing’s Big Supply Chain Wager” (17 May, 2007).

McCabe, Mark J., “Principals, Agents, and the Learning Curve: The Case of Steam-Electric
Power Plant Design and Construction,” Journal of Industrial Economics 44 (Dec., 1996),
357-375.
Neyman, Jerzy and Elizabeth L. Scott, “Consistent Estimates Based on Partially Consistent
Observations,” Econometrica 16 (Jan., 1948), 1-32.
Parente, Stephen L., “Technology Adoption, Learning-by-Doing, and Economic Growth,”
Journal of Economic Theory 63 (Aug., 1994), 346-369.

32

Poletaev, Maxim and Chris Robinson, “Human Capital Specificity: Evidence from the
Dictionary of Occupational Titles and Displaced Worker Surveys, 1984-2000,” Journal
of Labor Economics 26 (2008), 387-420.

Prendergast, Canice, “The Role of Promotion in Inducing Specific Human Capital Acquisition,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (May, 1993), 523-534.

RigZone, “Dune Energy Closes Acquisition of Barnett Shale Properties for $7.0 million” (16
Oct., 2006). http://www.rigzone.com/news/article_pf.asp?a_id=37135
Spence, Michael A., “The Learning Curve and Competition,” Bell Journal of Economics 12
(Spring 1981), 49-70.
Stokey, Nancy L., “Learning by Doing and the Introduction of New Goods,” Journal of Political
Economy 96 (Aug., 1988), 701-717.

Thompson, Peter, “How Much Did the Liberty Shipbuilders Forget?” Working paper, Florida
International University, Miami (2003).
Thornton, Rebecca A. and Peter Thompson, “Learning from Experience and Learning from
Others: An Exploration of Learning and Spillovers in Wartime Shipbuilding,” American
Economic Review 91 (Dec., 2001), 1350-1368.

Wiggins, Steven N. and Gary D. Libecap, “Oil Field Unitization: Contractual Failure in the
Presence of Imperfect Information,” American Economic Review 75 (Jun., 1985), 368385.
Williamson, Oliver E., Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications, New
York: Free Press (1975).
Williamson, Oliver E., The Economic Institutions of Capitalism, New York: Free Press (1985).
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., “Cluster-Sample Methods in Applied Econometrics,” American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 93 (May, 2003), 133-138.

Wright, T.P., “Factors Affecting the Cost of Airplanes,” Journal of the Aeronautical Sciences 3
(Feb., 1936), 122-128.

33

Figure 1: Photo of drilling rig

Figure 2: Drilling times vs. well depths
Mean drilling time
10th and 90th percentiles

Note: Observations grouped into depth “bins” of 1000 feet
Horizontal axis excludes highest and lowest 1% of depths
34

Figure 3: Estimates of learning by field producers: spline and log-log specifications
0.050

Change in log(drilling time)

0.000
-0.050

Log-log

-0.100
-0.150
-0.200
-0.250

Spline with 95% confidence interval
-0.300
0

20

40

60

80

100

Field-producer experience

Note: Plot includes 96% of data

Figure 4: Estimated splines for rigs’ general and relationship-specific learning

Change in log(drilling time)

0.050

General learning (with 95% c.i.)

0.000
-0.050
-0.100
-0.150
-0.200

Relationship-specific learning (with 95% c.i.)

-0.250
0

20

40

60

Experience in weeks

35

80

100

1

600

0.75

400

0.5

200

0

0.25
0

1

2

3

4

Difference in log(producer-rig experience); bins of width 0.2

36

Number of rig pairs per bin

Likelihood that less experienced rig exits first

Figure 5: Likelihood that the least experienced rig is the first to change producers
vs. the within-pair difference in rigs’ producer-specific experience

Table 1: Distributions of wells, fields, producers, and rigs
Min

25th
75th
percentile Median percentile

Mean

Max

Number of wells per field
Number of wells per producer
Number of wells per rig

2
2
2

2
3
4

4
7
8

10
20.5
19

14.1
27.1
14.1

784
630
157

Number of producers per field
Number of fields per producer
Number of rigs per driller

1
1
1

1
1
1

2
3
3

3
6
6

2.9
5.5
7.7

54
124
194

Table 2: Sample summary statistics

Drilling time (days)
Well depth (feet)
Gas well (0/1 dummy)
Oil and gas well (0/1 dummy)

Number of
observations

Min

Median

Mean

Std.
Dev.

Max

19059
19059
19059
19059

2
631
0
0

18
9000
1
0

23.0
9036
0.620
0.001

19.2
2817
0.485
0.036

179
23000
1
1

Table 3: Summary statistics of experience variables
Number of
observations

Mean

Std.
Dev.

Min

Median

Max

Number of wells drilled during the
past two years in:
Same field, same producer
Different field, same producer
Same field, different producer

19059
19059
19059

1
1
1

7
46
10

22.0
125.7
69.6

51.0
169.6
171.6

711
1098
1813

Number of weeks of drilling within
past two years by:
Same rig, different producer
Same rig, same producer

19059
19059

1
1

29
14

34.1
27.7

29
30.6

105
105

The well represented by each observation is included in all measures of experience. Thus, the minimum experience
level is one rather than zero.

37

Table 4: Regression results for learning by field producers
Dependent variable is log(drilling time)
Variable

Point
estimate

log(field-producer exper.)
log(well depth)
Gas well
Oil and gas well
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December

-0.042
1.179
0.058
0.239
-0.021
-0.030
-0.048
-0.045
-0.062
-0.046
-0.034
-0.016
-0.053
-0.030
-0.033

Standard
error
(0.005)
(0.075)
(0.026)
(0.081)
(0.014)
(0.013)
(0.014)
(0.013)
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.015)

***
***
**
***
**
***
***
***
**
**
***
**
**

Variable

Point
estimate

1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005

-0.040
-0.016
-0.062
-0.060
-0.038
-0.026
-0.035
-0.089
-0.072
-0.022
-0.087
-0.116
-0.191
-0.204

Standard
error
(0.026)
(0.022)
(0.030)
(0.035)
(0.032)
(0.036)
(0.039)
(0.039)
(0.037)
(0.039)
(0.036)
(0.040)
(0.043)
(0.042)

**
*

**
*
**
***
***
***

Regression includes fixed effects for fields and producers
Standard errors are clustered on field.
*,**,*** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level.

Table 5: Regression results for learning by field producers
Dependent variable is log(drilling time)
I

Log of experience with:

II

Reference
case
(Table 4)
***

III

IV

V

Experience
Fieldnot
Drilling time
producer
instrumented experience fixed effects
***

***

***

Learning
spillovers
***

-0.042
(0.005)

-0.053
(0.005)

-0.020
(0.002)

-0.050
(0.007)

Different field, same producer

-

-

-

-

-0.041
(0.005)
***
-0.022
(0.008)

Same field, different producer

-

-

-

-

-0.001
(0.007)

Field X producer dummies

N

N

N

Y

N

19059

19059

19059

19059

19059

Same field, same producer

Number of observations

Parenthetical values indicate standard errors clustered on field.
*,**,*** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level.
All regressions include controls for depth and well type, month and year fixed effects, and field and producer fixed effects

38

Table 6: Regression results for relationship-specific learning
Dependent variable is log(drilling time)

Log of experience with:

I
Relationshipspecific
learning

II
Producer-rig
fixed effects

III
IV
Rig-producer- Rig-producerfield
field fixed
specificities
effects

Same field, same producer
(Experience fpt )

-0.030***
(0.006)

-0.027***
(0.008)

-0.027***
(0.007)

-0.032*
(0.018)

Different field, same producer
(Experience -fpt )

-0.022***
(0.008)

-0.003
(0.012)

-0.022***
(0.008)

-0.015
(0.018)

Same field, different producer
(Experience f-pt )

-0.005
(0.005)

0.003
(0.008)

-0.005
(0.005)

0.005
(0.014)

Same rig, different producer
(Experience -prt )

-0.010**
(0.004)

-0.005
(0.006)

-

-

-

-

-0.025
(0.004)

-0.023
(0.006)

-

-

-

-

Same rig, diff field, diff producer
(Experience -f-prt )

-

-

-

-

-0.005
(0.004)

-0.010
(0.009)

Same rig, same field, diff producer
(Experience f-prt )

-

-

-

-

-0.007
(0.007)

0.001
(0.013)

Same rig, diff field, same producer
(Experience f-prt )

-

-

-

-

-0.011***
(0.004)

-0.006
(0.007)

Same rig, same field, same producer
(Experience fprt )

-

-

-

-

-0.024***
(0.005)

-0.019**
(0.009)

Producer X rig fixed effects

N

Y

N

N

Field X producer X rig fixed effects

N

N

N

Y

19059

16325

19059

14289

Same rig, same producer
(Experience prt )

Number of observations

***

***

Parenthetical values indicate standard errors clustered on field.
*,**,*** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level
All regressions include controls for depth and well type, month and year fixed effects, and field, producer, and rig fixed effects

39

Table 7: Relationship-specific learning results: alternative functional forms
Dependent variable is log(drilling time)

Log of experience with:

I

II

III

Reference
Case

Perfect
substitution

General CES

IV
Field and
producer
spline

V
Total rig
experience

Same field, same producer
(Experience fpt )

-0.030***
(0.006)

-0.031***
(0.006)

-0.031***
(0.006)

spline

-0.030***
(0.006)

Different field, same producer
(Experience -fpt )

-0.022***
(0.008)

-0.020**
(0.008)

-0.020***
(0.006)

spline

-0.022***
(0.008)

Same field, different producer
(Experience f-pt )

-0.005
(0.005)

-0.005
(0.005)

-0.005
(0.005)

spline

-0.005
(0.005)

Same rig, different producer
(Experience -prt )

-0.010**
(0.004)

-

-

-

-

-0.008**
(0.004)

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Same rig
(Experience rt )
Same rig, same producer
(Experience prt )
α
ρ
δ
Number of observations

-0.025***
(0.004)
-

0.928***
(0.082)

-

-

-

-

19059

0.712*
(0.112)
0.263
(0.432)

-0.033***
(0.008)

-0.040***
(0.007)

19059

19059

-0.026***
(0.004)

-0.018***
(0.007)
-0.018***
(0.004)

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

19059

19059

Parenthetical values indicate standard errors clustered on field.
*,**,*** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level
Specification in columns II and III includes a CES function of rig experience given by (δ/ρ)·log((1-α)Eρ-prt + αEρprt). ρ is set to 1 in column II.
Statistical significance for α is for a test against a null hypothesis of α=0.5
All regressions include controls for depth and well type, month and year fixed effects, and field, producer, and rig fixed effects

40

Table 8: Relationship-specific learning results: alternative specifications
Dependent variable is log(drilling time)
I

Log of experience with:

Reference
case

II
Stable
contract
types

III

IV

V
Drilling time
Wells 8000 ft Drilling time experience,
and deeper experience Prod-rig FE

Same field, same producer
(Experience fpt )

-0.030***
(0.006)

-0.031***
(0.010)

-0.024***
(0.007)

-0.013***
(0.003)

-0.012***
(0.003)

Different field, same producer
(Experience -fpt )

-0.022***
(0.008)

0.007
(0.016)

-0.019**
(0.009)

-0.014***
(0.003)

-0.002
(0.008)

Same field, different producer
(Experience f-pt )

-0.005
(0.005)

0.006
(0.011)

-0.007
(0.007)

-0.003
(0.005)

0.001
(0.004)

Same rig, different producer
(Experience -prt )

-0.010**
(0.004)

9.1E-06
(0.008)

-0.009**
(0.004)

-0.009**
(0.004)

-0.003
(0.006)

Same rig, same producer
(Experience prt )

-0.025***
(0.004)

-0.022***
(0.007)

-0.023***
(0.005)

-0.027***
(0.004)

-0.024***
(0.006)

Producer X rig fixed effects
Number of observations

N

Y

N

N

Y

19059

11877

12581

19059

16325

Parenthetical values indicate standard errors clustered on field.
*,**,*** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level.
All regressions include controls for depth and well type, month and year fixed effects, and field, producer, and rig fixed effects

41

Table 9: Relationship-specific learning results: robustness of experience calculation
Dependent variable is log(drilling time)
I
Log of experience with:

Reference Case

II
One-year
experience

III
Three-year
experience

IV
Five-year
experience

Same field, same producer
(Experience fpt )

-0.030***
(0.006)

-0.033***
(0.006)

-0.025***
(0.006)

-0.026***
(0.006)

Different field, same producer
(Experience -fpt )

-0.022***
(0.008)

-0.025***
(0.008)

-0.018***
(0.006)

-0.014
(0.011)

Same field, different producer
(Experience f-pt )

-0.005
(0.005)

-0.006
(0.007)

-0.007
(0.007)

-0.004
(0.008)

Same rig, different producer
(Experience -prt )

-0.010**
(0.004)

-0.010**
(0.004)

-0.009**
(0.004)

-0.010*
(0.005)

Same rig, same producer
(Experience prt )

-0.025***
(0.004)

-0.025***
(0.004)

-0.023***
(0.004)

-0.023***
(0.004)

Number of observations

19059

19059

17891

15515

Parenthetical values indicate standard errors clustered on field.
*,**,*** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level
All regressions include controls for depth and well type, month and year fixed effects, and field, producer, and rig fixed effects

Table 10: Estimates for the probability a rig is the first to exit its pair
Values shown are marginal effects: dPr(ExitFirst) / dX
I
II
Conditional logit
Log of rig's producer-specific
experience

-0.061***
(0.012)

-

III

IV
V
Linear probability model

-0.059***
(0.016)

-0.067**
(0.034)

0.036
(0.093)

-

-0.008
(0.017)

-

-

-

Pair FE

N/A

N/A

Y

Y

Y

Rig FE

N

N

N

Y

Y

Rig X producer fixed effects

N

N

N

N

Y

Log of rig's total experience

Marginal effects calculated at sample mean.
Parenthetical values indicate standard errors clustered on producer.
*,**,*** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level.

42

