                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  INTERNATIONAL COORDINATION IN
                          THE DESIGN OF
                    MACROECONOMIC POLICY RULES


                          John B. Taylor



                     Working Paper No. 1506




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          November l98I




This research was supported by a grant from the National Science
Foundation to the National Bureau of Economic Research and by a
grant from the Guggenheim Foundation, and was conducted in part at
the Research Department of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia. Some of the computations reported in Section 1 of
this paper were performed as part of a research project with
Nicholas Carlozzi at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
am grateful to Kenneth Arrow, Steve Fries, Giampaolo Galli, Robert
Gordon, Peter Ho, Peter Kenen, Finn Kydland, Ronald Mckinnon,
William Nordhaus for helpful comments and assistance. The research
reported here is part of the NBER'S research program in Economic
Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper 1/1506
                                              November 1984




                  International Coordination in the Design
                        of Macroeconomic Policy Rules


                                    ABSTRACT



        The paper examines international issues that arise in the design

  and evaluation of macroeconomic policy rules. It begins with a theo-

  retical investigation of the effects of fiscal and monetary policy in a

  two—country rational expectations model with staggered wage and price

  setting and with perfect capital mobility. The results indicate that

  with the appropriate choice of policies and with flexible exchange

  rates, demand shocks need not give rise to international externalities

  or coordination issues. Price shocks, however, do create an external-

  ity, and this is the focus of the empirical part of the paper. Using a

  simple 7 country model —   consisting   of Canada, France, Germany, Italy,

  Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States —     optimal   cooperative

  and non—cooperative (Nash) policy rules to minimize the variance of

  output and inflation in each country are calculated. The cooperative

  policies are computed using standard dynamic stochastic programming

  techniques and the non—cooperative policies are computed using an

algorithm developed by Finn Kydland. The central result is that the

  cooperative policy rules for these countries are more accommodative to

  inflation than the non—cooperative policy rules.


                                                      John B. Taylor
                                                      Department of Economics
                                                      Stanford University
                                                      Stanford, California 91.3O5
                                                      115—t97—9677
       The purpose of this paper is to examine some of the
irternational   economic issues that arise in the design and
evaluation of macroeconomic policy rules. The focus is on the
seven industrialized countries that participate in the annual

summit meetings on economic policy——Cananda, France, Germany,
Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States.

Although international macroeconomic policy coordination is one
of the main subjects at the summit meetings, there has been

little empirical research on how the policy rules in these seven

countries should in fact be coordinated.

        The paper draws heavily on recent closed economy research,
in   which there has been   a considerable effort devoted to

designing and evaluating alternative policy rules.1       In

multicountry applications, however, the design and evaluation of
macroeconomic policy rules is considerably more difficult than
for a closed economy. Not only are the empirical models more
complicated, but also the issues of policy coordination and
cooperation must be faced when designing rules. Despite these
difficulties, such research would clearly be a useful component
of any attempt to construct a long—lasting macroeconomic policy
for the world economy.      It is certainly central to any discussion
of international monetary reform.
        The paper begins with a summary of some theoretical
results on the effects of policy in an international economy with

rational expectations. Although, the rational expectations

                                    1
assumption may not be appropriate in the period immediately after
a policy reform (when market participants are learning about the
policy), it does seem appropriate for estimating the longer—term
effects of a new policy. We use a two—country rational

expectations model with staggered wage and price setting;
expectations are assumed to be rational In all markets——labor
markets as well as financial markets..      Hence, wages are both
"sticky" and "forward—looking."       Monetary policy has an effect
on real output, though of a qualitatively different tpe than in
Keynesian models without rational expectations. The demand side
of the model is essentially a souped—up version of the Mundell—

Fleming ISLM model with perfect capital mobility. Using
representative parameter values we illustrate the domestic and
foreign effects of aggregate demand and supply (or price) shocks
in each country.

      Although the specific two—country results are o-f interest
on their own right (models with capital mobility, staggered price
setting, and rational expectations have been difficult to analyze
until recently), the more general policy implications are
exploited in the rest of the paper.       Under the assumptions that
both monetary and fiscal policy instruments can be controlled
and that the timing of their effects is known, the two—country
model indicates that the effect of aggregate deand shocks on
real output and inflation can be offset by an appropriate

monetary and fiscal policy in each country without affecting
economic performance abroad. Hence, with an efficient choice of


                                  2
policies, demand shocks need not give rise to any special
international externality or coordination issues under this set

of policy assumptions. On the other hand, supply shocks do
create an externality. In general even an efficient monetary
policy to deal with supply shocks in each country affects
macroeconomic performance in the other country.    Unlike the
case of demand shocks, this "supply—side" externality remains if
the policymakers have perfect control of the instruments.     The

policy implication of this supply—side externality is the main
subject of this paper.
      In order to measure the quantitative importance of the

externality, an n—country model that simplifies the structure of
the Mundell—Fleming two—country model is developed. This model
is then applied to the seven large summit countries. Parameter
estimates for these countries are obtained, and optimal

cooperative and noncooperative (Cournot—Nash) policy rules to
minimize the fluctuations in real output and inflation are
calculated.   The calculation of these cooperative and

noncooperative policy rules for a group of countries can be
viewed as an international extension of a similar calculation

reported in Taylor (1979) for the United States as a closed

economy. The cooperative policy rules are calculated using
standard optimal control theory, and the noncooperative policy
rules are calculated using a control algorithm proposed by
Kydland (197). The main result is that the cooperative policy
rules are more accommodative to inflation than the noncooperative


                                3
policy rules.


1.. Two   Countries with Rational Expectations and Mobile Capital.
        Table 1 displays the equations of the two country model.
The notation is defined in Table 2.      All the variables

except the interest rates and the inflation rates are measured as
logarithms., and all variables are deviations from means or

secular trends. For example, y is the deviation of the log of
real   GNP from secular or   potential GNP.   Equations (1) through
(6) describe country 1; equations (8) through (13) describe
coLintry 2; an asterisk denotes the variables of country two;

equation (7) is the condition of perfect capital mobility:
the interest rate in country 1 is equal to the interest rate in
country 2 plus the expected rate of depreciation of the currency
of country 1. Because the structure in the two countries is the
same, we need describe only the equations in country 1.
       Equation (1) is the   "contract" wage (x) equation.. A wage
decision is assumed to last for three years, with only 1/3 of

wages being negotiated in any one year.       The wage set at time t

depends on expectations of future wages paid to other workers,
expectations of prices, and expectations of future demand
conditions as proxied by the deviation of real GNP from trend.
Equation (2) defines the average wage in the economy as a whole.

Equation (3) is a markup pricing assumption: domestic goods
prices are a weighted average of wages and the prices of imported
inputs to production measured in domestic currency units. Note


                                     4
                            TABLE 1. TWO COUNTRY MACRO MODEL


Country 1
                                            2                                   2           y
                                                                                           +.
                                                                                              2
     (1)            x                    i'O
                                                                 +—                              iOyt+i
                                         2
                            1
     (2)                                E
                                        jaO

                                                                                *
     (3)                —   8       wt + (1—8) (e
                                               t +-t-t)
                                                    -        -




                            —dr + f(e +                                —
                                                                            p)      +
                                                                                        gy

                                            —bin + ay

     (6)            rt a             —




Capital    Mobility Condition


     (7)
                    iaj*+e1_e
Country 2
                                                                                    2             *
                                                2                               *
                    *           6
                                    *
                                                            V t+1 +        1—6•     Z -* + y          2
     (8)           x                                                                                  iO
                                            2            *
                    *       1
     (9)           w                                    x
                    *           **                           *          —
    (10)           Pt       0               + (1—8 ) (P                      e)
                                    **                  f* *
                    *                                                                      *
    (11)                =   —d r —                                +         —           + g
                                                                      et                     y
                    *           *
                                    a
                                                    **+ **
    (12)                —                   —b          a          y
                                **
    (13)            r
                    *

                                                                 -4a-
                  TABLE 2.       DEFINITION OF VARIABLES AND PARAMETER VALUES




Definition of Variables


        —   real   GNP   (log)
            price level (log)

   1. —     nominal interest rate

   rt —     real   interest rate

            inflation rate

            nominal wage (log)

        = money supply (log)

            contract wage (log)

   e exchange rate (log); country 1 price of country 2 currency
            conditional expectation based on information through period t.


Parameter Values for Simulations


    6 =     0.5
   -y —     1.0
    o = 0.8
    d = 1.2

    f=O.l
    g0.l
   b—4.O
    a =     1.0




                                             -4b-
that we do not explicitly model the difference between the      price
of domestically produced goods and the price of consumption
goods, due to imported final goods. This would give a further
linkage between foreign prices and domestic prices and wages.
However, the effects on inflation and output would be
observationally equivalent to the approach used here to model
price linkages.       Equations (4) and () are textbook IS and LM
curves respectively. The real interest rate differs from the
nominal interest rate according to the rationally expected
inflation rate as described in equation (6).


The   closed   economy as a frame   of -eference.
        To give some perspective to the two country results we

first examine the effects of monetary and fiscal policy in
the closed economy described by equations (1) through (6) with

l, f0,     and g0. The other parameters are reported in Table 2.
The co—existence of rational expectations and forward—looking,

though sticky, prices gives rise to real interest rate
movements which are unlike traditional ISLM models.
        To illustrate the properties of the model, we consider a
money shock, a fiscal shock, and a supply shock. The money
shock is a one percent unanticipated permanent increase in the
money supply, the fiscal shock a one percent unanticipated

permanent rightward shift in the IS curve (equation(4)), and the
supply shoc:: is an   unanticipated    temporary shock to the wage
equation (1). The results are shown in the time series charts in


                                      5
Figures 1 and 2. The figures show the actual values of the
variables rather than their logarithms. The parameters are
chosen so that the time unit is about one year, though no attempt
has been made to model the dynamics of the aggregate demand side.

In Figure 1 the fiscal shock is denoted by a square and the money
shock is denoted by a circle.   If only a circle appears for
particular period, the effects of the money and fiscal shock are
the same for that period; No attempt has been made to scale the
shocks so as to give similar effects for monetary and fiscal

policy.

      Monetary policy has an expected positive effect on output
which dies out as prices rise and reduce real money balances back
to where they were at the start. Note that the real interest
rate drops more than the nominal rate because of the increase in
expected inflation that occurs at the time of the monetary
stimulus. For this set of parameters the nominal interest rate
hardly drops at all; all the action of monetary policy shows up
in the real interest rate..

     Fiscal policy creates a similar dynamic pattern for real
output and the price level. Note, however, that there is a
strong "crowding in" effect of fiscal policy in the short run as
the increase in the expectation of inflation causes a drop in the
real interest rate. Eventually the expected rate of inflation
declines and the real interest rate rises; in the long run

private spending is completely crowded out by government spending
as in any model with price adjustment.
        Before discussing the supply shock simulations it is
necessary to digress on a technical point involving the effect of
a shift in the expected rate of    inflation    on the aggregate
demand curve. The aggregate demand curve is the negatively
sloped relationship between y and p obtained by substituting
equation (4) in to equation (s).       This   curve will generally shift
with the expected rate of inflation. For example, a monetary
policy rule which holds the money stock constant will result in a
leftward movement in the aggregate demand curve whenever there is
a decline in expected inflation. A lower expected rate of
inflation increases the demand for money. In order to offset
such a drop in aggregate demand the monetary authorities have to

increase the money supply. An efficient monetary policy rule
will generally have a term to reflect this money adjustment.

When expected inflation falls, the money supply is increased.
Such a policy and can be written as


(14)        m =       +


where       is the expected rate of inflation.      The parameter
measures how accomodative monetary policy is to price shocks; the
parameter     measures the money adjustment for expected
inf]atjon.' When       = —b this rule eliminates the expected

inflation rate from the aggregate demand curve. In the price
shock   simulations reported here we consider the case where O
and where =—b. and in each case we set c<=O.        Higher values of c


                                   7
iould represent more accommodative policies.

        The supply shock results are reported in Figure 2.
expected the shock results in a decline in real output.           If there

is no offset for expected inflation (=cD, then there is a large
drop in output in the third period as the expected rate of
inflation is sharply reduced.        If there is an offset to the

expectation of inflation (=—b) then there is a much smoother
response of output. Notes however, that the money supply is
first reduced and then increased quite sharply to offset the
decline in expected inflation.


To cour,t'ies bvith a flexible exchange rate.
        The effects of monetary and fiscal shocks in the full two—
country model are shown in Figure 3 when the exchange rate is

perfectly    flexible. For these simulations the parameters are
assumed to be the same in both countries and are given in Table
2.     In all of these experiments the policy shock occurs in

country 1.
       The   dynamic impacts in country 1 of   a   fiscal   shock are similar
to the closed economy case. The initial impact on real output is
only   slightly less than in the closed economy, and the effect
dies out at about the same rate. There is also an initial drop
in the real interest rate and this is the primary reason for the
strong effect of fiscal policy in the flexible exchange rate
regime. is in the fixed      price   Mundell—Fleming model the

exchange     rate of country 1   appreciates so that exports are


                                      8
crowded—out by fiscal policy, but the drop in the real interest
rate stimulates investment. Note. that the long—run output effect

of the fiscal shock is slightly positive in country 1. This is
matched by an   equal negative long—run output effect   in country 2.
However, there is an initial positive output effect in country 2
as the real interest rate first declines before increasing and
crowding out    investment spending there. Fiscal policy definitely
has inflationary effects abroad.

       The effect of an increase in the money supply in
country 1 is also much like in the closed economy. There is a
positive short—run effect on output that diminishes to zero over
time. Part of the monetary stimulus comes from a depreciation of
the exchange rate for country 1 and part comes from the decline
in real interest rates. There is no significant overshooting o-f

the exchange rate following the monetary impulse. Unlike in the
Mundell—Fleming model, however, the increase in the money supply
is not contractionary abroad. As noted in Carlozzi and Taylor
(1993) a monetary stimulus can have a positive effect abroad
because the price level is not fixed; the depreciation of the
country   1 currency reduces prices in country 2 and this reduces
real balances in that country. The real interest rate also
declines slightly in country 2.

       The response of the two countries to a supply shock in
country 1 is shown in Figure 4. We assume that the money supply
in both countries responds to a supply shock as in equation (14)
with   =O (the squares) or =—b (the circle),   and c<=O.    As in the


                                   9
closed economy the monetary policy that offsets shifts in the
expected inflation rate achieves a smoother path for output.
There  is a negative foreign output repercussion in response to
the price shock in country 1. This foreign effect is small
partly because of the small real exchange rate and foreign demand
coefficients in this specification.      Less accommodative   policies
(<O)     would increase the size of the foreign output effect.

TeQO   countries eQith a fixed exchange rate.
     For comparison we report in Figure 5 the results from
similar experiments with fixed exchange rates. gain the shocks
occur in country 1. But now country 2 has the responsibility for
maintaining the fixed parity. With perfect capital mobility this
means that country 2 must give LL an independent monetary policy.
The money supply in country 2 must move around in order to keep
the exchange rate fixed.

        The short—run output effects of fiscal policy with fixed
exchange rates are a bit weaker in country 1 compared
with the flexible exchange rate case. The output
effects abroad are strongly negative, even in the short run.
There is no short run decline in the real interest rate in
country 2 as there was when the exchange rate could adjust. In
fact the real exchange rate in country 2 oversroots its new

higher long—run equilibrium value. Note that in order to keep
the exchange rate fixed, country 2 must reduce its money supply.
This    means that its price level must eventually fall; in the
short run there is thus an expected deflation which raises the

                                   10
real interest rate in country 2 for a time above the long—run
equilibrium.

      Monetary policy has a slightly weaker effect on real
output in country 1 than in the flexible exchange rate case.           In

the long—run the output effect diminishes and the price level
rises by the same amount that the money supply increases. The
effect    of   this monetary policy on the other country is much
stronger than in the case of FlexibLe exchange rates. In order
to keep the exchange rate fixed,         the   monetary authority in country
2 must expand its money supply by the same amount as the money
increase in country 1. This has stimulative effects on real
output that duplicate the effects of money in country 1.
         Figure 6 shows the response in the two countries to a
supply shock in country 1. Country 1 has the same monetary
policy rules as before (=O or =—b, and c<=O) while country 2
must dedicate its money supply to the fixed exchange rate.
Compared to the flexible exchange rate case, the fluctuations in
real output are smaller in the home country and somewhat larger
abroad.




                                    11
'1'                                             103




      102                                       102




      I I) I                                    UW




      1OC                                       100



      6.0                                  R    6.0




      5.5                                       5.5




                                                5.0




                                                4.5




      Figure 1.   Fiscal (a) and Monetary (• ) Shocks in a Closed Economy.

                                   ha
Y ml                                      p    ioi




     100

           'c7'                     I          100
                                                                                   M 204


     99 —                                      99
     5.5                                  R    5.5 —                                    200




     5.0                                       5.0                                       196




     4.5                                       4.5
t.




            Figure 2. Price Shocks in a Closed Economy with Constant Money (   ) and with Money Adjusted ( • ) for
                       Changes in VeociW due to Expected Inflation,

                                                       lib
y 102                                     P 102




     101                                      101




     100                                      100




     99                                        99
                                                                                         E 1.01
I    5.5                                  R 5.5


                                                                                              1.0

     5.0                           S.          5.0




                                                                                               .99
     4.5                                       4.5

ya 102 -                                  p 102

                                                                                               .98



     101 —                                     101



                                                                                               .97



     100




      99 —                                     99

1*   5.5   —
                                          R* 5.5




     5.0                                       5.0




     4.5 —                                     4.5


               Figure 3.   Fiscal (0) and Monetary ( •) Shocks in a Two Country Model with Hexible Exchange Rates.

                                                           lie
'f   101                           P 101


                                                                                  M204
     100                                100




                                                                                       200
     99                                 99



I    5.5 -                         R    5.5
                                                                                       196




     5.0                                5.0


                                                                                   E   1.01




     4.5                                4.5


                                                                                        1.0



Y* 101 —                           P* 101 —

                                                                                        .99




     100             -                  100
                                                            -




                                                                                  M 204
     99                                       L

                                              -
1*   5.5                           R*
                                                                                       200 -IIII-—.

     5.0      —. .                      5.0 —     -   — —--—— -
                                                                                       196




     4.5 -                              4.5 -




             Figure 4. Price Shock in a Two Country Model with Flexible Exchange Rate; Constant Money (D ) and
                        Money Adjusted (• ) for Changes in Velocity Due to Expected Inflation Shifts.

                                                      lid
y     102                             p    102




      101                                  101




     100                                   100




      99                                   99
                                                                                  M* 202.0

I    5.5                             R     5.5



                                                                                        200.0


     5.0                                   5.0



                                                                                         198.0


     4.5 —                                4.5




                                          101                                           196.0




                                                                                        194.0
     100                                  100




     99                                   99



1*   55                              R*   5.5




     5.0                                  5.0




     4.5                                  4.5



             Figure 5. Fiscal (D) and Monetary (• ) Shocks in a Two Country Model with Fixed Exchange Rates.

                                                     lie
V 101 -                             P   101




    100                                 100                    SS



     99 -                                99


I   5.5                             R   5.5




    5.0                                 5.0



                 V
                                                                              M* 202.0 -
    4.5 —                               4.5




                                                                                    200.0 -
    10 -                            pS 101



                                                                                    198.0 -
    I tI                                100




     99 -                               99 —


    5.5 -                               5.5 —




    5.0                                 5.0




    4.5                                 4.5 —




            Figure 6. Price Shock in a Two Country Model with Fixed Exchange Rates; Constant Money (0) and
                       Money Adjusted (• ) for Changes in Velocity Due to Expected Inflation Shift.

                                                   hf
2.4 Class of Policy Rules.

         In the previous section we considered three types of
macroeconomic shocks:    (1) IS carve shocks which   could be due to
shifts in any of the behavioral components of total spending

including consumption, investment, or government, (2) LM curve
shocks which could be due to velocity as well as to money supply
errors, and (3)   supply shocks which   are simply unanticipated
changes in the price (or wage) setting process. As we saw, these
shocks cause both economies to move temporarily from their

equilibrium    of full employment and stable prices. The task of
macroeconomic policy is either to offset these shocks, or to keep
the    deviations from full employment and price stability as small

as possible.

        Rather than calculate the most general type of policy
rules to deal with these shocks we will consider a somewhat

narrower but simpler set'of policy rules. We assume at the start
that the instruments of policy can be controlled without error,
thatthe shocks are observable by policymakers, and that the
magnitude and timing of the effects of policy are known. These
are 1'textbook' assumptions, and though they can be questioned in

the real world, they are a good starting place for studying
policy coordination.
         The policy rules that we consider for each country have
four   prescriptive components: (1) use fiscal policy——government
spending or taxes——to offset IS shocks (this might be called the
"stabilization" component of policy), (2)     use monetary policy to
offset velocity shocks by adjusting the money supply (this is the

                                  12
"technical" component of monetary policy; it is already widely
followed in many countries), and (3) use monetary policy to set
the degree of accommodation to supply shocks——that is, to
determine how large a change in output will accompany a given
price shock (this is the "accommodation" component of policy).
The degree of accommodation is the central policy rule parameter
that   must be chosen in computing the best policy aLit of this
class of policies given a particular social welfare function..
Sinc:e this class of policy rules calls for- an independent
monetary policy in each country, it implies one further
prescription: (4) exchange rates are flexible.
       The second component of this class of policy rules seems
least objectionable given the assumptions we have made about the
information and control possessed by policymakers.. Some would

argue that the first component gives up opportunities to mix
monetary and fiscal policy in order to influence the size of
investment relative to consumption.. (A compensating advantage
is discussed in the next paragraph). The third and fourth
components are perhaps most controversial; the main alternative
is to forego any choice about monetary accommodation in one of
the two countries (in the two country model) and let the money

supply be dedicated to controlling the exchange rate. Fiscal
policy could then have an additional role of cushioning the

economy temporarily from supply shocks in the country responsible
-for   pegging the exchange rate. Compared with pure monetary
ac:commodation, this would cause different interest rate movements
after    a supply shock. It would be useful to consider some of
                                                                -
these    alternatives in future research.


                                  13
        For this class of policy rules aggregate demand shocks (IS

or LM) to not have any external effects abroad at least for          the
type    of structure portrayed in the two country model. This would

not be true if monetary policy were used to stabilize the economy
in the case of IS shocks; monetary stabilization policy would

require fluctuations in interest rates and with perfect capital
mobility this would have effects abroad. The use of fiscal
policy to offset IS shocks does not require any movement in

interest rates. Similarly the use of fiscal policy to offset
velocity shocks would require     fluctuations   in interest rates that
would   have foreign   effects.

        Supply shocks have external effects under this set of
policies except in the special case when they are fully

accommodated. A fully accommodated supply shock does not have
any effect on real output, and movements in the domestic price
level d not have any effects abroad because they are matched by

equal changes in the floating exchange rate. When a supply shock
is not fully accommodated there will be both real output effects
and price effects and these will have foreign repurcussions; this
was shown in the previous section. A flexible exchange rate
cannot isolate other countries from both output and price
movements abroad.   Note also that a policy that fixes the
exchange rate does avoid this problem; as was illustrated in the
previous   section, supply shocks have external effects    whether
exchange   rates are fixed or flexible.


3. SimJe Empirical Framework for Computjnc Policy Rules.

       In this section we develop an simple framework to compute

                                  14
optimal cooperative and non—cooperative policies for       several
countries. Essentially we attempt to use a semi—reduced form
modelto describe the relation between inflation and output when
each country is following a policy rule of the type described
above.      In this way we make use of the fact that more complex
rules that require a full structural model to analyze are not
being used.


        7e'o cow,tris
         Consider first    the following two reduced form price
equations for two countries:


(1)            =           +      —
                                            +


(16)           =           +      —
                                      Yit   + uz ,


where the variables are defined as in Section 1 except that we
Use the subscripts 1 and 2 to distinguish between the two
countries.         There are stochastic shocks to each equation
denoted by U1 and              These are the "supply" shocks; in
general they are correlated between the countries (eg. world
Supply shocks), and in the empirical work below we use the actual
estimated correlation.

         The price equations are meant to capture the interaction
between the two countries that would be expected when the

previously    described class of policy rules is being used. The
parameters are assumed to be positive. Here they        are the same in
each country. but this assumption will be dropped in the
empirical work      which •follows.     Inflation   in each country is
assumed to depend on its own lagged value——an indication of

expectations    of inflation as well as inertia         due to contracts.

Inflation in each country is also assumed to be positively
related to demand in the same country as measured by real output
relative to trend. Note that demand conditions in one country
have an influence on inflation in the other country. This
influence will be negative if exchange rates are flexible and
monetary policy is used to steer aggregate demand after a supply
shock, as is    true    of the policy rules considered here.
reduction in real       output   in country 2 caused by a    restrictive
monetary policy after an inflationary supply shock in that
country will cause the exchange rate            to appreciate in coLintry 1.
Due   to linkages    from exchange rates       to prices (see equations (3)
and (10)), the appreciation will tend to reduce inflation in

country   1   (e., goes down), and    the    equivalent depreciation in
country 2 will tend to increase inflation in that country.
Hence, the direct positive effects of aggregate demand in country
1 will be augmented by the exchange rate movements and these same
movements will create a negative coefficient on aggregate demand
in the inflation equation in country 2.              (If exchange rates are
fixed or if fiscal policy is used to cushion supply shocks, then
this argument will no longer hold and               may be negative).
        The price equations (1) and (16) have abstracted from the
specific dynamics of       the staggered contract model in the original
two country    model.      In    particular   the e<plicit forward—looking
behavior is now assumed to have been incorporated in the
parameters. For this reason   equations (1) and (16) are not as
structural as they might be. Perhaps ,a better approximation of

                                        16
the      rward—looking behavior explicit in the model f Section 1
would be to replace the actual output variables on the right—hand
side with expectations of these variables——this approach was
taken in Taylor (1979).

       Now consider the aggregate demand side of the model. The
policy rules described above will give rise the following types

of reduced form aggregate demand equations for the two countries:


            y   = g.i7Tzt_1 +


(18)        y+ =           +    g7rt_z -

These equations represent the outcome of a particular policy for

adjusting the level of aggregate demand in response to inflation.
In writing (17) and (18) we are exploiting the first and second
components of the policy rules: that aggregate demand shocks are
perfectly offset without foreign repurcussions if aggregate
demand    shocks remained then disturbances would be added to
the equations,     and the correlation between these disturbances
would be affected by policy. The policy     parameters   in (17) and
(18) depend on how accommodative monetary policy is to supply
shocks.



       Optimal Rules in the Stochastic Steady State.
          The policy problem is to find values for the g—parameters
in (17) and (18) to maximize social welfare, This is a dynamic

problem: there are lags and we are interested in social welfare

for many periods.       practical way to deal with these dynamics is


                                    17
to focus on macroeconomic performance in the stochastic steady
state. The stochastic equilibrium describes how the economy
reacts on average to shocks——the typical business cycle
fluctuations of outpJt and inflation. It also captures the
essential ways that policy can affect macroeconomic performance
by altering the size of the fluctuations of output and inflation.
The variance of output and inflation is a convenient measure of
the   size   of these business cycle fluctuations.
        By +oc:ussing on the stochastic equilibrium we are

implicitly assuming an infinite time horizon for policy choice
with no discounting. This seems appropriate for macroeconomic
po].icy. We also are implicitly assuming that time inconsistency
will not be a problem: once a policy rule is chosen we assume
that it wi].l remain in Force with no attempt by the policymakers

to exploit     the past committments of   economic agents.

        Using game theory terminology we implicitly assume that the
policymakers in each country are dominant players in a game with
the residents of that country, and that the solution to game is
time   consistent.     There is also a game between countries and
this is where the issue of coordination or cooperation arises.
We consider two alternative solutions to this multicountry game:
the cooperative solution which is motivated by positive economic
considerations, and the non—cooperative (Cournot—Nash) solution
which is motivated by normative or descriptive considerations.
An    alternative to the latter is to use a dominant player solution
for the international game with the U.S. being the dominant
p1 aycr.
        To be specific consider the following welfare loss for each

country in the two country set—up:

                                    18
(19)             Xvar(7r+) +   (l—X)var(y)

where X is a weight between 0 and 1 representing the relative

cost of inflation and output fluctuations, and where i       1 or 2
for country 1 or 2.       The variances in (19) are the variances
of the steady -state stochastic equilibrium when the policy rules
in (17) and (18) are being used.

        The optimal cooperative policy is easy to describe and
compute.       The two countries choose the g—parameters of the policy
rules   in   (17) and (18) that minimize a weighted sum of (19) for i
equal 1 and 2; determining which country gets the higher weight
on its loss function in this cooperative effort is a matter for
negotiation. We will assume that the weights are equal.

        The non—cooperative (Cournot—Nash) optimal rules are
described as follows: country 1 minimizes its welfare loss
(19) in the steady state (for i=1) taking country Vs policy rule
(18) as given; similarly country 2 minimizes (19) in the steady
state (for i2) taking country l's policy rule (17) as given;
the Cournot—Nash equilibrium occurs when the rule that country 1
takes as given is optimal for country 2, and the rule that
country 2 takes as given is optimal for country 1.      In this two—
country symmetric model the non—cDoperative policy rules can
easily be computed by iterating each country's minimi:ation
(Note   that   if the two countries are the same then the optimal
policies in the two countries will be the same so that g =          g.
and g1 =

        Example.    Consider the two types of rules for the case

                                    19
where the welfare weight X =       . in     each country, and where
5.621, =.266,=.13;. the variance of the shocks u1 and u                is
1, and   the covariance between the shocks is zero.         (These 3 and

parameter values are what one obtains from a simple unconstrained
Phillips    curve regression over the 1970—82 period). The policy
rule parameters are given below:


                    Optimal   Cooperative   Policy Rules
                      Accommodation   Parameters (y)
                    Inflation in I         Inflation in 2
Country 1                —.207                 .072
Country 2                 .072               —.207



         Optimal Non—cooperative (Cournc,t Nash) Policy Rules


                     Accommodation Parameters (g)
                    Inflation in 1         Inflation in 2

Country 1                —.223                —.011
Country 2                —.011                —.223


        Note   the cooperative solution involves more accommodation
than the non—cooperative solution: both countries do not let
quite as deep a recession occur after an inflation shock when the
rules  are chosen cooperatively. For these parameter values the
differences in accommodation are not large, however.
     The policies are not only different in the accommodation to
dornstic inflation. Both sets of policies involve some reaction
to foreign inflationary developments; that is, g1 and g, are
not zero. The cooperative policies call for a stimulus to

                                      20
aggregate demand when there is a rise in inflation in the other

country. This permits the other country to appreciate its
currency by a larger amount and helps to reduce inflation there.
The boost to aggregate demand at home is not considered a gain in
welfare, however, so that the "gain from trade" implicit in the
cooperative solution is in the form of an agreement for the other
country to help out in a similar way when the inflation situation
reverses.

       The non—cooperative rule has the opposite response to
inflation in the other country. This occurs because without
cooperation there is a tendency for each country to counteract
some of the exchange rate effects caused by the policy in the

other country. For example, starting from a cooperative
equilibrium each country can improve its macro performance by
matching the policy of the other country; if one country
contracts in response to an inflation shock, the other country
can   reduce the inflationary consequences of the exchange rate
depreciation by similarly contracting. This means changing the
g coefficient from positive to negative. Of course, this
action will likely result in a change in the policy rule in the
other country, and eventually both countries are worse off than
they were in the cooperative mode.


        The   Gereral fr1dti—Cow,tr' Case,
        Generalizing   the model and the policy problem in equations
(15) through (19) to the case of an arbitrary number of countries
that   are not necessarily alike in their economic structure or in
their macro policy preferences is fairly     straightforward.
Equations     (15) and (16) become

                                     21.
(20)                  =
                            T_i +Ey              +   u+,     i=1,.,n.

The policy rules for each country become


(21)
                                          ,




The sums in (20) and (21) are from 1 to n Finally the welfare
function     is    given fc,r each of the n countries by (19) for

1=1

        This model can      be put in a matrix form convenient •for
computing        the optimal steady state rules as follows:


 (22)        z = Dz.        2.   + Cx. + u.
                   — t2.
                   — I——,




here    z.., =
                                                       and
ihere x.,, =      (yit,..,y,,+.), The         matrix •D is 2n by 2n with the only
nonzero elements on the diagonal of the upper lefthand n by n
block which has the                 parameters on the diagonal and zeros
elsewhere. The matrix C is 2n by n and has the 8 parameters
in the n by n matrix in its upper half and the n by n identity
matrix in its lower half. Finally, 6 is an n by 2n matrix with
the policy rule coefficients g in the first n columns and zeros
in    the   last n columns. (These zeros are the weights on the
lagged demand terms in the policy rule which we know will be zero
in this problem but not in a general optimal control problem of
the form (22) and (23)).
        Calculation of the cooperative equilibrium requires some
way of weighting the welfare functions in each country. We take
the weights to be equal. Then the optimal cooperative policy to
minimize loss in the steady state is given by the solution to


(24)     G = —(C'HC)--C'HD,



where H is the solution to


(2)     H       L + (D+CG)'H(D÷CG),



where the 2n by 2n diagonal matrix L has X., 1=1,... ,n on the

first n diagonal elements, and 1—X,, i=1,...n on the last n
diagonal elements. This cooperative solution is that given by a
standard optimal control problem (see Chow(1975), for example).
       The Cournot—Nash equilibrium solution for the steady state

problem is given by.




(2) G=—                      C       .      D

                                   r,Hr,



where the . vectors are the n columns of C, and where H is
given by the solutions to

(27)        H     L.a. +   (D+CG)'H(D÷CG), i1,...,n,


where L. is a 2n by 2n matrix            with all zero except the i element
which   is   equal to X and the (n+i)' element which is equal to 1—
>. This non—cooperative solution isgiven by Kydland (1975).
The computation of the non—cooperative policies is actually quite
similar to the computation of the optimal policies. The main
computational difference is that one must calculate ii                                         different
H matrices for each of the n countries in the non—cooperative
case, but only one H matrix in the cooperative case. Solving
(27)   for    each H is no different from solving (25) for H which
part of a standard optimal control problem.. An iterative
rL,L.t.JLtr  LIU
        — — .._. — _.j   I. —
                         TLJr                  y
                                  — - — — — — I__    ——   -    —   I d #flt
                                                     IyJ.or ..L7I'1)          15  mast
                                                                               — -— —-
                                                                                    _t_   — —-- —   —- I —
                                                                                          cOflVefliflt.
                                                                                                              -I--




        It   may appear paradoxical that neither the cooperative nor
the    non—cooperative policy rules depend on the correlation
between the        supply shocks uj.                 in       each country. Formally, this is
due to the certainty equivalence                              property of the linear
behavioral equations and the quadratic loss function. 0+ course
the value of the loss function evaluated at the optimal policies
will depend on the variances and covariances.. When one sees the
estimated outcome of the optimal policies——that is, the value of
the loss function——it is likely that one would want to change the
parameters of the loss function, and recompute the policies. For
this reason, the actual choice of policies is likely to depend on
the covariance between the shocks. This may explain the apparant
paradox of the certainty equivalence result in the nulticountry
context.

        The value of the loss function when the optimal policies are
being used can be calculated                        by substituting (2) with the                             optima].

value of S into                 (22) and evaluating the steady state covariance
matrix       of . Let             S be the          covariance matrix of the shocks u.
Then the steady state covariance matrix                                       denoted by c2 is given



                                                          24
by the solution to =(D+CG)'c(D÷ce) + S..        The steady state
variances of     inflation   and output in each o+ the countries are on
the diagonal elements of .        Using these variances the optimized
value of   the   loss function in each country can be evaluated
easily from equation (19).




                                    25
4.Calculatinp the       Optimal Policy Rules.
          In this section we report a set of calculations of
optimal cooperative and non—cooperative policy rules, andthe
resulting values of the loss function for the seven summit
countries. To do this we need parameter values                     and       of the
inflation equations       (20), the covariance matrix S of the
di sturbanc:es   t.c: these equati ons, and values of the welfare
parameters     ..      Because the inflation equations are semi—reduced
forms that partially depend on the policy ru].es being used,
estimating them is a precarious task. Most problematic are the
    for i:::.j. the values and even signs of which depend on whether
the pol ic:y rules USc flexible or fixed exchange rates. For the

optima] poi icy     calculations we need to          assume that the class of
policies with flexible exchange rates is being used.                  Yet   over
any recent sample period some of               the seven summit   countries have
used fixed exchange rates and others have               used   flexible exchange
rates..    Moreover,    the exchange rate        policies have changed for
some of the     countries.
          The following prodedure was          finally used:e Over the 1970—
1982 period individual inflation equations for the seven
countries     were estimated constraining             to equal 1 (the value
for a vertical long—run Phillips curve), and including only the
value of output -for the individual country (measured as a
deviation     from a   linear   trend).        From these estimates   we obtained
values -for         -for the seven countries. Using the            residuals


                                          26
from these     equations over- the same sample period, we then
estimated S. the covariance matrIx between the shocks in each
country. The cofficients                 of each other country's output
variables in     each equation were then scaled to be less than the
      and proportional to the trade of that country with each other

country.       The trade weights w were the values used by Masson
and Elunde].l—Winail        (198).       More specifically we set

  .   aw .   where a is a sc:al e parameter less than one. The
sc.ai e parameter is a measure of the overall i rnportanc.e of the

int.eracti on LDetween countri es.          this interacti on is the
                                           Since
focus of      this   study we e;perimented with a number of different
val LICS between 0 and 1.       In general the results were
qua]. i tati vel y similar , though the magni dutes of the poll ry

paramet.ers depend on the degree of interaction. For space
limitations we only repor-t the optimal            policies for a•2/3 here.
        The   val ucs of all the parameters of the model for this case
are presented in Table                 The effect of   the "own" demand measure
on i nfl at.i on :i. s posi Live
                            each country. The coefficient, is
                                   n

surprisingly small for Germany and large for Italy. Note that
the U.S. demand variable has a relatively large impact on the
inflation equations in the other countries according to thesE
parameter values.         There is        relatively large interaction
                                       also a
between France,        Germany, and Italy. Not surprisingly the
covariances between the inflation shocks in       country are
                                                          each
almost all positive: exceptions ar-c the covariances 3apan with

respect to France and the U.K. Note also that by. this measure


                                           27
the inf 1 ati on shocks are largest. in        Japan and the Li. K. The
variance for the U.K. is an         order of    magnitude larger than the
U.S.

       The optimal policy rules and resulting welfare loss for each
country and for the group as a whole are presented in Tables 4

through 7. The g—parameters of the non—cooperative rules are
given in Table  4 with the resultinQ welfare in Table 5, and g—
parameters of the c:ooperati ye rules are given in Table 6 with
the resulting welfare in Table 7. The policy rules were computed

for 3 different weights on inflation in the welfare function
(.i,.5 and   .9). For three        ca].culations we assumed that all
countries   had the same preferencesq       and   for   one we assumed a mix
of ciifferent  preferences. For the mixed case 9ermany was assumed
to have   a high weight on inflation and Italy was assumed to have
a low weight on inflation with the other           countries falling in
between. As       would expect the policy rule becomes 1 ess
                one

ac:c:ommodatj, ye to inflation as the weight on inflation in the
welfare   functi on   increases.
    A comparison of Tables 4 and 6 clearly indicates that the

cooperative policies are more accommodative to inflation than the
non—cooperative policies, much as in the symmetric two country
example. For all values of the loss function and for all

countries, the diagonal elements (i=j) are smaller in absolute
value in the cooperative case. Hence, an increase in domestic
inflation call for a smaller decline in output relative to trend
when countries   are cooperating in their choice of rules than when


                                      28
they are in a    non—cooperative equilibrium.
         The off—diagonal elements (i>j) or (i<J) are all negative in
the    nan—cooperative case: an increase in foreign inflation brings
about a decline in output     at   home for each country.    In the

cooperative case, however, the off—diagonal accommodation
parameters are usually posit.ive or at least less strongly

negative. There are three e>ceptions: compared to the non—
cooperative    equilibrium,   (1) with a .1 weight on inflation for
all    countries, France contracts output more strongly in response
to an increase in inflation in Italy in the cooperative case, (2)
with a .9 w'i ght on i nil ati oii in all countries, France contracts

output more strongly in response to an increase in inflation in
the    U.K.in the cooperative case, and (3) with the mix of welfare
weights    Italy c:ontrac::ts output more strongly   in response t.o an
increase  in inflation in Japan in the cooperative case.. These
results are therefore slightly different from the two—country
symmetric: mode]. consi dered previously where all the off—di agonal
parameters were positive in the cooperative case.
        The values of the loss function shown in Tables           and 7

indicate how welfare would change as a result of a shift from a

non—cooperative equilibrium to cooperation. The cooperative
policy rule minimizes the simple sum of the loss functions in

each country. Hence, it is not surprising that the sum of the
loss   functions——a indicator of world macroeconomic performance——
is smaller in the cooperative case The improvement           is

proportionate 1   y larger when count.ri es have a mi türe of

                                     29
prfrice for price             stability over     output stability.
       Note   that   the size of     the   improvement differs accross the
countries according to this          calculation.     Welfare is actually
reduced for Germany in all the cases that we consider; and it is

reduced for the U.S. as we].1 when the weight on irflation is

small (.1). There are offsetting gains in welfare for Canada,

France, 3apn         Italy   and the U.K.       In order for the change from

non—cooperation   to this particular cooperative policy rule to be
Pareto   improving-—at least one country better off and no country
worse off---some compensati nçj payments would be necessary to
make this cooperative policy an improvement to Germany (and the
IJ.S. if the weight. on inflation is small). More formally we
could adjust the weights in the sum of the loss functions——

placing a heavier weight on Germany and the U.S.——and

recompute the cooperative poiicy                If this   new cooperative policy
resulted in a reduction in welfare for some country, then the
weights c:ouid be adjusted further until a Pareto improving
coc)perative policy ws found. This calculation would then

constitute a formal proof that the cooperative policy results                in
a Pareto improvement         in world   welfare.

         It would also be reasonable to adjust the relative weights
on inflation and output         in   the individual country welfare

functions when calculating the cooperative policies. For example
when the weight on       inflation      is .9 in all countries, the
improvement in we].fare for Japan, the U.S. and the U.K. shows up
enti rely   in a reduct.i on in output variance.           y adjusting the


                                           30
re)ativ& cosLs of inflation and output flLtctuations, some of the
gain     could be placed in         a reduction in inflation fluctuations as

well..

         It is worth noting that there is no particular normative
reason to weight each co.rntry the same in the world welfare
function.. Perhaps a more utilitarian approach would be to weight
eac:h countrys we].fare in proportion to its population this
woul d be si   m:i.   1   arto wel ghti ng each persor the same when computing
wor].d welfare..



4..   Summary and Conc 1 udi ni Remarks..
         The ma:in objective of this paper has been to examine some
of the international issues that arise in designing macroeconomic
policy rules. A theoretical two country rational expectations
model was used to illustrate the effects of monetary and fiscal
policy in an international economy. In brief summary the
following effects were noted: A stimulative monetary policy has
positive real output effects abroad whether exchange rates are
fixed or flexible, though the foreign effects are much larger
with fixed rates. A stimulative fiscal policy has positve short—
run effects on output abroad when exchange rates are flexible and
negative effects when the exchange rate is fixed.. An
expansionary          fiscal policy    eventually raises real interest rates

abroad, but       there is initially       a   decline   when exchange rates are

flexible, and an over-shooting when exchange rates are fixed..
Regardless of whether exchange rates               are fixed or flexible
domestic: monetary and +.isc:a]. policy are effective aggregate
demand instrLtments at home even though capital is perfectly
mobile.       The international effects of demand shocks are
completely eliminated if monetary policy is used for LM curve
shocks    and fisca].         polic:y     is    used   for   IS curve shocks.
         The    two country model suggests a                  simple but attractive
class    of   po]. :i   c::y 'ui es in
                               monetary policy is used to off set
                                         which

velocity shocks and to determine the appropriate amount of
accommodation to inflation, while fiscal pol icy is used to deal
with aggregate spericiing shoc:ks.. Exchange rates need                     to be
flexible for this class                  of policy      rules because each country has
an independent,           monetary policy. We noted that               there is a

potential 1      y important       i   nternational externality         in the choice of
how accommodative monetary policy should be when                         exchange rates
are flexible. The under].ying reason is the effect of exchange
rate on inflation.

    This latter feature of the theoretical two country model was
highlighted in a simpler n—country model that was used to examine
policy in the seven summit countries. A comparison of
cooperative and noncooperative optimal macro policy rules for
these seven countries indicated that the cooperative policy rule

is in fact more accommodative regardless of the preferences in
each country.

         Finally from a technical viewpoint these results indicate
how some of the new policy                     evaluation techni ques recently
applied       t. closed ec:onomy models might be applied in an
intErnationa1 ccntet.. The     mcde1 used   in this paper is still   toc
aQQreativEe to address many of the important questions about
international   monetary and macro policy reform, but the results
are sufficiently promising to indicate that the general
econometric approach could be extended to deal with many
international reform issues.
                                             TABLE 3

          PARAMETER VALUES USED FOR COMPUTING POLICY RULES



Coefficjerits o+ Output in In+lation Equations (o3):


          Canada      France      Germany         Italy       Japan            U.K.        U-S.
Canada         1944   —. 0005     —. 0031      —.     0005   —.   002 1   —.   0022   —.   1203
France    — 0003           0970   —.0211       —. 0035       —.   0011    —- 0031     -.0272
Germany — . ooor      —. C>004         0080    —.     0003   —. 0001      —.   0003   —.   0033
Italy     —. 0033     —. 0458     —. 1958       1 •   0045   —.0101       —.0229      -. 3284
Japan     —.   0072   —.   0080   —.   0434    —.     0051   1.0795       —.0174      —.   6191
U. 1<.    —. 0022     —.0070      —. 0271      —.0038        —.0046            2975   —.   1304
U. S.     —.   0322   —.   0173   —. c:)76o    —.     0115   —.   0Z39    —.0289       .3591



Covariance Matrix between Shocks to Inflation Equations                               (8)
     (actual elements times 10)
          Canada France           Germany         Italy       Japan            U. K        U.S.
Canada     6.13        1.50            .74             98     5.46             .92         .61
France         —       2.29            56             .68     —.20         5.94        1.68

Germany                            2.04               .79     2.13         2.15        1 •     16
Italy                                            3.16             .97      3.66            •   30
Japan                                                        4?    •?     ——    OI
                                                                           — . l.A.        .57
U. K..                                                            —       28.30        6.64
U.S.




                                         —33a—
                                           Table 14
                         NON-COOPERATIVE MULTICOUNTRY POLICY RULES

                              Accommodation Parameters (gjj)                      Weight on
           Canada    France    Germany      Italy     Japan      U.K.      U.S.   Inflation

Canada     —.329     —.009     —.012        —.001     —.003     —.008    —.083       .1

France     —.0014    —.328     —.017        —.001     —.001     —.002    —.026       .1
Germany    —.000     —.000     —.076        —.000     —.000     —.000    —.001       .1
Italy      —.008     —.019     —.022        —.283     —. 004    —.011    —.090       .1
Japan      .0114     —.012     —.015        —.002     —.283     —.0114   —.155       .1
U. K.      —.010     —.012     —.015        —.002     —.003     —.322    —.076       .1
U.S.       —.022     —.oi6     —.020        —.003     —.008     —.017    —.330       .1
Canada     —.928     —.027     —.113        —.003     —.009     —.025    —.2148      .5
France     —.012     —.959     —.170        —.0014    —. ooi    —.015    —.079       .5
Germany    —.001     —.0014    _.591e       —.000     —.000     —.001    —.007       .5
Italy      —.025     —.059     —.182        —.620     —.012     —.0314   —.266       .5
Japan      —.0143    —.035     —.125        —.007     —.610     —.0141   —.1453      .5
U.K.       —.029     —.038     —.134        —.oo6     —.010     —.877    —.229       .5
U.S.       —.066     —.0148    —.169        —.009     —.025     —.051    —.896       .5
Canada    —2.327     —.081     —.573        —.010     —.027     —.0714   —.712       .9
France     —.036    —2.623     —.876        —.012     —.010     —.0146   —.235       .9
Geriny     —.006     —.020    —2.893        —.001     —.001     —.006    —.035       .9
Italy      —.0714    —.171     —.900        —.913     —.029     —.093    —.661       .9
Japan      —.1214    —.105     —.622        —.017     —.886     —.111    —1.109      .9
U.K.       —.086     —.1114    —.669        —.015     —.028    —1.997    —.6141      .9
U.S.       —.190     —.1414    —.839        —.023     —.061     —.1142   —1.998      .9
Canada     —.929     —.029     —.527        —.003     —.010     —.026    —.253       .5
France     —.013     —.963     —.770        —.0014    —.0014    —.016    —.086       .5
Germany    —.006     —.017    —2.918        —.001     —.001    —.006     —.0314      .9
Italy      —.023     —.056     —.852        —.2814    —.008    —.028     —.1914      .1
Japan      —.0144    —.038     —.597        —.005     —.610     —.0142   —.458       .5
U.K.       —.030     _.0141    —.631        —.004     —.011    —.878     —.2314      .5
U.S.       —.067     —.052     —.801        —.007     —.025     —.052    —.903       .5




                                        —33b—
                                              TABLE 5
                                  MACROECONOMIC PERFORMANCE:
                           NON-COOPERATIVE MULTICOUNTRY POLICY RULES


                                                        PercentStandard
                Variance (x1O)     Loss (x10')            Deviation
                                                                          Weight on
Country           a2         2y    Aa2 +
                                     w      (i—x)a2
                                                  y      aw         a
                                                                    y
                                                                          Inflation

Canada          55.9         7.2           12.0          7.5        2.7       .1
France          13.6         5.6           9.4           6.6       2.4        .1
Germany        202.1         1.2           21.3         14.2        1.1       .1
Italy            6.3         1.4           2.0           2.6       1.2        .1
Japan           27.0         3.5           5.8           5.2       1.9        .1
U.K.           168.9        20.5           35.4         13.0       4.5        .1
U.S.            13.3         2.7           3.6           3.6       1.6        .1
World Macro Performance:                  89.7

Canada          20.8        24.7          22.8           .4.6      5.0        .5
France          15.3        23.8          19.6           3.9       4.9        .5
Germany        146.5        51.5          99.0          12.1       7.2        .5
Italy            3.8         9.6           6.7           1.9       3.1        .5
Japan           15.6        12.9          14.3           4.0       3.6        .5
U.K.            67.0        65.7          66.3           8.2       8.1        .5
U.S.             5.2        13.6           9.4           2.3       3.7        .5
World Macro Performance:                 247.1

Canada           9.5        88.5          17.4           3.1       9.4        .9
France           5.9       107.3          16.1           2.4      10.4        .9
Germany         53.5       448.2         92.9            7.3      21.2        .9
Italy            3.2        58.5           8.7           1.8       7.7       .9
Japan           13.6        48.4          17.1           3.7       7.0       .9
U.K.            35.4       208.0          52.6           5.9      i4.4       .9
U.S.             2.8        69.1           9.4           1.7       8.3       .9
World Macro Performance:                 214.2

Canada          21.3        47.3         314.3           14.6      6.9       .5
France          17.5        71.9         44.7            14.2      8.5       .5
Germany         52.7       452.2         92.7            7.3      21.3       .9
Italy           10.6        51.7         47.6            3.3       7.2       .1
Japan           15.7        37.0         26.4            4.0       6.1       .5
U.K.            67.3        98.1         82.7            8.2       9.9       .5
U.S.             5.5        55.2         30.14           2.4       .4        .s
World Macro Performance:                 358.8




                                     —33c—
                                              TABLE 6
                               COOPERATIVE MULTICOUNTRY POLICI RULES

                                  Accommodation Parameters (gjj)                      Weight on
            Canada    France       Germany    Italy     Japan      U.K.       U.S.    Inflation
Canada      —.315      .007         —.007      .005      .006      .006      —.042      .1
France       .008     —.3114        —.009     —.013      .0014     .009       .008      .1
C..rmn.y      (7        nRc                    r)c        t119      flIL7      127       i
Italy        .016     —.009         —.015     —.267      .015      .013      —.0414     .1
Japan        .018      .011         —.009      .017     —.2514     .015      —.108      .1
U.K.         .009     —.008         —.009      .009      .008     —.309      —.032      .1
U.S.         .0147     .021         —.010      .056      .093      .046      —.260      .1

Canada      —.886      .020         —.076      .013      .016      .017      —.1314     .5
France       .022     —.917         —.115      .027      .010      .025       .017      .5
Germany      .106      .242         —.1443     .1214     .0147     .132       .348      .5
Italy        .046      .023         —.131     —.576      .036      .0314     —.132      .5

Japan        .0148     .031         —.085      .0143    —.538      .040      —.3.19     .5
U.K.         .026      .022         —.093      .022      .020    —.837       —.112      .5
U.S.         .110      .0514        —.112      .103      .159      .1014     —.689      .5

Canada     —2.200      .0149        —.448      .026      .025      .035      —.1443     .9
France       .060    2.1498         —.688      .040      .020    —.054        .002      .9
Germany      .295      .638        —2.364      .191      .101      .325       .817      .9

Italy        .098      .048         —.723     —.8140     .011      .064      —.330      .9

Japan        .080      .068         —.489      .054     —.791      .056      —.795      .9
U.K.         .059      .049         —.529      .035      .029    —1.888       .362      .9
U.S.         .152      .107         —.653      .095      .111      .135     —1.517      .9
Canada      —.875      .045         —.228      .020      .019      .027      —.108      .5
France       .037    —.884          —.340      .031      .013      .037       .050      .5
Germany      .267      .621        —1.419      .345      .165      .398      1.078     .9
Italy        .061      .089        —.392      —.233     —.027      .057       .014     .1
Japan        .069      .075        —.263       .050     —.529      .063      —.256     .5
U.K.         .0146     .064        —.281       .035      .027    —.817       —.058     .5
U.S.         .135      .107        —.3144      .082      .169      .131      —.624     .5




                                             —33d—
                                                 TABLE 7
                                    MACROECONOMIC PERFORMANCE:
                             COOPERATIVE MULTICOUNTRY POLICY RULES


                                                           Percent Standard
                Variance (xlO—4)     Loss (xlO—4)             Deviation
                                                                               Weight on
Country                      a2      Xa2 + (1—x)a2                             Inflation
                              y        iT
                                                     y                  I
Canada          50.7         5.5             10.0            7.1        2.3        .1
France          39.0         3.5              7.0            6.2        1.9        .1

Germany       -213.2         3.2             214.1         i14.6        1.8        .1

Italy            6.1          .5              1.0            2.5         .1        .1
Japan           214.6        2.0              14.3           5.0        1.4        .1
U.K.           161.1        16.4             30.9           12.7        14.1       .1
U.S.             33.5       10.0              4.2            .8       10.0         .1
World Macro Performance:                     81.5

Canada          19.2        18.4             18.8            1414      14.3        .5

France          13.9        114.6            114.3           3.7        3.8        .5

Germany        169.3        33.9            ioi.6           13.0        5.8        .5
Italy            3.6         14.3             4.0            1.9        2.1        .5
Japan           15.1         7.4             11.3            3.9        2.7        .5
U.K.            64.         51.8             58.1            8.0        7.2        .5
U.S.            11.9         5.9              8.9            3.5        2.14       .5

World Macro Performance:                    217.0

Canada           9.1        68.3             15.0            3.0       8.3         .9

France           5.2        76.9             12.6            2.3        8.8        .9
Germany         68.0       359.9             97.2            8.2       19.0        .9
Italy            3.2        39.9              6.9            1.8        6.3        .9
Japan           13.6        32.3             15.5            3.7        5•7        .9

U.K.            34.8       165.7             47.9            5.9       12.9        .9
U.S.             14.7       42.7              8.5            2.2        6.5        .9
World Macro Performance:                    203.6

Canada          18.6        23.8             21.2            14.3       14.9       .5

France          11.6        27.1             19.4            3.4        5.2        .5

               112.8       195.1            121.0           10.6       14.0        .9
Germany
Italy            6.0        17.1             16.0            2.5        14.1       .1

Japan           15.1        114.2            14.6            39         3.8        .5

U.K.            62.2        55.3             58.8            7.9        74         .5

U.S.             8.6        17.5             13.0            2.9        4.2        .5
World Macro Performance:                    2614.0




                                    —33 e—
                                    FOOTNOTES



    1.  MUCh recent macroeconomic research has been devoted to
    developing techniques to evaluate the economic impact o-F
    different policy rules on macroeconomic performance, primarily on
    the business cycle and inflation. Lucas (1976) outlines the case
    for looking at macroeconomic policy as a rule. Sargent (1984)
    provides a more recent discussion and addresses some of the
    reservations raised by Sims (1982). For some examples of
    applications of the rules approach see Taylor (1979, 1980, 1982a)
    It should be emphasized that one need not take a doctrinaire view
    on the rules versus discretion approach to policy.    more
    practical view is that there are some unique (non—recurrent)
    macroeconomic events that require intelligent policy analysis and
    that are not well—suited to a rule of the game approach, but that
-
    in most business cycles there are many common recurrent features
    that are best approached using policy rules.

    2.    Econometric research on policy coordination is rapidly
    expanding. The research related to that reported here can only be
    briefly summarized: Taylor (1982b) examines optimal cooperative
    policy rules in a mu].ticountry model with limited capital
    mobility. Johnson (1982) considers non—cooperative (Nash) policy
    rules in a similar 2 country model, building on the work of
    Hamada (1974).   In Carlozzi and Taylor (1983) policy rules in a 2
    country (symmetric) model with perfect capital mobility are
    considered, Papeil (1984) has examined the effects of
    alternative monetary accommodation rules in an empirical two
    country model of the United States and Germany. A careful
    theoretical examination of alternative solution concepts in two
    country macro policy problems is presented Car-izoneri and Gray
      1983). There are also several papers that consider optimal one-
    time paths (i.e. open loop) for the policy instruments. Sachs
     (1983) uses a theoretical two country model to derive optimal
    cooperative and noncooperative open loop paths for policy. More
    recently Oudiz and Sachs (1984) have computed optimal cooperative
    and noncooperative open loop paths for policy instruments in
    Germany, Japan, and the U.S. using empirical econometric models
    obtained by linearizing the Japanese Planning Agency's model and
    the Federal Reserve Board's Multicountry Modal.

    3.   This externa]. i ty was noted arid measured   in the paper of
    Carlozzi  and Taylor (1983).

    4.   The results reported below on monetary    policy   with flexible


                                     34
exchange rates in this model were previously reported in Carlozzi
and Taylor (1983).    The results on' fiscal policy with, flexible
exchange rates, and on monetary and fiscal policy with •fixed
exchange rates are reported in this paper for the •first time..

5.  The model is solved using the extended path algorithm
described in Fair and Taylor (1984). Since the model is linear
the extended path algorithm, which was designed for nonlinear
models, is too powerful and expensive. A more efficient
approach would be the iterative factorization algorithm desribed
in Dagli and Taylor (1983). The model could also be solve by
computing the roots e;plicitiy as in Blanchard and Kahn (1980),
though For the higher order models this might not he practical.

6.  Note that if there are no demand shocks we can equivalently
write policy in terms of the real interest rate as r =
where c = h(1—o)/d with h=(a + bid)—1. This Interest rate
policy is in the form of a price rule.

7. See Shubik (1981) for a discussion of Cournot—Nash non—
cooperative equilibria. From a descriptive viewpoint it is not
clear that this is the best non—cooperative solution concept for
countries choosing macro policy rules. Moreover, if we imagine
the Cournot—Nash equilibrium solution being arrived at in
practice through an iterative process in real time, the process
would be implausibly slow for macro policy rules. Recall that
the "reaction functions" are in terms of the par'eeters of the
policy rules rather than in the actual policy instruments.
8.. I originally intended to estimate the inflation equations for
all seven countries with the nine right—hand side variables
included without constraints, but the degrees of freedom became
distressingly low.  I therefore considered an unconstrained
estimation for only four of countries, but even then parameter
estimates appeared implausible for certain countries. Finally,
rather than reduce the number of countries I decided to
impose this plausible though somewhat arbitrary structure.




                              35
                                   REFERENCES


Blanchard, Olivier 3. and Charles Kahn (1980), "The Solution of
  Linear Difference Models under Rational Expectations,
 Econometrica, 69, 114—118.

Canzoneri, Mathev and Jo Anna Gray, (1983), "Monetary Policy
  Games and the Consequarnces of Non—cooperative Behavior," paper
  presented at the NBER International Coordination Conference on
  Economic Policy, August, 1983.
Carlozzi, Nicholas and Taylor, John B. (1983), "International
  Capital Mobility and the Coordination of Monetary Ploicy
  Rules," NBER Working Paper, in Jagdeep Bandhari (Ed.) Exchange
  Rate Fo].icy under Uncertainty, M.I.T. Press, forthcoming.
Chow, Gregory C. (1975) Analysis and Control of Dynamic Economic
  Systems, Wiley, New York.

Dagli, CA. and John B. Taylor (1983)," Estimation and Solution
   of Linear Rational Expectations Models using a Matrix
   Factorization Algorithm," unpublished paper, Princeton
   University.
Fair Ray and John B. Taylor (1983), "Solution and Maximum
  Likelihood Estimation of Nonlinear Dynamic Models with Rational
  Expectations," Econometrica, 51, 1169—1185.
Hamada, Koichi (1979), "Macroeconomic Strategy and Coordination
  under Flexible Exchange Rates, "in R. Dornbusch and 3.A. Frankel
  (Ed) International Economic Policy: Theory          and   Evidence, Johns
  Hopkins, Baltimore.
Johnson, Robert (1982), "Monetary         Stabilization and Interdepence
  in a Two Country Model," unpublished paper, Princeton
  University.

Kydland, Finn (1975), "Noncooperative and Cooperative Player
  Solutions in Discrete Dynamic Games," International Economic
  Review,    1é,    321—335.
Lucas Robert       E.Jr. (1976), "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A
  Critique,"       Carneciie Rochester Conference Series on Public
 Policy. K. Brunner and .H. Metzler (ed), North—Holland, 19—46.
Masson Paul and Adrian Blundell—Wignall (1985), "Fiscal Policy
  and the Exchange Rate in the Big Seven: Transmission of US
  Fiscal Shocks," European Economic Review forthcoming.
Papell, David H.        (1984)   "Activist Monetary F'oiicy and Exchange

                                     36
  Rate Overshooting: The Deutsche Mark/Dollar Rate," NBER Working
  Paper No. 1195.

Sachs Jeffrey (1983), "International Policy Coordination in a
  Dynamic Macroeconomic Model," NBER Working Paper, No. 1166
Oudiz, Gilles and JefFery Sachs (1984), "Macroeconomic Policy
  Coordination Among the Industrial Economies," Brookincis Papers
  on Economic Activity, forthcoming
Sargent T.3. (1984), "Reflections on Macroeconomics," American
  Economic Review. Papers and Proeedinps, 74, 408—415.

Shubik, Martin (1983), "Game Theory Models and Methods in
  Political Economy," in K.J. Arrow and M.Intriligator (Ed.),
  Handbook of Mathematical Economics, North—Holland.

Sims Christopher C. (1982), "Policy Analysis with Econometric
  Models," Brookjns Fapers on Economic Activity, 1, 107—164..
Taylor, John B. (1979), "Estimation and Control of a
  Macroeconomic Model with Rational Expectations," Econometrica,
  47, 1267—1286.

                 (1980), "Output and Price Stability: An
  International Comparison," Journal of Economic Dynamics and
 Control, 2, 109—132.
                (1992b), "Macroeconomic Tradeoffs in an
  InternationalEconomy with Rational Expectations," in
 Hildenbrand (Ed.) Advances in Economic Theory, Cambridge
 University Press.

                (1984), "What Would Nominal GNP Targetting do to
 the Business Cycle?" Carnegie—Rochester Conference on Public
  Policy.   forthcoming.




                             37
