                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     ADOPTION CURVES AND SOCIAL INTERACTIONS

                                          William A. Brock
                                          Steven N. Durlauf

                                        Working Paper 15065
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15065


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2009




This paper has been written in memory of Antoni Calvo-Armengol. The research has been supported
by the National Science Foundation grant SES-0518274 and University of Wisconsin Vilas Trust and
Graduate School. Thanks to Bryan Graham, Harald Uhlig and seminar participants at the memorial
conference for Antoni Calvo-Armengol and the University of Chicago for very helpful comments
on a previous draft. Nonarit Bisonyabut and Xiangrong Yu have provided superb research assistance.
 The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by William A. Brock and Steven N. Durlauf. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Adoption Curves and Social Interactions
William A. Brock and Steven N. Durlauf
NBER Working Paper No. 15065
June 2009
JEL No. C1,D01,O33

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper considers the observational implications of social influences on adoption decisions for an
environment of perfect foresight adopters. We argue that social influences can produce two observable
effects: 1) discontinuities in unconditional adoption curves and 2) pattern reversals in conditional adoption
curves, in which earlier adoption is found for one group of actors versus another when “fundamentals”
suggest the reverse ordering should occur; in turn the presence of either of these features can, under
weak assumptions, be interpreted as evidence of social influences. As such, these properties are robust
implications of social effects.


William A. Brock
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 537061393
wbrock@ssc.wisc.edu

Steven N. Durlauf
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393
and NBER
sdurlauf@ssc.wisc.edu
1. Introduction


            There has been a resurgence of interest in the role of social interactions in
determining the rate at which technologies are adopted (Bandiera and Rasul (2006),
Conley and Udry (2005), Manski (2004,2006), Munshi (2004), Skinner and Staiger (2005),
Young (2007)). Some of these recent efforts echo earlier debates that emerged when
Griliches produced his seminal work on adoption in agriculture (1957,1958). Griliches was
criticized by Havens and Rogers (1961) among others for ignoring the social determinants
of adoption decisions1. An important methodological implication of social interactions and
adoption literature is that it shows that economic incentives and social influences may be
synthesized so that any antithesis assumed between economic and social explanations is a
false one; private incentives and social incentives are both compatible with the choice-based
logic that Griliches developed.
            This paper focuses on the properties of a particular rational expectations model
of heterogeneous atomistic potential adopters. “Social interactions” in the context of this
model constitute positive feedback external spillover effects from the fraction having
already adopted in the payoff function to each agent who has adopted. Our objective is to
identify properties of adoption curves that imply the presence of social interactions under
relatively weak assumptions. Of course, any judgment on whether these assumptions are
weak enough to be plausible will depend on context. In motivating our analysis in various
places, we will return to the hybrid corn example; Skinner and Staiger (2005) and Sutch
(2008) are recent studies that revisit Griliches’ classic analysis in order to consider the
effects on adoption.      Of course the general literature on adoption of new technologies,
network effects, learning effects, and the relationship of adoption to general social
interactions is very large and had moved far beyond Griliches’s early studies; see the survey
by Hoppe (2002).
             We characterize equilibria for rational adopters who maximize intertemporal
profits. This characterization focuses on uncovering observational implications of social
interactions on adoption curves that are robust to various types of observed and



1
    See David (2005) for a discussion of this debate.
                                                1
unobserved heterogeneity.      In doing this, we are particularly concerned to identify
observable implications that are robust to the presence of heterogeneity.           To our
knowledge the insertion of endogenous (in the sense of Manski (1993)) social interactions
at the adoption level in the form of positive feedback of the fraction who have already
adopted into the payoff function of each agent (after adoption) in the context of a rational
expectations model of atomistic heterogeneous potential adopters and the study of the
resulting patterns in adoption curves produced by this type of model is new.2            We
recognize that the adoption curve itself may of less interest than other features of patterns
of adoption (e.g. delays in adopting superior technologies, patterns of strategic interaction
between a small number of major players, etc.) may be considered more relevant,
especially for policy making, we focus on properties of the adoption curve here because of
their use in uncovering the presence of social influences which are of general interest and
matter for policy questions.
         Our analysis reveals two properties that might assist empirical researchers in
interpreting some interesting patterns in the data.      First, we demonstrate that social
interactions can produce jumps in fraction adopting at some particular date. Second, we
demonstrate that social interactions can produce pattern reversals in which agents whose
private characteristics suggest they would adopt earlier than others in fact adopt later.
Rather, it follows from the requirement that agents with greater ability to profit from a new
technology adopt before those with relatively lesser ability.        The reason that this
requirement empirically distinguishes cases with and without social interactions is that
under monotonic (in ability) adoption curves, lower ability agents face an environment in
which a larger percentage of the population will have adopted than higher ability ones and
hence may experience stronger social interaction effects because they adopt at a later date.
In order to reconcile the difference in the strength of social interactions with the
monotonicity requirement in adoption times and individual ability, discontinuities can
occur. As for pattern reversals, the presence of discontinuities with in adoption curves with
respect to unobservables can break the monotonicity with respect to observables.



2
 See Brock and Durlauf (2001a,b,2006,2007), Graham (2008), Lee (2007) and Manski
(1993) for the econometric literature on social interactions.
                                              2
         To be clear, neither of these properties is necessary for the presence of social
interactions, and each is sufficient only in conjunction with additional assumptions on the
adoption process. That said, the relatively weak nature of these assumptions (compared to
others that appear in the literature) combined with the fact that these patterns only occur
when social interactions are large (in a sense made precise below), provide strategies for
empiricists to uncover social influences in adoption.3 While we certainly do not claim to
have established that either discontinuities or pattern reversals constitute a sine qua non of
observable implications of social interactions in adoption contexts, we do believe they
represent useful directions for uncovering social influences on individual behavior. As
such, they follow a research strategy in the social interactions literature developed in Brock
and Durlauf (2007), Graham (2008) of trying to identify implications of social interactions
are hold for an array of assumptions on unobserved heterogeneity and so may be regarded
as robust implications.
         Methodologically, two papers are closest to ours. Cabral (1990), in what appears
to be a relatively neglected contribution, studies adoption curves when social interactions
(in his language, network externalities) are present and shows how discontinuities in
adoption curves may result.4 We differ from Cabral first in terms of our analysis of forward
looking agents who face dynamic profit flows and second in our analysis of observable
implications in the presence of various types of heterogeneity.5 Our analysis also shares
much in common with Young (2007) who compares the properties of adoption models
with and without different types of social interactions, and like us focuses on uncovering
properties of adoption curves that are robust to heterogeneity. While our goals are similar,
our microstructures and analyses are not. We analyze environments in which adopters are

3
  We thank an anonymous referee for this formulation.
4
  We became aware of Cabral’s paper after writing the first draft of this one. We wish to
emphasize Cabral’s priority in uncovering the discontinuity property for adoption, despite
differences in our microeconomic specifications.
5
  Other papers share important similarities with our analysis and Cabral’s. De Palma (2007)
studies a model of synchronization in the presence of social interactions. This analysis
produces interdependences in hazard functions for individuals and in turn is related to
Brock and Durlauf (2001b) and especially Sirakaya (2006) each of which directly embeds
social interactions in a duration framework. Adsera and Ray (1998) consider a dynamic
migration model with spillovers and show that lags in the effects of social interactions can
eliminate multiple equilibria.
                                               3
forward looking whereas Young focuses on myopic adjustment rules that correspond to
different types of social interactions. Heterogeneity in Young’s analysis is associated with
parameters of these adjustment processes whereas ours concerns observable and
unobservable individual productivity. We find that social interactions produce different
observable implications from those identified by Young.         Unlike Young, we do not
differentiate between types of social interactions.
          We argue that one can derive some restrictions on adoption curves even when
agents are forward looking and even quite general forms of heterogeneity are present. This
will occur in two respects.     First, we argue that social interactions can endogenously
produce discontinuities in adoption curves. These discontinuities only arise exogenously
when social interactions are absent. Second, we argue that social interactions can, in the
presence of unobserved heterogeneity, reverse what would otherwise be a monotonic
relationship between “fundamental” determinants of adoption and adoption times. Brock
and Durlauf (2007) introduce the idea of pattern reversals in social interactions models.
While we do not claim to have established that either discontinuities or pattern reversals
constitute a sine qua non of observable implications of social interactions in adoption
contexts, we do believe they represent essential directions for uncovering social influences
on individual behavior.
          The ability of discontinuities and pattern reversals to reveal social interaction
effects in adoption curves does not rely on the existence of multiple equilibria, which is the
source of the pattern reversal findings in Brock and Durlauf (2007). Rather, it follows from
the requirement that agents with greater ability to profit from a new technology adopt
before those with relatively lesser ability.       The reason this requirement empirically
distinguishes cases with and without social interactions is that lower ability agents face an
environment in which a larger percentage of the population will have adopted than higher
ability ones and hence may experience stronger social interaction effects. In order to
reconcile the difference in the strength of social interactions with the monotonicity
requirement in adoption times and individual ability, discontinuities and pattern reversals
can occur. The uncovering of evidence of social interactions via multiple equilibria would
require repeated observations of the same environment, so that differences in the


                                               4
equilibrium outcomes can be used to infer the presence of the multiplicity. No such
mechanism is available here.




2. Basic model


          We model potential adopters as rational farsighted individuals who choose
adoption times. We claim no novelty for the microeconomic specification of this forward
looking model with the exception of the introduction of social interactions. Variations on
the model without social interactions appear in several papers in Punzo (2001); Brock
(2001) also gives a review of some of this type of literature.             In general, the social
interactions literature has not dealt with dynamic environments with rational agents.
Reinganum’s pioneering work (1981a,1981b) is an important predecessor in terms
providing examples of studies of adoption settings in which decisions are interdependent
because of the competitive structure. Reinganum shows that this force alone (with no
heterogeneity across individual actors) is enough to produce many Nash equilibria with
heterogeneous adoption times. In contrast, our model focuses on social forces that lead to
bunching in adoption times and explicitly considers the implications of heterogeneity.
Bandiera and Rasul (2006) is a recent study that is complementary to our; they work with a
social learning model in a linear environment.
          Formally, we consider a population of individuals each of whom chooses an
adoption time t in order to maximize the present discounted value of current and future
profits. We allow for heterogeneity across the individuals, by associating each individual
with a scalar x which may be interpreted as individual ability. Ability should be understood
as indexing individual productivity; we take no stance on its determinants as it is treated as
exogenous to the model.          This heterogeneity is drawn from some continuously
differentiable distribution function FX ( x ) with associated density f X ( x ) . The support of

x is assumed to be an interval I = [ 0, xˆ ] , where x̂ may be infinite.

       Individual actors choose adoption times t in order to maximize



                                                5
                                    (
                     J ( t , x ) = − exp ( − ρ t ) C + ∫ exp ( ( a − ρ ) s ) π ( x, q e ( s ) ) ds
                                                        t
                                                         ∞
                                                                                                     )    (1)



In this expression ρ is the discount rate, C is the cost of adoption, a is the rate of

technical progress, π ( x, q e ( s ) ) is expected profit flow at date s (which depends upon the

type x ), where q e ( s ) is the expected fraction of adopters in the population who have

adopted by date s .            We assume that all agents have the same expectations.                     The
dependence of profits on this fraction constitutes what we mean by social interactions.
Relative to standard adoption models, the only innovation is the presence of q e ( s ) in the

profit function. Our objective is to understand whether observed adoption behavior can
reveal the role of social interactions in individual decisions.
         We make the following assumptions on the elements of this decision problem.


Assumption A.1. ρ − a > 0 .


Assumption A.2. q e (t ) is a piecewise differentiable monotone nondecreasing function with
a finite number of points of discontinuity. For all t , right derivatives are well defined and
left limits exist for q e ( t ) .


Assumption A.3. π ( x, q ) is strictly increasing in x , weakly increasing in q and is twice

continuously differentiable in ( x, q ) .


Assumption A.4. Each potential adopter of type x does not take into account the impact
of his choice of adoption time t upon the adoption time choices of others.


         Assumption A.1 is necessary to ensure that each individual’s maximization problem
is well defined; it simply ensures that the present discounted value of profits is bounded.
Assumption A.2 imposes some regularity on the set of admissible beliefs which is useful in
developing our results as it rules out potential pathologies. The monotonicity requirement
                                                             6
is substantively quite restrictive. We make it in order to render the problem of
characterization of the set of rational expectations equilibria tractable.6 We conjecture that
monotone beliefs may be plausible in microfounded models where adopters keep learning
about their new technology by newsletters, user groups, and other mechanisms of
information transfer where the usefulness of the information transferred is increasing in the
fraction that have already adopted the particular technology under scrutiny. Assumption
A.3 restricts the payoff function and is therefore substantive in its impositions of
monotonicity, but is of course far weaker than assuming a particular functional form. The
main restriction is that the heterogeneity scalar x has a monotonic effect on profits, which
limits what sorts of interpretation may be placed on it. Assumption A.4 allows us to ignore
strategic interactions, i.e. we treat each agent as atomistic. The assumption is sensible when
an individual adopter is small relative to the overall group.
        All propositions stated in the paper assume at least some of A.1-A.4; for ease of
exposition we assume all of them for each of our lemmas and theorems. Further, we
always assume that there is a finite date in the past when the new technology first appears
and the first adoption occurs after that date; without loss of generality we date at which the
innovation first appears at 0.7 Finally, we conceptualize each agent as choosing an adoption
time from ( −∞, T ) , this avoids problems of corner solutions in the optimization problem.

        The first order necessary condition (FONC) and secondary order necessary
condition (SONC) for the optimal adoption time t * by type x are given by



6
  The assumption is consistent with the strategy of finding rational expectations equilibria
that is standard in macroeconomics models in that we in essence conjecture that agents
form beliefs that have certain properties and then show that these beliefs are justified in
the equilibrium law of motion for the system.
7
  Sutch (2008) shows that this is precisely what happeed in the case of hybrid corn. Hybrid
corn was invented by Donald F. Jones in 1917-1918, was developed and introduced on a
trial basis by Henry Agard Wallace in 1924, was first sold commercially in 1925,
competitors began sales in 1928, and widespread commercial adoption began in 1932. In
1933 .1 percent of the nation’s corn acreage was planted in hybrid corn and by 1960 hybrid
corn was planted on 96.3 percent of the nation’s corn acreage. 1917 corresponds to our
 t = 0.



                                               7
                               t* ( x ) =
                                            1
                                            a
                                              (                   (               ))
                                              ln ( ρ C ) − ln π ( x, q e ( t ) ) = 0                            (2)



and


                                      ⎛                            ∂π ( x, q e ( t ) ) dq e ( t ) ⎞
                   − ρ C ≤ exp ( at ) ⎜ (a − ρ )π ( x, q ( t ) ) +
                        2                               e
                                                                                                  ⎟             (3)
                                      ⎜                               ∂q e ( t )         dt ⎟
                                      ⎝                                                           ⎠


respectively for dates t, if q e ( t ) is differentiable at t. However, as will become clear, we do

not wish to assume differentiability at all dates. If q e ( t ) is not differentiable at date t,

observe that by A.3 q e ( t − ) < q e ( t + ) where “ − ” denotes the operation of taking the left

limit and “+” denotes the operation of taking the right limit.                                   A local maximum is
characterized (in our case) by the left limit being greater than the right derivative with a zero
between these two values. Letting J ( t , x ) denote the objective function in (1) evaluated at

the particular point ( t , x ) . Then the first and second order necessary conditions for a local

maximum at t may be expressed as



                               (                  )       (               (            ))
                            J ′ t − , x, q e ( t − ) = e − ρt ρ C − e atπ x, q e ( t − ) ≥
                                                          0≥                                                    (4)

                                   (                  )       (               (
                             J ′ t + , x, q e ( t + ) = e − ρt ρ C − e atπ x, q e ( t + )   ))

since this inequality can be decomposed in terms of the usual FONC and SONC,
J ′ ( t , x ) = 0, J ′′ ( t , x ) ≤ 0 when q e (t ) is differentiable at t .8




8
    Throughout, we write t − = t = t + for the parts of functions that are continuous in t .
                                                           8
         In the case where q e ( t ) is differentiable at date t , the FONC is quite intuitive as it

amounts to equating the marginal benefit to adoption at a given time with the associated
marginal cost. To understand the SONC, rewrite (2) as


                                      ρ C = exp ( at ) π ( x, q e ( t ) ) .                                         (5)


Substituting into (3), the second order condition holds if and only if,


                                                        ∂π ( x, q e ( t ) ) dq e ( t )
                              0 ≤ aπ ( x, q ( t ) ) +
                                            e
                                                                                         .                          (6)
                                                             ∂q e ( t )        dt


                                                                          ∂π ( x, q e ( t ) )             dq e ( t )
Equation (6) is satisfied provided that π ( x, q ( t ) ) ≥ 0
                                                         e
                                                                                                ≥ 0 and              ≥0.
                                                                              ∂q e ( t )                    dt

The first inequality is immediate from the FONC, since the cost of adoption is positive.
The second inequality holds by Assumption A.3 above. The third inequality cannot be
assessed without specification of the expectations formation process. In our subsequent
         dq e ( t )
analysis            ≥ 0 will be shown to hold in equilibrium under rational expectations. In
           dt
the case where q e ( t ) is not differentiable at t we will show that q e ( t − ) ≤ q e ( t + ) holds in

equilibrium. Hence it will be the case that the SONC holds for interior critical points t for
(2). If ρ C < π ( x, q e ( 0 ) ) , it is locally optimal to set t = 0 for type x .

           The following lemma provides a sufficient condition for uniqueness of an
individual adoption time.


Lemma 1. Uniqueness of optimal adoption time


Given, A.1-A.4, the optimal time to adopt for each agent type exists and is unique.




                                                        9
        For comparative purposes, we note the case where there are no social interactions,
i.e. π ( x, q e ( t ) ) = π ( x ) . In this case the optimal adoption times follow



                              t* ( x ) =
                                           1
                                           a
                                             ( ln ( ρC ) − ln π ( x ) ) if x < x ,             (7)
                                              t * ( x ) = 0 if x ≥ x


where x is defined by t * ( x ) = 0 (if such an x exists). Observe that t * ( x ) is decreasing in

x by Assumption A.3; this simply means that higher productivity types adopt earlier as the
profit incentives are higher.




3. Adoption curves and rational expectations equilibria


        We now consider equilibria under social interactions by imposing a rationality
requirement on beliefs about adoption levels. For any expectations process, one can
construct the actual adoption curve q ( t ) that describes the percentage of the population

which has adopted by date t . We first note a lemma.


Lemma 2. Monotonicity of adoption with respect to ability


Given A.1-A.4, suppose t < t1 and x < x1 . If x1 adopts at time t1 , then for all x < x1 , the

adoption time t of type x satisfies t ≥ t1 .


        Monotonicity means that the adoption rate may be calculated using the formula


                                                     f X ( z )dz = 1 − FX ( a ( t ) )
                                              ∞
                                 q (t ) = ∫                                                    (8)
                                             a(t )




where the lower integral limit a ( t ) is implicitly defined by

                                                           10
                                           t* ( a (t )) = t .                                     (9)


Eq. (8) means that there is a tight link between the adoption curve and the distribution
function of the type-specific heterogeneity. To understand eq. (9), recall that we have
shown that for each x there exists a unique adoption time t * ( x ) , a decreasing function

which may be discontinuous, i.e. t * ( x − ) > t * ( x + ) may occur. At continuity points of

t * ( x ) , the associated inverse function is well defined and one can solve for the value

x = a ( t ) that satisfies (9) at date t . At discontinuity points of t * ( x ) we use the right limit

x + as x decreases towards the point of discontinuity. This choice rule is consistent with
Assumption A.2; this ensures that q e ( t ) is increasing in t .

        Since the profit functions are assumed to depend on the expected adoption curves
of each agent, rational expectations equilibria thus are straightforward to define as they
require that the beliefs about adoption rate coincide with the actual adoption rates along an
equilibrium path.


Definition: rational expectations equilibrium (REE).


A rational expectations equilibrium is a pair of functions t * ( x ) and q* ( t ) such that


i. individual adoption times are optimal,


and


ii. the aggregate adoption curve is consistent with these individually optimal choices.


        The requirements of a rational expectations equilibrium, implicitly characterizes the
optimal adoption times. At points of differentiability, the optimal times must fulfill


                                                  11
                      t* ( x ) =
                                   1
                                   a
                                     (                (
                                     ln ( ρ C ) − ln π ( x, q* ( t ) )   )) if t ( x ) > 0
                                                                               *
                                                                                                  (10)




and the equilibrium fraction who have adopted by date t , q ( t ) , must fulfill



                               (                                           )
                  q* ( t ) = Pr x ρ C exp ( − at ) ≤ π ( x, q* ( t ) ) = 1 − FX ( x* ( t ) ) .    (11)



where x* ( t ) is implicitly defined by the first equality in (11). Substituting (11) into (10)



                           t* ( x ) =
                                         1
                                         a
                                           (                   (
                                           ln ( ρ C ) − ln π x,1 − FX ( x* ( t ) )     ))         (12)



        In contrast to this function, one can consider a best response function for each type
in which the population fraction adopting corresponds to the distribution of types:



                             S ( x) =
                                          1
                                          a
                                               (
                                            ln ( ρ C ) − ln π ( x,1 − FX ( x ) ) . )              (13)



This S ( x ) function differs from t * ( x ) as it is the best response function for an individual

without self-consistency imposed between the adoption time and adoption curves as an
equilibrium condition.




4. Restrictions on the shape of the adoption curve


        In this section, we consider how social interactions manifest themselves in observed
adoptions decisions. We follow the tradition started with Griliches (1957) in placing
primary emphasis on the shape of the equilibrium adoption curve q* ( t ) . We consider

how social interactions, in the sense that the profit function π ( x, q ) increases in both x
                                                          12
and q restricts this curve. Our goal is to understand how restrictions emerge in light of

heterogeneity as characterized by FX ( x ) and the unobservability of π ( x, q ) . In other

words, we are interested in uncovering empirical implications of social interactions that are
robust to unobserved heterogeneity in terms of individual types and the associated profit
functions that characterize agents.
             In order to develop restrictions on the shape of the adoption curve which are
generateed by social interactions, we focus on eq. (13).        When social interactions are
absent, π ( x, q ) = π ( x ) and so is monotonically increasing in x by Assumption A.3; this

implies that S ( x ) is monotonically decreasing as well. On the other hand, when social

interactions are present the π ( x,1 − FX ( x ) ) in (13) is not necessarily increasing in x

despite Assumption A.3 because 1 − FX ( x ) is decreasing in x ; by (13) nonmonotonicity

may be transferred to S ( x ) . Intuitively, this means that, as a best response, higher ability

agents may not find it as profitable to adopt as lower ability agents because of the absence
of others who adopt at the same or earlier times. The breakdown, in the presence of social
interactions, of the monotonicity of the profit function with respect to x and associated
nonmonotonicity of S ( x ) has important implications for the behavior for the observable,

q* ( t ) .

             We start by concentrating on a form of S ( x ) such that S ( 0 ) = ∞ , when x is

small, with a unique minimum x . Let x1 ( t ) denote the smallest and x2 ( t ) the largest

solutions to t = S ( x ) . We wish to demonstrate that x1 ( t ) can be part of a rational

expectations equilibrium, but that x2 ( t ) cannot. Suppose that x2 ( t ) is part of an REE.

At x2 ( t ) , higher t * values are associated with larger x values. This solution is not one

that will be produced by agents choosing optimally conditional on their commonly shared
belief that x2 ( t ) is an equilibrium; this contradiction follows from Assumption A.3 that

partial derivative of the profit function with respect to x is positive. Hence only x1 ( t ) has



                                                13
the potential to be part of an REE solution. This type of argument generalizes to produce
Lemma 3; the proof is trivial given our previous results and is therefore omitted.


Lemma 3. Monotonicity along equilibrium adoption paths


                                                                         (
Given A.1-A.4, along an equilibrium adoption path q* ( t ) = 1 − FX x* ( t ) ,  )

                                                                             dx
A. the process for optimal adoption times t * ( x ) must obey                   < 0 for points of
                                                                             dt
differentiability.


B. At jumps, larger x types adopt earlier than smaller x types.


        How does the possibility of nonmonotonicity of S ( x ) interact with the

                     dx
requirement that        < 0 in equilibrium? The reconciliation of these requirements places
                     dt
                                                                  dx
restrictions on q* ( t ) . Intuitively, in order to ensure that      < 0 , at differentiable times it
                                                                  dt
is necessary that for higher x ’s, a sufficient number of adopters are present to ensure that
adoption is monotonic in type. In order for this to always hold, it may be necessary for the
q* ( t ) function to exhibit discontinuities. This can produce discontinuities of the following

form: as t increases from slightly below t * to slightly above t * , a mass point of size
FX ( x* ) − FX ( x′ ) > 0 adopts where x′ < x* is defined by



                                         S ( x′ ) = S ( x * ) .                                 (14)



This jump in the number of adopters means that the t * ( x ) is never increasing in x . The

adoption of a mass point at date t * causes a jump of size



                                                  14
                                q ( t + ) − q ( t − ) = FX ( x* ) − FX ( x′ ) > 0 ,                (15)



to occur at time t = t * . Hence an observable implication of social interactions, when the
interactions are strong enough to induce a nonmonotonicity in the function S ( x ) in x , is

that there may exist at least one jump in q* ( t ) .

        As our objective is to explicitly link discontinuities in the REE function q* ( t ) to the

identification of social interactions, we formulate a theorem for the particular case of S ( x )

in which the function has a single local minimum xmin and a single finite local maximum

xmax ; Figure 1 illustrates the qualitative shape of S ( x ) that is assumed in the theorem The

structure of the theorem makes it evident that other formulations are possible. While we
conjecture that a more general theorem may be produced which directly maps the
nonmonotonicity of S ( x ) to discontinuities in q* ( t ) , we have yet to show this; the

difficulty is that in dynamic models, one needs to evaluate the best reply function against
the full dynamic path of the associated adoption curve. A parametric example of the
theorem is provided in the Appendix.


Theorem 1. Discontinuities in the adoption curve as evidence of social interactions


Given A.1-A.4, suppose that


i. S ( x ) is continuously differentiable in x , S ( 0 ) = ∞ ,


ii. S ( x ) is initially strictly decreasing in x , until it takes a positive local minimum at xmin ,


iii. S ( x ) increases in the open interval ( xmin , xmax ) ,




                                                       15
iv. S ( x ) takes a unique local maximum at xmax > xmin , and then strictly decreases in x for

all x > xmax until some point x% > xmax is reached


v. For all x > x% , S ( x ) < 0 .


Define x* < xmin < xmax via t * = S ( xmax ) = S ( x* ) . Then,



A. There exists an REE, q* ( t ) defined by, q* ( t ) = 1 − FX ( x* ( t ) ) , for which x* ( t ) satisfies

the equation,


                                                 t = S ( x* ( t ) )                                  (16)



where      x* ( t )   is defined to be the largest solution,               x3 ( t ) , to the equation

t = S ( x ) , for t ≤ t * and x* ( t ) is defined to be the unique solution, x1 ( t ) , to the equation

t = S ( x ) , for t > t * where t * = S ( xmax ) .


B. There exists one jump point of positive size in the equilibrium adoption curve q* ( t )

which occurs at t * = S ( xmax ) ,


C. There is a mass point, 1 − FX ( x% ) , at t = 0 .


            This discontinuity property represents a variant of a partial identification
argument in econometrics, cf. Manski (2008). By this, we mean that the presence of social
interactions can, for certain magnitudes of the interactions, place restrictions on observable
data, but that these restrictions neither identify the magnitude of the interactions (in this
case the effects of q on π ( x, q ) nor are the restrictions necessary for the interactions to be

present. The presence of a discontinuity means that in comparing the adoption model

                                                        16
with and without social interactions, i.e. comparing the implications of the dependence of
the profit function on q , a discontinuity may be interpreted as evidence of social
interactions.     However, the absence of a discontinuity does not imply that social
interactions are absent. The discontinuity property requires that the strength of the
influence of social interactions is large. Given the absence of any restrictions on π ( x, q )

beyond Assumption A.2, one cannot be more precise about what is meant by larger; if a
functional form were chosen in which a parameter measured the strength of social
interactions, then one could interpret the presence of discontinuities as a statement about
the parameter’s magnitude. “Large” is model-specific.
             Of course, discontinuities in FX ( x ) can produce discontinuities in q* ( t ) even

when social interactions are absent. If individual adoption times and associated values of x
are observable (so that FX ( x ) is observable), this alternative explanation can be assessed as

any discontinuity at td would have to align with a discontinuity at xd so that t * ( xd ) = td .

An example in the hybrid corn context is the date 1936 when the news that hybrid corn
produced much more then open pollinated varieties in that drought year spread like
wildfire through the farming community and caused the demand for hybrid seed to
explode (Sutch (2008, page 18)). This would look like a jump in the data but would not be
                                                                          ∂π
due to social interactions in the sense that the jump is not caused by       > 0 . Of course if
                                                                          ∂q
one conditions on relative yield information in 1936, separation of causes of jumps in
                            ∂π
adoption rates due to          > 0 in contrast to an exogenous driver of jumps (such as
                            ∂q
information on the relative productivity of hybrid corn in drought conditions) should be
possible.9



9
  One might argue that in the hybrid corn historical record our model is most relevant to
the period after the 1936 jump. Following Sutch (2008), this is so because of the
combination of the key initial role of Henry Agard Wallace in promoting the use of hybrid
corn and the fact that did not dramatically expand until prompted by the news of the very
high relative yields in the drought year, 1936. Sutch discusses the continued improvement
of varieties of hybrid corn, the role of demonstration plots, the sharing of information
                                              17
             Once one introduces individual heterogeneity, it is possible to develop empirical
implications of social interactions which do not rely on the presence of jumps. For
example, if one observes the adoption under two different distributions of observed
heterogeneity, one of which stochastically dominates the other, the absence of social
interactions places strong restrictions on the associated adoption curves.


Theorem 2. Stochastic dominance and the absence of social interactions


Suppose that the distribution function FX ,1 ( ⋅) is stochastically dominated by the

distribution function FX ,2 ( ⋅) . If there are no social interactions, i.e. π ( x, q ) = π ( x ) , then it

must be the case that q1 ( t ) ≤ q2 ( t ) for all t.




             The application of this Theorem would require that a research is able to identify
distinct cases of adoption under different FX ,i ( ⋅) ’s.




5. Unobservable heterogeneity


         In this section we introduce unobservable heterogeneity and consider how
empirical implications are affected. Interestingly, unobservable heterogeneity can produce
a different route to uncovering social interactions that is not present when the heterogeneity
is absent.
         We focus on the case of a scalar observable x1 and a scalar unobservable x2 .
Before we begin a detailed analysis for the case of one observable and one unobservable
we wish to indicate that the approach extends easily to the case of multiple observables and




about tailoring varieties to specific land types and the role of agricultural extension offices
in the diffusion process of hybrid corn.
                                               18
multiple unobservables. This will follow from an assumption of monotonicity of π in both
observables and unobservables.
        It is useful to recall the following elementary result from functional separability
theory in general utility theory (Varian (1992, p. 150)): For vector x and scalar q , if 1)

π ( x, q ) is strictly increasing in both arguments and 2) π ( x, q ) ≥ π ( x′, q ) if and only if

π ( x, q′ ) ≥ π ( x ', q ') for all x , x′ , q and q′ , then there exists a “subprofit” function u ( x )

(mapping x to a scalar) and an aggregator function V ( u , q ) such that


                                              π ( x, q ) = V ( u ( x ) , q ) .                     (17)


If V ( u , q ) is strictly increasing in ( u , q ) one may simply repeat our earlier analysis by

replacing x in the above analysis with u . Hence in an REE, it must be the case that,
q = 1 − FU ( u ) . In an REE, when V ( u , q ) is independent of q , individuals with higher

levels of u adopt first. When V ( u , q ) varies in q , the best response adoption times for

individuals with level u is given by



                                   S (u ) =
                                              1
                                              a
                                                (
                                                ln ρ C − ln V ( u ,1 − FU ( u ) )   )              (18)



In parallel to our earlier discussion, the unconditional equilibrium adoption curve is given
by


                                                    q* ( t ) = 1 − FU ( t )                        (19)


where



                 t* (u ) =
                             1
                             a
                               (                 (                            )) if t ( u ) > 0
                               ln ( ρ C ) − ln π u* ( t ) ,1 − FU ( u * ( t ) )         *

                                                                                                   (20)
                               t ( u ) = 0 if ln (π ( u , q ( 0 ) ) ) ≥ ln ( ρ C ) .
                                   *                              *



                                                             19
        Functional separability provides a general strategy for introducing unobservables.
Suppose that productivity is a vector rather than a scalar attribute. Partition the vector as
x = ( x1 , x−1 ) where x1 is observable and x−1 is not. We may now repeat our earlier

analysis to conditional adoption curves q* ( t x1 ) . These curves must obey



                                   q* ( t x1 ) = 1 − FU | X1 ( u ( t | x1 ) ) .                     (21)



        We now focus on the case of a scalar unobservable, i.e. x = ( x1 , x2 ) , where each

component is one dimensional. Notice that if one had infinite data on each “cell” x1 , i.e.

one observes the conditional adoption curve q ( t | x1 ) for every x1 , then this would be

enough to “reveal” the one dimensional unobservable x2 except at those dates when

nonmonotonicity of the conditional best response time S ( x2 | x1 ) occurs.                    To put it

another way if the function S ( x2 | x1 ) is one-to-one for all x1 then knowledge of the

conditional adoption curves at t and the observable covariate x1 reveals the unobservable

x2 . On the other hand when the function S ( x2 | x1 ) is not monotone in x2 for some x1

then our results derived above on the characterization of REE’s apply, i.e. there will
typically be a discontinuous burst of adoption as time t passes through a critical value
where the function is not monotone for this particular value of x1 .
           Without any restrictions on the unobservables, one cannot identify any
observable implications for social interaction effects on adoption curves.              Any adoption
pattern that is generated with social interactions can be replicated with them by suitable
choice of unobservables.            We proceed by using a “weak” assumption on the
unobservables:


A.5. FX 2 X1 ( x2 ) is stochastically increasing in x1 in the sense, x1 < x1′ , implies that



                                                      20
                                   FX 2 X1 ( x2 x1 ) ≥ FX 2 X1 ( x2 x1′ ) .                   (22)


Stochastic dominance is an example of a shape restriction. Shape restrictions are not only
weaker than functional form restrictions, they are often interpretable in economic terms in
ways that functional forms are not. For example, if one thinks of individual farmers as
characterized by an unobservable ability level and an observable education level, then
stochastic dominance says nothing more than higher education levels imply that the density
of abilities is shifted to the right. Brock and Durlauf (2007) show how stochastic dominance
can facilitate identification of social interactions, using partial identification arguments.
This work, in turn, draws from Manski (1997) and Manski and Pepper (2000) who
emphasize the constructive role of assumptions such as shape restrictions.


Theorem 3. Monotonicity of adoption curves with respect to observables.


Given A.1-A.5, suppose that both observables and unobservables, x1 , x2 are one
dimensional.


                                                ∂π ( x1 , x2 , q )
A. If there are no social interactions, i.e.                       = 0 , then if (22) holds
                                                      ∂q



                                                           ( )
                        x1 < x1′ implies q ( t x1 ) < q t x1′ , for all t ≥ 0.                (23)



B. If


                                  x1 < x1′ but q ( t x1 ) > q ( t x1′ ) ,                     (24)


                                ∂π ( x1 , x2 , q )
then it must be the case that                      ≠ 0.
                                      ∂q



                                                    21
         The theorem is intuitive. One expects agents with higher values of observable
characteristics x1 to have better values of unobservable characteristics on average and,
hence, to have higher profits on average which cause more of them to adopt at any given
observed date.        Unless there is some kind of externality in the profit function, i.e.
dependence on q , pattern reversals require that unobserved and observed heterogeneity
move in opposite directions, which is ruled out by the stochastic dominance assumption.
            Other routes exist to using pattern reversals as the basis for uncovering social
interactions. Theorem 4 is one example; the proof is analogous to the proof of Theorem 3
and is therefore omitted.




Theorem 4. Pattern reversals and order reversals


Suppose there exists a time t0 such that two different observable types adopt at this time.

Suppose that at this t0 ,


                                             q ( t0 x1 ) > q ( t0 x1′ ) ,                   (25)


i.e. more of the less educated types adopted by t0 than the more educated types. Then

                                                   ∂π ( x1 , x2 , q )
either FX 2 X1 ( x2 x1 ) < FX 2 X1 ( x2 x1′ ) or                      ≠ 0.
                                                         ∂q


            As a special case of the Theorem, if x1 and x2 are independent, then a pattern
reversal is interpretable as evidence of social interactions.
         Theorem 4 assumes a one-dimensional unobservable, but is more general than it
appears on the surface. For an n − dimension unobservable, denote the individual profit
function as π ( x1 , x−1 , q ) where x−1 = ( x2 ,..., xn ) and assume that the profit function is

increasing in all arguments. To adapt the argument to the higher dimension vector of
unobservables, assume there exist monotone increasing scalar valued functions V and u

                                                         22
such that π ( x1 , x−1 , q ) = V ( x1 , u ( x−1 ) , q ) . One can then replace the scalar x−1 in the

argument leading to Theorem 4 with the scalar u ( x−1 ) and obtain a generalization of

Theorem 4 to an arbitrary number of unobservables; the last part of Theorem 4
generalizes                 to                the                    requirement            that           either
                                          ∂V ( x1 , u ( x2 ) , q )
FU X1 ( u | x1 ) < FU X1 ( u | x1′ ) or                              ≠ 0 . Of course, the functional separability
                                                    ∂q
of payoffs with respect to a vector of unobservables may be more difficult to justify based
on heuristic economic reasoning.




6. Comparisons to other approaches to uncovering social interactions in adoption


         In this section, we consider some alternate approaches which have been proposed
for uncovering social interactions


A. logistic functions and adoption curves


         It is often claimed that logistic adoption curves are evidence of social interactions;
Schelling (1997) provides an overview of interpretations of logistic curves as evidence of
social effects. This type of argument typically derives from a view of social interactions as a
type of infection phenomena in which the fraction of those who have not adopted,
1 − q ( t ) , changes via


                                            dq ( t )
                                                     = Rq ( t ) (1 − q ( t ) ) .                            (26)
                                             dt


See Daley and Gani (2001) for discussion of this equation in epidemiology. In our model,
the derivative of the adoption curve is




                                                            23
                                                        −1
                    dq ( t )            ⎛ dS ( x ) ⎞
                             = − fX ( x)⎜          ⎟ = R (1 − FX ( x ) ) ( FX ( x ) ) ,    (27)
                     dt                 ⎝   dx     ⎠


and can be constructed by solving the ordinary differential equation,


                                                             fX ( x)
                                   S′( x) =                                 .              (28)
                                               R (1 − FX ( x ) ) FX ( x )


But it follows from the definition of S ( x ) that



                                                    ⎛ 1 ⎞ π ′( x)
                                         S′( x) = − ⎜ ⎟           .                        (29)
                                                    ⎝ a ⎠ π ( x)


Hence, given f X ( x ) (and the associated distribution function FX ( x ) , in order to have a

logistic dynamic (26) generated by our model all one must do is to construct a π ( x )

function, to satisfy the equation,


                                                                  fX ( x)
                    ln (π ( x ) ) − ln (π ( x0 ) ) =
                                                       a x
                                                        ∫      (
                                                       R 0 (1 − FX ( x ) ) FX ( x )
                                                         x
                                                                                   )
                                                                                    dx ,   (30)



for some lower bound x0 . This indicates how logistic dynamics can result from the shape

of the profit function π ( x ) with no implication about social interactions in the adoption

process. Since the profit function is not observable, one cannot use the shape of the
adoption curve to infer anything about social interactions. Put differently, π ( x ) represents

a latent variable that varies across types and is itself a form of unobserved heterogeneity; eq.
(31) shows that the mapping of a logistic curve to social interactions is not robust when this
type of heterogeneity is present.



                                                       24
       One can develop a parallel analysis to demonstrate that, in the context of our
model, logistic adoption curves may be generated in absence of social interactions10.
Suppose that the profit function does not embody social interactions and has the form


                                   π ( x, q ) = Axα , 0<α <1                            (31)


Mimicing our earlier arguments, profit maximization implies that equilibrium adoption
times are implicitly defined by


                                   x(t ) = ( ρ C / A )
                                                        1/α
                                                              e − ( a /α )t             (32)


                                        dq            dx                        dx   ax
Previous arguments establish that          = − f ( x)    therefore (32) implies    =− .
                                        dt            dt                        dt   α
Further, (26) indicates the necessary condition for a logistic adoption curve. Combining
these yields the following differential equation for F(x)


                                  a          dF ( x )                  dx
                                                               =r                       (33)
                                  α F ( x ) (1 − F ( x ) )              x


Integrating both sides of (33) (using partial fractions for the LHS) one obtains the
solution


                                               c0 x rα / a
                                  F ( x) =                   , c0 > 0                   (34)
                                             1 + c0 x rα / a


and



 See Manuelli and Seshadri (2008) for a distinct framework in which S-shaped adoption
10


curves are produced without social interactions, which captures the qualitative features of
the logistic function, the importance of which is discussed below.

                                                  25
                                                          d0
                                            q(t ) =                                           (35)
                                                      1 + d 0 e − rt


where the constant d 0 := c0 ( ρ C / A) r / a . This is a logistic function. The logistic shape for

this case derives from the density of types, F ( x ) , not from the presence of interactions.

One can therefore object that this is a knife edge case. However, as noted by Feller (1940)
and further argued in Brock (1999) and Dinardo and Winfree (2007), it is very difficult to
distinguish logistic curves from S-shaped alternatives, hence the qualitative properties of the
logistic are derivable from a range of densities.


B. relative acceleration rates


        Young (2007) is a recent effort to use adoption curve shapes to uncover social
interactions. His analysis is based on the function


                              d 2q (t )   dq ( t )
                   g (r ) =                        evaluated at tr where q ( tr ) = r.        (36)
                                dt 2       dt


which he calls the “relative acceleration rate when r is the proportion of the population
that has already adopted.” Young argues that in one type of social interactions model, a
social learning process, the relative acceleration rate “is often nonlinear: rising in the early
phases of adoption and declining in the later phases. In another type of social interactions
model, a contagion process, by contrast, he argues that the relative acceleration rate is
typically level or declining from beginning to end.” (Young (2007, p. 4)).
        To understand the behavior of the relative acceleration rate in our model, algebraic
manipulation reveals that, even when social interactions are absent, the relative acceleration
rate for our model is




                                                      26
                 df X ( xr* ( t ) ) ⎛                   dt * ( xr* ( t ) ) ⎞  ⎛ d 2t * ( xr* ( t ) ) ⎞ ⎛ dt * ( xr* ( t ) ) ⎞
                                                                           −1                                                   −2

        g (r ) =                    ⎜ f X ( xr* ( t ) )                    ⎟ −⎜                      ⎟⎜                     ⎟        (37)
                       dx           ⎜                         dx           ⎟  ⎜       dx 2           ⎟⎜        dx           ⎟
                                    ⎝                                      ⎠  ⎝                      ⎠⎝                     ⎠


where the quantities are evaluated at x* (tr ) . Additional algebraic manipulation produces


                                                              g (r ) =
                                                   ⎛ dπ ( xr* ( t ) ) ⎞        ⎛ df X ( x* ( t ) ) ⎞
                                                                          −1

                                   aπ ( xr ( t ) ) ⎜
                                         *
                                                                      ⎟        ⎜                   ⎟×                                 (38)
                                                   ⎜     dx           ⎟        ⎜       dx          ⎟
                                                   ⎝                  ⎠        ⎝                   ⎠
   ⎛ ⎛ df x* t ⎞                                                                  ⎛ d 2π x* ( t ) ⎛ dπ x* ( t ) ⎞2 ⎞ ⎞
          (       )                                            (           )            ( r ) − ⎜ ( r ) ⎟ ⎟ ⎟.
                                                                               −1
              ( )                                        ⎛ d π   x *
                                                                     ( t )   ⎞
   ⎜⎜ X             ⎟ f X ( x* ( t ) ) + π ( xr* ( t ) ) ⎜                   ⎟ ⎜
                                                                  r

  ⎜⎜ ⎝⎜    dx       ⎟
                    ⎠
                                                         ⎜
                                                         ⎝
                                                                dx           ⎟ ⎜
                                                                             ⎠ ⎝
                                                                                        dx2       ⎜
                                                                                                  ⎝
                                                                                                       dx       ⎟ ⎟⎟
                                                                                                                ⎠ ⎠ ⎟⎠
  ⎝


For our purposes, what is important about this expression is that one can manufacture a
                                                           df X ( x )     dπ 2 ( x )
wide variety of shapes of g ( r ) by varying the values of            and            . Economic
                                                              dx            dx 2
theory of course does not restrict these functions. Hence, the relative acceleration rate is
not restricted by our forward looking model. By implication, one cannot distinguish types
                                                                                                   df X ( x )     dπ 2 ( x )
of social interactions, i.e. contagion versus social learning. Again,                                         and            are
                                                                                                      dx            dx 2
forms of unobserved heterogeneity that break any logical link between the shape of the
adoption curve and social interactions.




7. Conclusions


         In this paper we have analyzed a model of adoption decisions in which social
interactions are present. Our analysis indicates that even in the presence of observable and
unobservable heterogeneity, it is possible to uncover properties of adoption curves that
observationally differentiate environments in which social interactions matter from those
that do not. While we have not translated these observational differences into econometric

                                                                 27
analogs, their presence provides a basis for constructing formal econometric tests. Work in
the time series literature and finance literatures on the identification of jumps in stochastic
processes, e.g. Ait-Sahalia (2004), Ait-Sahalia and Jacod (2008) and Barndoff-Neilson and
Shephard (2006), suggests that such testing is possible.




                                              28
                   Figure 1


         Shape of S ( x ) in Theorem 1




S(x)




                                         x
       xmin xmax




                      29
                                               Appendix 1: Proofs of Theorems


Proof of Lemma 1.


                Assumption A.1 implies that π ( x, q e ( t ) ) ≤ π ( x,1) ∀t . Suppose by way of

contradiction             that            there           exist   two         optimal           times    t1 < t2         such      that

J ( t1 , x, q e ( t ) ) = J ( t2 , x, q e ( t ) ) .        There are four cases to                  consider       (i)       q e ( t ) is

differentiable at both t’s,                    (ii) q e ( t ) is differentiable at t1 but not t2 , (iii) q e ( t ) is

differentiable at t2 but not t1 , (iv) q e ( t ) is not differentiable at either t . For each of the

                (                     )               (               )
cases, J ′ ti− , x, q e ( ti− ) ≥ 0 ≥ J ′ t I+ , x, q e ( ti+ ) by eq. (4). Using the representation in (4)

and cancelling off e− ρt , it must be the case that


                                                      (           )                         (
                                  ρ C − eat π x, q e ( ti− ) ≥ 0 ≥ ρ C − eat π x, q e ( ti+ )
                                               i                                        i
                                                                                                        )                         (A.1)



By Assumption A.2 any jump in q e ( t ) must be positive.                                                   Thus any jump in

                    (
ρ C − eat π x, q e ( ti− )
            i
                                 )        can only jump down if it jumps at all. Since q e ( t1+ ) ≤ q e ( t2− ) by

A.2, we have a contradiction to eq. (A.1). To see this, consider the RHS of eq. (A.1) for t1 :



                                  (                )                      (         )                    (
          0 ≥ ρ C − e at1π x, q e ( t1+ ) > ρ C − e at2 π x, q e ( t1+ ) > ρ C − e at2 π x, q e ( t2− ) ≥ 0 (A.2)        )

The second inequality between the 0’s follows because t1 < t2 and the third inequality

follows from monotonicity of π ( ⋅, ⋅) and q e ( t1+ ) ≤ q e ( t2− ) .                                  We thus arrive at a

contradiction. This argument addresses all four cases and ends the proof .



                                                                      30
Proof of Lemma 2.


          Suppose by way of contradiction that t < t1 . Since t1 is optimal,



                                                 (            )                       (           )
          0 ≤ g ( x1 , t1− ) = ρ C − exp ( at1 ) π x1 , q e ( t1− ) < ρ C − exp ( at ) π x, q e ( t + ) ≤ 0. (A.3)



This chain of inequalities follows from optimality of t1 , the assumptions t < t1 and x < x1 ,

and the implication of Assumption A.2 that q e ( t1− ) ≥ q e ( t + ) . As eq. (A.3) is internally

contradictory, it must be the case that t ≥ t1 .




Proof of Theorem 1.


          We first prove that the candidate REE above is an REE. It will help to follow the
argument if one considers the graph of S ( x ) with x on the horizontal axis and S on the

vertical axis.
          Let xi ( t ) , i = 1, 2,3 denote the smallest, middle and largest solutions of the

equation, t = S ( x ) ; when the solution is unique, these solutions simply coincide. Note that

for t* = S ( xmin ) , t * = S ( xmax ) there are two distinct values of x , x* and x* such that

t* = S ( x* ) , t * = S ( x* ) .   Note that x* < xmin < xmax < x* .          We will use the notation

xi ( t ) = Si−1 ( t ) when it is useful. For t < t* , the large x solution, x3 ( t ) is the only solution

of the equation t = S ( x ) , so intuitively it must be an REE, if an REE exists at all. For

t > t * the small x solution x1 ( t ) , is the only solution of the equation t = S ( x ) so intuitively

it must be an REE, if an REE exists at all. The first step in the proof of the theorem is to
formally demonstrate that the large x solution is part of an REE. The same type argument
will also imply that the small x solution is part of an REE. In other words, for each x, we

                                                       31
need to prove that the optimal t * is the part of S ( x ) described in the theorem statement.

Since we showed in Lemma 1 that, for each fixed x, there can be at most one solution to
the necessary conditions for a local maximum of J ( t , x, q ) all we need to do is show that

the relevant parts of S ( x ) satisfy these necessary conditions for each x.

        Consider first x > xmax . By the implicit function theorem, the implicit function

S ( z ) − τ = 0 has a well defined solution z (τ ) = S3−1 (τ ) in an open neighborhood of the

point ( t , x ) (given that S ′ ( x ) < 0 ). We claim that



                                            (              (
                          J ′ (τ , x ) = e − ρτ ρ C − e aτ π x,1 − FX ( S3−1 (τ )   ))             (A.4)



equals 0 at τ = t = S ( x ) and is decreasing for all τ in an open neighborhood of t , i.e. t is

a local maximum of J (τ , x ) . Substituting τ = S ( x ) into J (τ , x ) and using the definition

of S ( x ) and the identity S3−1 ( S ( x ) ) = x it is evident that J ′ (τ , x ) = 0 at τ = t = S ( x ) .

Since π ( x.q ) and FX ( x ) are, by assumption, continuously differentiable, and since by the

implicit function theorem, S3−1 ( z ) is differentiable at z = x , it must be the case that

J (τ , x, q ) is differentiable at τ = t . Since S3−1 ( z ) is strictly decreasing, we find by direct

computation that J ′′ (τ , x ) < 0 at τ = t by using J ′ (τ , x ) = 0 at τ = t . Hence the best

reply property for an REE is satisfied for x > xmax . The argument extends to x = xmax by

taking right hand limits. Define x* < xmin < xmax to be the smaller value of the two values of

x that satisfy the equation S ( xmax ) = S ( x* ) . The same argument as above shows that the

best reply property is satisfied for x < x* .

        We next verify that the optimal t for x ∈ [ x* , xmax ] is t * = S ( x* ) = S ( xmax ) . We do

xmax first. If one inserts x = xmax , into J ′ evaluated at t * , one sees immediately that




                                                    32
   (          )
J ′ t * , xmax = 0 . If one replaces t * by a slightly smaller value of t, J ′ will be negative at

x = xmax (on the branch x3 ( t ) = S3−1 ( t ) ).

          We next consider x* . This requires us to show that the derivative J ′ t * , x              (     )

                                       (        )             (            (
                                    J ′ t * , x = e − ρ t ρ C − e − at π x, q* t *
                                                          *            *

                                                                                   ( )))                         (A.5)



                                                                                         1            ρC
Is positive (negative) for t slightly less (greater) than t * for t* =                     ln                         .
                                                                                         a π ( xmax ,1 − F ( xmax ) )

                                                (     )
Now put x = x* , but evaluate J ′ t * , x in an interval around t * , i.e. compute right limits

and left limits at t * .              (Note that for the left limit we will be on the branch
q* ( s ) = 1 − FX ( S3−1 ( s ) ) , s < t * and for the right limit we will be on the branch

q* ( s ) = 1 − FX ( S1−1 ( s ) ) , s > t * ).       The left limit as t approaches t * from below of

   (           )
J ′ t * , x, q* is easily seen to be given by



                                                       ⎛     π ( x* ,1 − FX ( xmax ) ) ⎞
                              (           )
                           J ′ t *− , x* = e − ρ t ρ C ⎜ 1 −                           ⎟ > 0.
                                                  *
                                                                                                                 (A.6)
                                                       ⎜ π ( xmax ,1 − FX ( xmax ) ) ⎟
                                                       ⎝                               ⎠


This same inequality holds for all x ∈ [ x* , xmax ) since π is assumed to be strictly increasing

                              (       )
in x. Notice that J ′ t *− , x above is the marginal gain to waiting an extra day to adopt

before the jump in q* .

          Next, compute the right hand limit of J ′ ( t , x ) as t approaches t * from above. The

                                                                               (
atom FX ( xmax ) − FX ( x* ) has now adopted. Compute J ′ t * , x at t * to obtain   )

                                                      ⎛    π ( x* ,1 − FX ( x* ) ) ⎞
                               (       )
                           J ′ t * , x* = e − ρ t ρ C ⎜1 −                          ⎟ = 0,
                                                 *
                                                                                                                 (A.7)
                                                      ⎜ π ( xmax ,1 − FX ( xmax ) ) ⎟
                                                      ⎝                             ⎠

                                                                  33
because,       by        the         definition               of        x* ,       S ( x* ) = S ( xmax )           implies     that

                                                                                                    ρC
π ( x* ,1 − FX ( x* ) ) = π ( xmax ,1 − FX ( xmax ) ) and S ( x ) = ln
                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                   . We will be
                                                                                    a       π ( x,1 − FX ( x ) )

                                         (            )
finished once we show that J ′ t , x, q* is negative for t slightly bigger than t * . We have



                                                  (       )
                                                                  ⎛            (
                                                                       π x, q * t * + ε (       ⎞  ))
                           (
                        J′ t +ε, x = e
                               *
                                        )    − ρ t * +ε
                                                              ρ C ⎜1 −                          ⎟.
                                                                  ⎜ π ( xmax ,1 − FX ( xmax ) ) ⎟
                                                                                                                              (A.8)
                                                                  ⎝                             ⎠



                               (
                           π x, q * ( t * + ε )   )
Define h ( ε ) = 1 −
                        π ( xmax ,1 − FX ( xmax ) )
                                                          . It is clear from (24) that the sign of J ′ t * + ε , x      (        )
must be the same as h ( ε ) . Since h ( ε ) is continuously differentiable at ε = 0 , it has a

Taylor expansion, h ( ε ) = h ( 0 ) + h′ ( 0 ) ε + o ( ε ) . We first show that h ( 0 ) < 0 Recall that

           (        )
limε −>0 q* t * + ε = 1 − FX ( x* ) because under q* the atom FX ( xmax ) − FX ( x* ) is

anticipated to have already adopted for dates t slightly greater than t * . From this, we
obtain


                                                          π ( x,1 − FX ( x* ) )
                                      h (0) = 1 −                                        <0.                                  (A.9)
                                                      π ( xmax ,1 − FX ( xmax ) )


We next show that h′ ( 0 ) < 0 This derivative equals


                                                  π q ( x* ,1 − FX ( x* ) ) f X ( x* )
                                   h′(0) = −a +                                                <0,                           (A.10)
                                                      S ′ ( x* ) π ( x* ,1 − FX ( x* ) )


which is negative because S ′ ( x* ) < 0 . This completes the proof for x = x* .


                                                                   34
          The proof for each x ∈ ( x* , xmax ) proceeds as follows. We have already shown that

                                      (        )
the left hand limit of J ′ t * , x is positive for each such x. We must now show that the

                              (           )
right hand limit of J ′ t * , x is negative for each such x. We have



                                                       (         )
                                                                       ⎛          (       (
                                                                            π x, q * t * + ε        ))
                                                                                                     ⎞
                             (
                           J′ t +ε, x = e
                                  *
                                               )    − ρ t * +ε
                                                                       ⎜
                                                                     ρC 1 −                          ⎟.
                                                                       ⎜ π ( xmax ,1 − FX ( xmax ) ) ⎟
                                                                                                                          (A.11)
                                                                       ⎝                             ⎠



Define h ( ε ) = 1 −
                                      (
                                 π x, q * ( t * + ε )      )          .    We show that h ( 0 ) < 0 .                Recall that
                           π ( xmax ,1 − FX ( xmax ) )

              (        )
limε −>0 q* t * + ε = 1 − FX ( x* ) because under q* the atom FX ( xmax ) − FX ( x* ) is

anticipated to have already adopted for dates t slightly greater than t * . From this, we
obtain


                                                                 π ( x,1 − FX ( x* ) )
                                          h (0) = 1 −                                         <0                          (A.12)
                                                           π ( xmax ,1 − FX ( xmax ) )


because π ( xmax ,1 − FX ( xmax ) ) < π ( x,1 − FX ( x ) ) < π ( x,1 − FX ( x* ) ) for x ∈ ( x* , xmax ) . This

completes the proof .




Proof of Theorem 2.


             If there are no social interactions, π ( x, q ) = π ( x ) .                                  Hence the equation

                      ⎛ ρC ⎞
t = S ( x ) = a −1 ln ⎜
                      ⎜ π ( x ) ⎟⎟
                                              has    a           unique        solution       for        each   t.       Denote
                      ⎝          ⎠

qi ( t ) = 1 − FX ,i ( S −1 ( t ) ) . Therefore, q1 ( t ) = 1 − FX ,1 ( S −1 ( t ) ) ≤ q2 ( t ) = 1 − FX ,2 ( S −1 ( t ) ) ,


                                                                          35
by stochastic dominance               .




Proof of Theorem 3.


           The proof of the first part is obtained from a straightforward chain of inequalities
that exploits the assumption that π = π ( x1 , x2 ) is independent of q and is strictly increasing

in both x’s as well as Assumption A.5, Formally,


                                       q ( t | x1 ) = 1 − FX 2 X1 ( S −1 ( t | x1 ) | x1 ) ≤
                                                                                                                     .             (A.13)
                    1 − FX 2 X1 ( S −1 ( t | x1 ) | x1′ ) < 1 − FX 2 X1 ( S −1 ( t | x1′ ) | x1′ ) = q ( t | x1′ )


The       first    inequality       follows        from        eq.     (22)       and      the      second               follows    from
S −1 ( t | x1 ) > S −1 ( t | x1′ ) , which follows from S ( x2 | x1 ) > S ( x2 | x1′ ) , an inequality which

follows directly from the assumption that π ( x1 , x2 ) is strictly increasing in the vector

( x1 , x2 ) .   Given the proof of the first part, the proof of the second part is immediate. This

ends the proof .




                                                                 36
                       Appendix 2 : Closed Form Example For Theorem 1.


           Here we construct a parametric example of an environment of the type assumed
                                                                ρC
in Theorem 1. First, note that S ( x ) = a −1 ln                             falls, then rises, then falls again if
                                                          π ( x, q ( x ) )

and only if π ( x, q ( x ) ) , where q ( x ) = 1 − FX ( x ) moves in the opposite way, i.e. rises, then

falls, then rises. We therefore construct a π ( x, q ( x ) ) and q ( x ) = 1 − F ( x ) that satisfies

these last properties. We will choose A1 > 0 and construct two functions with the first
function designed so that it is concave, continuously differentiable, and increases then
decreases on ( 0, A1 ) and the second function defined on                         [ A1 , ∞ )   such that they join

together to form a continuous function.                    The parameters of these functions will be
designed so they generate an example of Theorem 1.                              This exercise will prove that
Theorem 1 applies to a nontrivial set of examples.
           We define the first function by


                                  π 1 ( x, q ( x ) ) = xα ( K + B (1 − F ( x ) ) )
                                                                                     β
                                                                                                              (A.14)



where α > 0, β > 0, α + β = 1 , K > 0 , B > 0 and FX ( x ) are chosen so that this function

is continuously differentiable, concave, increases, takes a maximum, call it xmin (because it

is a local minimum of S ( x ) , on ( 0, A1 ) , for appropriately chosen A1 > 0 , and decreases to

the smaller value π 1 ( A1 , q ( A1 ) ) < π 1 ( xmin , q ( xmin ) ) . Clearly π ( 0, q ( 0 ) ) = 0 . As we will

see below, this function will be concave, will increase to a maximum, then take a smaller
value at π ( A1 ,1 − FX ( A1 ) ) for appropriately chosen linear FX ( x ) on (0, A1 ) .

           Our second function will be defined by


           π 2 ( x,1 − FX ( x ) ) = π 1 ( A1 ,1 − FX ( A1 ) ) + L1 ( x − A1 ) + L2 ( FX ( A1 ) − FX ( x ) )   (A.15)



                                                         37
where A2 > A1 , FX ( x ) is chosen to be linear, and the other parameters are chosen so that

π 2 ( x,1 − FX ( x ) ) increases on    [ A1 , ∞ )    and π 2 ( A2 ,1 − FX ( A2 ) ) > π 1 ( xmin ,1 − FX ( xmin ) ) .

Note that the rightmost term comes from the term L2 ( q ( x ) − q ( A1 ) ) and that the two

functions take the same value at x = A1 . Therefore the join is continuous at x = A1 . We

also choose FX ( x ) so that it has positive support on [ 0, xS ) , xS ≥ A2

           Return to the specification of the first function. Compute


                                              d π 1 ( x, q ( x ) )
                                                                     =
                                                       dx
               α xα −1 ( K + B (1 − FX ( x) ) − β xα ( K + B (1 − FX ( x ) ) )
                                                                                   β −1
                                                                                          Bf X ( x ) =
                                            β
                                                                                                           (A.16)
                                                ⎛a            β Bf X ( x )     ⎞
                               π 1 ( x, q ( x ) ) ⎜ −                          ⎟
                                                ⎜x
                                                ⎝       K + B (1 − FX ( x ) ) ⎟⎠


It is evident that this derivative is positive for small x, is 0 for some xmin > 0 , and is negative

                   ⎛a      β Bf X ( x )      ⎞
for larger x’s iff ⎜ −                       ⎟ has the same properties. We therefore choose
                   ⎜ x K + B (1 − FX ( x ) ) ⎟
                   ⎝                         ⎠
FX ( x ) to satisfy,


                                                      x
                                       FX ( x ) =        , x ∈ [ 0, A1 ) ,
                                                      a1
                                          A1 x − A1
                                      =      +      x ∈ [ A1 , A2 ) ,                                      (A.17)
                                          a1   a2
                                                    = 1, x ≥ A2


where we are free to choose all these parameters to get what we want and satisfy all the
explicit and implicit constraints needed to get an example with just one jump. It is easy to




                                                        38
                                                                           α      a1 ( K + B )
check that π 1 rises for small x’s, takes a first zero at xmin =                                 , and is
                                                                         α +β          B

concave on ( 0, A1 ) so our first constraint on our parameter set is that xmin < A1 .

          Without loss of generality recall that we can assume that α + β = 1 by taking a

monotonic transformation. Therefore we know that π 1 is concave on ( 0, A1 ) so we know

that we have identified a maximum on (0, A1 ) . We now wish to construct the “rest” of

FX ( x ) and the function π 2 to produce a local minimum of π at A1 and such that for

some A2 > A1 , we have π 2 ( A2 ,1 − FX ( A2 ) ) > π 1 ( xmin ,1 − FX ( xmin ) ) before the end of the

support of FX ( x ) is reached. To do this, we identify parameters so that there is a local

minimum of π at x = A1 . We already know that the left hand derivative of π = π 1 at

x = A1 is negative. We must specify the parameters of π 2 so that the right hand derivative

                                                                         L2
of π = π 2 is positive at x = A1 . This condition is satisfied if L1 −      >0.
                                                                         a2

                                A1         A A − A1                      1 ⎛       ρC           ⎞
          Finally we require       < 1 and 1 + 2    ≤ 1 . Since S ( x ) = ln ⎜                  ⎟,
                                a1         a1    a2                      a ⎜⎝ π ( x, q ( x ) ) ⎟⎠

we may choose ρ C large enough so that it is above π evaluated at xmin so that

S ( xmin ) > 0 . We still have quite a bit of freedom to construct the rest of the example to

illustrate Theorem 1. Note that we have a nondifferentiability of S ( x ) at x = A1 whereas

Theorem 1 assumes continuous differentiability of S ( x ) . But the proof uses left and right

limits so differentiability is not really needed. In any event one can always locally smooth
the construction at x = A1 .
          We still need to choose the parameters so that the local maximum value of π is
smaller than π ( A2 ,1 − FX ( A2 )) so that we have a positive atom for our jump. This is
satisfied provided that




                                                 39
                                            π 2 ( A2 ,1 − FX ( A2 ) ) =
                                                                                                                  (A.18)
      π 1 ( A1 ,1 − FX ( A1 ) ) + L1 ( A2 − A1 ) + L2 ( FX ( A1 ) − FX ( A2 ) ) > π 1 ( xmin ,1 − FX ( xmin ) )


For simplicity, assume 0 < a1 = a2 . The restrictions needed on the various parameters may
be summarized as


                            A1      α a1 ( K + B)        A          L
                               < 1,               < A1 , 2 ≤ 1, L1 − 2 > 0                                    (A.19)
                            a1             B             a1         a1


and


                                                           L2 ( A1 − A2 )
                                        L1 ( A2 − A1 ) +                  =
                                                                 a1
                                                                                                              (A.20)
                      ⎛     L2 ⎞                 ⎛           xmin ⎞       ⎛ 1 − A1 ⎞
                      ⎜ L1 − ⎟ ( A2 − A1 ) > π 1 ⎜ xmin ,1 −      ⎟ − π 1 ⎜ A1 ,    ⎟
                      ⎝     a1 ⎠                 ⎝            a1 ⎠        ⎝      a1 ⎠


          The approach we have outlined provides a method for the construction of a fairly
large class of examples. The construction illustrates that it is straightforward to construct a
class of examples that satisfy the conditions of Theorem 1 so that there is an atom jump.
For example if one assumes that K = 0 and B = 1 , it is clear that one can set L1 large

enough and L2 small enough to satisfy all the above constraints. Define


                                                       S ( x)
                                      1 ⎛             ⎛      x ⎞⎞
                                  =    ln ⎜ ρ C / π 1 ⎜ x,1 − ⎟ ⎟ , if x < A1                                 (A.21)
                                      a ⎜⎝            ⎝      a1 ⎠ ⎟⎠

                                      1 ⎛             ⎛      x ⎞⎞
                                  =    ln ⎜ ρ C / π 2 ⎜ x,1 − ⎟ ⎟ if x ≥ A1
                                      a ⎜⎝            ⎝      a1 ⎠ ⎟⎠




                                                        40
Thus, t * = S ( A1 ) , by continuity there is x* < xmin < A1 , t * = S ( x* ) = S ( A1 ) . The size of

                                           A1 − x*
the jump atom is FX ( A1 ) − FX ( x* ) =           .
                                             a1

          The lack of differentiability of the example at x = A1 is not a problem since we
did not actually use differentiability in the proof of Theorem 1. Furthermore, the example
can be smoothed in an arbitrarily small neighborhood of x = A1 by choosing smooth

functions for each side of x = A1 .




                                                  41
Bibliography

Adsera, A. and D. Ray, (1998), “History and coordination failure,” Journal of Economic
Growth, 3, 267-276.

Ait-Sahalia, Y., (2004), “Disentangling diffusion from jumps,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 74, 487-528.

Ait-Sahalia, Y. and J. Jacod, (2008), “Testing for jumps in a discretely observed process,”
Annals of Statistics, forthcoming.

Bandiera, O., Rasul, I., (2006), “Social networks and technology adoption in northern
Mozambique,” Economic Journal, 116, 869-092.

Barndoff-Neilson, O. and N. Shephard, (2006), “Econometrics of testing for jumps in
financial economics using bipolar variation,” Journal of Financial Econometrics, 4, 1-30.

Brock, W., (1999), “Scaling in economics: A reader’s guide,” Industrial and Corporate
Change, 8, 409-446.

Brock, W., (2001), “Complexity-based methods in cycles and growth: Any potential value-
added?” in Punzo, L., pp. 301-338.

Brock, W. and S. Durlauf, (2001a), “Discrete choice with social interactions,” Review of
Economic Studies, 68, 235-260.

Brock, W. and S. Durlauf, (2001b), “Interactions-based models,” in: J. Heckman and E.
Leamer, eds., Handbook of Econometrics, Volume 5, North-Holland: Amsterdam, 3297-
3380.

Brock, W. and S. Durlauf, (2006), “Multinomial choice with social interactions,” in The
Economy as an Evolving Complex System III, L. Blume and S. Durlauf, eds., New York:
Oxford University Press.

Brock, W. and S. Durlauf, (2007), “Identification of binary choice models with social
interactions,” Journal of Econometrics, 140, 52-75.

Cabral, L., (1990), “On the adoption of innovations with ‘network’ externalities,”
Mathematical Social Sciences, 19, 299-308.

Conley, T. and C. Udry, (2005), “Learning about a new technology: Pineapple in Ghana,”
Working paper, University of Chicago and Yale University.

Daley, D. and J. Gani, (2001), Epidemic Modelling, New York: Cambridge University
Press.

                                            42
David, P., (2005), “Zvi Griliches on diffusion, lags and productivity growth…connecting the
dots,” mimeo, Stanford University.

De Palma, A., (2007), “Inference in a synchronization game with social interactions,”
mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.

DiNardo, J. and J. Winfree, (2007), “The law of genius and home runs refuted,” mimeo,
University of Michigan.

Feller, W., (1940), “On the logistic law of growth and its empirical verification in biology,”
Acta Biotheoretica, 5, 51-66.

Graham, B., (2008), “Identifying social interactions through conditional variance
restrictions,” 76, 3, 643-660.

Griliches, Z., (1957), “Hybrid corn: An exploration of the economics of technical change,”
Econometrica, 25, 501-522.

Griliches, Z., (1958), “Research costs and social returns: Hybrid corn and related
interactions,” Journal of Political Economy, 66, 419-431.

Havens, E. and E. Rogers, (1961), “Profitability and the interaction effect,” Rural
Sociology, 26, 409-414.

Lee, L.-F., (2007), “Identification and estimation of econometric models with group
interactions, contextual factors and fixed effects,” Journal of Econometrics, 140, 333-374.

Manski, C., (1993), “Identification of endogenous social effects: The reflection problem,”
Review of Economic Studies, 60, 531-42.

Manski, C., (1997), “Monotone treatment response,” Econometrica, Society, 65, 6, 1311-
1334.

Manski, C., (2004), “Social learning from private information: The dynamics of the
selection problem,” Review of Economic Studies, 71, 443-458.

Manski, C., (2006), "Social learning and the adoption of innovations," in Blume L.,
Durlauf, S., eds., The Economy as an Evolving Complex System, III, Oxford University
Press: Oxford.

Manski, C. and J. Pepper, (2000), “Monotone instrumental variables with an application to
the returns to schooling,” Econometrica, 68, 997-1010.

Manuelli, R. and A. Seshadri, (2008), “Frictionless technology diffusion: the case of
tractors,” mimeo, Univeresity of Wisconsin.


                                             43
Munshi, K., (2004), “Social learning in a heterogeneous population: technology diffusion in
the Indian Green Revolution,” Journal of Development Economics, 73, 185-213.

Punzo, L., ed., (2001), Cycles, Growth, and Structural Change: Theories and Empirical
Evidence, Routledge: New York.

Reinganum, J., (1981a), “On the diffusion of new technology: A game theoretic approach,”
Review of Economic Studies, 98. 395-405.

Reinganum, J., (1981b), “Market structure and the diffusion of new technology,” Bell
Journal of Economics, 12, 2, 618-624.

Schelling, T., (1997), “Social mechanisms and social dynamics,” in Social Mechanisms, P.
Hedstrom and R. Swedberg, eds., New York: Cambridge University Press.

Sirakaya, S. (2006), “Recidivism and social interactions,” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 101, 475, 863-877.

Skinner, J. and D. Staiger, D., (2005), “Technology adoption from hybrid corn to beta
blockers,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 11251.

Sutch, R., (2008), “Henry Agard Wallace, the Iowa corn yield tests, and the adoption of
hybrid corn,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 14141.

Varian, H., (1992), Microeconomic Theory, New York: Norton.

Young, H. P., (2007), “Innovation diffusion in heterogeneous populations,” mimeo,
University of Oxford.




                                             44
