                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             DECOMPOSING THE U.S. EXTERNAL RETURNS DIFFERENTIAL

                                        Stephanie E. Curcuru
                                           Tomas Dvorak
                                         Francis E. Warnock

                                        Working Paper 15077
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15077


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2009




This paper, a much-revised and updated version of a paper previously circulated as “The Stability
of Large External Imbalances: The Role of Returns Differentials,” will also be released as Federal
Reserve Board International Finance Discussion Paper 977. The views in this paper are solely the
responsibility of the author(s) and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, or of any other person
associated with the Federal Reserve System. We thank for helpful comments two anonymous referees,
Carol Bertaut, Ricardo Caballero, Charles Engel (the editor), Kristin Forbes, Gian-Maria Milesi-Ferretti,
Cedric Tille, Charles Thomas, Ralph Tryon, Eric van Wincoop, Jon Wongswan, and seminar participants
at the Dallas Fed, the European University Institute, Harvard, the IMF Conference on International
Macro-Finance, and UNC. Warnock thanks the Darden School Foundation for its generous support.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Stephanie E. Curcuru, Tomas Dvorak, and Francis E. Warnock. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Decomposing the U.S. External Returns Differential
Stephanie E. Curcuru, Tomas Dvorak, and Francis E. Warnock
NBER Working Paper No. 15077
June 2009
JEL No. F21,F3

                                               ABSTRACT

We decompose the returns differential between U.S. portfolio claims and liabilities into the composition,
return, and timing effects. Our most striking and robust finding is that foreigners exhibit poor timing
when reallocating between bonds and equities within their U.S. portfolios. The poor timing of foreign
investors—caused primarily by deliberate trading, not a lack of portfolio rebalancing—contributes
positively to the U.S. external returns differential. We find no evidence that the poor timing is driven
by mechanical reserve accumulation by emerging market countries; rather, it is driven almost entirely
by the poor timing of rich, developed (mainly European) countries. Finally, while poor foreign timing
appears to be persistent across subsamples, other terms in our decomposition (the composition and
return effects and U.S. timing abroad), as well as the overall differential, are sometimes negative, sometimes
positive, and usually indistinguishable from zero.


Stephanie E. Curcuru                                  Francis E. Warnock
Board of Governors                                    Darden Business School
of the Federal Reserve System                         University of Virginia
20th Street and Constitution Avenue, NW               Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
Washington DC 20551                                   and NBER
stephanie.e.curcuru@frb.gov                           warnockf@darden.virginia.edu

Tomas Dvorak
Union College
Department of Economics
Social Sciences Bldg 215
Schenectady, NY 12308
dvorakt@union.edu
1. Introduction

       The year 2007 proved to be a volatile one for financial markets. It was also a year

during which both foreign net purchases and foreign net sales of U.S. equities reached

record monthly levels. The record foreign net purchases occurred in May, and were

followed by declines in the S&P500 of 1.7 percent in June and 3.1 percent in July. The

record foreign net sales occurred in August, and were followed by a 3.7 percent increase

in the S&P500 in September. In October foreign investors once again piled into U.S.

equities; as before, the S&P500 fell the following month, losing 4.2 percent. So 2007

could not have been a happy year for foreign investors in U.S. equities. On top of a 9

percent dollar depreciation against major currencies, foreigners showed poor timing in

their equity purchases and sales—they were net buyers when the market was about to fall

and net sellers when the market was poised to rise.

       In this paper we investigate the impact of market timing—specifically,

reallocation among portfolio asset classes—on the performance of foreign investors in

the United States compared to that of U.S. investors abroad. Focusing on bond and equity

portfolios, we calculate the returns differential between what U.S. investors earned on

their foreign positions (“U.S. claims”) and what foreign investors earned on their U.S.

positions (“U.S. liabilities”). We decompose the returns differential into three

components: the composition, return, and timing effects. The first two—the composition

and return effects—capture average characteristics of U.S. cross-border claims and

liabilities. The composition effect is positive if U.S. claims on foreigners are weighted

toward asset classes with higher average returns. The return effect is positive if U.S.

investors earned higher average returns within each asset class. The third effect, timing, is
driven by reallocations among different asset classes and captures the covariance between

current weights and subsequent returns. A positive covariance between current asset

weights—themselves the outcome of a passive buy-and-hold strategy or active trading—

and subsequent asset returns means that portfolios are correctly positioned to capture

subsequent returns. If portfolio weights and subsequent returns covary more positively in

U.S. claims than in U.S. liabilities, the timing effect is positive.

         Understanding the sources of the returns differential is important for several

reasons. As pointed out by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2005), the U.S. gross external

claims and liabilities positions are so large that even a small returns differential has

significant implications for the U.S. net international investment position. Also,

understanding the components of the returns differential may help researchers evaluate its

persistence and role in the sustainability of global current account imbalances.

Furthermore, documenting the dynamics of gross asset class allocation is relevant to the

growing literature on portfolio dynamics in open economy macroeconomics (Engel and

Matsumoto (2006), Devereux and Saito (2006), Tille and Wincoop (2007)). Finally,

evaluating the timing ability of foreign investors contributes to the literature on

information asymmetries between foreign and domestic investors (Dvorak (2005), Choe,

Kho and Stulz (2005), Brennan et al. (2005)).1

         Our paper differs from existing work in two important ways. First, while the

composition and return effects have been studied (e.g., Gourinchas and Rey (2007)), the

role of timing in the returns differential has not. Our decomposition, which is inspired by


1
  Our study is related to the empirical literature on international capital flows, which includes (but is not
limited to) Tesar and Werner (1994), Brennan and Cao (1997), Taylor and Sarno (1997), Chuhan et al.
(1998), Montiel and Reinhart (1999), Froot et al. (2001), Bekaert et al. (2002), Griffin et al. (2004), Portes
and Rey (2005), Richards (2005), Edison and Warnock (2008), and Warnock and Warnock (2008).


                                                       2
performance evaluation techniques from the finance literature (Grinblatt and Titman

(1993)), enables us to separate the effect of average portfolio characteristics (such as the

composition and return effects) from market timing, and to evaluate the role of timing in

the returns differential. The second way our analysis differs from previous work is that

we use information on the actual composition of bond and equity portfolios matched with

more precisely estimated returns by country. Earlier work on the composition and return

effects uses implied returns from datasets that Curcuru, Dvorak and Warnock (2008) and

Curcuru, Thomas, and Warnock (2009) show are internally inconsistent. In contrast, we

use monthly data on the country and asset class composition of U.S. portfolio claims and

liabilities from January 1994 to June 2007. By matching country and asset class weights

to corresponding total market returns (and by being careful with, for example, the

currency composition by asset class and country), we are able to obtain more accurate

estimates of the returns differential and its underlying components. Data on bilateral

positions also have the advantage of allowing us to distinguish differentials by country,

which can shed additional light on factors that are behind our main results.2

         We find that the timing of reallocations among equities and bonds is a

quantitatively and statistically important component of the overall returns differential.

Specifically, we find that foreign investors in the United States exhibit poor timing,

tending to have a relatively high equity weight when U.S. equity prices have already

peaked and a relatively low equity weight when U.S. equity prices are poised to rise. In

contrast, the foreign timing of U.S. investors is not statistically different from zero. On


2
 It should be noted at the outset that by focusing on high quality data on bond and equity portfolios, we are
necessarily excluding foreign direct investment (FDI), another important component of cross-border
positions. With FDI included the overall differential is somewhat larger (Curcuru, Dvorak, and Warnock
2008; Curcuru, Thomas, and Warnock 2009).


                                                     3
net, the difference between the timing effects of foreign investors in the United States and

U.S. investors abroad adds over one-half percentage point per year to the overall annual

returns differential.

          We also differentiate between two underlying components of the timing effect,

active trading and the more passive failure to reallocate after the portfolio’s composition

is altered by valuation changes. The more active component—the trading effect, a widely

accepted metric of portfolio performance originated by Grinblatt and Titman (1993)—

summarizes whether investments were shifted into asset classes that subsequently rose in

value. We find systematic evidence that active trading plays an important role in the poor

timing of foreign investors in the United States over our 162-month sample period. In

contrast, we do not find that active trading significantly impacts U.S. investors’ returns

abroad.

          We perform a number of robustness checks. First, we examine whether our results

are driven by the accumulation of U.S. bonds by foreign official institutions, in particular

the governments of emerging market countries. We find that this is not the case. The

results are, in fact, much stronger for developed countries and carry through to private

foreign investors. An examination of the foreign timing of individual countries shows

that it is precisely the rich developed countries that are behind the poor foreign timing

result. Many developed countries, especially from Europe, exhibit statistically significant

poor timing in shifting between U.S. equities and U.S. bonds. Finally, poor timing by

foreign investors appears persistent as it is statistically significant across different

subsamples. In contrast, all other terms in our decomposition (the composition and return




                                             4
effects and U.S. timing abroad), as well as the overall differential, are sometimes

negative, sometimes positive, and usually indistinguishable from zero.

       The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section we discuss the underlying data

on international portfolios and returns characteristics. In Section 3, we decompose the

returns differential into the composition, return, and timing effects; examine these effects

by type of investor and country; and then further decompose the timing effect into its

active and passive components. In the conclusion (Section 4) we summarize and briefly

discuss some possible reasons for poor foreign timing.



2. Characteristics of U.S. Portfolio Claims and Liabilities

       Our technique to form portfolio returns is as in Curcuru, Dvorak, and Warnock

(2008): Observe monthly portfolio weights and then calculate one-month returns using

indexes that mimic (to the extent possible) the composition of those portfolios. In this

section we describe the underlying data as well as the characteristics of the resulting

bilateral bond and equity positions and within-asset-class returns.

2.1 Positions

       We use the highest quality dataset available on the monthly portfolio bond and

equity investment positions of U.S. investors abroad and foreign investors in the United

States. A description of the technique used to construct the monthly positions data is in

Bertaut and Tryon (2007). Briefly, monthly bilateral investment positions are constructed

using two types of data reported by the Treasury International Capital Reporting System

(TIC): infrequent but highly accurate benchmark surveys of holdings (both foreign

holdings of U.S. securities and U.S. holdings of foreign securities) and net monthly




                                             5
transactions (both net purchases of U.S. assets by foreigners and net purchases of foreign

assets by U.S. residents). Bertaut and Tryon (2007), building on a technique originated in

Thomas, Warnock, and Wongswan (2006), bring these data sources together to produce

high-quality estimates of monthly positions of U.S. claims and liabilities. The data cover

portfolio investment in long-term securities, specifically debt instruments with greater-

than-one-year original maturity (“bonds”) and equities.

         Two features of our dataset should be noted. One, we include only those countries

for which we have at least fifty monthly observations for both equity and bond returns

between January 1994 and June 2007. This leaves us with 19 developed countries and 17

emerging markets. These 36 countries make up most of U.S. portfolio investment abroad

as well as most foreign investment in the United States.3 Two, the TIC data distinguish

between private and official positions only at the aggregate level, so our country-level

analysis groups together official and private investors. We recognize that foreign official

purchases of U.S. assets may occur for reasons other than mean-variance optimization.

Except for Japan, private positions dwarf official holdings in developed countries, but for

emerging market countries official positions are likely to be more important. In

robustness checks we delve further into this issue.

2.2 Returns

         The monthly bilateral positions dataset provides time-varying portfolio weights.

To calculate one-month returns we must select returns indexes that mimic (to the extent

possible) the composition of those portfolios. Ideally, we would build up specific returns

3
  In 2004, the countries in our sample account for 84 percent and 80 percent of U.S. equity and bond
investment abroad and 77 percent and 73 percent of all foreigners’ equity and bond investment in the
United States. Of the international investment that we do not cover, Caribbean financial centers (CFCs)
account for more than half. Note that about 75% of U.S. holdings of long-term debt securities issued in the
Caribbean is backed by U.S. assets, raising the question of just how international it is.


                                                     6
indexes based on the weights of each U.S. security in foreigners’ portfolios and of each

foreign security in U.S. investors’ portfolios. Such weights are technically available at

infrequent intervals; they are the foundation of the comprehensive, security-level

benchmark surveys of international holdings that the U.S. government conducts. That

said, the security-level weights are confidential (one must be covered under the

International Investment Act of 1987 to view the security-level weights) and the very few

people who do have access have not processed the data in a way that would enable the

formation of returns indexes. Given that custom security-level return indexes do not exist,

we must rely on the next best solution: Find off-the-shelf returns indexes (and,

sometimes, combinations of off-the-shelf indexes) that mimic, to the extent possible,

what we have learned from the benchmark surveys about cross-border investment into

and out of the United States.

        While it is unlikely that investors hold portfolios that exactly mimic returns

indexes, research that analyzes the security-level portfolio weights at a point in time gives

us a reasonably good understanding of the types of securities that make up the bulk of

cross-border positions. For example, Cai and Warnock (2008) show that within their U.S.

equity portfolios foreigners tend to overweight large, liquid equities, exactly the type that

would comprise a large-cap index. We use the MSCI U.S. index, a market-capitalization-

weighted index of roughly 300 large and liquid U.S. firms.4 For foreign equities, MSCI

firms represent almost 80 percent of U.S. investors’ foreign equity investment (Ammer et

al. 2006), so we use dollar returns on each country’s gross MSCI equity index.


4
 Our results are nearly identical when we use the S&P 500 index (not reported). We use the MSCI index
because the S&P 500 included almost 20 foreign firms prior to 2002 and still includes some firms with U.S.
headquarters that are incorporated outside of the United States (for example, Tyco International and
Schlumberger). U.S. data on transactions and holdings classifies such firms as foreign.


                                                    7
           Data on debt securities returns are gathered from a variety of sources. For U.S.

debt securities, we have the breakdown of each country’s monthly positions in U.S.

Treasury, corporate, and agency bonds. Thus, for each country we form a U.S. bond

return as the weighted average of Lehman Brothers U.S. Treasury, Corporate and Agency

Bond Indexes, with the weights given by country-specific positions in each type of bond.

Foreign investors, especially those from emerging markets, tend to overweight Treasury

and agency bonds relative to a broader market-capitalization benchmark such as the

Lehman Brothers Aggregate U.S. Bond Index, so it is important to use the actual weights

of a country’s investors to produce an accurate measure of returns. For foreign bonds, as

a first approximation U.S. investors tend to hold local-currency bonds in developed

countries and dollar-denominated bonds in emerging markets (Burger and Warnock

2007). But we go a step further and form country-specific indexes based on the shares of

U.S. holdings in each country that are dollar-denominated and local-currency-

denominated. For U.S. holdings of emerging market debt we calculate the return on

holdings in each country as the weighted average of the J.P. Morgan’s EMBI+ index

(which is comprised of dollar-denominated bonds) and ELMI+ index (which consists of

local-currency-denominated bonds); for each country the weight on the EMBI+ index is

the share of dollar-denominated bonds in U.S. holdings of that country’s bonds. For

developed countries we calculate returns as the weighted average of the GBI Broad 1-10

year bond index (which consists of local-currency-denominated bonds) and the Lehman

Corporate Eurodollar index (an index of dollar-denominated bonds); for each country the

weight on the Eurodollar index is the share of dollar denominated bonds in U.S. holdings

of that country’s bonds.5
5
    There are a few exceptions. For U.S. holdings of the debt of Norway and Sweden, we use bond return data


                                                      8
          The preceding paragraphs describe how we form individual countries’ returns

indexes. To calculate returns on the aggregate U.S. portfolios of foreign bonds (or foreign

equities), we weight each country according to U.S. investors’ bond (or equity) holdings

in that country. The average weight of each country in U.S. foreign equity and bond

portfolios and the average returns on each country’s equities and bonds appear in Table I.

          Our sample period covers the 162 months between January 1994 and June 2007.

The starting point is determined by the availability of EMBI+ bond indexes, which start

in December 1993. The ending point is determined by the availability of U.S. foreign

asset positions, which are currently available through June 2007. For some countries,

equity or bond returns data start after January 1994. We add these countries to the U.S.

asset and liability portfolios when the data for both equity and bond returns become

available (see the last column in Table I). Countries added after January 1994 tend to

have very low weights in both U.S. claims and liabilities portfolios, so our results are

nearly identical if we restrict our study to countries with returns data for the entire sample

period.

2.3 Descriptive statistics

          Table II shows the descriptive statistics for aggregate equity weights in U.S.

portfolio claims and liabilities and aggregate returns on U.S. and foreign bonds and

equities. It is evident from Panels A and B that U.S. claims are weighted heavily toward

equities, while U.S. liabilities are weighted toward bonds. This resembles the “venture

capitalist” capital structure of the U.S. external balance sheet pointed out by Gourinchas

and Rey (2007). Specifically, the mean equity-to-bond ratio in U.S. claims is 72:28

across all countries, with equities having a higher weight in U.S. investors’ developed

from Bloomberg. For holdings of Indian and Thai debt we use the GBI EM Broad Traded index.


                                                 9
country portfolios (73:27 equity-to-bond ratio) than in their emerging market portfolios

(64:36). By contrast, the mean equity-to-bond ratio in U.S. liabilities is 41:59, and is

much higher in the portfolios of developed countries (45:55) than in emerging markets

countries (8:92).

          Equity and bond returns are shown in Panels C and D, respectively. Note at the

outset that, while over short periods returns differentials are driven mainly (but not

solely) by dollar exchange-rate movements, over our 162-month sample the dollar

depreciated only slightly. For example, for the short period from end-2001 to end-2004

the dollar depreciated 10 percent per year against the currencies of developed countries

(that is, the Fed’s Major Currencies Index fell 10 percent per year), but from January

1994 to September 2003 it was flat, and over our whole sample it depreciated only 9.2

basis points per month. For our sample the effect of exchange rate movements on the

returns differentials is small, but the effect in shorter samples can be sizeable.6

          Panel C shows that over the period from 1994 through June 2007 average returns

were slightly higher on U.S. equities (0.97 percent per month) than the dollar returns on

U.S. investors’ portfolio of foreign equities (0.91 percent per month overall, with 0.93 in

developed countries and 1.07 in emerging markets).7 For bonds (Panel D), dollar returns

on developed country bonds (0.53 percent per month) were somewhat higher than returns

on U.S. bonds (0.46), while dollar returns on emerging market bonds were much higher

(0.85).

6
  See, for example, Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2005) and Forbes (2007, 2008).
7
  It may seem counterintuitive that the average return on foreign equities in all countries is lower than the
average return on either developed countries or emerging markets. At any point in time the return on all-
countries portfolio must be between the return on developed and emerging countries portfolios. However,
this does not hold for the time-series average of returns, as relatively high returns in emerging markets
occurred when their weight in the all-countries portfolio was relatively low, contributing little to the
average return on the all-country portfolio. Put differently, with time-varying weights a time-series average
of a weighted average of two series need not be bound by the time-series averages of the two series.


                                                     10
3. The Returns Differential and its Decomposition

       In this section we formally decompose the sources of the returns differential into

three components; the composition, return, and timing effects.

3.1 Methodology

       The average return on any portfolio p can be written as the time series average of

the sum of the products of lagged asset weights and returns:

                                               1 T       N
                                        rp =     ∑
                                               T t =1
                                                         ∑w
                                                         j =1
                                                                 p
                                                                       r  p
                                                                 j ,t −1 j ,t                         (1)


where wpj,t-1 is portfolio weight of asset j at the end of period t-1 (the beginning of period

t), rpj,t is the period t return on asset j in portfolio p and N is the number of assets in the

portfolio. Note first that that equation (1) can be also written as:

                                    N
                                                    1 T         N
                             r p = ∑ w jp r j p +     ∑         ∑ (w       p
                                                                           j ,t −1   − w jp )r jp,t   (2)
                                    j =1            T t =1      j =1



where w jp and r j p are the time-series averages of the weights and returns on asset j.

Equation (2) shows that the average portfolio return has two components: (i) average

returns and average holdings, and (ii) the covariance of portfolio weights with subsequent

returns. For investors whose portfolio weights and future returns move together, these

covariances will tend to be positive. Note that if either returns or weights remain

constant, the second term in (2) is zero and the portfolio return will depend only on

average weights and average returns. If, as is more likely, investors change their portfolio

weights and returns are not constant, the second term is potentially important.




                                                    11
        Using equation (2) to express the average returns on U.S. claims, r c , and

liabilities, r l , the returns differential can be written as:

                                             N       (r jc + r jl )
                              r −r =∑
                                c    l
                                                                      ( w jc − w jl )
                                             j =1          2
                                              N      ( w jc + w jl )
                                         +∑                              (r jc − r jl )
                                              j =1          2
                                                                                                 (3)
                                          1 T               N
                                         + ∑              ∑ (w        c
                                                                      j ,t −1   − w jc )r jc,t
                                          T t =1           j =1
                                                     T      N
                                             1
                                         −     ∑
                                             T t =1
                                                          ∑ (w
                                                           j =1
                                                                      l
                                                                      j ,t −1   − w jl )r jl,t


Each line in equation (3) represents a component of the decomposition of the difference

between the returns on U.S. claims and liabilities. The first line, the composition effect, is

the sum of the differences between the average weights of each asset class in U.S. claims

and liabilities, multiplied by the average of the claims and liabilities returns for the asset

class. If U.S. and foreign investors put the same average weight on each asset class, the

composition effect is zero. If U.S. investors put a higher weight on asset classes with

higher average returns, the composition effect would be positive.

        The second line, the return effect, is the sum of the differences between average

claims and liabilities returns within each asset class, multiplied by the average weight of

the asset class in claims and liabilities. If each asset class has the same average return in

claims and liabilities, the return effect is zero. If average returns in each asset class tend

to be higher for U.S. claims than for U.S. liabilities, the return effect will be positive.

        The timing effects are captured by the third and fourth lines. Each line is a sum of

sample covariances between investors’ weights on each asset class and subsequent

returns on that asset class. This is a version of Grinblatt and Titman’s (1993) measure of



                                                          12
portfolio performance.8 If U.S. investors put relatively high weights on assets that have

subsequent high returns, these covariances will be positive and will contribute positively

to the aggregate returns differential. In contrast, positive covariances between foreign

investors’ weights and subsequent returns will contribute negatively to the aggregate

returns differential: The better the timing of foreign investors in the United States, the

lower the return on U.S. claims relative to U.S. liabilities. Therefore, foreign timing

enters equation (3) with a negative sign.

3.2 Return, Composition and Timing Effects

         In Table III we decompose the difference between the return on U.S. claims and

liabilities into the composition, return, and timing effects. The composition effect is

positive because U.S. claims are on average weighted toward equities, which have higher

average returns than bonds. The composition effect is larger vis-à-vis emerging market

countries (about 2.6 percent per year) than developed countries (about 1.5 percent per

year). In neither case, however, is the composition effect statistically significant.9

         The return effect is essentially zero. This indicates that within asset classes, U.S.

claims and U.S. liabilities tended to have similar returns over this sample period.

Although U.S. investors earned slightly more on foreign bonds than foreigners earned on


8
  In general, the Grinblatt and Titman (1993) measure can be written as 1 ∑ ∑ ( w j ,t −1 − E[ w j ,t −1 ])r j ,t
                                                                            T t    j
where E(wj,t-1) is the expected weight on asset j at t-1 that needs to be estimated. As discussed in Wermers
(2006) there are many approaches to estimating this expected weight. One possibility is to use the time-
series average weight as an estimate of the expected weight. Our timing effect uses this approach. Another
possibility, suggested by Ferson and Khang (2003), is to use buy-and-hold weights as an estimate of
expected weights. Our trading effect, discussed below, uses the buy-and-hold weight as an estimate of the
expected weight.
9
  Because the composition effect is a product of two averages, its distribution is unknown. In order to
assess statistical significance of the composition effect, we calculate its standard error using bootstrapping.
We obtain 1000 different samples by drawing 144 observations from our data with replacement 1000 times.
Using these samples we calculate 1000 compositions effects. The standard error of our original
composition effect is the standard error of these 1000 composition effects. The z-statistic reported in the
table is the original composition effect divided by the bootstrapped standard error.


                                                      13
U.S. bonds, U.S. investors earned slightly less on foreign equities than foreigners earned

on U.S. equities. The differences in returns within each asset class almost completely

offset each other.

        The last two columns in Table III show the foreign and U.S. timing effects; that

is, the sums of covariances between asset weights and subsequent returns. Across all

countries, the foreign timing effect is on average negative and statistically significant.

This means that foreign investors have relatively high weights on U.S. assets with

subsequently low returns. The size of the effect is 5.6 basis points per month. Thus, poor

timing by foreign investors reduces their U.S. return by 67 basis points per year and

positively contributes to the returns differential. In fact, negative foreign timing is the

only statistically significant term in the decomposition of the returns differential between

U.S. claims and liabilities. The U.S. timing effect is also negative, but is considerably

smaller and not statistically significant.

        The timing effect can be depicted graphically by comparing the dynamics of

portfolio weights (for foreigners, within their U.S. portfolios; for U.S. investors, within

their foreign portfolios) on bonds and equities with the time variation of relative returns.

Figures 1 and 2 show a depiction of this relationship. The top panel in each figure shows

year-over-year returns in equities and bonds; the bottom panel in each shows equity

weights from actual portfolios (the thick lines) and theoretical 24-month buy-and-hold

equity weights (thin lines).10 If investors do not actively alter portfolio weights, the actual

and 24-month buy-and-hold weights will be identical. Any deviation of the actual from

the 24-month buy-and-hold equity weights is indicative of active trading. Specifically, if


10
  The buy-and-hold equity weight series begins only in January 1996 since it is the weight that foreigners
would have in equity had they not traded for twenty-four months starting in January 1994.


                                                    14
at a point in time the 24-month buy-and-hold equity weight is above the actual weight,

investors have traded away from equities (thereby making the actual equity weight lower

than the passive, 24-month buy-and-hold weight). Similarly, if at a point in time the 24-

month buy-and-hold equity weight is below the actual weight, investors have traded into

equities and away from bonds.

       Figure 1 shows the 12-month returns for U.S. bonds and equities (top panel) and

foreigners’ actual and buy-and-hold U.S. equity weights (bottom panel). The top panel

shows that U.S. equity returns were dramatically higher than U.S. bond returns from the

beginning of the sample until late 2000 and again (but less dramatically) from 2003 to the

end of the sample. Between those two periods of strong relative returns for U.S. equities

were two years (2001 and 2002) during which annual U.S. equity returns were roughly

negative 20 percent. U.S. bond returns, as the figure shows, were much less volatile,

ranging between zero and 10 percent per year. The bottom panel shows that foreigners

traded away from U.S. equities and into U.S. bonds from the beginning of the sample

through 1998, traded into U.S. equities (and out of bonds) from early 1999 until mid-

2002, and then from early 2003 through the end of the sample (June 2007) traded away

from equities.

       Putting the top and bottom panels together, the source of the significant poor

foreign timing result is evident. Foreigners actively reallocated from U.S. equities into

U.S. bonds for much of the 1990s, missing much of the 1990s bull market in U.S.

equities. They then actively traded into U.S. equities for the final year of the bull market

but also for a few more years (until about mid-2002), thereby bearing the brunt of a sharp

sell-off in U.S. equities. In 2003 they shifted toward U.S. bonds at a time when equities




                                            15
were about to outperform bonds for the rest of the sample. It is precisely this switching

into one asset class just prior to its underperformance that is behind the statistically

significant poor foreign timing that we document.

           Figure 2 allows a similar analysis for U.S. claims. In the late 1990s U.S.

investors’ buy-and-hold weight was often lower than the actual equity weight. This

indicates that within their foreign portfolios U.S. investors shifted toward equities while

equity returns were relatively high. U.S. investors continued to shift toward foreign

equities even as prices were falling between 2000 and 2002. But unlike foreign investors

in the United States, U.S. investors abroad did not shift out of equities before the 2003

and 2004 recovery in global equity markets. As the insignificant coefficient on the U.S.

timing effect shows, in a statistical sense U.S. timing between foreign bonds and foreign

equities is neither poor nor exceptional.

3.3. Which investors are behind the poor foreign timing effect?

           We have shown that some of the returns differential owes to foreigners’ poor

timing in reallocating within their U.S. portfolios. A natural question to ask is, Which

investors are behind the poor foreign timing effect?11

           One might suspect that the significantly negative timing effect for foreign

investors owes to the mechanical accumulation of dollar reserves. For example, foreign

governments could, for reasons that have nothing to do with expected portfolio returns,

accumulate U.S. bonds just before U.S. bonds underperform. To see if reserve

accumulation might be behind our timing result, we omit foreign governments’

investments by re-estimating the decomposition using aggregate private positions in the



11
     We thank a referee for posing this question.


                                                    16
United States (Panel B of Table III).12 We find that foreign timing for foreign private

investors is negative and statistically significant. The poor timing of private foreign

investors strongly suggests that our foreign timing effect is not driven by mechanical

dollar reserve accumulation.

         We also split the sample between developed and emerging market countries. We

find that foreign timing is significant and negative for developed countries (Panel C), but

not for emerging markets (Panel D). Estimation of Panel C excluding Japan, excluding

the United Kingdom (since some emerging market countries may trade through London

(Griever et. al. 2001)), and excluding both Japan and the United Kingdom produces

nearly identical (unreported) results: For developed countries, foreign timing is negative

and statistically significant. The results in Panels C and D, interesting in their own right,

can be considered further evidence that the poor timing of foreign purchases of U.S.

securities is not driven by the mechanical accumulation of dollar reserves by emerging

markets.13

         Table III thus shows that there is a statistically significant poor foreign timing

effect, that it is not due to mechanical reserve accumulation, and that it is concentrated

not in emerging markets but in developed countries. Exactly which countries are behind

the poor foreign timing result? As Panel A of Table IV shows, the aggregate results on

foreign timing appear to be driven mainly by some of the largest developed countries in

12
   Note that to the extent that some foreign governments hide their holdings of U.S. securities by using
third-party (and third-country) custodians, some foreign government holdings might be in our foreign
private data. Our guess is that this is more of an issue for Middle East oil exporters, which are not in our
sample, and the U.K.
13
   Separating emerging markets from developed countries helps to reinforce our results in Panel B on
foreign private investors. The reinforcement is welcome because the split between foreign private investors
and foreign governments is somewhat murky in the TIC data (Warnock and Warnock, 2009) and, hence, in
our dataset. With the exception of Japan, official purchases are likely negligible for developed countries, so
the developed country sample in Panel C provides, at least to some extent, additional evidence on foreign
private investors.


                                                     17
the world—Japan and the large European countries of United Kingdom, Germany,

France, Italy, Spain, and Netherlands—as well as Austria, Denmark, and Finland. In

contrast, the reason for the lack of a significant timing result for emerging markets is

evident in Panel B, as only 3 of 17 emerging markets have negative and statistically

significant timing (Argentina, China, and Hungary).14

        Figure 3 shows, for the developed countries that have significant negative timing

effects, graphs of actual and buy-and-hold equity weights that parallel the bottom panels

of Figure 1; for relative returns, refer back to Figure 1. What we see in the figure is very

similar to what was depicted in Figure 1: Many countries, especially European ones,

underweighted U.S. equities during the booming 1990s, moved into U.S. equities in time

for the last gasp of the bull market, kept adding to U.S. equity positions through the bear

market, and then finally moved away from U.S. equities just when they were poised to

outperform U.S. bonds. The poor timing in our aggregate results is evident in many

foreign countries’ U.S. portfolios.

3.4. Timing due to trading vs. revaluation of existing positions

        The timing effects documented in Tables III and IV are, to be precise, driven by

two underlying components: the passive evolution of existing positions and active

reallocation (trading). That is, the variation in weights on different asset classes is a

function not only of active trading but also to some extent by returns on existing

positions. For example, when equities do particularly well and investors do not rebalance

their portfolios, the equity weight will rise. Our graphs in Figures 1-3 allow an analysis of

active trading versus a lack of rebalancing, but the statistical work in Tables III and IV


14
   As Table IV shows, one emerging market (India) and no developed country has a foreign timing effect
that is positive and statistically significant.


                                                  18
combine the two effects. In this subsection we more formally differentiate between

timing that is a result of a passive strategy compared with deliberate trading.

              Specifically, we decompose the timing effect into trading and passive effects.

Note that the weight of asset j at the end of t-1 that would have resulted from a buy-and-

hold strategy adopted k periods ago can be calculated as follows:




                                                                                       1           ,
                                               ,      ,            ,
                                                                                       1           ,


where wj,t-1-k is the actual weight at the end of period t-1-k. This weight is then updated

according to actual returns on asset j and returns on a buy-and-hold portfolio rpbh .15 From

this we can decompose the timing effect into the part that depends on the deviations of

actual weights from buy-and-hold weights and the part that depends on the deviation of

actual weights from average weights:



     1 T       N
                                             1 T           N
                                                                                                  1 T      N

       ∑
     T t =1
              ∑ (w j ,t −1 − w j )r j ,t =
              j =1
                                               ∑
                                             T t =1
                                                          ∑ (w j ,t −1 − wbhj ,t −1,k )r j ,t +
                                                          j =1
                                                                                                    ∑
                                                                                                  T t =1
                                                                                                           ∑ (w
                                                                                                           j =1
                                                                                                                  bh
                                                                                                                  j ,t −1, k   − w j ) r j ,t
                                                                                                                                                (4)



              We refer to the first term on the right hand side of equation (4) as the trading

effect. It measures the covariance between the deviations of actual weights from buy-and-

hold weights and subsequent returns. If investors tend to increase weights in assets that

subsequently rise in value, this term will be positive. We call the second term the passive

15
  In order to construct the buy-and-hold weight at the end of t-1, we need the return on a buy-and-hold
portfolio in period t-1. This is not circular because the buy-and-hold portfolio return in t-1 uses buy-and-
hold weights from t-2.


                                                                       19
effect. It measures the covariance between the deviations of buy-and-hold weights from

average weights and subsequent returns. This covariance will tend to be positive if

returns are positively serially correlated.

        Table V shows the foreign and U.S. trading and passive effects. Both are

calculated for different lags corresponding to different buy-and-hold weights. For

example, lag 6 uses buy-and-hold weights that would have resulted from a buy-and-hold

strategy adopted six months ago.

        Panel A shows the results using all countries. The foreign trading effect is always

negative and statistically significant. The passive effect is also always negative and

sometimes significant. This indicates that both poor passive performance and ill-timed

trading contribute to the negative foreign timing effect that we documented in Table III,

but the trading effect is slightly more dominant. Foreign investors make new purchases

(sales) that tend to be followed buy low (high) returns. Interestingly, even though the

overall timing effect in Table III was statistically significant only for developed

countries, the part of the timing effect that results from active trading is negative and

significant in both developed and emerging market countries (Panels B and C). The size

of the effect is about 3 basis points per month at the 12-month lag and 6 basis points at

the 24-month lag. This translates to roughly 36 and 72 basis points per year. In contrast,

the U.S. trading effect is almost always positive although never statistically significant.16

        In Table VI we calculate the trading and passive effects for aggregate private

positions in the United States. We find that foreign private positions also show a negative

and statistically significant trading effect. This means that private foreign investors tend

16
  This is entirely consistent with Thomas et al. (2006), who found that U.S. investors beat foreign
benchmarks not by skilled month-to-month trading but as a result of longer standing differences from
benchmark allocations.


                                                   20
to buy (sell) assets that subsequently experience low (high) returns. This is further

evidence that our aggregate results are not driven by mechanical accumulation of dollar

reserves; rather, they appear to be driven by the behavior of private investors.

3.5 Decomposition for two subsamples

        In this subsection we investigate whether the decomposition of the returns

differential varies over time. Our aim is to shed some light on which components of the

returns differential are stable over time and which vary. In part, this is motivated by a

desire to understand the permanency or transitory nature of any calculated returns

differential.

        In Table VII we split our sample into two periods: January 1994 through

December 2000, and January 2001 through June 2007. We focus first on the items that

appear to be transitory. The overall returns differential is negative (but not significant) in

the first part of the sample, but highly positive in the second half (when the dollar was

depreciating, increasing U.S. returns abroad). The composition effect was positive and

significant in the first half, but near zero in the second half. The return effect was strongly

negative in the first half and strongly positive in the second half. This is not surprising, as

over short time periods the primary (but not sole) driver of the return effect (and the

overall differential) are currency movements, and the dollar trended strongly in each

subsample. Recall that over the entire sample the return effect is essentially zero (Table

III).

        The only item in Table VII that does not switch signs is the foreign timing effect,

which is negative and statistically significant during both time periods. As in the full

sample, U.S. timing remains statistically insignificant during both time periods. In Table




                                              21
VIII we decompose the timing effect into the trading and passive effects. We see that at

the 12- and 24-month horizons the foreign trading effect is consistently negative and

statistically significant in both sub-samples. The size of the trading effect is roughly the

same in the two sub-samples as in the full sample. Therefore, poor timing of new sales

and purchases by foreign investors in the United States seems rather persistent. It is worth

emphasizing that the number of observations in the two sub-samples is relatively low.

Given the small number of observations, the significance and the robustness of the

negative trading effect of foreign investors in the United States is striking. It strongly

suggests that foreign poor timing is not driven by a few instances of bad luck.



4. Conclusion

       We decomposed the U.S. external returns differential in order to improve the

understanding of the sources of the returns differential that the United States receives on

its net international positions. We found evidence of poor timing of foreign investors’

reallocations across U.S. equities and U.S. bonds. This poor timing—evident primarily in

investment from rich, developed countries, especially European ones—lowered

foreigners’ returns on their U.S. portfolios by 67 basis points per year, thus contributing

positively to the U.S. external returns differential. Although we find no evidence of

superior market timing ability by U.S. investors abroad, they perform quite well relative

to foreign investors in the United States.

       For the current debate on global imbalances, it is important to know whether the

poor foreign timing we document is permanent or transitory. Our estimate of poor foreign

timing is stable over our 162-month sample, but we wonder if increasing financial




                                             22
integration, cross ownership of financial institutions, and improving information flows

mean that any skill advantage—if it is (lack of) investment skill driving the timing

effect—is likely to persist. 17 Should foreign investors improve their timing, the U.S.

external position would worsen at a faster pace.

        Understanding why foreign investors consistently fail to anticipate shifts in

relative returns on different asset classes is an important question for future research.

Even though we observe only foreigners' holdings in the U.S. and not their entire

portfolio, piling into equities as they are about to underperform and vice versa can hardly

be optimal. The fact that poor timing originates mostly from rich developed countries is

inconsistent with the notion that it might be due to the forced trading of liquidity

constrained foreign investors, since investors in emerging markets are more likely to face

these constraints. Moreover, the variation of the timing and trading effects across

countries does not appear to be correlated with geographic, cultural or linguistic

distances. One possibility is that foreign investors in the United States chase returns as

suggested in Bohn and Tesar (1996) and Brennan et al (2005). It is also possible that U.S.

returns are less predictable than foreign returns, which would be consistent with studies

that find negative market timing among U.S. mutual funds (see, for example, Ferson and

Schadt 1996). Poor foreign timing in the United States is also broadly consistent with

Parwada, Walter, and Winchester (2007) who, using proprietary trading data, find that

foreign investors incur higher transaction costs than domestic (U.S.) investors, and

Shukla and Inwegen (1995), who find that U.K.-based mutual funds investing in the

United States perform worse than U.S.-based mutual funds.


17
  For example, Dvorak (2005) finds that in Indonesia, U.S.-based global brokerages improve the
investment performance of both local and foreign investors.


                                                  23
       Another area for future research is foreign investors’ reallocations within each

asset class. We currently assume that foreigners invest in market indexes for both equity

and bonds; that is, we assume that foreign investors’ allocation within each asset class

matches that of a combination of benchmark indexes for each asset class. This

assumption is on solid footing, as security-level analysis of holdings suggests that at a

point in time the bulk of cross-border holdings is in just those securities that are in

benchmark indexes. But if over time foreign investors’ poor timing within asset classes is

as poor as is their timing between asset classes, then we underestimate the true magnitude

of the timing and trading effects.




                                           24
References:

Ammer, J., Holland, S., Smith, D., Warnock, F., 2006. Look at me now: The role of cross-listings
      in attracting U.S. shareholders. NBER Working Paper 12500.
Bekaert G., Harvey, C., Lumsdaine, R., 2002. The dynamics of emerging market equity flows,
      Journal of International Money and Finance 21 (3), 295-350.
Bertaut, C., Tryon, R., 2007. Monthly estimates of U.S. cross-border securities positions, Federal
      Reserve Board International Finance Discussion Paper # 910.
Bohn, H., Tesar, L., 1996. U.S. equity investment in foreign markets: Portfolio rebalancing or
      returns chasing? American Economic Review 86(2), 77-81.
Brennan, M., Cao, H., 1997. International portfolio investment flows, Journal of Finance 52,
      1851-1880.
Burger, J., Warnock, F., 2007. Foreign participation in local currency bond markets, Review of
      Financial Economics 16, 291-304.
Brennan, M., Cao, H., Strong, N., Xu, X., 2005. The dynamics of international equity market
      expectations, Journal of Financial Economics 77, 257–288.
Cai, F., Warnock F., 2008. International diversification at home, mimeo, University of Virginia.
Choe, H., Kho, B., Stulz, R., 2005. Do Domestic Investors Have an Edge? The Trading
      Experience of Foreign Investors in Korea, Review of Financial Studies 18(3), 795-829.
Chuhan, P., Claessens, S., Mamingi, N., 1998. Equity and bond flows to Latin America and
      Asia:the role of global and country factors, Journal of Development Economics 55, 439-
      463.
Curcuru, S., Dvorak, T., Warnock, F., 2008. Cross-Border Returns Differentials, Quarterly
      Journal of Economics 123(4), 1495–1530.
Curcuru, S., Thomas, C., Warnock, F., 2009. Current Account Sustainability and Relative
      Reliability, NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2008.
Devereux, M., Saito, A., 2006. A Portfolio Theory of International Capital Flows, Institute for
      International Integration Studies Discussion Paper No. 124.
Dvorak, T., 2005. Do domestic investors have an information advantage? Evidence from
      Indonesia, Journal of Finance 60, 817-839.
Edison, H., Warnock, F., 2008. Cross-Border Listings, Capital Controls, and Equity Flows to
      Emerging Markets, Journal of International Money and Finance 27, 1013-1027.
Engel, C., Matsumoto, A., 2006. Portfolio Choice in a Monetary Open-Economy DSGE Model,
      working paper.




                                               25
Ferson, W., Khang, K., 2002. Conditional performance measurement using portfolio weights:
      Evidence for pension funds, Journal of Financial Economics 65, 249-282.
Ferson, W. , Schadt, R., 1996. Measuring fund strategy and performance in changing economic
      conditions, Journal of Finance 51(2), 425-461.
Forbes, K., 2007. Global Imbalances: A Source of Strength or Weakness?, Cato Journal 27, 193-
      202.
Forbes, K., 2008. Why Do Foreigners Invest in the United States? NBER Working Paper 13908.
Froot, K., O’Connell, P.G., Seasholes, M., 2001. The portfolio flows of international investors,
      Journal of Financial Economics 59 (2), 151-194.
Gourinchas, P-O., Rey H., 2007. From world banker to world venture capitalist: The U.S.
      external adjustment and the exorbitant privilege, in R. Clarida (ed.) G7 Current Account
      Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment (Chicago, University of Chicago Press), 11-55.
Griever, W., Lee, G., Warnock, F. 2001. The U.S. system for measuring cross-border investment
      in securities: A primer with a discussion of recent developments. Federal Reserve Bulletin
      87(10), 633-650.
Griffin, J., Nardari, F., Stulz, R., 2004. Are daily cross-border flows pushed or pulled? Review of
      Economics and Statistics 86 (3), 641-657.
Grinblatt, M., Titman, S., 1993. Performance measurement without benchmarks: An examination
      of mutual fund returns, Journal of Business 66, 47-68.
Lane, P., Milesi-Ferretti, G.M., 2005. Financial Globalization and Exchange Rates, IMF working
      paper # 05/3.
Montiel, P., Reinhart, C., 1999. Do capital controls and macroeconomic policies influence the
      volume and composition of capital flows? Evidence from the 1990s. Journal of
      International Money and Finance 18 (4), 619-635.
Parwada, J., Walter T., Winchester, D., 2007. Do foreign investors pay more for stocks in the
      United States? An analysis by country of origin, working paper.
Portes, R., Rey, H., 2005. The determinants of cross-border equity flows, Journal of International
      Economics 65 (2), 269-296.
Richards, A., 2005. Big fish in small ponds: the momentum investing and price impact of foreign
      investors in Asian emerging equity markets, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
      40 (1), 1-27.
Shukla, R., van Inwegen, G., 1995. Do locals perform better than foreigners? An analysis of UK
      and US mutual fund managers, Journal of Economics and Business 47, 241-253.




                                                26
Taylor, M., Sarno, L., 1997. Capital flows to developing countries: long- and short-term
      determinants, World Bank Economic Review 11 (3), 451-470.
Tesar, L., Werner, I., 1994. International equity transactions and U.S. portfolio choice. In Frankel,
      J., The Internationalization of Equity Markets. NBER and University of Chicago Press,
      Chicago.
Thomas, C., Warnock, F., Wongswan, J., 2006. The performance of international equity
      portfolios, NBER Working Paper 12346.
Tille, C., van Wincoop, E., 2007. International capital flows, NBER Working Paper 12856.
Warnock, F., Warnock, V., 2009. International capital flows and U.S. interest rates. Journal of
      International Money and Finance (forthcoming).
Wermers, R., 2006. Performance Evaluation with Portfolio Holdings Information, North
      American Journal of Economics and Finance 17(2) , 207-230.




                                                 27
   Table I: Country Composition of U.S. Portfolio of Foreign Equity and Foreign Bonds
Country’s weight in U.S. equity (bond) portfolio is the U.S. equity (bond) position in the country divided
by the total U.S. equity (bond) position in all 36 countries included in the sample. Country’s equity return is
the average of simple monthly returns on its MSCI gross U.S. dollar total return index expressed in percent.
Except where noted, developed countries’ bond returns are the weighted averages of simple monthly U.S.
dollar returns on the country’s GBI Broad 1-10 year bond index and the Lehman Corporate Eurodollar
index, where the weights on the Eurodollar index are the shares of dollar denominated bonds in U.S.
holdings of foreign bonds. Similarly, emerging markets’ bond returns are the weighted averages of simple
monthly U.S. dollar returns on the country’s EMBI+ index and the ELMI+ index. The time period is from
January 1994 through June 2007 unless otherwise noted in the last column.
                    Country’s Avg.                            Country’s Avg.         Country’s        Country
                                          Country’s Avg.
   Country          Weight in U.S.                            Weight in U.S.         Avg. Bond        Included
                                          Equity Return
                    Equity Portfolio                          Bond Portfolio          Return            from
Australia                0.030                 1.259                0.040              0.556           Jan ‘94
Austria                  0.003                 1.107                0.005              0.629           Jan ‘98
BelgiumLux               0.011                 1.217                0.025              0.574           Jan ‘94
Canada                   0.073                 1.308                0.221              0.530           Jan ‘94
Denmark                  0.006                 1.405                0.016              0.643           Jan ‘94
Finland                  0.022                 2.135                0.009              0.567           Jan ‘94
France                   0.076                 1.129                0.050              0.550           Jan ‘94
Germany                  0.057                 1.135                0.091              0.553           Jan ‘94
Greece                   0.002                 1.467                0.003              0.753           Jun ‘97
Ireland                  0.013                 1.131                0.013              0.599           Jan ‘94
Italy                    0.028                 1.258                0.035              0.700           Jan ‘94
Japan                    0.159                 0.351                0.070              0.221           Jan ‘94
Netherland               0.077                 1.139                0.052              0.535           Jan ‘94
Norway*                  0.007                 1.477                0.011              0.643           Jan ‘94
Portugal                 0.003                 1.205                0.002              0.711           Jan ‘94
Spain                    0.024                 1.507                0.018              0.673           Jan ‘94
Sweden                   0.025                 1.660                0.025              0.607           Jan ‘94
Switzerland*             0.057                 1.135                0.002              0.493           Jan ‘94
U. K.                    0.210                 0.956                0.150              0.573           Jan ‘94
Argentina                0.005                 1.387                0.027              0.272           Jan ‘94
Brazil                   0.019                 2.192                0.027              1.356           Jan ‘94
Chile                    0.003                 1.185                0.010              0.658           Jun ‘99
China                    0.005                 0.440                0.003              0.649           Apr ‘94
Colombia                 0.000                 1.838                0.005              0.999          Mar ‘97
Hungary                  0.002                 2.340                0.001              0.737           Feb ‘99
India**                  0.007                 1.260                0.001              0.885          Mar ‘96
Korea                    0.021                 1.507                0.015              0.791           Jan ‘94
Malaysia                 0.007                 0.658                0.006              0.694          Nov ‘96
Mexico                   0.025                 1.411                0.047              0.872           Jan ‘94
Peru                     0.001                 2.094                0.002              1.343           Jan ‘94
Philippines              0.003                 0.370                0.006              0.911           Jan ‘94
Poland                   0.001                 1.321                0.004              1.023           Jan ‘94
Russia                   0.005                 3.310                0.007              1.776           Jan ‘95
South Africa             0.009                 1.330                0.004              0.684           Jun ‘94
Thailand**               0.005                 0.507                0.003              0.812           Jun ‘97
Turkey                   0.002                 2.119                0.003              1.332           Jul ‘96
* Bond returns from Bloomberg.
**Bond returns calculated from GBI-EM Broad Traded index.



                                                     28
                                              Table II
                       Characteristics of U.S. Foreign Claims and Liabilities
Equity weight in U.S. claims is the share of foreign equities in U.S. investors’ foreign bond and equities
portfolio. Equity weight in U.S. liabilities is the share of U.S. equities in foreign investors’ U.S. bond and
equities portfolio. Returns on U.S. equities are the monthly simple returns on the U.S. MSCI gross return
equity index. Returns on U.S. bonds are foreign-portfolio-weighted averages of Lehman Brothers Treasury,
Corporate and Agency bond indexes. Returns on foreign equities are U.S.-portfolio-weighted averages of
each country’s simple monthly dollar return on its MSCI gross return equity index. Returns on foreign
bonds are U.S.-portfolio-weighted averages of each country’s bond returns. Except where noted in Table I,
developed countries’ bond returns are the weighted averages of simple monthly U.S. dollar returns on the
country’s GBI Broad 1-10 year bond index and the Lehman Corporate Eurodollar index, where the weights
on the Eurodollar index are the shares of dollar denominated bonds in U.S. holdings of foreign bonds.
Similarly, emerging markets’ bond returns are the weighted averages of simple monthly U.S. dollar returns
on the country’s EMBI+ index and the ELMI+ index. All data are from January 1994 through June 2007,
unless otherwise noted in Table I.

                                            Mean          Median      St.Dev.        Min          Max
                              Panel A: Equity Weight in U.S. Claims (%)
   All Countries                          0.718        0.716         0.042        0.636        0.795
   Developed Countries                    0.729        0.735         0.045        0.625        0.811
   Emerging Markets                       0.636        0.630         0.090        0.450        0.846
                            Panel B: Equity Weight in U.S. Liabilities (%)
   All Countries                          0.406        0.386         0.061        0.324        0.545
   Developed Countries                    0.449        0.422         0.058        0.387        0.591
   Emerging Markets                       0.076        0.080         0.026        0.036        0.131
                                Panel C: Equity Returns (% per month)
   Return on U.S. Equities                0.970        1.312         4.108        -13.905      9.984
   Return on Foreign Equities
      All Countries                       0.911        1.352         4.188        -14.752      10.720
      Developed Countries                 0.925        1.124         4.024        -12.998      10.539
      Emerging Markets                    1.073        2.233         7.239        -32.592      16.517
                                 Panel D: Bond Returns (% per month)
   Return on U.S. Bonds
      By All Countries                    0.458        0.519         0.899        -2.768       2.963
      By Developed Countries              0.463        0.556         0.935        -2.949       3.021
      By Emerging Markets                 0.435        0.429         0.765        -2.121       2.481
   Return on Foreign Bonds
      All Countries                       0.578        0.520         1.462        -3.788       5.341
      Developed Countries                 0.531        0.478         1.469        -3.445       4.948
      Emerging Markets                    0.847        1.249         3.274        -19.474      9.129




                                                     29
                                        Table III
  Decomposition of the Returns Differential into Composition, Return and Timing Effects
Difference, the difference between the average monthly percentage return on the portfolio of U.S. claims
(foreign equities and foreign bonds) and the return on U.S. liabilities (U.S. equities and U.S. bonds), equals
Composition Effect plus Return Effect minus Foreign Timing Effect plus U.S. Timing Effect. The
composition, return and timing effects are defined in section 3.1. Standard t-statistics are in parentheses.
Bootstrapped z-statistics based on 1000 draws are in brackets. Statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10
percent levels are denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.

    Difference           Composition            Return Effect                   Timing Effects
     (claims-              Effect                                         Foreign              U.S.
    liabilities)
                                         Panel A: All Countries
      0.203                  0.132               0.020             -0.056***                      -0.005
      (1.19)                 [1.43]              [0.15]              (-2.73)                      (-0.41)
                              Panel B: Vis-à-vis Private Foreign Positions
      0.152                  0.111               0.005              -0.042**                      -0.005
      (0.91)                 [1.38]              [0.12]              (-2.41)                      (-0.41)
                                     Panel C: Developed Countries
      0.177                  0.126               0.001             -0.061***                      -0.011
      (1.10)                 [1.44]              [0.01]              (-3.02)                      (-0.79)
                                  Panel D: Emerging Market Countries
      0.573                  0.213               0.302               -0.010                       0.048
      (1.40)                 [1.09]              [1.09]              (-1.40)                      (1.16)




                                                     30
                                          Table IV
              Decomposition of the Returns Differential into Composition, Return
                                and Timing Effects by Country
Difference, the difference between the average monthly percentage return on the portfolio of U.S. claims
(foreign country’s equities and foreign country’s bonds) and the return on U.S. liabilities (U.S. equities and
U.S. bonds), equals Composition Effect plus Return Effect minus Foreign Timing Effect plus U.S. Timing
Effect. The composition, return and timing effects are defined in section 3.1. Standard t-statistics are in
parentheses. Statistical significance at the 1 and 5 percent levels are denoted by ** and *, respectively.

                                    Panel A: Developed Countries
                                      Composi
                                        -tion    Return        Foreign                          U.S.
Country                Difference      Effect     Effect       Timing                         Timing
Australia             0.121 (0.53)     -0.021      0.184     0.002 (0.11)                -0.040** (-3.53)
Austria               0.209 (0.69)      0.129      0.047  -0.086** (-2.59)                 -0.053 (-0.65)
BelgiumLux            0.232 (1.06)      0.092      0.143     0.003 (0.08)                  -0.000 (-0.00)
Canada                0.022 (0.12)     -0.204      0.215    -0.001 (-0.08)                  0.010 (0.30)
Denmark               0.322 (1.40)     -0.046      0.306   -0.069* (-2.49)                 -0.007 (-0.15)
Finland               1.135 (1.92)      0.412      0.736   -0.124* (-2.38)                 -0.137 (-1.24)
France                0.295 (1.22)      0.108      0.101  -0.073** (-3.24)                  0.013( 0.45)
Germany               0.378 (1.60)      0.123      0.117  -0.114** (-3.34)                  0.024 (0.56)
Greece                0.631 (1.39)      0.208      0.320    -0.033 (-0.85)                  0.069 (0.60)
Ireland               0.188 (0.75)      0.129     0.127     -0.031 (-1.64)                -0.099* (-2.49)
Italy                 0.388 (1.25)      0.077      0.232  -0.080** (-3.13)                 -0.001 (-0.02)
Japan                -0.194 (-0.52)     0.205     -0.441   -0.040* (-2.26)                  0.002 (0.07)
Netherlands           0.183 (0.79)      0.051      0.121   -0.030* (-2.15)                 -0.020 (-0.55)
Norway                0.428 (1.29)      0.059      0.344    -0.017 (-0.32)                  0.009 (0.15)
Portugal              0.496 (1.34)      0.276      0.229    -0.006 (-0.20)                 -0.017 (-0.47)
Spain                0.821* (2.42)     0.373      0.364    -0.087* (-2.30)                 -0.003 (-0.09)
Sweden                0.504 (1.54)      0.040      0.481    -0.031 (-1.71)                 -0.049 (-0.99)
Switzerland           0.304 (1.01)      0.174      0.106    -0.031 (-1.33)               -0.006** (-2.81)
United Kingdom        0.180 (1.06)      0.120     -0.003  -0.083** (-3.85)                -0.020 (-1.13)




                                                     31
                                Panel B: Emerging Countries
                                 Compo-
                                   sition    Return            Foreign           U.S.
Country          Difference       Effect     Effect            Timing           Timing
Argentina      -0.142 (-0.28)     -0.027     -0.058       -0.074** (-2.63)   -0.131 (-1.32)
Brazil          1.305 (1.82)       0.295      1.040         0.027 (0.75)     -0.003 (-0.05)
Chile           0.106 (0.27)       0.154      0.038        -0.045 (-1.35)    -0.131 (-0.64)
China           0.070 (0.13)       0.069     -0.121       -0.009** (-3.49)    0.113 (0.57)
Colombia        0.475 (1.22)       0.134      0.425         0.001 (0.08)     -0.083 (-0.34)
Hungary        1.520* (2.24)      0.798       0.632       -0.043** (-2.69)   -0.068 (-0.63)
India           0.670 (1.12)       0.402      0.292         0.059* (1.99)     0.035 (0.75)
Korea           0.762 (1.25)       0.425      0.398         0.004 (1.37)     -0.058 (-0.24)
Malaysia        0.030 (0.06)       0.156     -0.081        -0.028 (-1.87)    -0.073 (-0.57)
Mexico          0.498 (1.12)       0.154      0.395         0.023 (1.23)     -0.029 (-0.63)
Peru            0.607 (1.21)      -0.070      0.926         0.027 (0.47)     -0.221 (-1.01)
Philippines    -0.006 (-0.02)     -0.040      0.080        -0.002 (-0.26)    -0.049 (-0.45)
Poland          0.513 (1.00)       0.150      0.506        -0.001 (-0.47)    -0.144 (-0.91)
Russia          1.696 (1.60)       0.429      1.575        -0.000 (-0.01)    -0.309 (-1.32)
South Africa    0.348 (0.72)       0.042      0.232        -0.065 (-1.69)     0.008 (0.35)
Thailand        0.040 (0.06)       0.028      0.004        -0.001 (-0.20)     0.008 (0.04)
Turkey          1.084 (1.13)       0.313      1.026         0.067 (1.14)     -0.189 (-1.44)




                                            32
                                         Table V
                Decomposing the Timing Effect into Trading and Passive Effects
The covariance between lagged weights and returns (the timing effect) is decomposed into (1) the
covariance between lagged deviations of actual from buy-and-hold weights and subsequent returns (the
trading effect), and (2) the covariance of the lagged deviation of buy-and-hold weights from average
weights and subsequent returns. Lag indicates the horizon of the buy-and-hold weight in months. T-
statistics are in parentheses. Statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels are denoted by ***, **,
and *, respectively.

                    Foreign Timing Effect                     U.S. Timing Effect                          # of
 Lag
            Trading Effect       Passive Effect       Trading Effect     Passive Effect                   obs
                                        Panel A: All Countries
   6           -0.012**             -0.047**              0.003              -0.006
                                                                                                           156
                 (-2.32)             (-2.43)              (0.64)             (-0.47)
  12          -0.033***              -0.027              -0.002              -0.001
                                                                                                           150
                 (-3.74)             (-1.53)             (-0.30)             (-0.10)
  24          -0.060***              -0.000              -0.004              -0.000
                                                                                                           138
                 (-3.75)             (-0.02)             (-0.56)             (-0.03)
                                   Panel B: Developed Countries
   6           -0.011**            -0.052***              0.003              -0.012
                                                                                                           156
                 (-2.12)             (-2.83)              (0.86)             (-0.85)
  12          -0.031***             -0.034**              0.001              -0.009
                                                                                                           150
                 (-3.39)             (-2.07)              (0.16)             (-0.63)
  24          -0.056***              -0.006               0.004              -0.013
                                                                                                           138
                 (-3.47)             (-0.32)              (0.77)             (-0.84)
                                Panel C: Emerging Market Countries
   6            -0.005*              -0.004               0.017               0.032
                                                                                                           156
                 (-1.84)             (-0.61)              (1.22)             (0.68)
  12          -0.018***               0.007               0.020               0.032
                                                                                                           150
                 (-3.73)             (0.87)               (0.97)             (0.59)
  24          -0.028***               0.013               0.000               0.061
                                                                                                           138
                 (-2.84)             (1.00)               (0.01)             (0.98)




                                                       33
                                         Table VI
    Trading and Passive Effects of Aggregate Foreign Private Investors in U.S. Securities
The calculations in this table use aggregate private foreign positions in U.S. securities. The covariance
between lagged weights and returns (the timing effect) is decomposed into (1) the covariance between
lagged deviations of actual from buy-and-hold weights and subsequent returns (the trading effect), and (2)
the covariance of the lagged deviation of buy-and-hold weights from average weights and subsequent
returns. Lag indicates the horizon of the buy-and-hold weight in months. T-statistics are in parentheses.
Statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels are denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                   Foreign Private Timing Effect                        # of
            Lag             Trading Effect                  Passive Effect              Obs

             6                 -0.008*                        -0.035**
                                                               (-2.07)                  156
                                (-1.95)
            12                -0.021***                        -0.022
                                                                                        150
                                (-3.13)                        (-1.41)
            24                -0.038***                        -0.002
                                                                                        138
                                (-3.58)                        (-0.10)




                                                   34
                                        Table VII
  Decomposition of the Returns Differential into Composition, Return and Timing Effects:
                                       Subsamples
Difference, the difference between the average monthly percentage return on the portfolio of U.S. claims
(foreign equities and U.S. bonds) and the return on U.S. liabilities (U.S. equities and U.S. bonds), equals
Composition Effect plus Return Effect minus Foreign Timing Effect plus U.S. Timing Effect. The
composition, return and timing effects are defined in section 3.1. Standard t-statistics are in parentheses.
Bootstrapped z-statistics based on 1000 draws are in brackets. Statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10
percent levels are denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.


     Difference                                                                   Timing Effects
                      Composition Effect          Return Effect
 (claims-liabilities)                                                       Foreign              U.S.
                                              Panel A: 1994 -2000
       -0.152                 0.181*                 -0.377*               -0.056**                -0.012
       (-0.64)                [1.73]                 [-1.89]                (-2.15)                (-0.74)
                                          Panel B: 2001 – June 2007
      0.619**                 0.057                 0.472***              -0.088***                 0.002
       (2.56)                 [0.32]                  [3.08]                (-2.91)                 (0.11)




                                                      35
                                         Table VIII
          Decomposing the Timing Effect into Skill and Passive Strategy: Subsamples
The covariance between lagged weights and returns (the timing effect) is decomposed into (1) the
covariance between lagged deviations of actual from buy-and-hold weights and subsequent returns (the
trading effect), and (2) the covariance of the lagged deviation of buy-and-hold weights from average
weights and subsequent returns. Lag indicates the horizon of the buy-and-hold weight in months. T-
statistics are in parentheses. Statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels are denoted by ***, **,
and *, respectively.

                     Foreign Timing                     U.S. Timing
  Lag                                                                                               Nobs
             Trading Effect   Passive Effect   Trading Effect   Passive Effect
                                    Panel A: 1994 -2000
    6            -0.013*             -0.048**               0.009*                -0.018          78
                  (-1.83)             (-2.00)               (1.70)                (-1.13)
   12          -0.037***              -0.026                 0.011                -0.020          72
                  (-2.67)             (-1.15)               (1.53)                (-1.19)
   24           -0.069**               0.013                0.009                 -0.021          60
                  (-2.46)              (0.43)               (0.88)                (-1.49)
                                       Panel B: 2001-June 2007
    6            -0.010              -0.058**               -0.002                 0.011          71
                 (-1.25)               (-2.48)              (-0.28)               (0.45)
   12           -0.027**              -0.028*               -0.008                 0.021          65
                 (-2.16)               (-1.81)              (-1.09)               (0.83)
   24           -0.046**                0.014                0.003                -0.003          53
                 (-2.17)               (1.00)               (0.44)                (-0.10)




                                                       36
                                                                                      Figure 1
                                                    U.S. equity and bond returns and the equity weight in U.S. portfolio liabilities
The 12-month total return on U.S. equities is the return on the MSCI U.S. total return index. The 12-month
total return on U.S. bonds is the foreign-portfolio-weighted average of Lehman Brothers Treasury,
Corporate and Agency bond returns. Actual equity weight in U.S. portfolio liabilities is the share of U.S.
equities in foreign investors’ U.S. bond and equities portfolio. The 24-month buy-and-hold weight is the
share of equity that would have resulted from a buy-and-hold strategy adopted 24 months ago.
                                         60
      12-month total return (% per year)




                                                                             U.S.
                                40




                                                                            equities
                       20




                                                                                                                   U.S. bonds
    -20     0                                 .55
    equity weight in U.S. portfolio liabilities




                                                                       24-month
                                   .5




                                                                      buy-and-hold
                                                                         weight
                         .45




                                                            actual
                .4




                                                            weight
       .35




                                                    1994   1995      1996    1997      1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007




                                                                                                       37
                                                                               Figure 2
                                              Foreign equity and bond returns and the equity weight in U.S. portfolio claims
The 12-month total return on foreign equities is the U.S.-portfolio-weighted average of each country’s
dollar return on its MSCI gross return equity index. The 12-month total returns on foreign bonds are U.S.-
portfolio-weighted averages of each country’s bond returns. Except where noted in Table I, developed
countries’ bond returns are the weighted averages of simple monthly U.S. dollar returns on the country’s
GBI Broad 1-10 year bond index and the Lehman Corporate Eurodollar index where the weights on the
Eurodollar index are the shares of dollar denominated bonds in U.S. holdings of foreign bonds. Similarly,
emerging markets’ bond returns are the weighted averages of simple monthly U.S. dollar returns on the
country’s EMBI+ index and the ELMI+ index. Actual equity weight in U.S. claims is the share of foreign
equities in U.S. investors’ foreign bond and equities portfolio. The 24-month buy-and-hold weights is the
share of equity that would have resulted from a buy-and-hold strategy adopted 24 months ago.
                                         60
      12-month total return (% per year)
                                40




                                                                       foreign
                                                                       equities
                                                                                                                 foreign
                       20




                                                                                                                  bonds
    -20      0
     equity weight in U.S. portfolio assets
                      .7     .75




                                                       actual
                                                       weight
            .65




                                                                   24-month
                                                                  buy-and-hold
                                                                     weight
    .6




                                               1994   1995      1996     1997     1998   1999   2000   2001   2002    2003   2004   2005   2006   2007




                                                                                                  38
                                               Figure 3
                         Equity weight in U.S. portfolio liabilities by country
For developed countries with significant negative timing effects in Table IV, the thick lines depict actual
equity weights (the actual share of U.S. equities in the country’s investors’ U.S. bond and equities
portfolio) and the thin lines 24-month buy-and-hold weights (the share of equity that would have resulted
from a buy-and-hold strategy adopted 24 months ago).

                          Austria                                                  Denmark
   1




                                                          1
   .5




                                                          .5
   0




                                                          0
    1994   1996   1998    2000      2002   2004   2006        1994   1996   1998   2000     2002   2004   2006


                         Finland                                                   France
   1




                                                          1
   .5




                                                          .5
   0




                                                          0




    1994   1996   1998    2000      2002   2004   2006        1994   1996   1998   2000     2002   2004   2006


                         Germany                                                    Italy
   1




                                                          1
   .5




                                                          .5
   0




                                                          0




    1994   1996   1998    2000      2002   2004   2006        1994   1996   1998   2000     2002   2004   2006




                                                         39
                Japan                                   Netherlands
1




                                       1
.5




                                       .5
0




                                       0
 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006        1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006


                Spain                                      U.K.
1




                                       1
.5




                                       .5
0




                                       0




 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006        1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006




                                      40
