NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ORDER OF LIBERALIZATION OF THE
CURRENT AND CAPITAL ACCOUNTS OF
THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS

Sebastian Edwards

Working Paper No. 1507

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138

November

19814

This paper was written while I was visiting the Country Policy
Department of the World Bank during the summer of 1983, and
presented at the World Bank Conference, Economic Liberalization:
Adjustments During the Transition, Washington, D.C., October 1983.
I am indebted to A. Choksi, D. Papageorgiou, L. Ahamed, M. Khan, M.
Selowsky and S. van Wijnbergen for helpful discussions. I am nest
grateful to Daniel Gros, Deepak Lal, Ron McKinnon, Ed Tower and Jan
Tumlir for very helpful comments. The research reported here is
part of the NTBER's research program in International Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research or the World Bank.

NBER Working Paper #1507
Noveniber 1984

The Order of Liberalization of the
Current and Capital Accounts of
the Balance of Payments

ABSTRACT

The opening up of an economy to the rest of the world has generally
been considered an Integral part of economic reform aimed at increasing the

role of markets. Until recently, however, very little discussion was devoted
to the order in which the capital and current account should be liberalized in
developing countries.

This paper deals with several aspects of the order of liberaliza-

tion. The different arguments usually given to advocate a particular ordering

are critically reviewed. Then a three-good two—factor model is used to
analyze the effects of alternative ordering on production and income distribu-

tion. A two—period model of a small economy is also used to investigate the
welfare effects of opening the capital account in the presence of distor-

tions. While the discussion does not yield a theorem regarding the appropriate order of liberalization, there are strong presumptions that it is more
prudent to liberalize the current account first.

Sebastian Edwards
Department of Economics
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA. 900214
(213) 825—1011

Contents

Page

1. Introduction

1

2. The Order of Economic Liberalization

S

3.

2.1 Macroeconomic Stability and Real Exchange Rate Movements
2.2 Welfare Effects of Alternative Orderings
2.3 Adjustment Costs and Asslstance

20

2.4 Summary

25

Prices and Resource Movements During Capital and Current
Account Liberalization

29

3.1 The Economy Under Consideration

31

3.2 Trade.Llberalization
3.2.1 Long—Run Effects of Trade Liberalization
3.2.2 The Short—Run Effects
3.2.3 The Transition Period After a Trade Liberalization
3.3

3.4

6

15

32

33
LID

47

The Liberalization of the Capital Account

51

3.3.1 Long—Run Effects
3.3.2 The Short—Run Effects

54
56

3.3.3

61

Transition

Summary

4. Welfare Implications of Opening the Capital ACcount in the
Presence of Trade Distortions

66

69

4.1 The Model

70

4,2 Opening the Capital Account In the Absence of Trade
Distortions

73

14.3

The Opening of the Capital Account in the Presence of Trade
Distortions

5. Summary and Concluding Remarks

80

6. References

87

1.

Introduction

For many years economists have argued that developing countries

should rely more heavily on the market mechanism. In particular it has

been

argued that liberalization processes, consisting of "freeing" domestic markets

and opening up the economy to the rest of the world, should be implemented. A
large amount of effort and resources have been devoted to the study of the
relationship between the degree of market use, economic efficiency and eco-

nomic growth. These studies have resulted in the accumulation of an impressive body of empirical evidence that indicates that liberalized and export—
oriented economies outperform -— both in terms of growth and equitable income
distribution -—

repressed

and closed economies. .1!

However, despite this

evidence, and the widespread belief among economists of the merits of liberalizing the LDC's economies, little serious efforts to that effect have been

taken by these countries. Many times liberalization attempts are frustrated
at different stages, with these economies reverting to repressed inward—
looking developing strategies.

Why, then, if liberalization is so desirable don't we observe more

successful liberalization attempts? There are a number of possible answers to
this question. First, even if a liberalization process results in an overall
(for the economy as a whole) welfare gain, there are sectors that will gain

and sectors that will lose from it. If losing sectors are politically powerful they may frustrate these liberalization efforts.

I"

This problem becomes

Harberger 1958; Little et al. 1970; Krueger 1978; Balassa 1971, 1982;
Bhagwati 1978; Bhagwati and Srinivasan 1978; Krueger 1978, 1981, 1983.
On the order of liberalization see Edwards (1985b).
This statement, of course, assumes away the possibility of fully
compensating the losers of the liberalization effort.

—2—

more complicated once it is recognized that short—run winners and losers may
differ from long—run winners and losers [see Mayer 1970, Mussa 19714]. From a
policy perspective this fact suggests that the identification of different
groups affected by the liberalization process, and the possible compensation
of

(short—run?)

losers could be important to generate a successful process.

Second, to the extent that there are short-run rigidities and
adjustment costs, a liberalization process may result in short-run output (and

welfare) losses. Even if these losses are more than compensated in the future
——

with

the present value of the change in society's welfare being positive ——

governments may be reluctant to embark into a liberalization episode. The
reason for this is that the time horizon relevant to a government may be
different (i.e.., shorter) than that relevant to the economy as a whole. From

a policy perspective this problem indicates that the analysis of the dynamics
of liberalization ——

differences

between short— and long—run effects ——

is

critical. Once this dynamic process is understood, policies aimed at reducing
the short—run costs of the adjustment could be implemented.

Third, many times liberalizations have been attempted at the same

ti.me as a major stabilization program, aimed at reducing inflation and solving
a serious balance of payments crisis, is underway. 1" As a result of this the
costs of the liberalization process are confused with those of the stabilization program, with the consequent resistance against the liberalization
effort.

Finally (fourth), sometjnes the transition between a repressed and
liberalized economy is mismanaged at a macroeconomic level, generating

See Krueger (1978, 1981), LIttle (1982), Mlchaely (1982).

additional costs, which can become associated with the liberalization process
itself.

It is clear from

this

discussion that the dynamic aspects of

liberalization episodes are extremely important. The transition between a
repressed state and a liberalized economy should be implemented carefully, in

order to avoid the abortion of the liberalization attempt itself. Among these
dynamic aspects, those related to the speed and order of liberalization are

particularly important. With respect to the former, the main question is how
fast should an economy be liberalized? In analyzing this problem considera-

tions related to (a) efficiency gains, (b) income distribution,
Cc)

credibility

of the liberalization reforms, and Cd) feasibility of the

attempt should be taken into account.!" Regarding the order of
liberalization, the main question is which markets should be liberalized

first. This is a complicated question that has both micro (welfare) and macro
implications. At the micro level typical second—best problems are present,
while at the macro level, different orders of the liberalization process will
imply different paths f or the critical variables, including the real exchange
rate, aggregate output and unemployment.

The present paper deals with a particular aspect of the order of

economic liberalization: the order of liberalizing the current and capital
account of the balance of payments. It has generally been considered that the
opening of the economy to the rest of the world is an integral part of any

economic reform aiming at increasing the role of markets in LDC's. Until

On the speed of liberalization see Aizenman (1983), Learner (1980), Pindyk
(1982), Krueger (l983b), Mussa (1982, 1983).

—14 —

recently,

however, very little discussion had been devoted to the order in

which the current and capital accounts should be liberalized. ! The recent
experience of a group of countries from the cone of South—America ——

Argentina,

Chile and Uruguay —- has generated new interest on the subject.

These countries followed opposite orders -—

Argentina

and Uruguay opened the

capital account first, while Chile opened the current account first —-

with a

common fate in the early 1980s: deep economic recession and (partial) rever-

sal of the liberalization attempt. An important policy question that has
emerged from these experiences has to do with defining liberalization policy
packages (including a specific order) that would increase the possibility that
the reforms will indeed be undertaken and will not be reverted.
In the present paper some of the most important issues related to the
order of liberalization of the current and capital accounts of the balance of

payments are surveyed. The paper is organized in the following form: In
Section 2 the literature on the subject is reviewed, and some interpretations

are suggested. In this section the central role o' credibility in any
successful policy reform is emphasized. In SectIon 3 a positIve analysis of

the effects of liberalizing the cpital and currnt accounts on production and
income distribution Is presented. The framework used for this discussion is a
3 goods—two factors node1 with sector specific capital in the short-run. This
analysis proceeds with great detail and shows that each reform on Its own will
tend to have opposite effects on production and income distribution.

In

Of course, this question is only relevant in a world with market
imperfections and/or externalities. In a world without externalities or
frictions the question of the orders of liberalization Is trivial: all
markets should be liberalized simultaneously and Instantaneously.

—5--

Section

14 a two—period model of' a small economy is used to investigate the

welfare effects of opening the capital account (i.e., allow some foreign
borrowing or lending) in the presence of
provides

trade

restrictions. This discussion

a general multi—period framework useful for analyzing the welfare

consequences of partial reforms. It is shown that the welfare effects of
opening the capital account in the presence of trade distortions will depend
critically on whether the foreign funds obtained
(directly)

increase present consumption or if they are used to finance capital

accumulation.

are

from abroad are used to

Finally, in Section 5 a

summary and some concluding comments

presented. Also in this section some thoughts regarding future lines of

research on the subject are presented.

2.

The Order of Economic Liberalization: A Review of the Literature
The order of economic liberalization —— understood as whether the

capital or the current accounts should be liberalized first -— has become an

explicit topic of analysis only during the last few years. It was

basically

the recent liberalization and stabilization experience of the countries of the
cone of South-America (Argentina, Chile and Uruguay) that triggered a broad

discussion on the subject. Since 1980 an increasing number of conferences,
papers, Ph.D. theses and research projects have been devoted to the subject. -Y

Even though the explicit analysis of the order of liberalization of the
current and capital accounts is only recent, it is possible to find some
important discussions on the topic in some earlier work devoted to other

See, for example, Mckinnon (1932), Blejer and Landau (1984), Corbo and de
Melo (1981), IMF Staff Papers (June 1983), Khan and Zahler (1983), and
Krurnrn

(1983).

—6—

aspects of economic liberalization [i.e., McKinnon 1973, Chap. 11; Little,
Scitovsky and Scott 1970, Ch. 10].

The different authors that have analyzed the order of liberalization

have tended to focus on different aspects of the problem. However, in order
to organize this review these arguments will be grouped Into three broad cate-

gories: (a) Macroeconomic Stability and real exchange rate movements;

(b) Welfare effects of alternative orderings; and (C) Costs of the
adj ustment process.

2.1 Macroeconomic Stability and Real Exchange Rate Movements
It has been suggested that the opening of the capital account of the
balance of payments will result, in the short—run, in large destabilizing
capital flows. 21

If

the capital account Is opened at a stage where the

domestic capital market is still repressed, with Interest rates fixed at arti—

fically low levels, massive capital outflows will take place. For this reason
most, if not all authors that have discussed this issue have suggested that
the capital account should only be opened after the domestic capital market
has been liberalized, and domestic Interest rates have been raised. .!

It

is

also generally accepted that in an inflationary environment the domestic
financial market should only be liberalized after the fiscal deficit has

.1!

been

See, for example, McKinnon (1973, 1982), Dornbusch (1983), Corbo (1983),
Arriazu (1983b), Little, Scitovsky and Scott (1970, Ch. 10, p. 365).

Interestingly,

in most of the literature on domestic financial markets
liberalization authors have referred to "raising" interest rates rather
than "freeing" them (see, for exarip1e, Mc}Cinnon's 1973 classical
treatment of the subject).

—7-

controlled.

Mathiesori

The reason for this is that, as emphasized by McKinnon and

[1981], the existence of a large fiscal deficit, which is financed

by an inflation tax, necessitates that reserve requirements are kept high and

interest payments on deposits are kept low. In this way it is assured that
the base on which the inflation tax is collected -—
money --

is

If,

the

stock of high powered

not eroded. J-2!

on the other hand, the fiscal deficit has been controlled and the

domestic fInancIal market liberalIzed, the presumption is that the opening of
the capital account of the balance of payments will result in large inflows of
foreign capital, triggered by the existence of substantial interest rates

differentials [see MeKinnon, 1973]. These inflows of foreign funds will then
be monetized and, under a fixed exchange rate will result in inflation and a
real appreciation of the domestic currency. IL"

if,

on the other hand, the

country In question chooses to adopt a floating exchange rate, the massive
inflow of capital will result in an appreciation of the nominal (arid real)

2!

Most of the discussion on the order of liberalization in the context of
the southern cone countries has focused on the problem of liberalization
with stabilization. The reason for this is, of course, that these
countries attempted to liberalize and reduce extremely high inflation
rates (up to 500% per year) simultaneously.
See McKinnon (1982) and 'IcKinnon and Mathieson (1981) for discussions on
the subject. It has been suggested that the inability to control the
fiscal deficit in Argentila wa ne of the major causes of the failure of
the recent liberalization 4ith stabilization attempted in that country.
See, f or example, Rodriguez (1fl3), Nogues (1983), Fernandez (1983),
Sjaastad (1983), Arriazu (1933) and McKinnon (1982).

IL! The implicit assumption here io rHt as a result of the opening of the
capital account an excess sUp3ly of' money will be generated.

—8--

exchange rate.

Not only will the opening of the capital account generate

a real appreciation of the domestic currency, but since financial markets
adjust fast —— indeed much faster than goods markets ——

this

real appreciation

will be quite abrupt [see Frenkel 1982, 1983].
While the opening of the capital account will generate a real

ciation, it has been argued that a successful liberalization of the trade
account will require a real devaluation of the domestic currency. This real
depreciation would help the exportables sector to expand as the new structure
of relative prices replaces the old protective structure.

If, however,

due to the opening of the capital account this devaluation is precluded, the
transition in the tradeable goods sector from a protective to a freer envi-

ronment will become more difficult. The appreciation generated by the opening
of the capital account will tend to squeeze profitability in the tradeable
goods sector at a moment when this sector (or part of it in the import substitution industries) is going through a costly readjustment. -Li"

Consequently

some authors have suggested that the capital and current accounts should not
be open simultaneously, and that during the transition period after trade has
been liberalized, capital Inflows should be tightly controlled.

It is

On the relationship between capital flows and the real exchange rate In
LDCs see, for example, the discussions in Harberger (1982); Harberger and
Edwards, (1982); Munoz (1982); Diaz—klejancjro (1981); Cline (1983); Calvo
(1982); Corden (1982); Khan and Zahier (1983); Corbo and Edwards (1981);
Corbo (1983); Arriazu (1983b); Van Wijnbergen (1982); and McKinnon (1973,
1976, 1980, 1982).
Li."

See, for example, Mckinnon (1973, 1982); Little, Scitovsky and Scott
(1970); Balassa (1976, 1982); Michaely (1982). See, however, the
in Section 14 of this paper.

—

114/

That is an exchange rate deprotection, a la Corden (1982) will take
place.

—9—

interesting to quote what McKinnon wrote on the subject in 1973, since the

hypothetical situation described by him closely reflects some of the problems
faced by the southern cone countries during their recent (late l9lOs—early
1980s) liberalization efforts:

.unusually large inflows of foreign capital.. .inhibit
the exchange rate to depreciate sufficiently....
[F]reviously protected competing industries, which face a
significant adjustment problem, could have their
difficulties magnified... .[HJence the capital inflow
could trigger a decline Ir overall domestic
output...
(page 160)

McKinnon then goes on to recommend that an economy that liberalizes
its foreign trade should "deliberately avoid an unusual or extraordinary
injection of foreign capital" [1973, p. 161, emphasis added].

More recently

this kind of reasoning has also been made by Dornbusch [1983], Arriazu [1983],
again by McKinnori [1982], and Harberger [1983]. The general theme is that

during the transition of a trade liberalization process capital inflows should
be controlled, since otherwise the real exchange rate will appreciate
producing harmful effects, and even destroying the liberalizing experiment.

As Dornbusch [1983, p. 176] has recently put it: "The worst thing to do is to
liberalize the capital account.. .before the required real depreciation has

been achieved".

A critical question regarding this line of argument is to what extent

the freeing of the capital account will result in an "extraordinary" Injection
of foreign capital, in the sense of the McKinnon quote. If the opening of the
capital account results in large capital inflows which are sustainable in the
long—run, the resulting appreciation should be viewed a a long—run equilib—

—1 O-

rium phenomenon. Under those circumstances it is not clear that the opening
of the capital account should be delayed on the grounds of its effects on the
real exchange rate.

It turns out, however, that it is not difficult to

build simple models of an economy that restricts capital Inflows, where an

opening of the capital account will result in short-run overshooting of the

level of capital inflows. Possibly one of the simplest ways of modelling this
behavior is by assuming

that

capital inflows (AK) respond to the following

equation:
L,K =

m1nCO(D*_D1),]

where D* is the desired or sustainable level of foreign debt, which will
depend on the level of "the" world interest rate, real

Income, real wealth and

the perceived profitability of investments at home, among other things. D_1
is the actual stock of debt in the previous period, 0 is a partial adjust-

ment coefficient, and K is the maximum (possibly zero) amount of (net)
capital inflow allowed by the economic authority In every period.

See the discussion in Stockman (1982) on the merits of opening the
capital account as soon as possible.

The term 0[D* -

D1] responds to the idea, advanced by Harberger (1982)
for example, that there is a long-run equilibrium ratio of foreign debt
to GDP. If GD? grows at g% per annum so will the stock of debt. If,
on the other hand, the real interest rate on the foreign debt is r*,
net annual capital inflows will grow at a rate of (g —
Notice that
a problem with this formulation is that it only looks at the phase where
foreign debt is accumulated, and does not explicitly incorporate the
existence of an intertemporal budget constraint. On the different phases
of the accounts of the balance of payments see Fischer and Frenkel
(1972).

r*).

••1 1—

Clearly, if bJC < e(D* —

D1)

the gap between desired and actual debt will

increase through time. Once the restrictions on capital inflows are lifted,

actual inflows will become equal to O(D* —

D1).

That means that immediately

following the opening of the capital account capital flows will jump to a

fraction 0 of the accumulated gap between the desired and actual debt. As
this gap is closed, the level of capital inflows will slowly be reduced until

they reach a new equilibrium level. For the case of a simple economy the
behavior through time of capital flows that emerges from this formulation can

be represented in Figure 2.1. Alternatively, it is possible to assume that
once the capital account Is liberalized the perceived profitability of domes-

tic investrent will dramatically increase [McKinnon, 19733. This will result

in a (significantly) higher 0* ——

sustainable

level of foreign debt —— and in

a jump In the level of capital inflows, as shown in Figure 2.1.

This sudden increase (i.e., overshooting) of capital inflows will
produce a large current account deficit -— as was the case of Chile during
1980—1981. .11-" As has been pointed out by McKinnon (1976), Corden (1982) and

Harberger

(1982,

l983)) among others, as long as a fraction of these flows are

these capital inflows will
of these goods and a real apprecia

spent on nori-tradeable goods, theabsortjri of

require

an increase In the relative price

tion of domestic currency.

Once the gap between desired and actual debt

begins to close, the relative price of riorl—tradeables will slowly tend to

See Harberger (1982), Corbo (1933),. Edwards (198k). See also Nogues
(1983) and Rodriguez (1983) ror a discussion of the Argentinian case.

Harberger (1982) actually caloulated that the increase in the level of
capital inflows in Chile is capable of "explaining" a real appreciation
of the peso of up to 25 percent.

—12—

decline towards its new long—run equilibrium. At this point of the adjustment
process another problem may emerge if the country has fixed its exchange
rate: If f or some reason -—
indexation, f or example —-

the existence of minimum wages, or of backward

the nominal price of non—tradeables is Inflexible

downward, the decline of this relative price will not occur, and unemployment
will result.

It Is interesting to notice that the dynamic effect of a capital
account liberalization on the relative price of nontradeable goods resembles
that

of the Dutch—Disease, in that in order to adjust to a large increase in

absorption a real appreciation of the domestic currency will have to take

place. !2/ Also, it should be pointed out that there are other reasons
besides the "jump" in the level of capital flows discussed above, why the
opening of the capital account could result in a short-run appreciation of the
domestic currency that will exceed the long—run appreciation. One of such
cases is related to the difference between short— and long—run elá$ticities of
supply of the nontradeables goods sector.
The conflicting movements of the real exchange rate as a result of

opening the capital or current accounts (i.e., real appreciation and depreciation respectively) captures the fact that these policies will exercise
for resources to move in opposite directions. The opening of the
capital account will generate (at least in the short—run) an expansion
pressures

of the nori—tradeable goods sector and a contraction of the importables and

!21

On

Dutch-Disease see, for example, Corden (1981, 1982), Corden and Neary
(1982), Harberger (1982), Edwar'd.3 and Aoki (1983), Van Winjbergen
(l98i4a,b).

—13—

exportables

sectors.

The opening of the current account, on the other

hand, will result in an expansion of the exportables sector, a contraction of
the production of Importables, with the nontradeables sector either expanding

or contracting [see the discussion in Section 3 below]. To the extent that
there could be advisable to implement policies that would avoid unnecessary
resource switches (I.e., resource movements that will be reversed after a
short period of time). .-i_"

In

particular a synchronization of the effects of

opening the capital and current accounts, in the sense suggested by Frenkel

[1982, 1983] might be called for. Frenkel has proposed that given the
differential speeds at which the goods and capital markets adjust, this
synchronization
only

after

could be achieved by

opening the current account first, and

some time opening the capital account. In Section 3 below, a

specific analysis of the effects of both types of liberlization, that spells
out the difference between short- and long—run effects on resource movements
is presented.

An alternative view has been recently presented by Deepak Lal

[1982]. According to Lal, sInce exchange rate behavior is critIcal during the
transition period from a protected towards a liberalized trade account, it is
better not to let the government manipulate the nominal exchange rate during

this transition. There have been plenty of cases, he argues, where exchange

This indeed has been the case in countries that have opened the capital
account. In Chile, for example, after the capital account was opened in
1979/80, an important fraction of the massive capital inflows was used to
finance the expansion of the construction sector. This was also the case
of Argentina and Uruguay (see Nogues 1983; Hanson and de Melo 1983).
A critical question at this stage is why wouldn't the private sector take
into account these considerations when making their decisions about
production and resource movements.

—14—

Figure 2.1

N
*

time

—15—

rate management has been inappropriate

and

has resulted in

the trade reform

being finally aborted (i.e., the recent experience of Argentina). -?_?J

For

this reason Lal has proposed that a floating exchange rate system with full
currency

convertibility, should

be implemented before

the trade reform takes

place. This, of course, means that the capital account should be liberalized
before the trade account. A problem with this proposition however is that Lal
does not spell out how to handle the real

appreciation problem resulting from

the opening of the capital account —- even
though admittedly its effects will
be less severe if the trade side has not been reformed yet,

nor does he

specify how much in advance the capital account should be opened. Also, in
his discussion on the subject Lal does not refer to the Institutional setting

that would be required for a floating exchange rates system to succeed in a
developing country.

2.2 Welfare Effects of Alternative Orderings
A second line of argument used in discussions related to the ordering
of economic liberalization refers to traditional welfare analysis. It has

Other authors that discuss how to handle the exchange rate during the
transition period after a trade reform include McKinnon (1973), Kapur
(1983), Michaely (1982), Balassa (1982). One possible way to deal with
the exchange rate problem during the transition is to
adopt a dual
system, with a fixed (or managed) rate for trade transactions, and a
floating rate for financial transactions. The problem with this kind of
system, however, is that it becomes verycumbersome and difficult to
manage. On dual exchange rate systems see, for example, Meade (1951, p.
302); Flood (1978); Lainy (1975, Fleming (1974) and Dornbusch (1976).
On thi8, see however, Branson (1983).

Some authors have argued that due to the lack of some basic institutional
requirements (freely) floating exchange rates systems are not feasible In
developing countries. See, for example McKinnon (l979a,b).

—16—

been argued that if the current and

capital

accounts are

not

liberalized

simultaneously there might be welfare implications of reducing one distortion
while other distortions are kept In place.

This kind of argument has been

made by Frenkel [1982, 1983], Krueger [1983] and McKinnon [1973]. These
authors have generally concluded that welfare considerations indicate that the

current account should be liberalized first. The main reason for this is that

(negative) indirect welfare effect of opening the capital account in the
presence of trade distortions will exceed the indirect effects arising from
the

the opposite ordering. MeKinnon [1973, P. 157], for
liberalization [of] capital inflow[s]. . .

increase[s]

example stated that "the

the basic distortion in

the economy". Frenkel [1983], has expressed that
when the trade account is opened first the cost of remaining
distortion (i.e., the closed capital account)...is likely to
be relatively small. On the other hand, when the capital
account is opened up first the cost of the remaining distortion (i.e., the close trade account)...is likely to be very
large. Thus a comparison of the costs of distortions...
supports the proposition that the trade account should be
opened first.
[p. 167].
Kruger [1983] has stated that

Since exchanges of assets are exchanges of capitalized values
of income streams, income streams generated by distorted
prices are probably the inappropriate ones at which to
trade. It would then follow that capital account libera—
lization should not be undertaken unless both current account
and domestic financial transaction are already

liberalized.
In

[P. 19].

some sense this type of reasoning, which focuses on the welfare

effects of opening the capital account in the presence of trade distortions,

As mentioned in the introduction, in a world with no distortions the
Optimal (i.e., welfare maxirnizing) strategy is to liberalize both accounts
simultaneously and instantaneously.

—17—

can

be related to the irnnilserizing capital accumulation argument originally

advanced by Harry Johnson [1967]. ?_"

This

argument points out that if there

are tariffs and the importable goods is capital Intensive, capital accumula-

tion may be welfare reducing. The reason for this is that when capital is
accumulated, production of the capital Intensive (i.e., the importable) sector
will increase, [Rybczynskl 1955], and the effect of the pre—existing distor-

tion will be reinforced. This effect can be strong enough, so that the accumulation of capital will result in a reduction of welfare.

An obvious

question at this point Is why would the recipients of capital inflows use them

to accumulate capital (i.e., to invest) if welfare might be reduced? The
answer

may

be

is that while from a private perspective the accumulation of

capital

beneficial, since under our assumptions regarding capital intensity,

the domestic rental rate of capital will exceed the world rental rate,

from a social perspective, it will be less desirable —- and could even he

immiserizing. This suggests, then, that if once the capital account is opened
investment decisions are made using shadow prices, welfare will never decrease
[see Edwards and Van Wijnbergen 1983].

Of course, irnmiserization represents an extreme case. However, the
analytics of this case can be applied to more plausible results, where the
increase in welfare resulting fron capital accumulation is lower in the
presence of trade distortion. See also Bertrand and Flatters (1971) for
extensions on the welfare efrects of the accumulation of capital.
The condition for this welfare reduction to take place is that the
Rybczynski line is flatter' than tie world's relative price line. See
Johnson (1967).

This,

of course, according to Solper-Sarnuelson's theorem.

—18—

The analysis of the welfare effects of foreign investment in the
presence of tariffs —— as developed by Bhagwati and Srinivasan [1982], and
Brecher and Diaz—Alejandro [1977], among others —— can also be useful for the

present discussion regarding the order of liberalization. Brecher and DiazAlejandro, for example, have shown that in the presence of tariffs if the
importable goods is capital Intensive a small amount of foreign investment
will always be welfare reducing if foreign capital is paid its marginal

product. This will happen even If the conditions required for the Johnson
[1967] immiserlzation discussed above, do not hold. If, however, the return
to foreign capital is taxed, foreign investment may be welfare improving.
They argue that if the amount of this tax Is equal to the difference between
capital's marginal productivity valued at domestic prices, and capital's
marginal productivity valued at world prices, welfare will remain unaffec-

ted. Again, the main reason for this result lies on the fact that under the
assumption that the importable goods is capital Intensive foreign investment
—-

or for that matter any form of capital accumulation ——

will

result in an

increase in the production of the sector that already produces too much from a
social perspective.

In general, the welfare effects of additional investment resulting
from the liberalization of the capital account can be analyzed within the
context of the emerging literature on factor trade.

If before the

liberalization process the (private) domestic rate of return to capital
exceeds the world rate of return, once foreign borrowing is allowed some of

On factor trade see, for example, Grossman (1983), Bhagwati and Srinivasan
(1983), Brecher and Findlay (1983), Brecher (1983) and Srinivasan (1983).

—19—

these

funds

will

be used for the importation of machines. Analytically this

is equivalent to allowing trade in machines (today), and thus can be analyzed
within

the factor trade framework.
The above discussion -— and,

to some extent, the argument of MeKinnon

[1973], Frenkel [1982, 1983] and Krueger [1983] presented above ——

focus

exclusively on the case where, as a result of the liberalization of the
capital account, the additional borrowing is used to increase investment.

This, of course, needs not be the case. A fraction (possibly zero) of the new
borrowing could be used to increase present consumption. Indeed that will
happen as long as prior to the liberalization the domestic rate of time

preferences exceeded the world rate of interest. It is easy to show that,
under

these

circumstances, if all of the (new) foreign borrowing is used for

additional present consumption (with the world rate of interest below the
domestic rate of time preferences) welfare cannot deteriorate even if there
are tariff's.

We now briefly turn to discuss the welfare effect of liberalizing

trade in the presence of a closed capital account. The question here is if
there arecircumstarices urder whiô'n this particular order of liberalization
will result in some indirect negative welfare effects.

In principle, at a

theoretical level, it is conceivable that some models might yield this kind of

result. Specifically, if the restricitons In the capital account take the
form of a tax on foreign borrowing that introduces a wedge between the world
and domestic rates of interest, and the liberalization of the current account

A different, and more relevant question of course, is whether the total -—
direct plus indirect effects -- can be negative.

—20—

results In a reduction (i.e., leftward shift) of the dnand for foreign
borrowing, an indirect negative welfare effect could result.

In practice, however, this case is quite Implausible. First, It is
unlikely that the reduction of tariffs will generate a reduction of the demand

for foreign borrowing. The reason for this is that once tariffs are reduced
the demand for importables will increase, with part of the Increase in consumption of this type of goods being financed by additional foreign borrowing.

Second, In a large number of cases the distortions associated with

capital account take the form of quantitative restrictions, where a given

maximum amount of foreign borrowing is allowed. In this case then, there is
no indirect welfare cost (i.e., welfare rectangle), in the borrowing market

associated with the reduction of trade distortions. In general, these
considerations constitute a part of the presumption that trade liberalization
is welfare improving even if distortions in some other markets are maintained
EKrueger 1983; Michaely 1982; Corbo and de Melo 1981].

2.3 Adjustment Costs and Assistance
Some authors have postulated that in order to increase the
probability of success (i.e., non—reversal) of a trade reform, the adjustment
costs (unemployment and others) related to the tariffs reduction should be

il-'1

There is an important problem, however, related to the speed of tariff
reductions. it is conceivable that if a slow tariff reform schedule is
announced today, borrowing will decrease, since the public will postpone
consumption towards the future, when tariffs will be lower.

-21 -

minimized [see for example Michaely, 1982].

i! It

has then been argued that

one way of reducing these adjustment costs is through the importation of

foreign capital, which would be used to finance a smoother adjustment of the

import competing industries. According to this view then, the capital account

be opened first, or simultaneously with the trade account. This would
be used to ease the
increase the availability of "cheap" funds that could then
adjustment process. Paul Clark [1982], for example, argues that the success-

should

ful

liberalization of

extent,

the Egyptian economy in the 1970s was due, to a large

to the adjustment assistance provided by foreign sources. Anne

Krueger [1983a] on the other hand, while not agreeing with the order "capital

account first

important

puts

and trade—account second", has also recognized the possible

role of foreign

funds to

help

achieve a smoother transition. As

she

it:

[O]ne of the important contributions international lending can
make to a country when its leaders are genuinely committed to full
liberalization, [is to].. .permit higher levels of imports than
would otherwise be feasible....Not only does this reduce the
economic and political strains associated with liberalization, it
also reduces uncertainty of business as to the likelihood that
liberalization will persist. [1983a, p. 11].

The arguments for using foreign funds to

process

smooth the adjustment

during a trade liberalization episode are, to some extent, equivalent

Usually the idea of' minimizing adjustment costs is translated into two
(1) liberalization of trade should be
forms of policy recorarnentations:
done slowly [see Michaely 1982; Little, Scltovsky, Scott, 1970); and
(b) adjustment assistance —-- usually in the form of foreign funds —-

should

be provided.

See also, for example, Little, Scitovsky and Scott (1970, Ch. 10);
Michasly (1982, p. 17).

—22—

to the arguments in favor of providing adjustment assistance to industries
that are negatively affected by (exogenous) changes In the terms of trade.

A

recent NBER study edited by Jagdlsh Bhagwatl [1982] contains a number of
interesting papers on the subject.

As Bhagwati himself puts it in the

introduction to this volume, the analysis of the adjustment assistance issue
requires knowing the path the economy will take following the change of relative prices (i.e., changes in terms of trade and/or tariff reductions).
According to the simple textbook case, following a change in relative prices,

resources will immediately move out of the sector whose relative price has

declined and into the expanding sector. In more complex models however, there
will be adjustment costs and resource reallocation will only take place
slowly, and will possibly result in a short—run loss of output.

it is very important to clearly specify

the

However,

nature of these adjustment costs

before making inferences regarding the desirability of intervention. If these
costs are related to the activity of moving resources between sectors, as in
Mussa's [1978] model, and there are no externalities, there is no welfare—
related reason to provide adjustment assistance.
adjustment costs arise from market imperfections ——
minimum wages for example --

there

If, on the other hand,

like

the existence of

is some room for intervention. The first

best policy, of course, is to try to eliminate the source of these market

11" See, for example, Bruno (1932), ieary (1982), and Mussa (1982).
The most popular models wit-i adjustment costs are of the Ricardo-Viner
type. See for example Jones (197L), Mayer (19724), Mussa (19711, 1978,
1982), Neary (1978, 1982), and Jtit and Norman (1980).

However, adjustment assistance mIght be called for other reasons, like
income distribution consider'.3tIn. See Learner (1981).

—23—

imperfections. If, for whatever reason, this first best policy is not
available, second best solutions should be sought.
McKinnorj [1973, 1982], however, has strongly opposed the idea of

using foreign capital flows to assist the trade reform transition period. In
fact, in his 1973 book he characterized aborted liberalization

episodes as

"partial liberalization with foreign capital" [1973, p. 155]. This view,

which is consistent with his position of

tightly controlling capital inflows

throughout the trade liberalization, is based on the idea that short—term
capital movements provide incorrect signals to the private sector:
[T]rade liberalization should proceed without relying on
unusual short—term inflows of private oapital...Such capital
inflows are simply not sustainable In the long—run; and during
the liberalization process itself they throw out incorrect
market signals. [1982, p. 163]

There are two problems with this view. First, it is not clear what
is meant by "unusual" inflows of capital.

Second, there is no theoretical a

priori reason to believe that these "unusual" capital inflows will provide the

wrong signals. In order for this argument to make sense it Is necessary to
explicitly specify why the private sector will not realize (as the government

presumably does in McKinnon' model) that these inflows are

temporary

and

"unusual". If, on the other hand, the private sector does realize the
temporary nature of the inflows, they will not throw incorrect signals and

there is no reason, at least on these gounds, to restrict capital movements.
A critical question regarding this problem is related to the

credibilit1 of the trade reform. If the public believes that there is some

the future, foreign funds,
through the opening of the capital account, may be used by the owners

probability that the reform will be reversed in

obtained

—214-

of capital in the Import substitution industries to maintain their firms

functioning at a (temporary) loss. Alternatively, these funds could be used
to finance lobbying activities aimed at convincing the government officials of
the desirability of reversing the trade reform. .31-"

Also,

If agents believe that the trade reform will be reversed, they

will tend to borrow heavily today, in order to finance a higher present consurnption. This, of course, is a rational strategy if it is expected that
(importable) goods in the future will be more expensive, due to the perceived

hike of tariffs. This optimal behavior from a private perspective, however,
may result in excessive (i.e., non—optimal) borrowing from the social point of
view.

The above discussion suggests that depending on the degree of credi—
bilty a larger availability of foreign funds may either help the adjustment
process -— by making it politically more pallatable as Krueger suggests -—

or

may frustrate the whole experience. However, the degree of credibility --

which is critical for the analysis of the order of,liberalization -— should
not be viewed as an exogenous variable. On the contrary, the strategy
followed during the liberalization process will affect the degree of credibi—

lity. If the economic reforms are pursued in a way such that credibility is
low, agents will not make the required adjustments and the likelihood of

failure of the economic reform will be high. In that sense, a fundamental and
critical aspect of establishing credibiiity is related to the Internal consis—

.31."

As Carlos Rodriguez (1983) has documented it, this was the recent case of
Argentina.

-25—

tency

of the policies being pursued.

In that respect, for example, the

inconsistency of the Argentinian fiscal policy —- which maintained a very
large fiscal deficit —— and the pre—announced exchange rate policy severely
undermined the degree of credibility of the whole reform package.

2.11 Summary
In this section the literature on the order of economic liberali-

zation has been reviewed and discussed. The discussion has basically abstracted from th relationship between liberalization and stabilization (see
however the brief discussion in Section 5 of this paper) and has focused on
different arguments used to suggest a specific ordering for liberalizing the

capital and the current accounts of the balance of payments. It is important
to emphasize that a large part of this literature has asked the following

question: given that the liberalization of the trade account (I.e., the
dismantlement of QR's and reduction of tariffs) is a policy objective, should
the capital account be opened simultaneously, or only after tariffs have been

reduced? In that sense, then, the existing literature has focused on a
narrower question than the one addressed here.
In this section the arguments that have appeared in the (brief)
literature on the subject were organized into three broad categories:

(a) macroeconomic stability and real exchange rate movements;

(b) welfare

effects of alternative orderings and (c) adjustment costs and assistance.

On problems of credibility in the context of' anti—inflationary policy see
Schelling (1982), Taylor (1982) and Fellner (1982).

See Sjaastad (1983) for an illustration of the degree of inconsistency of
these policies using an inflation tax view.

—26—

An interesting policy question related to the order of liberalization
advocated by MoKinnon, Frenkel and others —-

"current

account first" -— stems

from the recent Chilean experience. Chile followed almost exactly the
McKlnnon-Frenkel order, liberalizing the trade account first and only after
tariffs had reached their final goal of 10%, partially opening the capital
account. 9_"

However, the Chilean economy recently entered Into the worst

recession in its history with real output declining by 15% in 1982. While a
complete analysis of the Chilean experience is well beyond the scope of the
present paper, .J_"

it

is possible to point out some of the major causes of the

the Chilean crisis. First, the adoption of a fixed exchange rate to the
dollar (In June 1979), at the same time as real wages were fully indexed

created serious policy inconsistencies. The pegging of the peso, in the
presence of massive capital inflows in 1980 and 1981 resulted in a real appreciation of the Chilean peso of almost 30%, which was translated into an

important loss of competitiveness of the tradeables goods sector. This situation was aggravated by the presence of extremely high real rates of interest
--

partially

generatedby generalized expectations of a large devaluation --,

the woi'ld reöessiOn, and the decline in Chile's terms of trade. The failure
to take corrective policy measures in time aggravated the situation, generating speculation against the peso, with the consequent loss of international
reserves.

Mckinnon (1982, p. 159) states that "The correct order of
liberalization.. .approxirnates the successful Chilean experience after
1975. Chile is to be treated as a norm or standard of reference."
On the recent Chilean experience see Harberger (1982), Corbo (1983),
Edwards (1981, 1985a) and Sjaastad (1983).

—27—

The Chilean experience indicates the macroeconomic management
following a liberalization attempt is much more difficult than what it has

been thought. Also, this case confirms the central role of expectations and
credibility in any major economic reform. If credibility is low, and there
are expectations of policy reversal, it will be very difficult for the reform

to succeed. Since, as it was argued above, expectations and credibility are
largely endogenous, one of the considerations that should be taken into
account when formulating the reform policy is to set the speed and ordering of
the liberalization in a way such that these expectations of reversal will be
low.

An important problem related to the opening of the capital account,
which has not received the attention it deserves has to do with the level of
foreign indebtedness resulting from the opening process.

The main

question here is to what extent can a liberalization of the capital account

result in a foreign debt crisis because the private sector over—borrows? In
principle, it could be argued that this is unlikely, since the private sector,

which now faces the "correct" signals, will take loans only if the marginal

return obtained from those funds exceeds the cost of the loans. Theoretically, in the simplest class of models, the free interaction between the

Of course, this is more easily said than done. The role of policy
credibility is clearly one or the nore important topics of macroeconomic
research at the moment. Some early and promising contributions on the
subject include Taylor (1982), Schelling (1982) and Fellrier (1982).
Mcklnnon (1973), however, briefly rentions this problem in his taxonomy of
the successful and unsuccessful Leralization attempts.

—28—

private

domestic sector and the foreign banks will result in an optimal

borrowing/lending strategy. From a practical point of view and in more
sophisticated models, however, there are a number of reasons to believe that

this will not be the case. First, as the recent experience of some Latin—
American countries has shown, the distinction between private and public

foreign debt is highly artificial. Once a country's private sector runs into
debt problems, the government takes over (or is forced to take over) this
private debt.

This

means that to the extent that the private sector knows

that it will be bailed out by the government, the possibility of moral hazard

type of behavior becomes highly likely. Under these circumstances, there will
be an important difference between socially and privately optimal borrowing
strategies, with a tendency on behalf of the private sector to over-borrow.
Second, contrary to the textbook case, even small countries cannot borrow

infinite amounts at "the" given world rate of interest. Quite the contrary,
even small countries face (up to a certain point) upward sloping supplies of
foreign funds, where the Interest rate charged is an increasing function of
the amount borrowed.
tend

to

This fact also suggests that the private sector will

over-borrow once the capital account Is opened. Specifically, there

is an argument for Imposing an optimal tax on borrowing at a rate of

1/c, where c is the elasticity of supply of foreign funds. And third, If
the private sector expects that the trade reform will be reversed In the

See, for example, Diaz—Alejandro (1983).

See McDonald (1982) for an exhaustive review of issues related to country
risk. See also Edwards (19814) and Harberger (1976, 1980).

—29—

future (i.e., that tariffs will be raised), they will perceive a very low
consumption

interest

rate (measured

as the

rate at which they can exchange

traded goods between today and tomorrow) today, and will thus tend to increase
While this is a perfectly optimal strategy from

its foreign borrowing.

the private point of view it may not be so

from a social perspective.

Prices and Resource Movements During Capital and Current Account

3.

Liberal izat ion

The purpose of
analyzing

section is to set up an analytical framework f or

this

the process of' economic liberalization in a small economy. The

discussion will focus on

different aspects of economic liberalization:

two

(a) the liberalization of foreign trade, and (b) the liberalization of'
capital

flows (i.e., allowing foreign borrowing), and will emphasize price and

resource movements during the liberalization episode. The analysis presented

here is largely positive and develops a model of a simplified economy, with
three goods and two factors. The discussion traces in detail how both reforms
will

affect prices, resource movements and production in the short and long-

run. The analysis is

largely

based on the extension of the Viner—Ricardo

model for the case of three goods as presented by Corden and Neary (1982).

The model used assumes that there is no capital accumulation. For this

reason, the analysis of the effects of opening the capital account is somewhat

simplified, since it assumes that all funds obtained from abroad are used to
increase present consumption. However, the framework presented here can be

See Dornbusch (l983b) for a discussion on the subject. See also Martin
and

Selowsky (19814).

—30—

also used to deal with the more general case where capital accumulation is
also allowed.

The main objective of the analysis presented here is to provide a
clear picture of the real consequences of the process of economic libera—

lization, Including changes in production and in income distribution. At the
risk of being repetitive, the analysis proceeds slowly, trying to make clear
every Important step in the chain of events that follows a liberalization

episode. The model developed In this section shows that as a result of each
of these reforms on their own resources and production will tend to move in

opposite directions. Also the effects on Income distribution of both reforms
will be the opposite. While a trade reform (i.e. the removal of tariffs) will
result In resources moving into the exportables sector; the opening of the

capital account will result in resources moving out of that sector. To the
extent that resource movements involve some costs, this fact suggests that
from a policy perspective some efforts should be made to coordinate the real

effects of the two reforms. A general principle that should be considered
when deterrniing the order of these two reforms in that the (unnecessary)

reversal of reéource movements should be avoided.

Then, the opening of

the two account should be synchronized in a way such that resources do not
move in and out of a sector in a short period of time, since the economy will
incur

an

unnecessary cost.

In Section II, however, a nore general model that allows for foreign funds
to be used both to increase present consumption and to accumulate capital
presented.

is

It is important to note that in the real world this should be only one of'
the principles used for determining the correct ordering. Others -- not
mentioned in this section due to the nature of the model -— refer to
issues related to credibility and continuity of the reform.

—31 —

3.1

The Economy Under Consideration

Assume the case of a small country that produces three goods:

exportables CX), importables (M) and non—tradeables

(N). Production is

carried out using capital arid labor. Production functions have the conventional properties and it is assumed that in the short-run capital is sector—
specific, with labor being perfectly mobile between the three sectors.
Imports are initially subject to a tariff, and external borrowing is

not allowed. With respect to the labor market, it will be assumed that it is
free of distortions. However, the consequences of assuming the existence of
an economy wide minimum wage, which is binding in the short-run, will also be

investigated. The domestic capital market is free of distortions, with the
rental rates of capital being equalized in the long—run, across sectors.
Regarding factor intensity, it will be assumed that importables have the

highest capital/labor ratio. With respect to exportables and non—tradeables,
alternative assumptions regarding factor intensities will be briefly discussed
in sub—section 3.2.1.

! riticai assumption made in this section is that there is no capital acóumulation and, consequently, one international borrowing is allowed, the
proceeds of foreign loans are fully used to Increase present consumption.

In that sense, then, it is assumed that at the initial point the rate of' time

preference exceeds "the" world rate of interest. The analysis presented

On sector—specific models see, for example, Jones 1971; Mayer 19714; Mussa
l97, 1978, 1982; Neary 1978a,b, 1982.

In that sense, then, this analysis from the possibility of negative
welfare effects of allowing foreign investment in the presence of'
tariffs. On this, however, see Section 14 of this paper.

—32-

here

also assumes that there is no initial inflation, and

that

tariff proceeds

are returned to consumers in a nondistorting lump—sum fashion. These two
assumptions represent a simplification of the real world characteristics of

countries that have embarked in liberalization attempts. As has been pointed
out by Krueger (1981), (1983) and Little (1982), among others, most
liberalization attempts by developing countries have started from crises

situations with high inflation. However, by ignoring inflation in the present
section, it is possible to focus on issues related to liberalization,

abstracting from those of stabilization. On the relationship between stabilization and liberalization, however, see Krueger (1981). See also Section 6 of
this paper.

3.2 Trade Liberalization
In this section the effects of reducing (eliminating) tariffs in a
three—goods small economy are

investigated.

It is assumed, for analytical

convenience, that initially there are no quantitative restrictions (or that
they have been already replaced by tariffs), and that the exchange rate is

fixed and equal to one. It is also assumed that capital is sector specific in
the short-run,

discussion

while it

can freely move between sectors in the long—run. The

will first deal with long—run effects, then, the short—run effects

and the transition towards the long-run will be discussed. The analysis will
concentrate

on the

behavior of good prices, factors rewards (i.e., income

distribution) and production. tt ts assumed that while all prices are
flexible

in the long-run, some or tnen (i.e., wages) may he

short—run.

rigid

in the

—33—

3.2.1

LongRun Effects of Trade Liberalization
In

this class of

ables, exportables

models

of a small economy with three goods (import—

and non—tradeables), two factors (capital arid

labor), and

the usual competition assumptions, long—run domestic prices are fully determined (under non—specialization) by world prices, technology and tariffs.

Equilibrium can be described in the following way: world prices of export—
ables and importables (plus the tariff) determine the rewards to both factors
of production; these rewards, on their turn and under the assumption of competition, determine the price of non-tradeables. Demand considerations f or nontradeables determine total output of non—tradeables and total factors used In

their production. This leaves a certain amount of factors that Is used in the
production of exportables and Importables In a traditional Hecksher-Ohlln
(11—0) fashion.

In the rest of the analysis the price of exportables will be taken to

be the numeraire (i.e., P =

1).

Consider now the effect of a reduction

(elimination) of the level of the import tariff on the relative prices of

final goods and on factors rewards. This effect will basically depend on the
assumptions made regarding factor intensities. Two cases will be considered

here: Case 1 assumes (K/L) < (K/L) < (K/L)M; while Case 2 assumes (K/L)N
< (K/L) < (K/L)M.
Consider first Case 1, where imports are assumed to have the highest.

capital labor ratio with exports having the lowest. The effect of a reduction
of the taritf on factor rewards and the relative price of non—tradeables
can be analyzed using Figure 3.1, which is the dual to the well—known Lerner-

Pearce diagram. The initial equilibrium is given by the Intersection of the

—3±' —

three is000st3 MM, XX and NN. These curves present the cnbinations of
wages and

rental rates of capital that result in a constant

cost of producing

these goods at the existing technology [see Mussa, 1979]. The slopes of these
curves are equal to the capital labor ratio, and as may be seen in Figure 3.1,
correspond to the assumptions of Case 1. Initially equilibrium is obtained

at

A with a wage rate (relative to exports) equal to

and a rental rate

equal to r0.
The reduction of the Imports tariff will result in a leftward shift

of the MM curve towards M'M'. The reason for this is that now, in order to
rnanitain equilibrium between domestic costs and the world price of' import-

ables, plus the tariff, lower canbinations of wages and rental rates will be

required. New long—run equilibrium will be obtained at B where the new
M'M' curve intersects the XX curve. As the Stolper—Samuelson theorem indicates, the reduction of the import tariff in an economy where exportables are
labor intensive, will result in higher wages and lower rental rates (i.e.,

> W0, and r1 < r0).
The new equilibrium point B is below the NN isôcost,indicating
that as a consequence of the tariff reduction the price of non—tradeables in

terms of exportables will nave to fall. This conclusion, of course, will not
hold under Case 2, where non-tradeables are more labor intensive than export-

ables. In that case the intersection of the XX and M'M' curves will be
above the NN curve, and in order to restore equilibrium in the non—

—35—
Figure 3.1

w

MM

xx

___ ____
Wi
A.

W

0

NN
I

M'M'

—36—

tradeables sector their relative price will have to increase.

In order

to simplify the discussion, through the rest of this paper we will focus on

Case 1, [(K/L) < (K/L), < (K/L)M].
While the long-run (relative) price of non—tradeables is completely
determined by technological considerations, the amount

produced

of this type

of

goods will also depend on the demand side. In particular, production of

N

will be such that, at

the prevailing prices, the non—tradeables market

clears. The production side of the model can be analyzed using a three goods
Edgeworth—Bowley box as

developed

by Melvin (1968). Figure 3.2 illustrates

the case where exportables are the most labor intensive good. [See Corden and

Neary (1982) for an application of this diagram to a Dutch—disease type of
analysis.] In this diagram

non-tradeables

Isoquants are drawn from origin

At the Initial prices the non-tradeable goods market clears at a level of

production given by isoquant MN0. The capital—labor ratio in non—tradeables
production

measured

is given by the slope of 0N0M• Production of exportables

from O, and that of importables by distance OMR. In equilibrium

the slope of MN0 Isoquant at °M equals the slopes of the corresponding
isoquants for exportables and importablès, which are tangent at R.
The discussion regarding factor rewards and relative prices (Figure

3.1) showed that the reduction of the tariff will generate, in the long-run,
an increase in the wage rate relative to the rental rate. That means that all
three sectors will now become more capital intensive. This Is shown in

Notice then that theoretically depending on the assumptions regarding
capital-labor intensity the real-exchange rate, defined is the domestic
relative price of tradeables to non-tradeables may either increase or
decline.

—37—

Figure 3.2

0
.4-fl

Capital

0
Labor

L3

LA

—38—

Figure 3.3, where the dashed rays depict the new (after tariff reduction)

capital/labor ratios. However, in order to determine the new equilibrium it
is necessary to know what will happen to the demand of non-tradeables, as a
consequence of the tariff reduction.

Assume first, in order to organize the discussion,that the quantity
demanded for non—tradeables does not change after the imports tariffs are

reduced. This assumption will be relaxed later. In this case, the new
equilibrium point in production of non-tradeables will be obtained at the

intersection of the new (higher) capital-labor ratio and the initial NN0

isoquant, at point O. Production of importables will be reduced to OAT,
and

production of exportables will increase to MxT. This result was obtained

under the assumption that the quantity demanded of non—tradeables was not

affected by
the

the

reduction of tariffs. In general, however, this will not be

case. Moreover, given our assumptions regarding capital/labor intensity,

it is expected that the demand f or non—tradeables will increase as a result of

the liberalization. The reasons for this are two: (a) As shown in Figure
3.1, after the liberalization of trade the (relative) price of nori—tradeables

will decline, producing a substitution effect in demand towards non—trade—
ables; and

(b) the trade liberalization will generate a positive incane

effect, as national income at international prices increases, which will also

have a positive effect on the quantity demanded of N. If the demand for non—
tradeables increases, long—run equilibrium in Figure 3.3 will be on the new

capital—labor ratio ray to the left of the NN isocost. In terms of Figure
3.3 this new equilibrium is obtained at O, with production of exportables
being equal to OS, production of imnportables having

and production of non—tradeables being equal to

been reduced to OS

—39—

Figure 3.3

+0-ri

pita1

+

o-.

x

Labor

—140—

In

effects of
(i)

summary,

under Case 1 capital intensity assumptions, the long—run

a tariff reduction will be:
Prices of nori—tradeables, relative to exportables will fall.

(ii) Wages, relative to all goods, will increase.
(iii) The rental rate of capital, relative to all goods, will
decrease.

(iv) Production of exportables will expand.
(v)

Production of non—tradeables will expand.

(vi) Production of Importables will decline.

3.2.2 Short—Run Effects
This section investigates the short—run effects of a tariff reduction
under the Case I assumptions about capital labor intensity.

that

It is assumed

in the short—run capital is sector specific, while labor cart move freely

across sections. The representation used in this model, then, is an adaptation for a three goods case of the Virier—Ricardo models of Jones (1971), Mayer
(1974) and Mussa (19714).

[See

the paper by Corden and Neary 1982, for an

application of this kind of model.]

The initial equilibrium situation can be illustrated using Figure
3.4,

which

is adapted from Mussa (19714) for the case of the three goods.

this figure, the horizontal axis measures

total

In

labor available in the

economy, while the vertical axis depicts the wage rate in terms of export—

ables. LT is the denand for labor by the tradeable goods sectors and is
equal to the (horizontal) sum of the demand for labor by the exportable sector
(which is given by
icnportables sector.

In this rigure) and the demand for labor of the

on the other hand is the demand for labor of the non-

—In —

tradeable

goods sector. The initial equilibrium is characterized, then, by a

wage rate equal to W0, with OTLA labor used in the production of
exportables, LALB labor used in the production of importables and OLB used
in the production of rion—tradeables.

There are several differences between this short—run model and the

long—run model discussed in the previous sub—section. FIrst, since capital Is
now sector specific, the direct link between tradeable goods prices and fac-

tors rewards is broken. For this reason Stolper—Samuelson theorem does not
hold (in the short—run), and the price of non—tradeables will be determined by
the Intersection of the demand and supply schedules for these kind of goods.

The strategy Is now to analyze the short-run effects of trade liberalization
on prices, production, resource movements and income distribution, (i.e.,

factor rewards). This analysis is then combined with the long—run results
already

the

discussed in the previous section to find out the characteristics of

transition, in a

In

way similar to that proposed by Peter Neary (1978).

the short run, the reduction of the tariff, under the assumption

of sector—specific fact'ors, will generate changes both In the (relative) price
of importables and non—tradeable (see, for example, Dornbusch 19714, 1980).

While the price of importables will unambiguously fall, the behavior of the
price of non-tradeables will depend on the assumption regarding substitu-

tability and the magnitude or the income effects. Assuming that the three
goods are

gross

substitutes in consumption and production, and that the income

effect does not exceed the substitution effect, it can be shown that as a
result of the reduction of the tarirf' the price of non—tradeables will fall

relative to that of exportables and increase relative to that of importables.

—42--

Figure 3.4

w

L

x

LN' W

LT

w

0

I

I
I

I

LA

I

ON

—143 —

The reduction in the level of the tariff will reduce the domestic
price of importables, generating a downward shift of the LT curve

the

(with

Lx curve con8tant). In Figure 3—5 the new LT curve will intersect

the LN curve at R. However, this is not a final equilibrium situation,
since, as already discussed the tariff reduction will also result In a decline

in the price of non—tradeables (relative to exports). As a consequence, LN
will shift downward (by less than LT) and final short-run equilibrium will
be achieved at S. In this new equilibrium, production of exportables has
Increased -—

with

labor used by this sector increasing by LALQ. The produc-

tion of non-tradeables may either increase or decrease, and production of

importables will fall. In the case depicted in Figure 3.5 labor has moved out
of irnportables goods sector, into exportables and non—tradeables sectors.

What has happened to factors rewards in the short—run? Wages have
declined

in terms of the exportable good (from W0 to W1 in Figure 3.5).

Also, wages decline In terms of the non—tradeable good, since the vertical

distance between the LN and

curves is smaller than the reduction of

W from W0 to W1 Esee Mussa 19714]. However, wages increase relative to the

importable good, since the domestIc price of Importables has fallen by more

than wages. In the exportables sector, the rental rate of capital will
increase in terms of all three goods, while the rental rates of the capital
decrease.

Formally, the rental rate of capital specific to the importable sector
will decrease in terms of importables, and could either increase or
decrease In terms of the other two goods. With respect to capital
specific to the non—tradeables sector, its rental rate will in terms of
flOn—tradeables, and could either increase or decrease In terms of the
other two goods.

—k 14—

The above discussion has a3sumed that all prices (of goods and

factors) are fully flexible. However, this needs not be the case. In a
number of countries the labor market is usually characterized by the existence
of (real) minimum

wages.

It is easy to see from

Figure

3.5 that If wages,

expressed in terms of exportables are inflexibly downward, short—run unemploy-

ment will result as a consequence of the reduction of tariffs. In terms of

35,

Figure

the magnitude of this unemployment will be equal to distance

FG. This unemployment will only be a short—run phenomenon, which will tend to
disappear as capital moves between sectors in the medium and long—run.

In

general, in the presence of sector specific capital and wage rigidity in the
short-run, there will be a second—best argument for slow trade liberalization

and adjustment assistance. The first—best policy, however, Is to act directly
on the labor market, removing the sources of wage rigidity.

Under the assumption of wage flexibility, the short-run effect or
trade liberalization on the levels of production can be depicted in Figure

3.6.

The initial (pre—reform) equilibrium is givei by points A and G,

with production of exportables proportional to distance OA, production of

non—tradeables given by iocost N0,

and

production of importables

See Neary (1982) and Edwards (1982) for discussions regarding trade
liberalization, sticky wages and unemployment. It i$ interesting to note
that an effect of this type can be used to analytically derive short—run

output losses following a trade liberalization process, as is done by Khan
and Zahler (1983).
In

the specific case of Chile, the tariff—reform proceeded at the same
as the minimum wage was raised in real terms. Elsewhere I have

time

tariff

reduction process and the
computed that the combination of the
increase In the minimum wage in Chile resulted in an increase in the rate
of unemployment in Chile of approximately —- percentage points. See
Edwards (1982).

—45—

Figure 3.5

w

44

w

\

L

A

\

\

/

/

\
/

w

-———

Wi

-

0

\

- ._ — — —i.-

—

—

/

T

/

''N
S

/

I

I
LA

L

I

L LB

S..-

—146—

proportional to distance GA. Notice that Initially the nontradeable goods
sector uses

ONKN capital, the exportables sector uses OK capital, and

the importables will use the rest (KNKx). Since in
sector specific these amounts

of

the

short—run capital is

capital will also be used by each sector

after the tariff reform. This means that the new short-run equilibrium points

will necessarily lay on the KNKN and KK

lines.

The tariff reduction will result in an increase in the use of labor
(and thus in production, for given amounts of capital) in the exportables and

importables sectors. This is shown in Figure 3.6 by the movement of the

equilibrium points to B and F. The new capital—labor ratios are now given
by the dashed lines, and as may be seen both the exportable and nontradeable
sectors become relatively more labor intensive, while the importables sector

has become more capital intensive. A comparison of Figures 3.3 and 3.6
provides some indication on how the transition period will look like, with
factors moving from their post—reform short—run allocation (Figure 3.6)
towards thair long-run post-reform allocation (Figure 3.7).

In summary, for the general case with wage flexibility, the short-run
effects of a tariff redubtiori on production, prices, arid factors rewards are
the following:
(i)

Production of exportables increases.

(ii)

Production of importables is reduced.

(iii) Production of nontradeables increases.
(iv)

Wages increase in terms of importables, and decline in
exportables and nontradeables

(v)

The rental rate of capital in the exportable sector
increases relative to all goods.

terms

of

—147

(vi)

The rental rate of capital in the irnportables sector will decrease
relative to the importable good. It could increase or decrease
relative to the other goods.

(vii) The rental rate of capital in the non-tradeables sector will
increase relative to non—tradeable goods, and could either increase
or decrease relative to the other two goods.

3.2.3 The Transition Period After aTradeLibera1i
According to the model used in this section the main difference
between short— and long-run effects of a trade liberalization is that In the
short-run capital IS

locked into Its sector of origIn. As time passes,

however, capital will (slowly) move between sectors.

In the present model,

and in order to simplify the exposition, we assume that the movement of

capital does not require the use of resources. However, the analysis could be
modified by introducing a "moving industry", which uses labor and some
specific factor, as In Mussa [1978].
The transition period will, be basically characterized by factors

(both capital and labor) moving between sectors, until the new long-run

equilibrium (i.e., post-liberalization) capital—labor

ratios and levels of

production are attained. As discussed in Section 3.2.1, and as may be seen
from Figure 3.3, in the final long—run equilibrium all sectors will be more
capital—intensive, with the exportable sector using more capital, in absolute
terms; and with the importable sector using less capital in absolute terms

than prior to the trade reform. As may be also seen from Figure 3.3, the nontradeable goods sector could use either a larger or small absolute amount of
capital than before the tariffs reduction.

Th.e nature of factors movements

during the transition period cn be seen in Figure 3.7, which combines Figures
3.3 and 3.6. Initial (i.e., pre-1,iberalizatlOn) equilibrium is given by

—48.-

Figure 3.6

+0
4.

Capital

K

K

x

0

x

•Labor

—149—

points A and G. Short—run equilibrium is given by points
long-run equilibrium will be attained in points

H

and

C.

B and F; while
In order to avoid

cluttering the diagram, only the post—liberalization capital—labor ratios have

been drawn. The arrows between points B and C and F and H, respectively, show the way resources will move during the transition. As may be seen
in Figure 3.7, for the particular case considered here, the transition will be
characterized by:
(I)

Capital and labor will move out of the importable goods sector;

(ii)

Capital and labor will move into the exportable goods

sector;

(iii) Capital will move into the r'iontradeable goods sector, and
labor will move out of the nontradeable goods sector.

Table 3.1 summarizes the movement of resources that follows a trade

liberalization. Column (1) depicts the movement of resources in the short—
run.

Column (2) shows how resources move in the long—run, when compared with

the

initial situation. This column is a summary of the situation described in

the Melvin—Edgeworth-BoWly box in Figure 3.3. Finally, in column (3) the
movement of resources during the transition period' is presented.

An important question that has not been discussed yet is related to

the timing of these prices and resources movements. Broadly speaking, it
would be expected that following a eariff reduction some time would pass
before

goods arbitrage will result in relative prices adjustments. In that

sense

the initial effect of tariff reductions on resource movements will not

be instantaneous.

On the other hand, it is difficult to know a priori,

From a practical point of view there are a number of considerations, like
the creation of the required infrastructure to increase imports, that tend
to indicate that the actual reduction in domestic prices will take more
time.

—50—

Figure 3.7

n
Capital

0x -

Labor

—51 —

how fast the adjustment process between the short— and long—run will take.
This is largely an empirical question whose answer will require country—
specific analyses.

3.3 The Liberalization of the Capital Account
In this sub—section the model presented above is used to investigate
how the opening of the capital account (only) will affect relative prices,

income distribution, production and resource movements. The analysis assumes
that the icnportables sector is subject to a tariff and that the world relative

price of exportables and importables is constant, so that these two goods can
be aggregated into a single tradeable good.

It is clear that the framework used in this section (a 3 goods—2
factors model) is not the most appropriate one to deal with intertemporal
problems related to the financial sector, as those generated by the opening of

the capital account. However, this model is still rich enough to allow us to
investigate how the opening of the capital account will affect the real side
of the economy.

In order to do this, an approach similar to that

suggested by McKinnon 11976] for analyzing a transfer related adjustment is
used.. 1t is assumed that prior to the bpening of the capital account the

domestic rate of time preferences exceeds the world rate of interest. This
means that once the capital account is opened, domestic agents will borrow

from abroad in order to increase present consumption. It is further assumed
that all of the foreign funds

obtained,

once the capital account is opened are

Ideally one would want a fully specified multi-period general equilibrium
model of both the real and financial sectors of the economy. Clearly,
however, a model of this kind is not analytically tractable. An
alternative way to tackle the problem of the opening of the capital
account is to use a simulation fr'amework as in Khari and Zahier (1983).

—52—

Table

Short-

3.1

and Long-Run Resource Movefflents Fo11oi1ng
A

Trade LtherallzattOn

(2)

(1)

(3)

Long—Run

Short-Run
Initial Situation
K

QILU1flU11

•

VS •

Sector

vs.

Long-Run

L

Initial Situation
K

L

(Transition)

K

Exportables
Irnportables

Nontradeables

4
+

L

—53—

used to increase present consumption. 21"

Even though this is not a very

realistic assumption, it simplifies the exposition. The case where the funds

obtained

when the capital account are used to increase investment is discussed

in the next section. The discussion will then focus on the adjustment problem
created by the inflow of foreign capital that will follow the opening of the
capital account.

The analysis presented in this section assumes that once the capital
account is opened, foreign capital will flow into the domestic economy at a

stable rate for some time. This means that during a certaIn perIod of time
expenditure will exceed income and foreign debt will be accumulated.

For

expositional convenience this discussion does not deal specifically with the

following stage, where the foreign debt has to be paid. However, the analytical
tools developed here can easily handle this stage of the problem.

It is

possible to say, then, that in this section the time horizon for the analysis

has been broken into three distinct runs: the short—run, characterized by
positive foreign borrowing, and sector—specific capital; the long—run, where

there still is a positive inflow of foreign funds, but where capital can move

between sectors; and the long-lonrufl (nQt specifically considered), where the
foreign debt begins to be repaid.

21'

abstract, then, from the issues related to welfare reducing investment
discussed in Section 2.2. See, however, Section 14

We

This idea responds to the notion, developed by Fischer and Frenkel (1972a,
l972b) among others, that there are stages of the different accounts of
the balance of payments through which contries pass. In that sense, then,
we assume that our country is in the. stage of development where foreign
debt is accumulated.
Of course, once the foreign debt has to be repaid the analysis will be
similar to what is discussed here, in the sense that a distinction between
the period when capital is sector-specific and when it can move across
sectors has to be made.

—514—

The basic effect of opening the capital account is that expenditure

will exceed income during some period of time. In order to simplify the

the core of this sub—section assumes that the amount by which
the same in
expenditure exceeds income (i.e., the current account deficit) is
every period. However, the case where there is an initial overshooting of the
discussion

level

of capital inflows, as discussed in Section 2.2, is also briefly

investigated. The relevance of this latter case stems from the fact that it
has generally been observed that following an opening of the capital account
there is a jump, and consequent reduction (i.e., an overshooting), of the
level of capital inflows (for example, Korea 1965; Chile 1980; Argentina 1978;
Uruguay 1979).

3.3.1 Long—Run Effects
In the long—run -— when capital can move between sectors --

relative

prices of the three goods are completely given by world prices, technology and
the tariff [see the discussion in Section 11.2].

For this reason, in the

present model the opening of the capital account will have no long-run effect
on relative prices of gooçls or factors. However, to the extent that a
fraction of the new funds obtained from abroad are used to finance a higher'
consumption of non-tradeables, the production of these goods will increase.

Since a higher production of N, requires an increase in the amount of

However, as will be discussed below, in the short—run there will be
changes on relative prices, generated by demand effects.

—55—

Figure 3.8

•4-0
4.

:apital

0x +

Labor

—56—

resources used in that sector, production of the two tradeable goods will have

to decline. The long-run effects of the opening of the capital account on
production can be summarized in Figure 3.8, which is a by—now familiar Melvin—

Edgeworth-Bowley box. The initial equilibrium conditions are summarized by

points G and A. Since in the long-run the opening of the capital account
has no effect on relative prices or factors rewards, the original capital—
labor

ratios

are

not

altered. The increase in the demand

however, requIres a hIgher

production of thIs

type

for

nontradeables,

of goods. The expansIon

of

the nontradeable goods sector will then take place along the original capital

labor ratio ONG, with new (after liberalization) production of nontradeables

proportional to distance OMG, and given by isoquant NM1; new production
of exportables will be proportional to distance XA'; and

importables

new production of

will be proportional to distance G'A'. It can then be seen that

the long—run effects of opening the capital account will be the

(i)

Production of nontradeables will Increase, with capital and labor
moving into this sector.

(ii) Production of importables will decrease, with capital and labor
moving out of this sector.
(iii) Production of exportables will decrease, with capital and labor
moving out of this sector.

(iv) Prices of goods and factors will not be altered.
3.3.2 The Short—Run Effects

In the short-run, however,

capital

will be sector—specific, and the

increase in the demand for riontradeable goods will be reflected in an increase

—57—

of their relative price.

The short—run effects of a capital inflow on

production can be summarized in a Salter—type diagram, as used by MoKinnon

[1976] in his analysis of transfers and the adjustment problem. In Figure
3.9, the importable and exportable goods have been aggregated into a composite

tradeables good. TT is the (short—run) production possibilities curve between
tradeables and nontradeables and has been constructed under the assumption

that when relative prices change only labor can move between sectors. Initial

equilibrium is attained at point Q, with the trade account being equal to
zero, and the nontradeable goods market in equilibrium. The inflow of capital
that takes place after the opening of the capital account has the property of
allowing the consumption possibilities schedule to exceed the production

possibilities frontier. The new consumption possibilities schedule is equal

to NT, which exceeds TT by the amount of the capital inflow, measured in
terms of tradeables [see McKinnon 1976, and Datta 1983].

After the opening of the capital account, and assuming that OE is
the income—expenditure path corresponding to the initial relative price,

consumption will tend to move to S, while production will remain at Q.
However, at this point there wilt be an excess demand for nontradeables
goods. As a result of this, the relative price of riontradeables will increase

until

a new equilibrium situation, characterized by points R (consumption)

and T (production) is attained. In this new equilibrium there is a current
account deficit, and the non-tradeab1- goods market is in equilibrium. We can

fJJ Remember that we are a.ssurniig thit the magnitude of the current account
the same in the 5hr't- and long—run. See sub—section 3.3.3,
deficit
however, f or a brief analysis f' the case where there Is an overshooting
Of the level of' capital inf1w5.

is

—58—

FIgure 3.9

Tradeables

E
T

-R

T

0

I

0

NN
0]

N

Non—Tradeables

—59—

see,

then, that in the short—run the opening of the capital account will

result in an increase of the relative price of nontradeables relative to
tradeables ——

this

is the real appreciation effect of opening the capital

account pointed out by several authors, and discussed in Section 2.1.

The

production of nontradeables will increase from N0 to N1, and the production of tradeables will decline from T0 to T1 in Figure 3.9.
We can now translate the short—run effects of opening the capital

account into a Melvin-Edgeworth-Bowley box. This will prove to be useful f or

the analysis of the transition. Figure 3.10 summarizes the short—run effects
of opening the capital account.

Initial equilibrium conditions are given by

points G and A. Once the capital account is opened, expenditure will
exceed

income, with production of nontradeables increasing

and that of import-

ables and exportables decreasing. New (short-run) equilibrium is attained

points

at

H and G, which, by definition, are characterized by the fact that

the same amount of capital is used in each sector as prior to the liberalization process. However in order to increase its putput, the nori—tradeables
sector becomes more labor intensive; while both tradeables sectors become more
-

capital intensive.

In

the short-run the wage rate increase in terms of both tradeable

goods and declines in terms of non-tradeables. The return to capital specific
to the rion—tradeables sector goes up in terms of all goods, while the return
to capital in the two non-tradeable goods declines.

See McKinnon (1973, 1976, 1982), Harberger (1982), Diaz—Alejandro (1981),
Harberger and Edwards (1982), Oline (1983), Edwards (19814).

This can be seen by following an analysis similar to that presented in
Figure 3.6.

—60—
Figure 3.10

4,

apita1

+

ox

Labor

—61 —

In

summary, the short—run effects of the opening of the capital

account are the following:

Relative price of nontradeables increases in terms of both tradeable

(1)

goods.
(ii)

Production of nontradeables increases.

(iii) Production of both nontradeables decline.
(iv)

The wage rate increases in terms of both nontradeables and declines in
terms of the nontradeable.

Cv)

The rental rate of capital in both tradeable goods sectors declines,
in terms of all goods.

(vi)

The return to capital in the nontradeable goods sector goes up in terms
of all goods.

3.3.3 Transition
As in the case of the trade liberalization, the transition will be
characterized by resources moving from their short—run equilibrium (Figure

3.10) towards their long—run equilibrium (Figure 3.8). As before, the best
way to look at these resource novements is by combining the short— and long—

run diagrams. This is done in Figure 3.11. In this diagram A and G are
initial (i.e., pre—liberalization) equilibrium points; H and B depict the
short—run equilibrium after liberalization; and A' and G' are the long—run
post-liberalization equilibrium points. It may be noted that in Figure 3.11

the final equilibrium level of production of N, given by isoquant NN1

(G')

exceeds short—run level of production (given by the isoquarit that passes

through point H). The reason for this result is that while the income effect
——

stemming from the higher absorption allowed by the opening of the capital

account ——

is

by assumption the same in the short- and long—run, the relative

—62—

Figure 3.11

4-C
4

Capital

+

o-x +

Labor

—63—

price

of nontradeables is higher in the short—run. Consequently the equili-

brium level of production of non—tradeables will be higher in the long—
run. .-_"

If,

however, it is assumed that in the short—run the level of

capital inflows will overshoot their long—run levels, the result will be
somewhat different [see Figure 3.12 below].

Under the present assumptions -the

that

the current account deficit is

same in short- and long-run -— the transition will be characterized by

resources moving from H to G' and from B to A' in Figure 3.11.
Capital and labor will move into the nontradeables sector and out of both

tradeable sectors. The production of nontradeables will further expand during

the transition, with

the production of both tradeables declining. Table 3.2

presents a summary of the short- and long—run resource movements that will
follow

an opening of the capital account, under the maintained assumptions.

This table is equivalent to Table 3.1 constructed for the case of the trade
reform

only. A comparison of both tables shows that both reforms, on their

own, will tend to generate opposite movement of resources.

This fact, of

course, is reflected by the fact that the real exchange rate will tend to move
in opposite directions under each reform.

At this point, it is important to recall some of the critical assump-

tions that have been made for this exercise. First, it was assumed that as a
consequence of the opening of the capital account, capital would flow into the

domestic country, allowing absorption to exceed income. It was

further

The reason for this is that while in both cases (short— and long—run) the
demand curve for non-tradeables will shift to the right by the same
amount, the supply curve is more elastic in the long—run. Thus, the
equilibrium output of non-tradeables will be higher in the long—run.

—6 —

assumed

time,

that this situation was sustainable for a (fairly) long period of

and that all

the funds

obtained

from abroad were

channeled into addi-

tional consumption. In that sense in this section the time horizon of the
analysis was broken into three distinct lengths. The short-run, characterized
by a positive foreign borrowing (absorption > income), and by capital being

sector specific. The long—run, where there also is positive borrowing
(absorption > income) but where capital can move between sectors; and the
long-long—run when the foreign debt has to be paid.

It was assumed that the

long-long-run takes place in the (distant) future, and was not analyzed.
A second important assumption made here is that once the capital
account is opened a stable inflow of foreign capital takes place.

In that

sense, the possibility of an overshooting of the level of capital flows was

ignored. This is not an innocent simplification, since, as has

been

mentioned, the stylized facts indicate that generally following the opening of
the capital account there is an initial jump in the level of capital

inflows. If such a behavior of capital flows was allowed, the analysis
presented here will change with more resources moving into the rioritradeable

goods sector into the short—run. This case is presented in Figure 3.12, where
short-run production of non-tradeables --

given by isoquant NN2 —- exceeds

long—run production of this kind of goods (given by isoquarit NN1).
case the transition will differ from our previous analysis.

In this

As may be seen in

Figure 3.12, in this case while capital will move into the nontradeable
sector, labor will move out of the non-tradeable goods sector during the
transition.

A critical question related to he effects of opening the capital

account of the balance of payments has to do with the speed at which these

—65—

Table 3.2
Short—

and LongRun Resource Movements

Following a Capital Account Liberalization
(3)

(2)

(1)

Long—Run

Short-Run
Sector

Exportales

Irnportables
Nontradeables

vs.

Initial Situation
K

vs.

Long—Run

vs.

L

Initial Situation
K

+

4'

+
+

Short-Run
(Transition)

L

K

L

4'

+

+

+

—66—

price and resource movements will take place. In general -- and as has been
emphasized by Frenkel [1982, 1983] ——

it

is expected that the inflow of

capital following the opening of the capital account will be fast. In that
case then, it is expected that the short—run consequences of liberalizing this
account of the balance of payments -—

in

particular the increase of the

relative price of N and the tendency for labor to move into this sector ——

will

be felt quickly. In fact, as will be argued below, and has been

suggested by Frenkel [1983], the difference in the speed of adjustment of the
capital and current account suggests that an appropriate order will consider
opening the current
account

account

first. It will also be argued that the capital

should be opened slowly, following a multi—stage procedure.

3.4 Summary
This

section has presented a three-goods two—factors model to analyze

real effects -— i.e., production and income distribution effeäts -— of the
liberalization of the current and capital account of the balance of payments.
The analysis presented provided details on the characteristics of these
the

processes,

comfirmirig prior conjectures: each reform on its own will result

in opposite effects on resource movements and incc*ne distribution.

Abandoning the sphere of positive analysis, a critical question at

this stage is If there is anything to be learned regarding the appropriate

order of liberalization from this liscussion? The answer to this question is
a qualified yes. To the extent that in the real world resource movements
across sectors are costly, there Ls i r'eason to try to avoid "unnecessary"

—67—

shifts

in resources.

A possible instance where these kind of costs will

occur will emerge if, for example, due to a given policy labor and capital
move out of the exports sector, and shortly afterwards, due to a different
policy labor and

capital

"unnecessary" adjustment

have to move back into this sector. These

costs could be avoided if resources are directly

reallocated into their final sectors of use. This could be
syiachronizirt

achieved by

the openings of the capital and current accounts as has been

suggested by Frenkel (1983), At this point it could be argued that the
of reducing the adjustment costs would call for a simultaneous
principles
opening

of both accounts. In this case, the argument would go, resources

would move directly into their final sectors without "unnecessary" switches.
The problem with this reasoning, however, is that it implicitly assumes that

the adjustment process following the opening of these accounts is equally

fast. If however, this is not the case, and the adjustment of the capital
account is faster —— as Frenkel 1982, 1983, Khan and Zahier (1983) and others
have suggested ——

the simultaneous opening of both accounts will result in

resources moving first into the non-tradeable goods

exportables and importables. In

dthe.r

sector and out

of

words, if both accounts are opened

simultaneously, in the short-run the capital account effects will tend to

dominate. If the capital account adjusts faster,

the avoidance of

A possible way to model moving costs is through the existence of a "moving
sector" as in Mussa (1978).
In terms of this model a faster adjustment of the capital account means
that interest arbitrage is faster than good arbitrage, and that
immediately following the opening of the capital account resources will be
borrowed and absorption will exceed absorption. On the other hand,
following trade reform some time will pass befOre goods arbitrage will
result in resource investment.

—68—

Figure 3.12

40
4.

Capital

+
o

x

Labor

—69—

"unnecessary" adjustment costs, and the synchronization of both effects would
be obtained

following the order of liberalization suggested by Jacob Frenkel

(1982, 1983): the current account should be opened first, and only when this
is open should restrictions on capital movements be restricted.

1L

Welfare Implications of
Trade

Opening The Capital Account In the

Presence of

Distortions
As discussed in Section 2 above, one of the arguments that has been

used to suggest that the trade account should be liberalized first Is that if
capital inflows are allowed In the presence of trade distortions (i.e.,
tariffs) welfare losses will result [McKinnon 1973; Frenkel 1982, 1983;

Krueger 1983]. In this section this proposition is investigated in detail
using a multi—period general equilibrium model of a small open economy.

First we investigate the welfare effects of allowing foreign borrowing in an

economy without trade distortions. The results obtained are, of course, the
standard ones: welfare will increase if prior to the liberalization of the
capital account the domestic consumption rate of interest exceeds the world

rate of interest. Next we introduce tariffs into the picture and investigate
the welfare effects of opening up the capital account in the presence of trade

distortions. The analysis shows, as it was

suggested

in Section 2.2, that the

welfare effects of opening the capital account will depend on how the funds

obtained

are used. If these resources are used to increase present consurnp

tion, and the domestic consumption rate of interest exceeds the world rate of

JJ' Much of the discussion in this section draws from Section 3.1 of a joint
paper with Sweder van Wijnbergen. See Edwards and Van Wijnbergefl (1983).

—70—

interest, the opening of the capital account can never be welfare deteriorat-

ing. If, however, these funds are

used

to finance capital accumulation,

welfare may deteriorate as long as the importable goods is capital intensive.
As

discussed

in Section 2.2, this is a direct extension of the literature on

welfare—reducing

capital accumulation in a static framework.

An important question regarding this line of argument is the
following: Why would the resources borrowed from abroad be used to accumulate

capital,
socially

if society's welfare will be reduced? The answer is

that, while

capital accumulation might be immiserizing (since it increases a pre-

existing distortion), privately it may be profitable. Indeed this will be the
case since, under the assumptions of capital intensive importables, due to the
presence of tariffs the marginal product of capital in the domestic country
will exceed the world marginal product of capital [Stolper and Samuelson

l9'3]. It is also possible to show that If shadow prices are used to make
investment decisions the opening of the capital account can never result in
welfare reductions [Edwards and van Wljribergen, 1983].

14,] ii! Model

The model assumes a two—period world where total welfare depends on
the levels of utility obtained in periods 1 and

2 respectively.

If foreign

borrowing is not allowed, in each period the budget constraint has to hold,

See, for example, Johnson (1967), Bertrand and Flatters (1971) and Brecher
and Diaz-Alejandro (1977).

—71 —

with

total expenditures being equal to total revenues. In this section a

general version of the model (with trade distortions) is presented. In
Section 14.2 the welfare effects of opening the capital account (i.e., allowing

a small amount of foreign borrowing) is investigated under the simplifying
assumption
distortions

of no—trade distortions. In Section

14.3 the assumption of trade

are reintroduced into the analysis.

It is assumed that there are two goods in the economy CX

Y).

and

Good X is taken to be the numeraire and is assumed to be the exportable
(i.e., the labor intensive good). It is also assumed that prior to opening
the

capital account the domestic consumption rate of interest exceeds the

world rate of' iriteres (r*). The essentials of the model, under the assumption that foreign borrowing is forbidden are presented in equations
through (14.8), where throughout the analysis a super index I

(14.1)

refers to the

ith period. [For analyses using this kind of' model see, for example, Svensson
and Razin 1983; Van Wljnbergen 19814; and Edwards and van Wijnbergen
1983]. .12/

fi2! In
as

some sense the effect3 of opening the capital account can be analyzed

a two—way transfer, where the domestic country receives a transfer in

the first period

and

gives a (1rger) transfer in the second period.

.121' See Dixit and Norman (1980) for a clear exposition of the use of duality
in trade analysis. See Mussa (147) for a geometric exposition.

—72—

— W(U,U)

w
U1

—

('4.1)

&(X1,y1);

u2 — U2(X2,y2)

U; E2 2

=

(14.2)

(14.3)

U2

n1(1,P1)
y
=

i2
*

P

y

(iF2)

(14.5)

+

(14.6)

y

2J(1p1(i) +
M1 =

Equation

Ei.

— R1

P1

P

= E1(1,Pl;U1)

i

1.2

(14.8)

y
y
(14.1) is the welfare function which is assumed

separable. The subutilities

U1 and U2,

to

be weakly

for periods 1 and 2 respectively

(equation (14.2)) are assumed to be identical and homothetic.

theticity

(14.7)

Given the hotno—

assumptions of U1 and U2, the underlying expenditure functions

each period E1 and E2 can be written as equation (11.3), where
ll and U2 [equations (14.14) and (14.6)] are "exact" price indexes and are

for

equal to unitary expenditure functions. .11!' Equation (14.6) establishes that

the domestic relative price of the inportable (Pr) is equal to the world

price (F) plus a tariff r.

Notice that by (14.6) we are assuming that

prices do not change between periods 1 and 2. Even though this assumption
greatly simplifies the exposition, it is not essential for the results

obtained [see Edwards and Van Wijnbergen 1983, for a similar discussion where
the domestic price

declines in period 2 due to the reduction of the level

Dixit and Norman (1980) for the properties of an expenditure
function. On exact price indexes see Svenssofl and Razin (1983) and van

IL" See

Wijnbergen (19814).

—73—

and 2

of the tariff.] Equation (11.7) is the budget constraint for periods 1

This equation captures the assumption of a closed capital

respectively.

account, since it indicates that total revenues

function R plus tariff collection iM —- has

——

given

to

equal total expenditure in

by the revenue

each period. If on the other hand a fully open capital account is assumed
equations (11.7) would be replaced by a single intertemporal budget constraint. .1?-"

Equation (11.8) defines the level of imports In every period.

Total imports are equal to the difference between the quantities demanded and

supplied of good y in each period.
One of the simplifying assumptions of the model is that prior to the
opening of the capital account there is no capital accumulation in the economy

(i.e., dK1

0). However, it is assumed that when the capital account is

opened domestic firms can

borrow abroad and use the proceeds of these loans to

increase their capital stock. While this is clearly a simplifying assumption
it allows us to focus on the essentials.

11.2 Opening the Capital Account in the Absence of Trade Distortions
Assume, in order to simplify the discUssiOrl and to set up the general

analytical framework, that tariffs are equal to zero:

t

= 0.

Consider now

that a small amount of foreign borrowing is allowed, and that the proceeds of
this loan are

used

to increase present consumption. Analytically we assume

See van Wijnbergen (19811) for example., and Edwards and van Wijnbergen
(1983).

However, It is possible to interpret the results presented here as
resulting from an increment in the rate of capital accumulation, which is
made possible b the opening of the capital account.

—711—

that

the loan is in terms of the numeraire good. However, under the assuinp-

tion of an open economy, domestic agents will obtain the desired consumption
bundle through international exchange [see Dixit and Norman, 1980].
Under the present assumptions, the opening of the capital account
will imply that consumption will increase

loan,

in period 1 by the

amount of

the

and will decrease in period 2, by a larger amount, since principal plus

interest have to be paid in that period. The effects of this operation on the
levels of utility in periods 1 and 2 can be found by totally differentiating
equation (11.7). The effect of opening the capital account on total welfare

(W) is then found by totally differentiating equation (4.1) and by then

inserting the results for dU1 and dU2.
The changes in utility in periods 1 and 2 are given by expressions

(4.9) and (4.10) respectively where dB is the amount borrowed in period 1,

which is fully used to increase present consumption, and where r* is the
world rate of interest.

dU1 =

(l/E11)
U

dU2 =

— [(l+r*)/E22]

dB > 0

('4.9)

and

dB < 0

(4.10)

U

The total effect on welfare of allowing (some) foreign borrowing is
then obtained by totally differentiating equation (1Ll), and by using (4.3),
(4.9), and (4.10).

dW =

where

[1

—

(l+r*)X]

(3W/1113U1) dB

(14.11)

—75-.

A

(3W/iL2U2)

(3W/IiU3')

is

equal to the inverse of one plus the consumption rate of interest In the

domestic country (1 + CR1).

Under the assumption of closed, capital

account, assuming that intertemporal substitutions is not allowed, the
consumption

rate of

Consequently,

interest will exceed the world rate of interest r*.

(1 + r*)A

< 1 and In equation (i.ll)

>0

('1.11')

The opening of the capital account will be welfare improving. Of
course, if prior to the opening of the capital account present consumption was

"too high" in the domestic economy X(l+r*) will be smaller than one.

In

this case, however, the opening of the capital account will still be welfare

improving since once it Is opened the domestic country will lend in the world
[(l+r*)A -

market! In that case (.ll) would be dW

1] (3W/fl1aU1)dB. Of

course, what generates an improvement in welfare is to allow (some) Inter—
temporal substitution of consumption, which was

previously

banned.

Assume now that once the capital account is opened, the proceeds from
the foreigri loans are used to

country

increase 'capital accumulation in the domestic

(i.e., machines are Imported). This will allow the economy

increase production in period i. J—!

In

to

period 2, however, the loan has to be

paid. In order to simplify the discussion it will be assumed, at his stage of

.IJ See, for example the discussion in Svenssori and Razin (1983, p. 109110). See also Van rJijnbergen (19814).

It is assumed that capital begins producing in the same period it is
installed. Alternatively it could be assumed that there was a one period
lag. The'results will remain essentially the same, however.

—76—

the analysis, that the loan is also paid in the form of machines (i.e.,
disinvestment takes place in the second period).

('Li)

Totally differentiating (4.7), and
very similar to (4.11), is found —— where

the following expression,

RK, the partial derivative of the

revenue function in respect to the stock of capital and is equal to the
domestic marginal productivity of capital [see Dixit and Norman (1980)]:
dW =

[1

—

(l+r)A]

(4.12)

(3W/ItlU1)RK dK

As may be seen, also in this case if the consumptIon rate of Interest
exceeds the world interest rate (i.e.,

(1 +

r*)A

< 1) the opening of the

capital account -— where the proceeds from the loan are used to accumulate
capital -—

will

be welfare improving (i.e., dW/dK > 0). The main difference

between (4.12) and (4.11) is that instead of dB we now have RKdK.

This

last term, of course, represents the increase in national income in period 1,

in terms of the numeraire good, resulting from an increase in the stock of
capital
that

equal

to dK. From the comparison of (4.11) and (4.12)

it follows

to the extent that the price of machines in terms of the numeraire good,

(i.e., Tobin's "q") is equal to (1/RK) it Is indifferent whether once
foreign borrowing is allowed the resources obtained from

abroad

are used to

add one machine to the stock of capital or directly to increase present
consumption. 21! As will be shown in Section 4.3 below this is not the case
once

trade distortions are allowed into the picture. the reason for this is

that, while in the presence of trade distortions, the private price of

11! Of course, this price of capital (1/RK) can be used to formulate the

problem in a way such th3t
of machines. The resul.ti,
presented here.
present
and not

the loan is paid in the form of goods,
however, are exactly the same as those

—77—

machines is still (l/RK), from

could

a

social perspective this price is lower arid

even be negative.

It.3 The

Opening

of the Capital Account

in the Presence of Trade

Distortions
In this section it is assumed

good y

(i.e.,

t

> 0),

account is investigated.

and

the welfare effect of opening the capital

present

last section's strategy It

Following

ass timed that the proceeds from

Increase

that there is a tariff on the import of

the foreign loan are

used

is first

exclusively to

consumption.

Assume, as before, that the world rate of interest is

equal to r*.

in the previous case, consider first what happens when the proceeds from
consumption. The effects
the foreign loan are fully used to increase present
1 and repaid (with an
on each period's utility of a loan obtained in period
As

interest equal to r*) in period 2 is now given by
dU1 =

d )}
{] _l 'Ey

and

(14.13) and (14.114):
(14.13)

dB

-

dU2 =

j__
(1 _l

—

U2

}

(l+r)

dB

(14.114)

TdE

y

where dEy captures the pure income effect on the demand for y resulting

This corresponds to Bhagwati's et al. case of negative shadow prices.

—78—

from changes in real income.12! Since tdEy is smaller than one, (14.12) will
be positive and (14.13) negative..2! As before, the effect on total welfare is
found by totally differentiating (14.1) and using (14.13) and (14.1i4).

The

result obtained is:

dW =

El — (l+r*)A] (3W/rfU1)

1
)

1 —

dB

(14.15)

which under our assumptions of X(1+r*) < 1 is greater than zero. That means
that In the presence of trade restrictions allowing foreign-borrowing to
increase present consumption is still welfare improving.

Assume now that the private sector uses the proceeds of the foreign

loans to increase its stock of capital. That would be the case if

price

the

(world)

of a machine, in terms of the numeraire good is equal or lower than

(l/RK).

Assume in

order to simplify the exposition that this price is

exactly equal to (l/RK). In this case the welfare effect of opening the
capital account, under the assumption that the loan is also paid in •the form
of machines, will be given by equation (14.16):

12.!

In

order to derive (5.12) and (5.13) the following property was used: dEy
=
See Dixit and Norman (1980, p. 62).

This statement can be proven in the following way: Py

is the

marginal propensity to spend on y and consequently smaller than one.

Also, since Py > t
Thus (1 —

IdE

> 1.

it

follows that (PydEy) (fr—)

= dEyt

< 1.

—79—

[1 —

dW

where R1, 1<

(l+r*)A]

(3W/]113U1)

(RK —

TRPK) [l/(l_tdE)] dK

('4.16)

is a Rybczynski term that captures the effect of capital

y

accumulation on the production of the importable good. Given our assumption
regarding factors proportions ——
in our developing economy -—

the importable good y is capital intenzive

RyK

> o

Equation (14.16) is interesting for several reasons. First, as may be

seen it can be either positive or negative. It can be negative even If the
world rate of interest Is below the consumption rate of Interest [I.e.,

(l+r*)X < 1]. This will be the case if

< rR K

This is nothing else

than the Johnson [1967] condition f or imrniserizing capital accumulation. 8

Intuitively the possibility that the opening of the capital account

will result in a welfare loss Is easy to explain. Under the presence of
tariffs there will be a difference between the private and social marginal

productivities of capital. While the private marginal productivity of capital

is K (as it was in the absence of tariffs), its social marginal If shadow
prices are used to make investment decisions this welfare reducing effect of
opening the capital account in the presence of trade distortions will not

!

arise [Edwards and van Wljnbergen 1983]. Productivity Is (RK -

TRPK).

It

is interesting to note that, contrary to the Brecher—Diaz—Alejandro

(1977) one—period analysis on foreign investment, if

> tR K capital

accumulation cannot be immenserizing even if r* = RK. The reson for
this is that in the present intertemporal framework the important
comparison
between

is between r* and the consumption rate of

interest, and not

and r*.

An alternative way of looking at this is comparing RK evaluated at
domestic tariff inclusive prices, and evaluated at world prices. It is

easy to show that this last expression will be equal to (RK —

y

—80—

The reason for this is that capital accumulation will result in lower total
imports and thus lower tariffs collection (term

tM in equation 14.1). It is

possible then that the negative effect on welfare of the reduction of tariffs
collections will generate an
second

welfare reduction. This is a typical

best type of argument that indicates that reducing some distortions

only can result in
are

overall

total

welfare being reduced. Of

course,

if

shadow

prices

used to make investment decisions this welfare reducing effect of opening

the capital account in the presence of trade distortions will not arise
[Edwards and van Wijnbergeri 1983].

5.

Summary and Concluding Remarks

In

this paper I have surveyed some of the most important issues

to the order of liberalization of the current and capital accounts
balance of payments. This topic has recently attracted considerable

related
the

attention

of

both from academic and policy—oriented circles. From a theoretical

point of view the question of the appropriate order of liberalization is only

relevant in a world with some kind of adjustment costs, market imperfections
and/or externalities.

If, on

the contr4ary, a textbook economy free of

imperfections is assumed, the answer to this question becomes trivial: both

accounts of the balance of payments should be liberalized simultaneously and
instantaneously.
political,

However, there are a number of

reasons, both economic and

why a simultaneous arid instantaneous liberalization might not be

feasible. In this context, then, the question regarding
lization becomes important.

the order of libera-

—81—

The problem of the order of liberalization of the current and capital
accounts of the balance of payments has become more interesting in light of

the recent experience of a group of countries from the Cone of South America
-—

(Argentina, Chile and Uruguay). These countries followed opposite orders

Argentina
current

and Uruguay opened the capital account first, while Chile opened the

account first—— with a common fate in the

recession

and (partial) reversal of the

Southern-Cone

early

l980s: deep economic

liberalization attempt. This

experience has triggered greater concern on the issue of the

adequate order of liberalization. At the present time there are no definite
answers regarding these experiences and more research on the subject should be
encouraged.

The present paper has focused exclusively on the analysis of some
aspects of the order of liberalization of the capital and current accounts of

the balance of payments. However, there are
related

a number of

important issues

to a broadly defined liberalization process that deserve to be briefly

mentioned.

There are four major

issues

related to these reforms: First, if a

liberalization will not fully eliminate all distortions, the question of

welfare effects of partial reforms will become critical. Even though from a
second—best perspective almost anything, in terms of welfare, can happen as a
consequence of a partial reform, there are well founded conjectures that the

liberalization of some

markets

only will be welfare improving. .i"

Second,

the question of the speed of liberalization is also Important. In the absence
of market imperfections and/or exterrtalities, markets should be liberalized

very quickly (now). If externaUties are present, however, and the first best

Krueger (l983b), Michaely (1.932), Corbo de Melo (1982).

—82—

policies to deal with them are

not

available, a gradual liberalization might

be called for.!! Third, the relationship between liberalization and
stabilization is crucial to understand the success or failure of liberalization reforms, since most liberalization attempts have been undertaken in con-

junction

in

with major stabilization programs.

The reason for this is that,

the first place, the initial Imposition of restrictions and controls is

usually related to an increase in the fiscal deficit and inflation. There are
some important aspects of the relationship between these two policies ——

stabilization

and liberalization ——

that

deserve further attention. In

particular, the desirability of implementing a major
tion

at the same time as a stabilization program is

further

investigated. And, fourth, the

market should be liberalized
agreement

(almost

full) liberaliza—

on its way, should be

order of liberalization (i.e.,

first) is also

which

important. There is generalized

among experts about some aspects of the order of liberalization.

There is agreement, for example, that the capital account should only be
opened after the domestic capital market is freed, and that this can only

happen after the fiscal deficit has been substantially reduced. There has
been less agreement, however, on the .order of liberalization of the capital

and

current accounts. This is the topic that has been discussed in the

present paper.

In Section 2 of the present paper the existing literature on the
order of liberalization of the capital and current accounts of the balance of

See Learner (1981), Mussa (1982), Neary (1982), Edwards (1982), Michaely
(1982) and Edwards and van 4ijnbergefl (1983).

See Krueger (1978, 1981, l983a), LIttle (1982).

—83—

payments was critically reviewed, and some interpretations were suggested.
The existing

arguments were grouped in three broad categories for this

discussion. The first line of argument is

behavior

and

concerned with real exchange rate

macroeconomic stability during the liberalization effort. Some

authors have argued that to the extent that the opening of the capital account
will generate destabilizing capital flows, the real exchange rate will be

highly volatile after this account is liberalized. For this reason, the
reasoning goes, the capital account should only be opened after the trade

reform has

been

lidated".

Other authors, however, have argued that the best way to avoid

completed, and the new structure of production is "conso-

undesired real exchange rate movements is by having a freely floating exchange

rate with full convertibility. This exchange rate system, they argue, should
be implemented before the trade reform. Consequently, according to this view
the capital account should be liberalized first. The second line of argument
that appears in the literature is related to welfare effects of particular

orderings. This analysis centers on plausible values of cross elasticities
and of indirect welfare effects. The third group of arguments deals with the
problem

of

adjustment costs and ttle provision ot adjustment assistance through

cheaper foreign credit. While some authors believe that the higher availability of cheaper foreign credit -capital account -—

will

obtained through the opening of the

help the adjustment process, others think that the

effect of this credit will be highly 'indesirable since the "wrong" signals

will be provided, and that capital flows should be avoided during the transition following a trade reform.

—8Z1 —

In

Section 3 a positive analysis of the effects of liberalizing both

accounts was presented. A three goods-two factors model of trade was

used

to

analyze how both reforms will affect production and income distribution in the

short— and long—run.

that

The model assumes

the short-run can be character-

ized by a Ricardo—Viner setting, while in the long—run a Hecksher—Ohlin

framework Is used. This discussion shows that both reforms, on their own,

tend to generate opposite effects on production and income distribution.

will

To the extent that there are real costs related to resource movements, there

is

an

to

avoid resources moving In and out of particular sectors. If, as has been

argument to synchronize the effects of opening both accounts, in

order

suggested by Frenkel [1982, 1983] and Khan and Zahler [1983] among others, the
speed of adjustment of the capital account Is faster than that of the current
account, this synchronization of the economic effects of opening both accounts
will require that the current account is opened first.
In

Section

of a small open economy was developed

a two-period model

to analyze the welfare consequences of liberalizing the capital account in the
presence

of trade distortions. It was shown that these welfare effects will

depend on two key variables. First the relationship, prior to the liberalization

reform, between the domestic consumption rate of interest and "the" world

interest rate will be critical. If
exceeds

the

domestic consumption Interest

rate

the world rate of interest the opening of the capital account will

result in an importation of capital and welfare will improve. Second, the
social welfare consequences of opening the capital account in the presence of
tariffs will depend on whether the additional funds obtained from abroad are
used for capital accumulation or for consumption.

It

was shown that if funds

—85—

are

used to increase

present

consumption welfare will always improve. More-

over it is shown that under these assumptions the welfare increase will be
greater

in the presence of

tariff's. If, however, these funds

are used to

increase investment in the presence of tariffs welfare may be reduced as a

consequence of the capital account liberalization. This welfare reduction
will not take place, however, if shadow prices are used to guide investment
decisions.

The purpose of this paper has been to survey the major issues related
to the order of libralization, presenting the different aspects of this

problem in an organized fashion. While the analysis has not yielded a strong
theorem regarding the appropriate order for liberalizing the current and capital accounts of the balance of payments, both the historical evidence and the
theoretical considerations discussed suggest that a more prudent strategy
would be based on liberalizing the current account first.
A central aspect

of

any reform package is related to the degree of

credibility that the public has on the reform. If there is no credibility,
agents will not make the decisions required for the new policy to have an
effect: on the economic structure. Moreover, in the particular case of the
liberalization of the current and capital accounts of the balance of payments,
the lack of' credibility can result -- as was the case of Argentina --

in

agents using foreign funds to increase investments in the "wrong"
sector.

Of course, the degree of'

credibility of

a reform package is not

Of course, if the lack of credibility was founded, and the reforms are
reversed, the investment was being done (from a private perspective) in
the "right" sectors.

—86—

an exogenous variable, but will depend on a number of variables. One of the
most important determinants of the degree of credibility is the perceived

consistency of the proposed policies. If these policies are perceived as
inconsistent, then agents will expect that the reform attempt will be

discontinued or reverted. This is a basic, but important principle that
should be kept in mind when implementing global economic reforms. In that
sense, it may be argued that more important than determining the correct order
of liberalization, it is important to define consistent and credible policy
packages that will support any particular order that is chosen.

—87—

References
Arriazu, Ricardo: "Policy Interdependence From a Latin-American Perspective,"
IMF Staff Papers, 30, 1 (March 1983): 113—152.
"Remarks on the Southern Cone," IMF Staff Papers, 30, 1
(March 1983): 177—18'L

Aizenman, Joshua: "Dynamics of Trade Liberalization Policy," Journal of
Development EconomIcs (1983).
Balassa, Bela: "Principlos de Reformas Arancelarias en Paises en Desarrollo,"
in Estudios Monetarios IV (Banco Central de Chile, 1976): 11—26.

.,

Development Strategies in Semi—Industrial Economics, (Oxford
_____________
.._.....
4...
...
s.',
uju. veI-,J.
1

IT.....'

"Reforming the System of Incentives in Developing Economies,"
in B. Balassa (ed.) Development Strategies in Semi-Industrial
Economies (Oxford University Press 1982).

____________

Bertrand, T.S. and F. Flatters: "Tariffs, Capital Accumulation and Immisiriz—
ing

Growth," Journal of International Economics (1971): p53—1460.

Bhagwati, J.: The Theory and Practice of Commercial Policy: Deartures From
Unified Exchange Rates (Princeton University Special Papers No. 8,
1968).

____________

Anatomy

and Consequences of Exchange Control Regimes

(Ballinger:

New York 1978).

____________

"Directly

Political

____________

1982).

Unproductive Profit Seeking Activities," Journal of

Economy (October 1982)..

Import Competition and Response (University of Chicago Press,

___________ and

T.N. Srinivasan: "Trade Policy and Development," in R.
Dornbuschand J.A. Frenkel (eds.) International Economic Policy:
Theory and Evidence, (Johns Hopkins University Press 1979).

"Revenue Seeking: A Generalization of the
and
Theory of Tariffs," Journal of Political Economy (December 1980).
:

_____________ and

Lectures in International

Trade (MIT Press

l983a).

"On the Choice Between Capital and Labor
Journal of International Economics (May 1983): 209—222.

____________ and __________:

Mobility,"

—88—

Blejer, M. and L. Landau: Economic Liberalization and Stabilization in
Argentina,

Chile and Uruguay: The Monetary Approach to the
(The World Bank, forthcoming i984).

Balance

of' Payments

__________ and Donald J. Mathieson: "Preannouncement of Exchange Rate Changes
as a Stabilization Instrument," IMF Staff Papers (December 1981).
Brarison, William: "Remarks on the Southern Core," IMF

1983):

Staff Papers (March

Brecher, R.A.: "Minimum Wage Rates and the Theory of International Trade,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics (197k): 98—116.

____________

Journal

"Optimal Commercial Policy for a Minimum Wage Economy,"
of International Economics k (197k): l39—lk9.

Brecher, R. and J. Bhagwati: "Immiserizing Transfers From Abroad," Journal of
International Economics (1982): 353—36k.

__________ and C. Diaz-Alejandro: "Tariffs, Foreign Capital and Immiserizing
Growth," Journal of International Economics (1977):
__________ and R. Findlay: "Tariffs, Foreign Capital and National Welfare
with Sector Specific Factors," Journal of International Economics
(May

1983): 277—288.

Bruno, Michael: "Import Competition and Macroeconomic Adjustment Under Wage—

Price

Rigidity," in J. Bhagwati (ed.) Import Competition and Response
(University of Chicago Press 1982).

Calvo, Guillermo: "Trying to Stabilize: Some Theoretical Reflections Based
on the Case of Argentina," Columbia University Workding Paper No. 128

(1981).
_______________

"Devaluation:

Levels vs. Rates," Journal of International

Economics (May 1981).

"The Chilean Economy in the 1970's," in K. Brunner and A.
Meltzer (eds.) Economic Policy in a World of Change, v. 17 CarnegieRochester Conference Series 1982.

_______________

Cavallo, D. and Y. Mundlak: Agriculture and Economic Growth in an Open
Economy: The Case of Argentina: (IFPRI, 1982).

Clark,

Paul: t'Step—by-Step Liberalization of a Controlled Economy:
Experience in Egypt," unpublishe.d paper, 1982.

Corbo, Vittorio: "Recent developmeritsof the Chilean Economy," unpublished
paper, prepared for the conference on "National Economic Policies in
Chile" (November 1982).

—89—

and Sebastian Edwards: "El Rol de Una Devaluacion en la Econotnia
Chilena Actual," unpublished paper (June 1981)

de Melo: "Liberalization with Stabilization in the
__________ and Jaime
Southern Cone," unpublished paper 1982.
Corden, W.M.: "The Exchange Rate, Monetary Policy and North Sea Oil," Oxford
Economic Papers (1981): 23—116.

"Exchange Rate Protection," in R.N. Cooper ét al. (eds.) The
International Monetary System Under Flexible Exchange Rates
(Ballinger 19181).

____________

"Booming Sector and Dutch—Disease Economics: A Survey,"
____________
Australian National University Working Paper No. 079, 1982.
and J.P. Neary," Booming Sector and De-industrialiZatiOfl in a
Small Open Economy," Economic Journal (1982): 825—118.

Datta, G.: "Capital Importing Oil Exporters: Macroeconomic Issues in a
Period of Rapidly Improving Terms of Trade," unpublished paper, The
World Bank, 1983.
Diaz—Alejafldro, Carlos F.: "Southern Cone Stabilization Plans," in William R.
Cline and Sidney Weintraub (eds.) Economic Stabilization in
Developing Countries (Washington, D.C.: Brookings InstItution, 1981).
"Good—Bye Financial Repression, Hello Financial Crash,"
unpublished paper 1983.

_____________

Dixit, Avinash and Victor Norman: Theory of International Trade (Cambridge
University Press 1980).
Dornbusch, Rudiger: "Tariffs and Non-traded
117—185.
Economics (May 19711):

Goods," Journal of

International

"The Theory of Flexible Exchange Regimes and
Macroeconomic Policy," Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 78 (May

1976): 255—75.

_________________

1980.
Open Economy Macroeconomics, Basic Books, New York

"Remarks on the Southern Cone," IMF Staff Papers (March
1983).

Interest

Borrowing,"

Rates, Home Goods and Optimal Fxterna1
"Real
Journal of Political Economy (February 1983): 1111—153.

—90—

Liberalization: Some ReflecEdwards, Sebastian: "Minimum Wages and Trade
tions Based on the Chilean Experience," Working Paper No. 230, Dept.
of Economics, UCLA, 1982a.
"The Short-Run Relation Between Grown and Inflation in
Latin-America: Comment," American Economic Review (June 1983): 1477-

82.
"LDC's Foreign Borrowing and Default Risk: An Empirical
InvestIgation 1976—1980," American Economic Review (September 19814).
"Economic Policy and Growth In Chile: 1973—1982," in G.
Walton (ed.) National Economic Policies In Chile forthcoming 19814.
"Stabilization

with Liberalization: An Evaluation of Ten

Years of Chile's ExperIment with Free Market Policies, 1973—1983",
Economic Development and Cultural Change (January 1985a).
The Order
Developing Countries,

of Liberalization of' the External Sector in
Princeton Essays In International Finance:

Princeton, N.J. (Forthcoming 1985b).

Aoki: "Oil Export Boom and Dutch Disease,"
Resources and Energy (1983).
and Masanao

of' Trade
of
Different
and Capital Market Liberalization: Consequences
Sequencing Scenarios," NBER Working Paper No. 12145, December 1983.

and Sweder Van Wijnbergen: "The Welfare Effects

Feldstein, Andrew: "A General Equilibrium Approach to the Analysis of Trade
Restrictions with an Application to Argentina," IMF Staff Papers 27

(1980):

Feilner,

7149_7714.

William: "In Defense of' the Credibility Hypothesis," American
Economic F(eview (May 1982): 90—92.

Fischer, Stanley and Jacob Frenkel: "Investment, the Two-Sector Model, and
Trade in Debt and Capital Goods,"
(August

1972): 211—233.
and _____________: "International Capital Movements Along

Balanced Growth Paths: Comments and Extensions," Economic Record, 48

(June 1972): 266271.
Fleming, J.M.: "Dual Exchange Markets and Other Remedies for Disruptive
1—28.
Capital Flows," IMF Staff Papers 21 (19714):
Flood, Robert: "Exchange Rate Expectations in Dual Exchange Markets," Journal
of International Economics (1978): 65—77.

—91—

Frenkel, Jacob: "The Order of Economic Liberalization: Discussion," in K.
Brunner and A.H Meltzer (eds.) Economic Policy in a World of Change
(North—Holland, 1982).
"Remarks on the Southern Cone," IMF Staff Papers (March
1983).

Fry, Maxwell: "Money and Capital or Financial Deepening in Economic Development," Journal of Money, Credit, and Bankin (1978): 11614-1475.

"Savings, Investment, Growth and the Cost of Financial Repres____________
sion," World Development, 8 (April 1980): 317—327.
Fullerton, Don: "Transition Losses of Partially Mobile Industry—Specific
Capital," Quarterly Journal of EconomIcs (February 1983): 107—126.
Galbis, Vicente: "Financial Intermediation and Economic Growth in Less—
Developed Countries: A Theoretical Approach," Journal of Development
Studies (1977): 58—72.
Grossman, Gene: "The Gains from International Factor Movements," unpublished
manuscript, May 1983.
Hanson, James: "Optimal International Borrowing and Lending," American
Economic Review, 614 (September 19711): 616—630,

_____________ and Jaime de Melo: "The Uruguayan Experience with
Liberalization and Stabilization," Journal of Inter—American and
World Affairs, 1983.

Harberger, Arnold C.: "Using the Resources at Hand More Efficiently,"
American Economic Review (May 1959).

"Notas Sobre la Dinamica de la Liberalizacion del
Comercio," in Estudios Monetarios III (Banco Central de Chile, 1976).

___________

"On Country Risk and the Social Cost of Foreign
____________
Borrowing by Developing Countries," unpublished manuscript,
University of Chicago 1976.
"A Primer on Inflation," Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking (August 1978): 505-21.

"Vignettes on the World Capital Market," American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 70 (May 1980): 331—337.

___________

"The Chilean nomy In the 1970s: Crisis,
____________
Stabilization, Liberalizatvn, Reform," in K. Brunner and A.H.
Meltzer (eds.) Economic Po'.i2y in a World of Change (North—Holland,
1982).

—92—

Edwards: "International Sources of
Some New Results," unpublished manuscript, 1982.

____________________ and Sebastian

Inflation:

Johnson, Harry G.: "The Gains From Freer Trade With Europe: An Estimate,"
(Manchester School of Economics and Social Studies, Sept. 1958).
_________________

"Optimal Trade Intervention in the Presence of Domestic

Dostortions,"

in R. Caves et al. (eds.) Trade Growth and Balance of
Payments (Rand-McNally, 1965).

_________________
or Factor
(March
Jones,

The Possibility of Income Losses From Increased Efficiency
Presence of Tariffs," Economic Journal

Accumulation in the

1967):

151—1514.

R.J.: "A

Three Factor Model in Theory, Trade and History," in J.
Bhagwati (ed.) Trade, Balance of Payments Growth (NorthHoliand,
1971).

Kapur, Basant: "Optimal Financial and Foreign Exchange Liberalization of
Less—Developed Economies," Quarterly Journal of Economics (February
1983): 141—62.
Khari, Mohsin and Roberto Zahier: "The Macroeconomic Effects of Changes in
Barriers to Trade and Capital Flows: A Simulation Analysis," IMF
Staff Papers (June 1983): 223—282.

Krueger, Anne 0.: "The Political Economy of the Rent Seeking Society,"
American Economic Review (June 19714):

________________

Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development:
Attempts and Consequences (Cambridge, MA, 1978).

Liberalization

Trade Policy as an Input to Development," American EOonomic
Review (May 1980).

_______________

________________ "Interactions etween Inflation and Trade Objectives in
Stabilization Programs," in W.R. Cline and S. Weintraub (eds.)
Economic Stabilization in Developing Countries (Washington, D.C.:
Brookings Institution, 1981).

________________ Trade and Employment in Developing Countries (University of
Chicago Press, 1983a).

_: "The Problems of Liberalization," unpublished paper, The
World Bank, 1983.
Krumm, Kathie: "Credibility and Investment: Argentina's Attempted
Liberalization 1976—1981," unpublished paper 1983.
Lal, Deepak: "The Real Aspects of Stabilization and Structural Adjustment
Policies — An Approach," unpublished manuscript, World Bank 1982.

-.93—

Lanyi, Anthony: "Separate Exchange Rate Markets for Current and Capital
Transactions," IMF Staff Papers (1975): 71'4739.
Learner,

E.E.: "Welfare Computations and the Optimal Staging of Tariff Reduc—
tions in Models With Adjustment Costs," Journal of International
Economies (February 1980).

Little, Ian M.D.: Economic Development (Basic Books, 1982).

________________ T. Scitovsky and M. Scott: Industry and Trade in Some
Developing Countries (Oxford University Press, 1970).
________________ and Marcelo Selowsky: "Energy Prices, Substitution and
Optimal Borrowing in the Short-run: An Analysis of Adjustment in
Oil—Importing Developing Countries," Journal of Development Economics
(forthcoming 198k).

Mayer, W.: "Short Run and Long Run Equilibrium for a Small Open Economy,"
Journal of Political Economy (19714).
McKinnon, Ronald J.: Money and Capital In Economic Development (Brookings
InstitutiOn, 1973).

"Foreign Exchange Rate Policy and Economic
___________________
Liberalization in LDC's," unpublished paper 1979.

"International Transfers and Non—Traded Commodities:
___________________
Adjustment
Problem," in D.M. Leipziger (ed.) The International
The
System
and the Developing Nations (AID, 1976).
Monetary
Money In International Exchange: The Convertible
___________________
Currency System (Oxford University Press,1979).
"Financial Repression and .Liberaliza.tion Problems in
LDC's," in S. Grossman and E. Lundberg (eds.) The Past and Prospects
•

:

of World Economic Order (MacMillan, 1980).
Chile

"The Order of Economic Liberalization: Lessons from
Argentina," in K. Brunner and A. Meltzer,(eds.), Economic

and
in a World of Change (North-Holland, 1982).

Policy

__________________ and

D.J. Mathiason: How to Manage a Repressed Economy

(Essays in International Einance, Princeton University Press, 1981).

Meade, J.E.: The Balance of Payments, (Oxford University Press, 1951).
Melvin, James: "Production and Trade With Two Factors and Three Goods,"
American Economic Review (1968): 12149—1268.

Mlchaely, Michael: "The Sequencing of a Liberalization Policy: A Preliminary
Statement of Issues," unpublished paper, 1982.
Munoz, Oscar: "Crecimiento y Desequilibrios en Chile," Estudios Cieplan, 8
(1982).

Mussa, M.L." "Tariffs and the Distribution of Income: The Importance of
Factor Specificity," Journal of Political Economy (19714),

"Dynamic Adjustment in the Heckscher—Ohlin—Samuelson Model,"
___________
Journal of Political Economy (1978): 1191—1203.
"The Two Sectors Model in Terms of its Dual: A Geometric
Exposition," Journal of International Economics (November 1979): 513-526.

__________

"Government Policy and the Adjustment Process," in J. Bhagwatl.
(ed.) Import Competition and Response (University of Chicago Press,

___________

1982): 73—120.
Neary, Peter: "Short-Run Capital Specificity and the Pure Theory of

national Trade," Economic Journal, 88 (1978): 14118—510.

Inter-

Stability and the theory of Factor—Market

____________

"Dynamic

____________

"Capital Mobility, Wage Stickiness and the Case for Adjustment

Distortions," American Economic Review (1978): 671—682.

Assistance," in J. Bhagwati (ed.) Import Competition and Response
(University of Chicago Press, 1982).

Nogues, Julio: "Politica Comercial y Cambiaria: TJna Interpretacion de la
Experiencia Argentina 1976—1981," Banco Central de Argentina, 1983.

Pindyck, Robert S.: "The Optimal Phasing of Phased Deregulation," Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control, 11(1982), 281—2914.

Rodriguez, Carlos A.: "Politicas de Estabilizacion en la Economia Argentina
1978—1982," Cuadernos de Economia (April 1983)
T.M.: "Factor Endowments, International Trade,
Prices," Economica (November 1955): 336—3141.

Rybczynski,

'and Factor

Schelling, Thomas: "Establishing Credibility: Strategic Considerations,"
American Economic Review (May 1982): 77—80.

Sjaastad, Larry: "Failure of Economic Liberalism in the Cone of
America,"

The World Economy (March 1983):

Latin

5—26.

_______________ and Hernan Cortes: "La Politica Economica de la Reforma
Comercial en Chile," Cuadernos de Economla (Octubre/Diciembre 1981).

—95—

Squire, Lyn: Employment Policies for Developing Countries, (Oxford University
Press, 1983).

Srinlvasan,

T.N.: "International Factors Movements," Journal of International
Economics (May 1983).

Stockman, Alan C.: "The Order of Economic Liberalization: Comment," in K.
Brunner and A.H. Meltzer Economic Policy in a World of Change (NorthHolland, 1982).
Svensson, Lars 0. and Arsaf Ragin: "The Terms of Trade and the Current
Account," Journal of Political Economy (February 1983): 97—125.

Taylor, John: "Establishing Credibility: A Rational Expectations View,"
American Economic Review (May 1982): 81—86.
Van Wijribergen, Sweder: "The Dutch Disease: A Disease After All?" mirneo
1983; forthcoming in Economic Journal i98I.

