                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    WHAT DO EMISSIONS MARKETS DELIVER AND TO WHOM? EVIDENCE FROM
             SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA'S NOX TRADING PROGRAM

                                             Meredith Fowlie
                                            Stephen P. Holland
                                              Erin T. Mansur

                                          Working Paper 15082
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w15082


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2009




We would like to thank Barbara Bamberger, Lucas Davis, John DiNardo, Justine Hastings, Matt Kahn,
Patrick Kline, Justin McCrary, Mushfiq Mobarak, Steven Redding, Randall Walsh, and seminar participants
at the University of California Energy Institute, Yale University, University of North Carolina at Greensboro,
Iowa State University, Harvard University, Dartmouth College, Texas A&M University, Camp Resources,
POWER, and the University of Pittsburgh for comments. We thank Gray Kimbrough for excellent
research assistance. We also thank Darryl Look at CA ARB and Danny Luong at SCAQMD for assistance
with accessing data. All authors thank the University of California Energy Institute for generous research
support during this project. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Meredith Fowlie, Stephen P. Holland, and Erin T. Mansur. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Do Emissions Markets Deliver and to Whom? Evidence from Southern California's
NOx Trading Program
Meredith Fowlie, Stephen P. Holland, and Erin T. Mansur
NBER Working Paper No. 15082
June 2009
JEL No. L5,Q52,Q53,R20

                                               ABSTRACT

A perceived advantage of cap-and-trade programs over more prescriptive environmental regulation
is that enhanced compliance flexibility and cost effectiveness can make more stringent emissions reductions
politically feasible. However, increased compliance flexibility can also result in an inequitable distribution
of pollution. We investigate these issues in the context of Southern California's RECLAIM program.
We match facilities in RECLAIM with similar California facilities also located in non-attainment areas.
Our results indicate that emissions fell approximately 24 percent, on average, at RECLAIM facilities
relative to our counterfactual. Furthermore, we find that observed changes in emissions do not vary
significantly with neighborhood demographic characteristics.


Meredith Fowlie                                       Erin T. Mansur
University of Michigan                                Yale School of Management
Ford School of Public Policy                          135 Prospect Street
5224 Weill Hall                                       P.O. Box 208200
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-3091                              New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER                                              and NBER
mfowlie@umich.edu                                     erin.mansur@yale.edu

Stephen P. Holland
Bryan School of Business and Economics
University of North Carolina, Greensboro
P.O. Box 26165
Greensboro, NC 27402-6165
and NBER
sphollan@uncg.edu
1         Introduction

Policy makers have a variety of instruments at their disposal when pursuing emissions reduc-

tion objectives. Traditionally, regulators have relied upon “command and control” (CAC)

approaches involving prescriptive emissions or pollution control technology standards. In-

creasingly, however, emissions trading programs are the preferred policy choice. In the

United States, the Clean Air Act Amendments (CAAAs) of 1990 initiated a monumental

shift away from CAC regulation towards more market-based alternatives such as emissions

trading.1 In Europe, the European Union’s greenhouse gas Emission Trading System has

brought emissions trading to the fore.

        Despite this prominence, questions remain about how emissions trading is working in

practice. First, can these market-based programs reduce emissions beyond what could be

achieved with more prescriptive CAC regulation? An important perceived advantage of

market-based approaches over CAC is that they can, in some circumstances, deliver more

significant public health and environmental benefits; lower compliance costs and greater com-

pliance flexibility make more stringent emissions reductions politically feasible (Keohane et

al., 1998; Ellerman, 2006; Tietenberg, 2006; US EPA, 1992). Although this hypothesis seems

plausible, it has been diﬃcult to test empirically (Ellerman, 2003; Harrington and Morgen-

stern, 2007; Stavins, 1998; Tietenberg, 2006). Second, some have expressed concern that a

reliance on permit markets (versus prescriptive regulations and standards) to coordinate pol-
    1
    The CAAAs authorized the use of economic incentive regulation for the control of acid rain, the devel-
opment of cleaner burning gasoline, the reduction of toxic air emissions, and for states to use in controlling
carbon monoxide and urban ozone.




                                                      1
lution abatement activity can lead to environmental injustice (Kaswan, 2008; Vandenbergh

and Ackerly, 2007). If polluting facilities can achieve compliance by purchasing permits (ver-

sus reducing emissions), there is the possibility that permitted pollution will flow into areas

where poor or minority populations live. To the extent that there are pre-existing inequalities

in the distribution of environmental risks, these inequalities can be exacerbated.2

       We assess these questions in the context of a renowned emissions market: the REgional

Clean Air Incentives Market (RECLAIM). Our primary objective is to identify the causal

eﬀects of this emissions trading program on facility-level emissions vis a vis the CAC regula-

tions it replaced. Our essential challenge is to construct a credible benchmark; a precise and

believable estimate of the emissions we would have observed in the absence of the program.

Design features unique to the RECLAIM facilitate the construction of this counterfactual.

More specifically, we can exploit the fact that only a subset of industrial facilities located

in non-attainment counties in California were removed from a CAC regime and required to

participate in RECLAIM.

       The RECLAIM program marked many firsts for emissions trading. Specifically, it was

the first mandatory trading program to supplant a pre-existing CAC regime that was, in

theory, capable of achieving the same environmental objectives. It was the first program to

include a broad and diverse population of sources, making it particularly relevant to future

trading programs that will need to be more heterogeneous to achieve increasingly aggressive

air quality and climate goals. Illaudably, it was also the first emissions trading program to
   2
    Although a broad literature examines environmental justice concerns with plant citing, CAC regulation
and neighborhood location choices (see Banzhaf and Walsh 2008), few papers assess the environmental justice
eﬀects of emissions trading.


                                                    2
be challenged on the grounds of environmental injustice and noncompliance.

       This analysis of the RECLAIM program is motivated by three observations. First, a

recent resurgence of interest in RECLAIM makes our study both timely and appropriate.

Cap-and-trade programs figure prominently in regional and federal proposals for addressing

climate change, thus drawing increased attention to past experiences with market-based

instruments in general, and RECLAIM in particular. Recent attempts to extract constructive

insights from the RECLAIM experience arrive at very diﬀerent conclusions. Whereas some

regard the program as a clear success (Stavins, 2007), others see a “spectacular” failure

(Green et al., 2007).3

       Second, axiomatic questions about the eﬀectiveness in reducing pollution of market-based

programs relative to more traditional CAC regulations remain controversial and unresolved.

Compared to the previous literature addressing these questions (see, for example, Harring-

ton and Morgenstern, 2007), we take a fundamentally diﬀerent approach.4 We exploit the

participation requirements of the RECLAIM program in order to construct semi-parametric

estimates of program impacts. Emissions trajectories at RECLAIM facilities are compared
   3
     Stavins (2007) summarizes domestic experience with emissions trading and reports that the RECLAIM
program has generated significant environmental benefits “with NOx emissions in the regulated area falling
by 60 percent.” Green et al. (2007) discuss the relative strengths and weaknesses of greenhouse gas emissions
trading relative to a carbon tax. While reflecting upon past experiences with the former approach, they note
that: “additional pitfalls and dilemmas of emissions trading can be seen through a review of the spectacular
trading failure of the RECLAIM.” They go on to argue that although “SCAQMD estimated that SO2 and
NOx would be reduced by fourteen and eighty tons per day, respectively,...RECLAIM never came close to
operating as predicted.”
   4
     Both Stavins (1998) and Ellerman (2003) note that, in the context of comprehensive cap-and-trade
programs such as the Acid Rain Program, it has been diﬃcult (if not impossible) to construct credible
estimates of the emissions that would have been observed under a diﬀerent regulatory regime. Harrington
et al. (2004) compare outcomes from controlling similar pollutants in the United States and Europe using
diﬀerent policy instruments. The limitation of this approach is that diﬀerences in outcomes across the
two contexts likely reflect social, cultural, political, and economic diﬀerences, in addition to diﬀerences in
regulatory regimes.


                                                      3
with those at similar California facilities outside of RECLAIM. One important advantage

of this approach is that it generates counterfactual emissions estimates that are free of the

potentially confounding eﬀects of changing economic conditions at the state-level, industry-

wide production trends, and technological change.

   Finally, our empirical framework facilitates an analysis of how RECLAIM-induced changes

in emissions are distributed across communities with diﬀerent socio-economic characteristics.

For a number of reasons, the RECLAIM market has been the most criticized of any emis-

sions trading program with respect to environmental justice concerns. Some contend that

RECLAIM has placed a disproportionate burden of the region’s air pollution in low-income,

minority communities (Drury et al., 1999; Moore, 2004). We combine semi-parametric

matching methods with parametric regression techniques. This allows us to examine cor-

relations between RECLAIM-induced emissions changes and socio-economic neighborhood

characteristics with unprecedented precision.

   Our results indicate that emissions at RECLAIM facilities have fallen by more than

20 percent, on average, relative to the control facilities (i.e. similar California facilities

subject to command and control regulation). These results are generally robust to alternative

estimation methods, functional form specifications, and diﬀerent control group composition.

We fail to reject the hypothesis that pollution reductions under RECLAIM were equally

distributed across neighborhoods with diﬀerent socio-economic characteristics.

   The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background on Southern California’s

RECLAIM program, emphasizing past experiences with program evaluation and environ-



                                                4
mental justice issues in particular. Section 3 describes the research design and econometric

approach. Section 4 summarizes the data. Section 5 presents the empirical findings. Section

6 concludes.



2     Background on RECLAIM

In this section, we introduce Southern California’s RECLAIM program and provide some

background on two areas of emphasis: measurement of the emissions impacts of RECLAIM

and related environmental justice concerns.

2.1     A Brief History of the Regional Clean Air Incentives Market

Los Angeles suﬀers from some of the worst air quality in the nation.5 The South Coast Air

Quality Management District (SCAQMD) is the government agency responsible for regulat-

ing air pollution in the Los Angeles basin.6 In 1989, SCAQMD introduced an aggressive set

of rules and standards for stationary sources. Industry representatives fiercely opposed these

rules on the grounds that compliance costs would prove excessive.

    In 1990, Congress turned its attention to the widespread failure of US cities to attain

health-based national ambient air quality standards (NAAQS). Under the 1990 CAAAs, Fed-

eral NOx standards were significantly revised. Because SCAQMD was much further from
   5
     Air pollution problems are due in part to meteorological and topographical conditions; the basin is sunny,
warm, and poorly ventilated. The dense population, large number of vehicles, and high levels of industrial
activity also contribute significantly to the problem. In 1988, ozone levels in the Los Angeles air basin
exceeded state standards on 148 days (California Air Resources Board air quality data statistics accessed
may 15, 2008. http://www.arb.ca.gov/adam/php_files/aqdphp/sc8start.php). Estimates of health-related
losses due to the poor environmental quality in the region were approaching $10 billion per year (Hall et al.,
1992).
   6
     Figure 1 shows the district’s boundaries.



                                                      5
attainment compared to other air basins, the district was given more time to comply. Al-

though required reductions in ozone concentration levels were larger for the Los Angeles basin

compared to other non-attainment areas in California, the required rates of concentration

reductions over time were quite similar.7

      The CAAAs also provided general authorization for states to use market-based regulatory

programs to achieve federal standards. Market-based approaches to pollution regulation were

endorsed on the grounds that so-called “command-and-control” approaches were insuﬃcient

to address the worst of the nation’s air quality problems, and that market-based approaches

oﬀered a “historic opportunity to help reconcile the nation’s economic and environmental

aspirations.” (US EPA, 1992). While the use of economic incentives to achieve air quality

standards was discretionary in most cases, it was required in extreme non-attainment areas,

i.e., Los Angeles.8

      SCAQMD responded by replacing over 40 prescriptive rules, which had been so opposed

by industry, with a market-based emissions trading program: RECLAIM.9 This program

was approved by state and federal regulators on the grounds that it would deliver emissions

reductions equivalent to—or greater than—what would have been achieved under the subsumed

command-and-control provisions, and would help to bring the region into compliance with

federal standards by the 2010 deadline.
  7
     Appendix A discusses the CAAA compliance requirements in more detail.
  8
     Pursuant to Sections 182 and 187, the US EPA issued a final rule and guidance on Economic Incentive
Programs (40, part 51, Subpart U) which outlined requirements for establishing EIPs. States or governing
bodies in extreme ozone nonattainment areas were required to design and implement economic incentive
programs (51.492, 182(g)5).
   9
     Although both NOx and SO2 emissions are capped under the program, the emphasis was on limiting
NOx emissions which are an important precursor to ozone formation.



                                                   6
       At its inception, RECLAIM included 392 facilities whose combined NOx emissions ac-

counted for over 65% of the region’s stationary NOx emissions (Schubert and Zerlauth, 1999).

Almost all facilities in the SCAQMD with annual NOx or SO2 emissions of four tons or more

are included in the program.10 Public facilities (such as police and fire fighting facilities)

were categorically excluded. Sources emitting less than four tons per year remained subject

to command-and-control programs.11

       A RECLAIM trading credit (RTC) confers the right to emit one pound of emissions

within a twelve month period.12 Figure 2 plots the aggregate allocation trajectory over time

(the red line).13 NOx emissions permitted under RECLAIM were reduced by over 70 percent

over the first ten years of the program. By the end of 2003, the aggregate permit allocation

reached the level of emissions that the subsumed rules and control measures were intended

to achieve by 2010.

       Early on, most firms found they had an excess of credits (the blue line in Figure 2

represents aggregate tons of NOx emissions).14 The aggregate cap did not start to bind until
  10
     Of these, 73% of these can be classified as manufacturing firms, 13% are involved in communication,
transportation or utilities, 2% are involved in construction, 3% are operating in the service sector, 6% in
wholesale trade, 2% are retail establishments, and the remaining 3% can be classified as government facilities.
  11
     Facilities could “opt-in” to the program. Facilities could not opt-out.
  12
     RTCs cannot be banked; a permit can only be used to certify emissions occurring within the twelve
month period with which the permit is associated. For emissions in any quarter, firms can use either permits
expiring in June or in December. Holland and Moore (2008) analyze this “overlapping cycles” feature of the
permits.
  13
     SCAQMD maintains a detailed database tracking all NOx permits and quarterly, facility-level emissions.
RTC price data were obtained from Evolution Markets LLC. Section 4 includes a detailed description of these
data.
  14
     Nonetheless, RECLAIM may have changed firms’ production and investment decisions in this early
period. A firm making a long-lived investment may have abated early in anticipation of higher future
prices. Furthermore, RECLAIM relaxed a vintage diﬀerentiated regulation, New Source Review, that has
limited firms abilities to modify facilities (Keohane et al. (forthcoming) discuss this literature). Under CAC,
operating permits are generally valid for several years unless modifications trigger New Source Review (NSR),
which can be contentious and costly. Under RECLAIM, traditional NSR regulations were replaced. There



                                                      7
1999 (SCAQMD, 2001). The figure helps to illustrates this “cross-over” point. While it is

clear that emissions permits were initially over-allocated, many believe that generous permit

allocations in the early years of the program were necessary to engender political support

for the program (US EPA, 2002). Because permits cannot be banked, impacts of the initial

over-allocation were confined to the early stages of RECLAIM.

   Figure 2 also plots the trend in average RTC prices (the green line). In the first five

years of the program, prices for NOx RTCs remained relatively low, as expected.15 How-

ever, the increase in prices following the cross-over was much larger than anticipated; the

price of NOx RTCs increased from approximately $2000 per ton in January of 2000 to over

$120,000 per ton in March of 2001. During the California electricity crisis, many generators

without retrofitted NOx reduction equipment were required to run and hence exceeded their

allocations significantly.16 In May 2001, the RECLAIM rules were amended to reduce the

RTC demand from power producing facilities and to stabilize the sharply increasing NOx

RTC prices. The rule amendments (Rule 2009) isolated fourteen power producers from the

rest of the RECLAIM market. These facilities were not allowed to trade RTC’s. Instead,
is some evidence that RECLAIM’s internal NSR procedure may have facilitated NSR for the RECLAIM
facilities. For example, only “BACT” is required and necessary oﬀsets can be demonstrated with RTCs.
Furthermore, the RECLAIM annual reports show a very high rate of NSR activity. From 1994 to 2006,
the reports show that on average forty-seven RECLAIM facilities had NSR activity per year. In contrast,
Committee (2006) report that on average 125 NSR permits per year were issued for the entire country from
1997 to 2002 for NOx .
   15
      Before RECLAIM began, it was predicted that trading in the market would be slow at first because of
the initial surplus of permits. In 1994, SCAQMD economists predicted that prices for NOx RTCs would
average around $577/ton in 1995 and rise to approximately $1,100/ton by 1999 (Miller, Michael (1994).
“Firms Can Earn Credits for Keeping Emissions Down, Then Sell Them.” The San Francisco Examiner.
January 9, 1994: B1).
   16
      Kolstad and Wolak (2003) provide evidence that some electricity producers in SCAQMD intentionally
purchased NOx RTCs at higher than competitive prices so as to be able to artificially increase electricity
prices.



                                                    8
they were required to oﬀset excess emissions at a price of $14,000 per ton. In addition, these

facilities were required to submit plans to install the “best available” control technologies on

all existing power generating units by the end of 2004.17

      By 2002, monthly average prices had fallen below $2000 per ton NOx . Regulators were

concerned that low permit prices were failing to provide suﬃcient incentives for facilities to

install pollution control technologies that would be needed to bring the region into compliance

with federal standards. In September of 2004, restrictions on power producers were made

more stringent and the aggregate RTC allocation for compliance years 2007-2011 was reduced

by an additional 20 percent.

2.2      RECLAIM Program Evaluation

Because RECLAIM represented such a major departure from the traditional regulatory ap-

proach, both federal and state agencies have required an unprecedented level of program

evaluation and oversight. In general, emissions trading program evaluation has proven to be

particularly challenging (Ellerman, 2003; Stavins, 1998; Tietenberg, 2006). Because indus-

trial emissions are influenced by numerous factors, attributing changes in emissions patterns

to specific policy interventions is diﬃcult. These challenges notwithstanding, agencies in

charge of overseeing RECLAIM remain committed to evaluating the emissions impacts of

the program.

      Unresolved disagreements about what constitutes an appropriate measure of counter-

factual emissions has resulted in a plurality of opinions regarding RECLAIM’s overall per-
 17
      For more information see SCAQMD (2007).



                                                9
formance. Appendix B summarizes some of the contradictory evidence provided by past

program evaluations and reports. After fifteen years of program evaluations, the emissions

impacts of RECLAIM vis a vis the subsumed CAC rules remain controversial.18 Federal

policy makers and other stakeholders have expressed frustration over the lack of consensus

emerging from RECLAIM program evaluations, noting that the public is entitled to “real

world information and practical comparisons in order to judge for itself whether the program

is living up to their needs and expectations” (US EPA, 2002). Disagreements surrounding

counterfactual emissions beget disagreements about the overall success of the RECLAIM

program. The proverbial jury is still out.

2.3       Environmental Justice and Emissions Trading

The term “environmental injustice” refers to any disproportionate human health or environ-

mental impact on minority or low income populations (EO 12898, 1994). Empirical research

conducted in the 1980s demonstrated significantly higher levels of exposure to environmental

hazards in traditionally disadvantaged communities.19 Subsequent work has brought more

sophisticated empirical methods to bear on this issue (Banzhaf and Walsh, 2008). A recent

review of the literature concludes that the evidence is mixed (Shapiro, 2005).

       Environmental justice advocates have historically opposed market-based approaches to

environmental protection (Bansal and Davis, 1998; Drury et al., 1999). Kaswan (2008)
  18
     Some studies have constructed counterfactual estimates using ex ante expectations about economic
trends and the control factors for subsumed rules (SCAQMD, Various years). Critics contend that this fails
to account for unanticipated economic conditions or technological changes that aﬀect emissions patterns with
or without emissions trading. Other studies have tried to adjust ex ante predictions using ex post observed
emissions trends (US EPA, 2001). This approach likely confounds exogenous and endogenous changes in
emissions. See Appendix B for further discussion of these regulatory studies.
  19
     See, for example, Brown, 1995; GAO, 1983; US EPA, 1992.


                                                    10
provides a detailed discussion of the perceived tensions between environmental justice and

emissions trading. The most common criticism is that emissions trading programs fail to

account for the distribution of pollution damages whereas permitting under the CAAAs

can explicitly consider environmental justice concerns. If polluting facilities can purchase

permits instead of reducing emissions, it is possible for pollution concentrations to flow

into areas where poor or minority populations live, thereby exacerbating any pre-existing

inequalities in the distribution of environmental risks. On the other hand, market-based

programs could mitigate pre-existing environmental justice problems. If relatively dirty

facilities with low marginal abatement costs are disproportionately located in traditionally

disadvantaged neighborhoods, a well functioning permit market should ensure that a larger

share of the mandated emissions reductions will be achieved in these areas (Burtraw et al.,

2005).20

       For a number of reasons, the RECLAIM market has been the most criticized of any

emissions trading program with respect to environmental justice issues (Chinn, 1999; Drury

et al., 1999; Moore, 2004). First, the Los Angeles area is home to an exceptionally diverse

population. Past studies have documented that race and ethnicity have historically played

a “persistent explanatory role” in explaining the distribution of environmental health risks

in Southern California (Morello-Frosch et al., 2001). Second, NOx is a non-uniformly mixed

pollutant. Damages from NOx emissions can vary significantly across space.21 Finally, the
  20
     An EPA analysis of outcomes under other the Acid Rain Program finds no evidence of disproportionately
adverse impacts on minority or low-income populations (EPA, 2005). A more recent paper finds that minority
groups receive a disproportionate share of the net benefits from the program (Shadbegian et al., 2007).
  21
     In the interest of avoiding “hotspots”, RECLAIM was designed as a zonal trading system. The SCAQMD
was divided into two zones: the region along the coast, and an inland region. Facilities along the coast (where



                                                      11
RECLAIM program was indirectly implicated in another highly controversial rule promul-

gated by SCAQMD that allowed stationary sources to oﬀset their uncontrolled emissions of

volatile organic compounds (VOCs) using mobile source emissions reduction credits.22 Al-

though RECLAIM was only indirectly involved in this high profile controversy, the program

has since been associated with environmental injustice.23


3     Research design

Previous estimates of the emissions eﬀects of RECLAIM are conditional on, and highly sen-

sitive to, controversial assumptions about what emissions would have been in the absence of

the program. In this study, we exploit some unique design features of the RECLAIM program

in order to construct more tenable and transparent estimates of counterfactual emissions.

Rather than rely on ex ante expectations about what aggregate emissions trajectories would

have been absent RECLAIM, we use econometrically adjusted ex post observed emissions at

facilities that were subject to CAC regulation over the same time period. In what follows,

we introduce our empirical framework and identification strategy.
pollution problems tend to be more severe) may only purchase RTCs from other coastal facilities. Inland
facilities can purchase permits from either inland or coastal facilities.
  22
     This rule was challenged by a coalition of environmental groups on the grounds that it violated Title VI
of the Civil Rights Act; the rule allowed reductions in mobile source emissions (whose eﬀects are arguably
distributed widely across the region) to be substituted for VOC reductions at point sources located in
minority communities. The lawsuit was withdrawn by the plaintiﬀs two weeks after the case was filed. See
“CBE Sues SCAQMD Over Amendments to Car Scrapping Rule”, California Environmental Insider: 12 (7),
Sept. 15, 1998.
  23
     The RECLAIM program, as it was originally designed, permitted the use of mobile source credits to
achieve compliance. This mobile source credit compliance option was rarely used. Mobile source credits
represented less than 0.02% of the total allocation of NOx permits.




                                                     12
3.1        Empirical framework

Building on the potential outcome framework that is now standard in the program evaluation

literature (see Holland, 1986 for a survey), we assume that there are two regulatory states to

which the California’s industrial NOx emitters could have been assigned: the market-based

RECLAIM program or the CAC regime that prevails in non-attainment counties outside

of SCAQMD (and which the SCAQMD continues to use to regulate smaller emitters). Let

Di = 1 if the ith facility is in RECLAIM (i.e., the facility is “treated”). Let Di = 0 if

facility i remains subject to CAC regulation throughout the duration of our study. Potential

outcomes Yit (1) and Yit (0) denote annual emissions at facility i at time t conditional on

participation and non-participation, respectively.

       We are primarily interested in estimating the average treatment eﬀect on the treated

(ATT):

                               αT T = E[Yit0 (1) − Yit0 (0) | Di = 1],                             (1)

where t0 represents any year following the introduction of the RECLAIM program and αT T

measures the average eﬀect of the RECLAIM program on annual facility level NOx emis-

sions.24

       Emissions at both treated and untreated facilities are observed prior to the RECLAIM

program (i.e., when all facilities in California’s non-attainment areas were subject to CAC

regulation) and over several years following the introduction of the program. Facility-level

emissions data collected from RECLAIM participants during years following the introduction
  24
    We will also evaluate program impacts in percentage terms, although we will emphasize [1] as a more
informative measure of the overall eﬀect of RECLAIM on industry emissions.


                                                  13
of the program can be used to identify E[Yit0 (1)|Di = 1]. Note that [Yit0 (0)|Di = 1] is

unobservable.

   The RECLAIM program applies only to major sources located within SCAQMD (see Fig-

ure 1). Thousands of California facilities located outside the Los Angeles air basin are sub-

ject to more traditional CAC. Furthermore, hundreds of smaller emitters within SCAQMD

remain subject to more traditional CAC rules. These incomplete program participation re-

quirements provide us with a potential comparison group. We use econometrically adjusted

emissions outcomes of these non-participants to estimate the unobserved potential outcomes.

   The simplest and most naive estimate of αT T is obtained using an unconditional diﬀerences-

in-diﬀerences estimator. This estimator may be biased if variables that are related to facility-

level emissions dynamics vary significantly across the treatment and comparison groups. In

order to reduce the bias potentially introduced by observable diﬀerences across RECLAIM

participants and non-participants, we will condition on observable covariates.

3.1.1   Regression-based conditioning strategies


Ordinary least squares (OLS) estimators can be used to control for factors other than regula-

tory regime that aﬀect facility-level emissions trajectories. We estimate the following simple

specification:

                                 Yi1 − Yi0 = β 0 Xi + αDi + εi ,                            (2)

where Xi is a vector of observable covariates that vary across observations. This implic-

itly assumes that the variables in X are exogenous to treatment status. In our case, these

variables will include facility level emissions observed prior to the introduction of the RE-

                                               14
CLAIM program, industry classification, county-level attainment status, and pre-determined

zip code-level economic and demographic indicators. The parameter α captures the average

eﬀect of the RECLAIM program on changes in facility-level emissions over time conditional

on variables in X. The error term εi is assumed to be independent of the covariates in Xi

and the treatment indicator Di .

      There are several potential problems with this approach. First, if there are regions of

the covariate space where there is only limited overlap in the distributions of X across the

treatment and control groups, the imputed missing outcomes will rely heavily on extrapo-

lation. If functional form assumptions are incorrect, estimates may be biased. Estimates

of average treatment eﬀects can also be biased if control observations are not appropriately

reweighted to control for diﬀerences in the distribution of the X variables over regions com-

mon to the control and treatment groups. In the interest of mitigating these biases, we turn

to semi-parametric matching estimators.

3.1.2      Semi-parametric conditioning strategies


Matching estimators, which are used extensively in non-experimental program evaluation,

are an extension of standard regression approaches. Our general approach follows Heckman

et al. (1997, 1998) who introduce the following generalized DID matching estimator:

                            1 X                           X
                  αd
                   DID =           {(Yj1 (1) − Yj0 (0)) −     wjk (Yk1 (0) − Yk0 (0))}.   (3)
                            N1 j I                        k I
                                  1                          0


Here, I1 denotes the set of program participants, I0 denotes the set of nonparticipants, and

N1 is the number of facilities in the treatment group.25 The participants are indexed by j;
 25
      This assumes a common support which we explore in the next section.

                                                   15
the non-participants are indexed by k. The weight placed on individual k when constructing

the counterfactual estimate for treated facility j is wjk . Diﬀerent DID matching estimators

adopt diﬀerent approaches to defining the weights wjk used to scale the contribution of each

non-participant. In general, when the observable characteristics, Xi , of an untreated unit

k are closer to the characteristics of a treated facility j (relative to other facilities in the

control group), the untreated unit k is weighted relatively more heavily in the construction

of a counterfactual estimate for unit j. In what follows, we will be emphasizing a nearest

neighbor estimator and a propensity score-based reweighting estimator.

       One clear advantage of matching estimators over standard linear regression techniques

is that they eschew parametric assumptions about the relationship between the outcome

variable and the covariates in X.26 Additionally, whereas treatment eﬀect heterogeneity may

bias OLS estimates of average treatment eﬀects, non-parametric matching estimators are

unbiased because they impose no restrictions on individual treatment eﬀects.

3.2       Identifying assumptions

Our most important identifying assumption is that the biases in the unconditional DID

estimates can be removed by adjusting for diﬀerences in observable covariates. More formally,

we assume that the distribution of the control outcome Yit0 (0), conditional on observable

facility and county characteristics (such as historic emissions, industry classification, county

attainment status), is the same among participating and non-participating facilities. If this
  26
    Smith and Todd (2005) compare results of matching and regression estimates using the same set of
covariates and demonstrate that avoiding functional form assumptions can be important in reducing bias.
However, if the true outcome equation is linear as in (2), failing to impose linearity will reduce the eﬃciency
of our estimates.


                                                      16
unconfoundedness assumption is satisfied, once we adjust for observable diﬀerences, we can

interpret diﬀerences in observed outcomes as the eﬀect of RECLAIM versus the CAC regimes

of other California air basins.

   In order to interpret [3] as an estimate of the eﬀect of RECLAIM vis a vis the CAC

regulation that would have prevailed in the SCAQMD absent RECLAIM, it must be the

case that the emissions trajectories of RECLAIM facilities and the matched control facil-

ities would have followed parallel trajectories absent RECLAIM. This implies a somewhat

stronger version of the unconfoundedness assumption: trends in the stringency of the control

treatment (i.e., the CAC regulations to which the control facilities are subjected) follow the

trajectory that the SCAQMD CAC regime would have taken absent RECLAIM.

   Our estimation strategy also requires that the support of the distribution of the condi-

tioning covariates in the treatment group overlaps the support of the distribution of these

covariates in the comparison group. Finally, in order to rule out spillovers and general equilib-

rium eﬀects, it must also be the case that potential outcomes at one facility are independent

of the treatment status of other facilities.

   Some of these assumptions and identifying conditions can be directly tested. For instance,

it is straightforward to demonstrate that the overlap condition is satisfied by simply looking

at the joint distributions of the covariates in the treated and control groups. Other assump-

tions pose more of a challenge. Most importantly, unconfoundedness is not directly testable

in principle. However, we are able to conduct indirect tests. The weaker unconfoundedness

assumption implies that Yit0 (0) will be distributed similarly within sub-populations that are



                                               17
homogeneous in observable covariates. As we have two diﬀerent control groups (i.e., facilities

located within SCAQMD exempt from RECLAIM, and similar facilities located outside the

SCAQMD), we can test whether the assumption holds across the two control groups.

   The stronger unconfoundedness assumption requires that the control treatment resembles

the regulations that RECLAIM facilities would have been subjected to absent RECLAIM.

In Appendix A, we assess the plausibility of this assumption by looking at the ozone con-

centrations reductions mandated in SCAQMD vis a vis other California air basins over the

study period.

3.3    Treatment eﬀect heterogeneity

In addition to identifying the average eﬀect of RECLAIM on facility-level emissions, we are

interested in investigating whether treatment eﬀects appear to vary systematically across

facilities located in neighborhoods with diﬀerent socio-economic characteristics. Standard

DID matching estimators discard potentially useful information about the joint distribution

of the outcome variable Yit and the covariates in X that is unrelated to the treatment

indicator Di . We combine matching with parametric regression so as to investigate what

this discarded information can tell us about how treatment eﬀects vary with observable

neighborhood characteristics.

   All of the matching estimators we use can be interpreted as nonparametric weighted

regression equations that weight treatment eﬀects according to the proportion of treated

facilities associated with each value of X. We specify a weighted regression model that

allows the treatment eﬀect to vary systematically with a subset of variables in Xi (denoted


                                             18
Zi ):

                                Yi1 − Yi0 = β 0 Xi + αDi + θ0 Zi Di + εi                                  (4)

       To investigate the extent to which emissions trading has exacerbated (or mitigated)

environmental injustice vis a vis CAC regulations, we define Zi as historic emissions, zip

code median income, and zip code percent minority. As a robustness check, we extend Zi to

include measures of regulatory variables, macroeconomic shocks, and industry fixed eﬀects

(see Appendix C).


4        Data

About 10,000 polluting facilities in California report emissions of criteria pollutants to the

California Air Resources Board (ARB). All polluting facilities are required to report to their

local Air Quality Management District; the ARB maintains a database of emissions reports

from the local districts. Our primary data comes from this database which also includes

information on industry classification beginning in 1990. We use addresses, geocodes, and

industry classifications to ensure a consistent coding of facilities across our panel.27 We also

use separate emissions data from RECLAIM to verify the emissions reported to the ARB

database.28

       In the regressions, we use zip code level demographics data from the year 2000 Census
  27
     To ensure consistent coding over time, we identify facilities with diﬀerent ID’s but the same address and
SIC. If the facilities do not report emissions in more than one overlapping year, then we code the facilities
with the same ID. To ensure consistent coding within a year, we combine facilities with diﬀerent ID’s but
the same geocodes and SIC.
  28
     Details available upon request. The data from RECLAIM were obtained under a public records request
and included information on allocations and quarterly emissions.




                                                     19
Summary File 3.29 The data include median household income in 1999 (variable p53) and

population by ethnicity and race (variable p7). We construct a measure of percent minority

as the percent of the zip code’s total population that is either non-Hispanic black or Hispanic.

See Figure 1 for the spatial distribution of this measure.

       Figure 3 shows the declining trends in total NOx emissions at California facilities between

1990 and 2005. The figure illustrates that, in the aggregate, NOx emissions from both

facilities in RECLAIM and those in comparison groups were declining at similar rates prior

to the introduction of RECLAIM. In the early years of the RECLAIM program (i.e., when the

aggregate cap was not binding) emissions of RECLAIM facilities appear to increase slightly

relative to facilities outside the program. After the cross-over point in 2000, however, the

average rate of emissions decrease among RECLAIM facilities exceeds that of non-RECLAIM

facilities. Overall, emissions among RECLAIM facilities have dropped 72 percent relative to

pre-1993 levels, whereas emissions among non-participating facilities have dropped only 62

percent over the same period.

       Table 1 summarizes a balanced sample of these same data. To construct this table, the

data are partitioned into four non-overlapping periods. Period 1 encompasses years prior to

the introduction of the RECLAIM program (i.e., 1990-1993). Period 2 covers the early years

of the RECLAIM program when the emissions cap exceeded aggregate emissions (1997-98).

Period 3 includes years immediately following the “cross-over” point (2001-02). Period four

includes the most recent years for which emissions data are available (2004-2005). The sample

includes all facilities reporting positive emissions in each period. Overall, annual facility-level
  29
       See http://factfinder.census.gov decennial census data sets.


                                                       20
emissions are significantly larger among RECLAIM firms vis a vis the comparison group.

Average emissions among RECLAIM facilities fell 70 percent between period 1 and period

4. We will subsequently refer to these unadjusted diﬀerences as “baseline” measures of the

average eﬀect of RECLAIM on facility-level emissions.30                This table also illustrates that

annual emissions are distributed diﬀerently across RECLAIM facilities and others in all

periods.

       Table 2 examines the distributions of treated and control facilities within the eight in-

dustries which accounted for the largest shares of NOx emissions in Period 1. While refining

and electricity generation are the largest polluters, about 40% of emissions are from firms in

other four-digit SIC codes. Regarding the distributions of the treatment and control groups,

there are several points worth noting. First, the industry-specific means of the RECLAIM

facilities are not always larger. In fact, for seven of these eight industries, the RECLAIM

facilities are smaller on average than the control facilities in the same industry. Second, the

common support assumption is satisfied for most of these eight industries in the sense that

the intervals containing the minimums and maximums of the distributions are overlapping.31

Third, the table suggests a word of caution about our matching strategy. Ideally we would

like to match each treated facility with a large number of control facilities to average out

idiosyncratic shocks in our estimate of counterfactual emissions. However, the number of

control facilities within each industry suggest that some industries have a limited number of
  30
     When the sample is limited to just those facilities who were in compliance with RECLAIM over the
entire study period, average emissions fell from 72.2 to 31.5 (a similar percentage reduction).
  31
     Of the fourteen relevant minimum or maximum comparisons, eleven are satisfied. Note that this is rather
a weak test, since it may be driven by outliers. Ideally, we would like suﬃcient density over the common
support.



                                                    21
potential controls.32

       Our panel of facility-level data is unbalanced. Of those facilities reporting emissions after

the RECLAIM program was introduced, only 60 (45) percent of RECLAIM firms and 32 (13)

percent of control facilities report emissions in the first three (four) periods. Facility-level

emissions data in a given period may be missing for a number of reasons, including firm

entry and exit, errors in the data, or simply a facility’s failure to report emissions in a given

period. On average, treated facilities reporting emissions in all periods were larger emitters

in period 1, although not significantly so.33 Section 5 discusses sample selection issues in

more detail.

       In Table 3, we calculate the change in tons of NOx emissions exposure per capita. We

use census tract data from 2000 to determine the number of people within a demographic

group who live in a tract whose centroid is within 1/2, 1 and 2 miles of each facility.34

For each demographic group, we aggregate the change in emissions across people in that

group and facilities and then normalize by the group’s total population in the LA area. The

first three columns report the actual change in emissions from period 2 to period 3. We

find that all groups experienced a reduction of emissions.35 Within a 1/2 mile, the group

that saw the largest actual reductions was high income Asians while the group that saw
  32
      A limited number of controls may lead to poor match quality. We discuss match quality below.
  33
      Among RECLAIM participants, average period 1 emissions are 101.8 tons and 95.0 tons for “balanced”
facilities (i.e., those facilities reporting emissions in all four periods) and unbalanced facilities, respectively.
Among the control group, these averages are 87.8 tons and 52.9 tons, respectively.
   34
      This technique is similar in spirit to Banzhaf and Walsh (2008) but is more closely related to earlier
techniques used in the environmental justice literature.
   35
      Standard errors are computed by assuming the facility-level changes in emissions are iid. Simple T-tests
find that most groups within 0.5 miles had statistically significant reductions in emissions from period 2 to
period 3.




                                                        22
the smallest reductions was middle income Asians. These results change depending on the

distance from facilities. In section 5, we look at the relative changes in emissions, namely

the actual changes less the changes from our counterfactual control group, that we attribute

to RECLAIM trading.


5     Results

In this section, we present estimates of treatment eﬀects for the long-term view of the program

as well as for the window surrounding the price spike when we expect to see emissions

reductions from RECLAIM. The estimates are broadly similar across our three estimators

and are subjected to several falsification tests. We then present estimates of heterogeneous

treatment eﬀects and environmental justice and discuss selection issues.

5.1    Diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences estimates

Table 4 summarizes our main results. The control group is restricted to facilities located in

counties that, during 1990 and 1993, were not in attainment with the 1-hour ozone NAAQS

standards. The columns on the right pertain to diﬀerences constructed using facility-level

annual emissions data. The columns on the left construct diﬀerences using log transformed

values. The top panel (Panel A) presents a more long term view of program impacts;

facility-level emissions in period 4 are subtracted from period 1 emissions. Panel B compares

facility-level emissions immediately before and after the emissions cap began to bind in

aggregate. Recall that some electricity generators did not comply with RECLAIM when

permit prices spiked in period 3. We thus exclude these electricity producers from this period


                                              23
2-3 comparison so as to focus on those facilities that were participating in (and complying

with) the cap-and-trade program.

   We use a simple linear regression framework to generate DID estimates that condition on

observable facility characteristics that are that are likely to be correlated with unobservable

determinants of emissions. Covariates include industry fixed eﬀects and NOx emissions in

period 1. Conditional on the identifying assumptions of this linear regression model, we

find that RECLAIM program eﬀects on emissions changes over period 1 to 4 are highly

significant. Emissions changes immediately following the cross over period (from period 2

to 3) are also statistically significant in logs. The period 1 NOx coeﬃcient (not reported) is

statistically significant and negative in all specifications, indicating that historic emissions

are a good predictor of emissions in later years.

5.2    Semi-parametric matching

Within the class of matching estimators, there are a variety of matching algorithms to choose

from. Asymptotically, all matching estimators produce the same estimate. However, in finite

samples, diﬀerent matching estimators can yield very diﬀerent treatment eﬀect estimates,

particularly if one or more of the identifying assumptions is violated (Morgan and Harding,

2006). In this section, we present results using two semi-parametric matching estimators: a

bias adjusted “nearest neighbor” estimator and the so-called “double robust” estimator.

   Nearest neighbor matching

   The non-parametric nearest neighbor (NN) matching estimator constructs the counter-

factual estimate for each treatment case using the control cases that most closely resemble


                                              24
the treatment cases. If m nearest neighbors are selected for each program participant, the

wjk are set equal to 1/m for the selected neighbors and zero for all other members of the

comparison group.36 We impose a strict overlap condition; only those control facilities in

the same industries as RECLAIM facilities are included in the pool of potential controls.

Following Abadie and Imbens (2006), we augment our covariate matching estimation with a

regression-based bias adjustment so as to eliminate bias introduced by poor match quality.

After matching the treated facilities with m nearest neighbors, within pair diﬀerences are

bias-adjusted using a parametric regression of the control outcome on X.37

       Table 4 presents these nearest-neighbor estimates. Matching covariates include pre-

treatment (i.e., period 1) NOx emissions, four-digit SIC code, and county attainment status.

These variables are likely to be correlated with unobservable determinants of facility-level

emissions, including production technology characteristics, firm size, demand for the prod-

ucts produced by the facility. Matching is exact on the categorical variables. Standard error

estimates are constructed using the variance formula of Abadie and Imbens (2006). Leave-

one-out cross-validation methods are used to select the neighbor parameter m. Appendix

tables A1 and A3 demonstrate that our results are not overly sensitive to the choice of m or

the bias adjustment.
  36
     Although a larger m reduces the expected variance of the estimate because more information is used to
construct the counterfactual for each participant, a large m also increases the bias of the estimate as the
probability of making poorer matches increases. One drawback of this estimator is that all “neighbors” are
equally weighted, regardless of their distance from the treated facility. The bias of this estimator is of order
N 1/z , where z is the number of covariates in X.
  37
     More specifically, using data from matched control facilities, we regress the dependent variable (i.e.,
diﬀerences in emissions) on the covariates. We then use this regression model to impute counterfactual
estimates for all treated facilities. Note that these estimates are not likely to be sensitive to our parametric
assumptions because regression techniques are only used to impute diﬀerences in outcomes among very
similar facilities. These bias adjustments are discussed in more detail in Appendix C.


                                                      25
   When the overall change in emissions between the pre-treatment period (period 1) and

period 4 is used as the dependent variable, the NN estimate, -17.79 tons per year, is statis-

tically significant at the five percent level. This is approximately 17 percent of the average

annual emissions at RECLAIM firms in period 1. Using log-transformed emissions data,

the estimated coeﬃcient is -0.25, implying that emissions reductions declined (in percent-

age terms) by approximately 25 percent more, on average, among RECLAIM firms versus

matched control facilities. Because the estimated average annual percentage reduction is

somewhat larger than the estimated average reduction (in levels) expressed as a percent-

age of period 1 emissions, this suggests that percentage reductions are somewhat larger at

smaller firms.

   Making the period 3 period 2 comparison, the NN estimate is -9.42 and statistically

significant. This represents 13 percent of the average annual emissions at RECLAIM firms

in period 2. The SATT estimate estimated using log transformed data is 0.26.

   Propensity score matching

   Since the seminal work of Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983), there has been considerable

interest in methods that avoid adjusting directly for observable covariates and instead adjust

for diﬀerences in the propensity score (i.e., the conditional probability of treatment). An

important result in the literature is that, if unconfoundedness holds, conditioning only on

the propensity score assures independence of Di and Yi (0). Recent work has demonstrated

that, when there is good overlap in the distribution of propensity scores for treated and

control units, reweighting estimators outperform nearest neighbor or kernel matching in



                                             26
finite samples (Busso et al., 2009). In our case, all treated observations receive a weight of
                                                           pe
one, whereas control observations receive a weight        1−e p
                                                                  (where pb is the estimated propensity

score).

       The propensity score equation describes the process by which the data are filtered or

selected to produce the observed sample. The process that determined whether a facility

located inside or outside of SCAQMD is not directly observed. Consequently, the propen-

sity score is an unobserved statistical object that needs to be estimated. We estimate the

propensity scores using a reduced form probit model. Explanatory variables include industry

aﬃliation, historic emissions, and squared historic emissions. We enforce a common support.

Balance is achieved and there is significant overlap in the propensity scores of the treatment

and comparison groups

       Although matching on propensity scores balances treatment and controls across the set

of covariates, facilities with very similar propensity scores may have diﬀerent combinations

of observable characteristics. In our case, we find that matching on p-scores does not always

imply a close match on observables (even after adding higher order terms to the selection

equation). This poor match quality can introduce bias. Consequently, we use a propensity

score based refinement of weighted regression: the so-called “double robust” (DR) estimator

(Robins et al.,1995; Robins and Ritov, 1997). By combining propensity score matching with

regression, we can reduce bias introduced by poor match quality.38 Table 4 summarizes the

main results. These SATT estimates are larger in absolute value as compared to the NN
  38
   This double robust estimator will not always constitute an improvement upon the more standard para-
metric regression approach. Reweighting of observations will only add noise if the parametric regression
model is correctly specified (Freedman and Berk, 2008).


                                                  27
estimates and somewhat noisier.

   Robustness of semi-parametric matching estimates

   Our empirical results indicate that emissions reported by facilities in the RECLAIM

program fell by significantly more over the fifteen year study period (i.e., 1990-2005) as

compared to emissions reported by a group of California facilities located in non-attainment

counties, operating in the same industries, with similar pre-RECLAIM emissions levels.

When we narrow our focus to the window of time surrounding the cross-over point (i.e.,

the point at which the aggregate cap began to bind), we continue to find that emissions

reductions among RECLAIM firms are significantly greater on average as compared to the

matched controls. In order to interpret these estimates as an unbiased measure of RECLAIM

program impacts, some important assumptions must hold. We investigate the plausibility

of these assumptions here.

   First, our analysis is predicated on the assumption that the emissions trajectories of

firms in the control group are representative of the emissions trajectories that would have

been observed at similar RECLAIM facilities had RECLAIM not been implemented. Put

diﬀerently, we assume that facilities with the same observed covariates should follow parallel

emissions trajectories if they are subject to CAC regulation in a non-attainment county.

Discontinuities in RECLAIM participation requirements allow us to indirectly test this un-

confoundedness assumption. We do this by means of a false experiment. We redefine our

“treated” group to be facilities in the SCAQMD but not regulated by RECLAIM. Our pool

of control facilities consists of facilities located in non-attainment areas other than the South



                                               28
Coast. If unconfoundedness holds, the estimated “treatment eﬀects” in this false experiment

should not be statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero.

   Table 5 summarizes the results from this experiment. We find that the change in the aver-

age emissions (in levels) among these facilities located in SCAQMD that remained subject to

more prescriptive forms of emissions regulation is not statistically diﬀerent from that of the

control group. Put diﬀerently, the emissions trajectories among smaller SCAQMD facilities

exempt from RECLAIM and the emissions at similar facilities located in other California air

basins follow parallel paths. This is consistent with our unconfoundedness assumption.

   Diﬀerences in percentage changes in emissions (i.e., the estimates obtained using log-

transformed emissions data) tell a somewhat diﬀerent story. In the more long run compar-

ison, estimated eﬀects of being located in SCAQMD (yet exempt from RECLAIM) versus

located in another California non-attainment area are negative and substantially smaller in

absolute value than the estimates reported in panel A. The double robust estimate is statis-

tically significant, suggesting that the percentage reduction in emissions observed over this

ten year period was larger among low-emitting firms subject to SCAQMD CAC regulation

as compared to small emitters located in other non-attainment areas of California. We find

the reverse is true in the period 2-period 3 comparison. In sum, although results using

untransformed data generally support the unconfoundedness assumption, results generated

using log-transformed data are less clear

   One might also be concerned that, in response to the introduction of the RECLAIM

program, production and associated emissions moved from RECLAIM facilities to those



                                              29
exempt from the program. This would bias upwards our counterfactual emissions estimates,

and exaggerate our estimates of program impacts. To investigate this issue, we experiment

with using diﬀerent subsets of the control group to identify the sample average treatment

eﬀect. In one exercise, we exempt Los Angeles facilities from the control group. In another

exercise we include only Northern California facilities. Table 6 summarizes these results.

Our point estimates are not substantially impacted. Our nearest neighbor estimates remain

highly statistically significant. Our double robust estimates are quite noisy, in part due to

the smaller sample size, and are harder to statistically distinguish from zero.

   The final row of table 6 report SATT estimates obtained using only data from facilities

in severe (versus moderate) non-attainment areas as controls. Estimated program eﬀects are

substantially larger in absolute value. This result is consistent with the idea that the politi-

cal palatability of emissions trading programs vis a vis CAC regulations makes it feasible to

introduce more aggressive environmental standards. In the early 1990s, California counties

that had historically suﬀered from more severe air quality problems had more strict regula-

tions in place (Figure A1). In these counties, industrial stakeholders would presumably have

be more resistant to the introduction of more stringent emissions regulations, as compared

to facilities in regions where the marginal costs of air quality improvements was relatively

low. If this were the case, we would expect that the eﬀects of market-based regulations (in

terms of emissions reductions achieved) would be greater when comparisons are made against

counties facing similar (versus less) political opposition to increased regulatory stringency.




                                              30
5.3    Environmental justice

The literature on environmental justice is concerned that polluters in poor or minority neigh-

borhoods may have been able to avoid reducing emissions by purchasing permits (Bansal,

1998). In this section, we ask whether trading resulted in changes in emissions that are

correlated with the demographics of the polluters location. From Tables 5 and 6, we con-

clude that emissions reductions were significantly greater among facilities in the RECLAIM

program relative to the CAC counterfactual we construct. We now investigate whether these

RECLAIM program impacts were more or less felt by traditionally disadvantaged neighbor-

hoods in the SCAQMD.

   In Tables 7 and 8, we use non-parametric matching methods to construct a counterfactual

change in emissions for each regulated (and compliant) facility and then regress the diﬀerence

between the actual change and the predicted change on a number of covariates measuring

environmental justice. We present results from several alternative specifications for both the

overall eﬀects of the program. Table 7 presents results from the period 2 and 3 comparison;

Table 8 investigates the period 1 to 4 comparison. Results are generated using both nearest

neighbor and propensity score matching. The results are qualitatively similar.

   Specification 1 includes only a treatment dummy, period 1 NOx emissions, and an inter-

action between these two covariates as explanatory variables. This specification is similar to

the linear regression equation introduced in section 5.1, although less restrictive because it

includes group (versus industry) fixed eﬀects and allows the Period 1 NOx coeﬃcient to vary

across the treatment and control group. The Treat * Period 1 NOx coeﬃcient is statistically


                                             31
significant. Conditional on group fixed eﬀects and the Period 1 NOx variable, this is the

eﬀect of historic emissions on the change in emissions at RECLAIM facilities relative to that

eﬀect for all firms. For example, in Panel A of Table 7, the coeﬃcient of -0.06 implies that for

each additional ton that a facility emitted in period 1, it reduced emissions between periods

2 and 3 by an additional 0.06 tons relative to the control group.

       Specifications (2) through (7) include income and race covariates. Specification (7) in-

cludes historic NOx emissions and all demographic variables. In this specification, neither

median income nor percent minority are statistically significant predictors of the changes in

emissions in RECLAIM. The same is true within the control group; neither income nor race

are significant determinants of changes in emissions. The change in emissions per capita

reported in Table 3 show similar findings. For both the actual change in emissions as well as

the relative change (the diﬀerence between the actual change and the change for the control

group), emissions fall for almost all demographic groups. Furthermore, the changes do not

have a clear pattern based on income or race.

       In all specifications containing Treat * Period 1 NOx, the variable is statistically signifi-

cant, indicating larger emissions reductions at larger facilities. Appendix Figure A3 helps to

illustrate this relationship between changes in emissions and historic emissions both for RE-

                                                                       e sample resulting
CLAIM and other facilities in more detail. As with Table 7, we use the N

from Table 5.39 In Figure A3, we smooth the observations, separately for RECLAIM and for
  39
    In particular, we use the results from the top row, period 1 to 4, m = 3. For each treated observation,
we construct a measure of what the change in emissions would have been for the control group if the control
group had the same historic emissions as the treated observation. This is done by using bias adjustments
developed by Abadie and Imbens (2006) to mitigate bias introduced by poor match quality. We use a
quadratic fit (see Appendix C).



                                                    32
other facilities, using a k-Nearest Neighbor estimator. We see that the relationship between

historic emissions and change in emissions is decreasing over the range of zero to 80 tons per

year of historic emissions. In contrast, the control group is relatively flat at zero for most of

the range: from zero to 55 tons that accounts for over 80% of the sample.

   In all specifications, the Period 1 NOx coeﬃcient is statistically significant. Ideally, our

within group matching on historic NOx emissions would be perfect and the Period 1 NOx

coeﬃcient would not be identified. In fact, our data are not suﬃciently rich to facilitate

perfect matching; historic emissions do vary within a group of matched facilities. Moreover,

we find that this within-group variation in historic emissions is significantly correlated with

the dependent variable. In light of these results, we are concerned about bias introduced by

poor match quality. All of our matching estimation incorporates a parametric adjustment

to mitigate this bias (Abadie and Imbens, 2006).

   Appendix C explores the robustness of the results presented in Table 7. The results

are robust to including noncompliant facilities and to the inclusion of other variables like

regulatory variables, macroeconomic shocks, and industry fixed eﬀects (Table A4). The

demographic variables are not significant if subsets of the demographic variables are excluded

(Table A3).

5.4    Selection issues

We are also concerned about the unbalanced nature of our panel. In order to interpret our

results as a measure of the average eﬀect of the RECLAIM program on facility-level emissions,

the subset of facilities reporting emissions should be representative of the populations of


                                               33
RECLAIM and control facilities, respectively. The group of facilities reporting emissions

changes over our sample period. Non-random selection into the data could imply that our

estimates of the average program impacts among the population of RECLAIM facilities may

be biased. Intuitively the direction of selection bias, were it present, is unclear. One might

be concerned that facilities with relatively high abatement costs would be more likely to exit

a CAC regime that oﬀers less compliance flexibility. This would result in inflated estimates

of RECLAIM program impacts vis a vis the CAC counterfactual. On the other hand, if

a market based approach does make more stringent emissions reductions more politically

feasible, we might expect to see facilities with relatively high abatement costs exiting the

SCAQMD with higher frequency, biasing our results in the opposite direction.

   One common approach to addressing sample selection issues involves augmenting the

outcome equation with an inverse Mills ratio estimated using a parametric selection model

(Heckman, 1979). We use a probit model to represent the selection process. When we include

facility-specific inverse Mills ratios as an additional explanatory variable in our parametric

regressions, the estimated coeﬃcient on this ratio is not statistically significant. Although

this suggests that selection bias does not contaminate our estimates, we report these results

with some important caveats. First, there are no variables included in the selection equation

that can be credibly excluded from the outcome equation. Moreover, we oﬀer no intuitive

motivation for the parametric assumptions underlying our model of the selection process.

   Another approach to assessing whether the unobserved factors that drive the selection

process are biasing our results is to investigate whether our results change significantly if we



                                              34
generate our results using only those units that are observed over the entire sample. Our

estimates of program impacts over the full time period, and in the late (post cross-over)

period are not significantly diﬀerent.


6     Conclusions

In this paper, we exploit some unique design features of the RECLAIM program in order

to bring new and illuminating evidence to bear on two important questions. First, did

emissions reductions at facilities subject to Southern California’s RECLAIM exceed emis-

sions reductions achieved at very similar facilities subject to CAC regulation over the same

time period? Second, has the compliance flexibility aﬀorded by market-based environmental

regulation resulted in more (or less) pollution in traditionally disadvantaged communities?

    Our results indicate that emissions at RECLAIM facilities fell approximately 20 percent,

on average, relative to the control facilities. However, during the period of great permit price

volatility, several facilities did not comply with the regulation. When these facilities are in-

cluded in our analysis, we find that RECLAIM did not reduce emissions relative to command

and control during this volatile time. For those complying, emissions fell significantly more

at large facilities, as is consistent with scale economies in abatement technology. We find no

evidence that neighborhood demographic characteristics were insignificant determinants of

their changes in emissions.




                                              35
References
 [1] Abadie, Alberto and Guido W. Imbens. 2006. “Large Sample Properties of Matching
     Estimators for Average Treatment Eﬀects.” Econometrica, 74(1): 235-267.

 [2] Bansal, Shipra and Sam Davis. 1998. “Holding our Breath: Environmental Injustice
     Exposed in Southeast Los Angeles,” pp. 17-28.

 [3] Banzhaf, H. Spencer and Randall P. Walsh. 2008. “Do People Vote with their Feet?
     An Empirical Test of Tiebout/s Mechanism,” American Economic Review 98(3), pp.
     843-63.

 [4] Brown, Phillip. 1995. “Race, Class and Environmental Health: A Review and System-
     atization of the Literature.” Environmental Research 69 (1): 15-30.

 [5] Burtraw, Dallas, David A. Evans, Alan Krupnick, Karen Palmer, and Russell Toth.
     2005. “Economics of Pollution Trading for SO2 and NOx,” Annual Review of Environ-
     ment and Resources, 30: 253-289.

 [6] Busso, Matias, DiNardo, John E. and McCrary, Justin. 2009. "New Evidence on the
     Finite Sample Properties of Propensity Score Matching and Reweighting Estimators."
     IZA Discussion Paper No. 3998.

 [7] Chinn, Lily. 1999. “Can the Market be Fair and Eﬃcient? An Environmental Justice
     Critique of Emissions Trading.” Ecology Law Quarterly, 26(1): 89-125.

 [8] Committee on Changes in New Source Review Programs for Stationary Sources of Air
     Pollution. 2006. New Source Review for Stationary Sources of Air Pollution The Na-
     tional Academies Press.

 [9] Drury, Richard Toshiyuki, Michael E. Belliveau, J. Scott Kuhn and Shipra Bansal. 1999.
     “Pollution Trading and Environmental Injustice: Los Angeles’ Failed Experiment in Air
     Quality Policy.” Duke Environmental Law Policy Forum, 9(2): 233-289.

[10] Ellerman, A. Denny. 2006. “Are Cap-and-Trade Programs More Environmentally Eﬀec-
     tive than Conventional Regulation?” Moving to Markets in Environmental Regulation:
     Lessons from Twenty Years of Experience. Freeman, Jody and Charles Kolstad Eds.
     Oxford University Press.

[11] Ellerman, A. Denny. 2003. “The U.S. SO2 Cap-and-Trade Program.” Proceedings of the
     OECD Workshop on Ex Post Evaluation of Tradable Permits: Policy Evaluation and
     Reform” Paris: Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development.

[12] Ellerman, A. Denny, Paul L. Joskow, and David Harrison, Jr. 2003. “Emissions Trad-
     ing in the U.S.: Experience, Lessons, and Considerations for Greenhouse Gases.” Pew
     Center on Global Climate Change.

                                            36
[13] Executive Order 12898. 1994. “Federal Actions To Address Environmental Justice in
     Minority Populations and Low-Income Populations.”

[14] Freedman, David A. and R.A. Berk. 2008. “On weighting regressions by propensity
     scores.” Evaluation Review 32: 392-409.

[15] Gangadharan, Lata. 2000. “Transaction Costs in Pollution Markets: An Empirical
     Study.” Land Economics 76(4): 601-614.

[16] GAO. 1983. Siting of Hazardous Waste Landfills and Their Correlation with Racial and
     Economic Status of Surrounding Communities. Washington, D.C.

[17] Green, Kenneth P., Steven F. Hayward and Kevin A. Hassett. 2007. “Climate Change:
     Caps vs. Taxes.” Environmental Policy Outlook. American Enterprise Institute for Pub-
     lic Policy Research June 2007.

[18] Hall, Jane V., Arthur M. Winer, Michael T. Kleinman, Frederick W. Lurmann, Victor
     Brajer, and Steven D. Colome. 1992. “Valuing the Health Benefits of Clean Air.” Science
     255(5046): 812-817.

[19] Harrington, Winston, Richard D. Morgenstern, Thomas Sterner, and J. Clarence (Terry)
     Davies. 2004. “Lessons from the Case Studies” in Choosing Environmental Policy: Com-
     paring Instruments and Outcomes in the United States and Europe Winston Harrington,
     Richard D. Morgenster, and Thomas Sterner, eds., RFF Press, Washington, DC.

[20] Harrington, Winston and Richard D. Morgenstern. 2007. “Economic Incentives Versus
     Command and Control: What’s the Best Approach for Solving Environmental Prob-
     lems?” Acid in the Environment: Lessons Learned and Future Prospects. Gerald R.
     Visgilio and Diana M. Whitelaw, eds. Springer. US.

[21] Heckman, J. 1979. "Sample selection bias as a specification error." Econometrica, 47,
     153—61.

[22] Heckman, James, Hidehiko Ichimura and Petra Todd. 1997. “Matching As An Econo-
     metric Evaluation Estimator: Evidence from Evaluating a Job Training Program,” Re-
     view of Economic Studies, 64(4): 605-654.

[23] Heckman, James, Hidehiko Ichimura, Jeﬀrey Smith, and Petra Todd. 1998. “Charac-
     terizing Selection Bias Using Experimental Data.” Econometrica, 66(5): 1017-1098.

[24] Holland, P. 1986. "Statistics and causal inference". Journal of the American Statistical
     Association 81, 945—70.

[25] Holland, Stephen P. and Michael R. Moore. 2008. “When to Pollute, When to Abate?
     Intertemporal Permit Use in the Los Angeles NOx Market.” NBER WP no. 14254.


                                             37
[26] Kaswan, A. 2008. “Environmental Justice and Domestic Climate Change Policy.” En-
     vironmental Law Reporter.

[27] Klier, Thomas H., Richard H. Mattoon, and Michael A. Prager. 1997. “A Mixed Bag:
     Assessment of Market Performance and Firm Trading Behavior in the NOx RECLAIM
     Programme.” Journal of Environmental Planning and Management 40(6): 751-774.

[28] Keohane, Nathaniel O., Erin T. Mansur, and Andrey Voynov. Forthcoming. “Averting
     Regulatory Enforcement: Evidence from New Source Review,” Journal of Economics
     and Management Strategy.

[29] Keohane, Nathaniel, Richard Revesz, and Robert Stavins. 1998. “The Choice of Regula-
     tory Instruments in Environmental Policy,” Harvard Environmental Law Review, 22(2):
     313-367.

[30] Kolstad, Jonathan and Frank Wolak. 2003. “Using Environmental Emissions Permit
     Prices to Raise Electricity Prices: Evidence from the California Electricity Market,”
     CSEM Working Paper 113.

[31] Moore, Curtis A. 2004. “RECLAIM: Southern California’s Failed Experiment With Air
     Pollution Trading.” Clean Air Trust http://www.cleanairtrust.org/release.121902.html,
     http://www.cleanairtrust.org/pdf/reclaim.pdf.

[32] Morello-Frosch, Rachel, Manuel Pastor, and James Sadd. 2001. “Environmental Justice
     and Southern California’s ‘Riskscape’: The Distribution of Air Toxics Exposures and
     Health Risks among Diverse Communities.” Urban Aﬀairs Review 36: 551-578.

[33] Morgan, Stephen L. and David J. Harding. 2006. “Matching Estimators of Causal Ef-
     fects: Prospects and Pitfalls in Theory and Practice.” Sociological Methods & Research
     35(1): 3-60.

[34] Robins, J.M. and Ritov, Y. 1997. "Towards a curse of dimensionality appropriate
     (CODA) asymptotic theory for semi-parametric models." Statistics in Medicine. 16:285-
     310.

[35] Robins J.M., Rotnitzky A and Zhao L.P. Analysis of Semiparametric Regression-Models
     for Repeated Outcomes in the Presence of Missing Data. Journal of the American Sta-
     tistical Association, 1995; 90(429): 106-121.

[36] Rosenbaum, P. R. and D. B. Rubin. 1983. “The central role of the propensity score in
     observational studies for causal eﬀects.” Biometrika 70(1): 41-55.

[37] Schubert, U. and A. Zerlauth. 1999. “Air quality management systems in urban re-
     gions: The case of the emission trading programme RECLAIM in Los Angeles and its
     transferability to Vienna,” in Environment and Health.


                                            38
[38] South Coast Air Quality Management District. 1998. Three Year Audit and Progress
     Report, Diamond Bar, California.

[39] SCAQMD. 2000. Review of RECLAIM Findings. Diamond Bar, California.

[40] SCAQMD. 2001. White Paper on Stabilization of NOx RTC Prices. Diamond Bar, Cal-
     ifornia.

[41] SCAQMD. 2002. “Comments on Draft Report ‘An Evaluation of the South Coast Air
     Quality Management District’s Regional Clean Air Incentives Market- Lessons in Envi-
     ronmental Market and Innovation’”Diamond Bar, California.

[42] SCAQMD. Various years. Annual RECLAIM Audit Report. Published annually be-
     ginning with compliance year 1994. Diamond Bar, California.

[43] SCAQMD. 2007. Over a Dozen Years of RECLAIM Implementation: Key Lessons
     Learned in California’s First Air Pollution Cap-and-Trade Program. Diamond Bar, Cal-
     ifornia.

[44] Shadbegian, Ronald, Wayne Gray and Cynthia Morgan. 2007. “Benefits and Costs
     From Sulfur Dioxide Trading: A Distributional Analysis” in Acid in the Environment :
     Lessons Learned and Future Prospects. Gerald R. Visgilio and Diana M. Whitelaw Eds.
     Springer.

[45] Shapiro, M. (2005). Equity and Information: Information Regulation, Environmental
     Justice, and Risks from Toxic Chemicals. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management,
     24(2), 373—398.

[46] Smith, Jeﬀrey and Petra Todd. 2005. “Does Matching Overcome Lalonde’s Critique of
     Nonexperimental Estimators?” Journal of Econometrics, 125 (1-2): 305-353.

[47] Stavins, Robert N. 1998. “What Can We Learn from the Grand Policy Experiment?
     Positive and Normative Lessons from SO2 Allowance Trading.” Journal of Economic
     Perspectives, 12(3): 69-88.

[48] Stavins, Robert N. 2007. “A U.S. Cap-and-Trade System to Address Global Climate
     Change” KSG Working Paper No. RWP07-052.

[49] Tietenberg, Tom H. 2006. Emissions Trading Principles and Practice. Resources for the
     Future. Washington D.C.

[50] US EPA. 1992. “The United States Experience with Economic Incentives to Control
     Environmental Pollution.” Washington. D.C.

[51] US EPA. 2001. “The United States Experience with Economic Incentives for Protecting
     the Environment.” Washington, D.C.


                                           39
[52] US EPA. 2002. An Evaluation of the South Coast Air Quality Management District’s
     Regional Clean Air Incentives Market- Lessons in Environmental Market and Innova-
     tion. Washington, D.C.

[53] US EPA. 2005. “The Acid Rain Program and Environmental Justice: Staﬀ Analysis.”
     Washington, D.C.

[54] US EPA. 2006. “An Overview of the Regional Clean Air Incentives Market.” Washing-
     ton, D.C.

[55] Vandenbergh, M.P. and B.A. Ackerly. 2006. “Climate Change: The Equity Problem.”
     Virginia Environmental Law Journal, 26.




                                         40
                                  Figures and Tables




Figure 1: The South Coast Air Quality Management District.




Figure 2: Trends in Nitrogen Oxides Emissions (blue), Allocations (red), and Permit Price (green).


                                                41
                                                 40,000
                                                                                                                                                                                               210,000


                                                 35,000

                                                                                                                                                                                               180,000


                                                 30,000

                                                                                                                                                                                               150,000

                                                 25,000




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Non-RECLAIM (tons)
        RECLAIM (tons)




                                                                                                                                                                                               120,000

                                                 20,000


                                                                                                                                                                                               90,000
                                                 15,000



                                                                                                                                                                                               60,000
                                                 10,000



                                                                                                                                                                                               30,000
                                                  5,000                                                RECLAIM

                                                                                                       Non-RECLAIM


                                                      0                                                                                                                                        0
                                                          1990


                                                                    1991


                                                                           1992


                                                                                         1993


                                                                                                1994


                                                                                                         1995


                                                                                                                 1996


                                                                                                                        1997


                                                                                                                               1998


                                                                                                                                      1999


                                                                                                                                              2000


                                                                                                                                                     2001


                                                                                                                                                              2002


                                                                                                                                                                     2003


                                                                                                                                                                               2004


                                                                                                                                                                                      2005
Figure 3: Total NOx Emissions in RECLAIM and in the rest of California.

                                                20




                                                10
 Change in NOx Emissions from Period 1 (tons)




                                                 0




                                                -10




                                                -20




                                                -30




                                                -40




                                                -50
                                                  1995           1996             1997            1998           1999          2000          2001           2002            2003        2004             2005



Figure 4: Average Cumulative Treatment Effect by Year (relative to Period 1 emissions), matching
          m=3.




                                                                                                                                                            42
Table 1: Summary Statistics of NOx Emissions.


              Period              RECLAIM                      Control                     Total

            Period 1                     101.8                      87.8                     89.8
        (1990-1993)                    (304.4)                   (394.0)                  (382.4)

            Period 2                      62.7                      67.7                     67.0
        (1997-1998)                    (179.8)                   (338.4)                  (320.5)

            Period 3                      43.8                      57.4                     55.5
        (2001-2002)                    (125.4)                   (309.6)                  (290.5)

            Period 4                      30.8                      44.9                     42.9
        (2004-2005)                    (117.1)                   (265.0)                  (249.3)

Notes: We report the summary statistics on the balanced sample of facilities with positive
       emissions in all four periods. For RECLAIM facilities, this includes both those that
       complied with the regulation as well as those that did not. We report the mean tons of
       NOx emissions per facility (e.g., 101.8) as well as the standard deviation 304.4). There
       are 213 facilities in RECLAIM and 1273 in the control group. The control group is
       restricted to facilities located in counties that, during 1990 and 1993, were not in
       attainment with the 1-hour ozone NAAQS standards.




                                               43
Table 2: Summary Statistics for Major Industries.

                                                   RECLAIM                   Treatment                             Control
Industry                                       SIC     Share             obs     min mean         max          obs    min      mean      max
Petroleum Refining                            2911    37.5%               10     9.8   880       2492           17     1.1     1046     4685
Electric Services                             4911    23.9%               21     5.3   378       1370           82     0.1      407     5545
Crude Petroleum and Natural Gas               1311     7.1%               10     8.4   116        374          154     0.1       83     1945
Cement, Hydraulic                             3241     4.1%                2    55.4   699       1342            9 501.4       1885     2978
Glass Containers                              3221     3.8%                1 611.1     611        611            5 287.9        856     1169
Natural Gas Trans. and Distribution           4923     2.3%                8     7.0    85        214            4     8.9      474     1361
Paper Mills                                   2621     1.8%                6     4.5    83        422            5     0.3      121      392
Electric and Other Services Combined          4931     1.6%                4    20.9   107        188           64     0.1      335     5545
National Security                             9711     0.9%                3    48.1    81        129           29     0.5       68      453
Industrial Inorganic Chemicals, NEC           2819     0.9%                5     8.3    31         80           10     0.3      223     2166
Steel Works, Blast Furnaces                   3312     0.9%                3     5.7   103        237            4     2.3       20       74
Steam and Air-Conditioning Supply             4961     0.9%                7     6.6    39        108            2   16.0        55       94
Products of Petroleum and Coal, NEC           2999     0.8%                1 259.1     259        259            1 579.6        580      580

Total for Major Industries                                 87%             81     4.5     281    2492          386      0.1     296     5545

Notes: “RECLAIM Share” is the 4-digit SIC industry share of initial, period 1 NOx emissions. Most of the electric services did not comply (86%
       of the initial emissions). For facilities with positive emissions, we also report the summary statistics of tons of NOx emissions during
       period 1 for both treated and the control facilities.




                                                                      44
Table 3: Change in Emissions (tons) per Capita by Demographic Group

                                                      Actual change                                                  Relative change
Group                           0.5 miles              1 mile               2 miles              0.5 miles             1 mile         2 miles
White, Low Income               -0.61 (0.30) **      -1.62 (0.64) **       -6.99 (2.22) ***      -0.68 (0.39) *      -0.96  (0.66)   -4.27 (2.59)
White, Middle Income            -0.21 (0.11) *       -1.45 (0.72) **       -8.48 (4.41) *        -0.02 (0.14)        -0.56 (0.38)    -3.37 (1.33) **
White, High Income              -0.88 (0.58)         -3.12 (1.98)         -10.72 (5.34) **       -0.12 (0.19)        -0.97 (0.70)    -4.52 (2.12) **
Black, Low Income               -0.38 (0.17) **      -2.08 (0.93) **      -15.26 (6.44) **       -0.38 (0.20) *      -1.61 (0.94) * -12.30 (5.83) **
Black, Middle Income            -0.21 (0.10) **      -1.39 (0.62) **      -14.34 (5.92) **       -0.07 (0.16)        -0.75 (0.53)    -9.08 (4.16) **
Black, High Income              -0.33 (0.20)         -8.80 (7.57)         -27.13 (18.69)         -0.07 (0.09)        -6.43  (6.08)  -21.53 (15.03)
Asian, Low Income               -0.90 (0.67)         -4.65 (3.34)         -17.20 (10.07) *       -0.59 (0.63)        -3.27 (2.88)   -12.11 (8.71)
Asian, Middle Income            -0.20 (0.10) **      -1.99 (1.23)         -13.99 (8.58)          -0.06 (0.16)        -0.20  (0.44)   -3.06 (1.65) *
Asian, High Income              -1.14 (0.91)         -3.57 (2.13) *       -14.13 (7.87) *         0.14 (0.22)        -0.76 (0.55)    -4.20 (1.82) **
Hispanic, Low Income            -0.65 (0.27) **      -5.26 (1.89) ***     -24.19 (8.05) ***      -0.71 (0.37) *      -1.99 (2.27)   -10.57 (9.24)
Hispanic, Middle Income         -0.33 (0.12) **      -1.63 (0.49) ***     -12.56 (3.71) ***      -0.02 (0.24)        -0.68 (0.57)    -5.77 (3.57)
Hispanic, High Income           -0.77 (0.49)         -2.04 (1.11) *       -10.35 (4.07) **       -0.04 (0.13)        -0.48 (0.35)    -5.52 (2.40) **

All Whites                      -0.63   (0.32) *     -2.36   (1.16) **     -9.42    (3.81) **    -0.18   (0.13)      -0.84   (0.42) **    -4.12   (1.39) ***
All Blacks                      -0.32   (0.10) ***   -3.05   (1.56) *     -17.03    (7.98) **    -0.23   (0.12) **   -2.19   (1.29) *    -12.93   (6.54) **
All Asians                      -0.77   (0.41) *     -3.29   (1.52) **    -14.82    (6.63) **    -0.10   (0.20)      -1.17   (0.78)       -5.71   (2.45) **
All Hispanics                   -0.55   (0.16) ***   -3.46   (0.99) ***   -17.88    (4.69) ***   -0.36   (0.20) *    -1.29   (1.14)       -8.07   (5.19)
All Low Income                  -0.63   (0.26) **    -4.09   (1.49) ***   -19.09    (6.09) ***   -0.65   (0.33) *    -1.82   (1.66)       -9.63   (6.69)
All Middle Income               -0.26   (0.10) **    -1.61   (0.61) **    -11.35    (4.37) **    -0.02   (0.18)      -0.58   (0.44)       -4.81   (2.28) **
All High Income                 -0.88   (0.58)       -3.22   (1.74) *     -11.85    (5.19) **    -0.06   (0.16)      -1.07   (0.64)       -5.38   (2.20) **

Total                           -0.59   (0.21) ***   -2.97   (0.87) ***   -14.09    (3.74) ***   -0.25   (0.14) *    -1.16   (0.63) *     -6.61   (2.82) **

Notes: Change in emissions from Period 2 to Period 3. Electric facilities are included. We denote significance with *** at the 1-percent level, ** at the 5-percent
           level, and * at the 10-percent level.




                                                                                   45
Table 4: Average Treatment Effect using Nearest Neighbors Matching.

Panel A: Change in NOx Emissions between Periods 1 and 4.

                                           Levels                       Logs
Method                                   Coef. Std.Err.             Coef. Std.Err.

OLS                                     -38.14 (15.06) **           -0.37     (0.11) ***

Nearest Neighbor Matching               -17.79         (7.63) **    -0.25     (0.09) ***

Propensity Score Matching               -24.81 (13.86) *            -0.27     (0.12) **

Panel B: Change in NOx Emissions between Periods 2 and 3 for Complying Facilities.

                                           Levels                       Logs
Method                                   Coef. Std.Err.             Coef. Std.Err.

OLS                                       -6.82        (6.66)       -0.23     (0.05) ***

Nearest Neighbor Matching                 -9.42        (3.85) **    -0.26     (0.06) ***

Propensity Score Matching               -14.78         (2.22) ***   -0.26     (0.03) ***

Period 1: average of positive emissions in 1990 and 1993
Period 2: average of positive emissions in 1997 and 1998
Period 3: average of positive emissions in 2001 and 2002
Period 4: average of positive emissions in 2004 and 2005

Notes: The OLS estimates control for average NOx emissions during Period 1 (1990-1993) and
       four-digit SIC code indicator variables, with standard errors clustered by air basin. The
       nearest neighbor matching models match on historic emissions and four-digit SIC codes
       and use the preferred number of matches (see Table A3). The propensity score matching
       models match on historic emissions and two-digit SIC codes. For all models, the control
       group is restricted to facilities located in counties that, during 1990 and 1993, were not in
       attainment with the 1-hour ozone NAAQS standards. In Panel A, there are 212 treatment
       observations of the sample of 1523. For Panel B, there are 255 treated, which excludes
       the 13 facilities not complying with RECLAIM, of 1932. For the log specifications,
       emissions differences are defined as ln(EmitX+1)-ln(EmitY+1) and all matching is on
       ln(Emit1+1). We denote significance with *** at the 1-percent level, ** at the 5-percent
       level, and * at the 10-percent level.




                                                  46
Table 5: Indirect Test of Unconfoundedness.

                                           Levels                          Logs
      Description                       Coef. Std.Err.                 Coef. Std.Err.
Change in NOx Emissions between Periods 1 and 4

       Nearest Neighbor Matching               -0.91     (2.13)        -0.07     (0.06)

       Propensity Score Matching               -3.03     (1.68)        -0.11     (0.04) **

Change in NOx Emissions between Periods 2 and 3 for Complying Facilities

       Nearest Neighbor Matching               -0.76     (1.98)         0.08     (0.06)

       Propensity Score Matching               -0.31     (1.51)         0.08     (0.03) **

Notes: Treatment is L.A. facilities not in RECLAIM, but in the same four-digit SIC industries as
       in RECLAIM.




                                              47
Table 6: Robustness to Control Group.

Panel A: Change in NOx Emissions between Periods 1 and 4.
                                           Levels                    Logs
     Description                        Coef.    Std.Err.        Coef.      Std.Err.
Nearest Neighbor Matching
     Exclude L.A. facilities            -20.86      (7.96) ***   -0.34       (0.09) ***

     Northern CA only                   -15.62      (6.04) **    -0.29       (0.11) **

     Southern CA only                   -23.67      (7.58) ***   -0.23       (0.11) **

     Severe Non-Attainment only         -43.48      (9.74) ***   -0.39       (0.13) ***
Propensity Score Matching
     Exclude L.A. facilities            -29.63   (17.59)         -0.28       (0.12) **

     Northern CA only                   -23.79      (9.12) **    -0.17       (0.08) *

     Southern CA only                   -23.86   (27.68)         -0.30       (0.22)

     Severe Non-Attainment only         -44.91   (25.67)         -0.33       (0.17) *

Panel B: Change in NOx Emissions between Periods 2 and 3 for Complying Facilities.
                                           Levels                    Logs
     Description                        Coef.    Std.Err.        Coef.      Std.Err.
Nearest Neighbor Matching
     Exclude L.A. facilities             -9.04      (4.40) **    -0.21       (0.07) ***

     Northern CA only                    -4.89      (7.51)       -0.19       (0.07) ***

     Southern CA only                    -8.71      (3.90) **    -0.28       (0.07) ***

     Severe Non-Attainment only         -10.49      (5.31) **    -0.23       (0.09) ***
Propensity Score Matching
     Exclude L.A. facilities            -17.25      (4.95) ***   -0.24       (0.09) **

     Northern CA only                   -22.88      (6.78) **    -0.14       (0.11)

     Southern CA only                   -13.43      (1.71) ***   -0.20       (0.06)

     Severe Non-Attainment only         -19.77      (7.77) **    -0.35       (0.04) ***




                                         48
Table 7: Environmental Justice Results from Emissions Trading

LHS is Change in NOx Emissions from Period 2 to Period 3 for Compliant Firms

Panel A: Nearest Neighbor Matching
                             1            2            3            4            5            6            7
Treatment                -6.70 ***    -7.51 ***    -7.22 **     -7.66 ***    -7.81 ***    -7.82 **     -8.46 ***
                        (1.43)       (2.21)       (2.45)       (1.90)       (2.00)       (2.91)       (2.26)
Treat * Period 1 NOx     -0.06 ***                              -0.07 ***    -0.07 ***                 -0.07 ***
                        (0.02)                                 (0.01)       (0.01)                    (0.01)
Treat * Income                        -0.23                     -0.15                     -0.37        -0.47
                                     (0.20)                    (0.13)                    (0.31)       (0.32)
Treat * %Minority                                   0.03                     -0.06        -0.11        -0.25
                                                  (0.09)                    (0.07)       (0.15)       (0.19)
Period 1 NOx             -0.35 ***    -0.34 ***    -0.34 ***    -0.37 ***    -0.37 ***    -0.34 ***    -0.37 ***
                        (0.08)       (0.08)       (0.08)       (0.09)       (0.09)       (0.08)       (0.09)
Income                                 0.22                      0.16                      0.29         0.31
                                     (0.24)                    (0.19)                    (0.37)       (0.33)
%Minority                                          -0.05                      0.02         0.05         0.14
                                                  (0.10)                    (0.09)       (0.17)       (0.17)
R2                       0.64          0.63         0.62         0.64         0.64         0.63         0.64

Panel B: Propensity Score Matching
                            1             2            3            4            5            6            7
Treatment              -12.02 ***    -19.74 ***   -18.67 ***   -16.52 ***   -16.64 ***   -18.55 ***   -16.91 ***
                       (2.84)        (3.06)       (3.20)       (3.42)       (3.35)       (2.69)       (2.93)
Treat * Period 1 NOx    -0.15 ***                               -0.19 ***    -0.19 ***                 -0.19 ***
                       (0.04)                                  (0.05)       (0.05)                    (0.05)
Treat * Income                        -0.18                     -0.14                     -0.02        -0.37
                                     (0.31)                    (0.23)                    (0.50)       (0.35)
Treat * %Minority                                   0.17                     -0.05         0.16        -0.20
                                                  (0.10)                    (0.10)       (0.22)       (0.16)
Period 1 NOx             -0.08 *      -0.15 ***    -0.15 ***    -0.03        -0.03        -0.15 ***    -0.03
                        (0.04)       (0.04)       (0.04)       (0.05)       (0.05)       (0.04)       (0.05)
Income                                 0.09                      0.07                     -0.04         0.13
                                     (0.30)                    (0.21)                    (0.44)       (0.31)
%Minority                                          -0.12                      0.02        -0.13         0.06
                                                  (0.11)                    (0.11)       (0.20)       (0.17)
R2                       0.35          0.35         0.35         0.46         0.46         0.35         0.46
Notes: For the nearest neighbor matching, there are 974 observations with demographic data. Group fixed
       effects are not shown. Weight control observations by control group size. For the propensity score
       matching, there are 1697 observations with demographic data and we do not show the two-digit SIC
       fixed effects. Significance is noted at the 10% (*), 5% (**) and 1% (***) levels. %Minority is
       percent black or Hispanic.




                                                     49
Table 8: Environmental Justice Results from Overall RECLAIM Policy

LHS is Change in NOx Emissions from Period 1 to Period 4 for All Firms

Panel A: Nearest Neighbor Matching
                            1             2            3            4            5            6            7
Treatment              -20.64 **     -15.35 **    -12.04 **    -15.75 **    -13.02 **     -9.68 ***   -10.84 **
                       (7.81)        (6.14)       (4.00)       (5.03)       (5.25)       (2.56)       (4.37)
Treat * Period 1 NOx    -0.19                                   -0.11 **     -0.10 **                  -0.10 **
                       (0.11)                                  (0.04)       (0.04)                    (0.04)
Treat * Income                        -0.45                     -0.17                      1.21         0.98
                                     (0.57)                    (0.59)                    (1.01)       (0.91)
Treat * %Minority                                   0.91 *                    0.61         1.35 *       0.96
                                                  (0.46)                    (0.37)       (0.69)       (0.54)
Period 1 NOx             -0.48 ***    -0.34 ***    -0.34 ***    -0.36 ***    -0.36 ***    -0.34 ***    -0.36 ***
                        (0.11)       (0.06)       (0.06)       (0.06)       (0.05)       (0.06)       (0.06)
Income                                -0.21                     -0.23                     -0.97        -0.88
                                     (0.54)                    (0.50)                    (0.93)       (0.84)
%Minority                                          -0.39                     -0.31        -0.73        -0.62
                                                  (0.29)                    (0.29)       (0.52)       (0.48)
R2                       0.90          0.93         0.93         0.93         0.93         0.93         0.93

Panel B: Propensity Score Matching
                            1             2            3            4            5            6            7
Treatment              -20.11 **     -22.16 **    -20.93 **    -18.04 **    -18.01 **    -18.59 ***   -16.24 ***
                       (8.23)        (9.55)       (8.91)       (6.25)       (6.51)       (6.08)       (4.99)
Treat * Period 1 NOx    -0.12                                   -0.12        -0.11                     -0.11
                       (0.10)                                  (0.09)       (0.09)                    (0.09)
Treat * Income                        -0.28                     -0.17                      0.65         0.37
                                     (0.33)                    (0.37)                    (0.80)       (0.63)
Treat * %Minority                                   0.59 **                   0.36 **      0.83         0.49
                                                  (0.25)                    (0.13)       (0.51)       (0.33)
Period 1 NOx             -0.61 ***    -0.69 ***    -0.68 ***    -0.62 ***    -0.62 ***    -0.68 ***    -0.62 ***
                        (0.11)       (0.05)       (0.05)       (0.09)       (0.09)       (0.05)       (0.09)
Income                                -0.34                     -0.32                     -0.61        -0.47
                                     (0.50)                    (0.44)                    (0.82)       (0.70)
%Minority                                          -0.08                      0.00        -0.30        -0.17
                                                  (0.14)                    (0.11)       (0.41)       (0.33)
R2                       0.87          0.89         0.89         0.89         0.89         0.89         0.89

Notes: For the nearest neighbor matching, there are 829 observations with demographic data. Group fixed
       effects are not shown. Weight control observations by control group size. For the propensity score
       matching, there are 1396 observations with demographic data and we do not show the two-digit SIC
       fixed effects. Significance is noted at the 10% (*), 5% (**) and 1% (***) levels. %Minority is
       percent black or Hispanic.




                                                     50
Appendices: Not for Publication
Appendix A: Emissions trends under the CAAAs

In 1990, Congress turned its attention to the widespread failure of US cities to attain health-

based national ambient air quality standards (NAAQS). Title I of the 1990 CAAAs sought

to address urban ozone problems in particular.40 The requirements for the 96 metropolitan

areas failing to attain federal ozone standards were significantly revised. Nonattainment

areas were reclassified according to the extent to which they exceeded federal standards.

Each classification was subject to a diﬀerent deadline for achieving compliance. Figure A1

graphically illustrates the compliance requirements required under the CAAA for five air

basins in California. The dotted lines connect one hour ozone concentration values in 1990

(when the CAAAs were passed) with the Federal one hour standard (0.12 ppm) in the year in

which the air basin was required, under the auspices of the CAAA, to come into compliance.

Because SCAQMD was much further from attainment as compared to other air basins, the

district was given more time to comply.

       The stronger unconfoundedness assumption described in Section 3.2 requires that the

control treatment resembles the regulations that RECLAIM facilities would have been sub-

jected to absent RECLAIM. To assess the plausibility of this assumption (albeit crudely)

we look at the ozone concentrations reductions mandated in SCAQMD vis a vis other Cal-

ifornia air basins over the study period. Figure A1 illustrates the compliance requirements
  40
    Of all the criteria air pollutants regulated under the auspices of the Federal Clean Air Act, ground level
ozone has proven to be the most recalcitrant. Ozone is the primary constituent of smog. It is a highly
reactive compound that can damage the linings of the respiratory tract, reduce lung function, and aggravate
pre-existing respiratory conditions. In 1990, an estimated sixty percent of Americans lived in metropolitan
areas that were failing to meet Federal health-based ozone standards.


                                                      i
required under the CAAA for five air basins in California. The dotted lines connect one

hour ozone concentration values in 1990 (when the CAAAs were passed) with the Federal

one hour standard (0.12 ppm) in the year in which the air basin was required, under the aus-

pices of the CAAA, to come into compliance. The broken lines represent the more recently

required ozone concentration reduction trajectories that pertain to the federal 8-hour ozone

standard.41 The black lines (associated with the highest ozone concentrations) correspond

to the SCAQMD.

      Because SCAQMD was much further from attainment as compared to other air basins,

the district was given more time to comply. Although ozone concentrations (and thus the

extent of non-attainment) in the South Coast significantly exceed that of other California

non-attainment areas, mandated reductions follow similar–if not parallel–trajectories over

time. Figure A1 illustrates that mandated ozone concentration reduction trajectories were

similar across California’s non-attainment counties. This is consistent with, but certainly

not proof of, the hypothesis that regulations of NOx emissions from industrial sources in

SCAQMD and other non-attainment areas would have followed parallel paths over the time

period we study absent RECLAIM.

Appendix B: Ex post evaluation of the RECLAIM program

Evaluations of the RECLAIM program have been carried out by SCAQMD staﬀ (SCAQMD,

Various years), the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA 2002; US
 41
    In 1997, the EPA concluded that the 1-hour standard was inadequate for protecting pub-
lic health.  The Agency issued a Federal 8-hour standard of 0.08 ppm which was oﬃcially up-
held by the courts in 2001. Deadlines for compliance with the 8-hour standard can be found at
http://www.epa.gov/ozonedesignations/regions/region9desig.htm.


                                             ii
EPA 2006), and academic researchers (Gangadharan, 2000; Schubert and Zerlauth, 1999).

Although these studies and reports arrive at diﬀerent conclusions, there is consensus that a

RECLAIM program evaluation is an important exercise:

         How have actual emissions reductions [in RECLAIM] compared to those that
         would have occurred under the subsumed CAC system? While there can be no
         definitive answer, this question is so central to the aﬀected public in any area
         contemplating converting from CAC to a trading based program that we are
         obligated to try to answer it. (US EPA, 2002)


       In the periodic program evaluations carried out by SCAQMD, the aggregate RTC permit

allocation serves as a proxy for counterfactual emissions. The authors maintain that this is

a reasonable, and potentially conservative estimate of counterfactual emissions because the

aggregate permit allocation was designed to track ex ante expected endpoint mass emissions

under the subsumed suite of CAC rules that were being fiercely opposed by industry. These

periodic evaluations routinely conclude that RECLAIM is achieving emissions reductions

equivalent, and possibly greater, than what would have been achieved under the subsumed

CAC measures.

       A comprehensive EPA study (US EPA, 2002) argues that assumptions made during initial

projections for the RECLAIM program were “not valid predictors of real world behavior,”

nor were they substantiated with actual data (US EPA, 2002). Consequently, initial RTC

allocations are dismissed as invalid measures of counterfactual emissions. The authors allege

that RECLAIM has “produced far less emissions reductions than could have been expected

from the subsumed CAC system” (US EPA, 2002).42
  42
    SCAQMD was quick to respond to allegations that their counterfactual emissions significantly exceeded
that which could realistically have been expected under the subsumed CAC rules. This dispute was never


                                                   iii
   Unresolved disagreements about what constitutes an appropriate measure of counterfac-

tual emissions has resulted in a plurality of opinions regarding RECLAIM’s overall perfor-

mance. Whereas the Deputy Executive Oﬃcer for the California Air Resources Board has

stated publicly that RECLAIM “hasn’t done as well as the regulations it replaced” (US EPA,

2006), a Pew Center report concludes that “the [RECLAIM] program’s ten-year phase-in de-

sign and trading provided the flexibility that led to the achievement of environmental goals

that had been previously elusive.” (Ellerman et al., 2003).

Appendix C: Robustness to Estimates

This appendix tests the robustness of the main results. First we examine the overall match

quality (see Figure A2). In Table A1, we explore the robustness of our nearest neighbor

results in Table 4 to the bias adjustments we make using no correction, a linear correction,

and a quadratic correction. Patterns of coeﬃcient significance are unaﬀected by the bias

adjustments.

   For the observations used in Panel A of Table 8, Table A2 summarizes the demographic

data and other covariates we use to test the robustness of the environmental justice results.

These include: a variable measuring whether toxics were measured on site from the California

ARB’s Air Toxics “Hot Spots” Program (http://www.arb.ca.gov/AB2588/overview.htm);

annual county employment, payroll and establishments variables; an indicator of whether

the RECLAIM facility was located in the coastal zone with restricted permit access; and
resolved. A more recent, retrospective overview of the RECLAIM program published by the US EPA
concludes: “RECLAIM shows the critical nature of baseline credibility in a program’s perceived success or
failure”(US EPA, 2006).




                                                   iv
indicators of two-digit SIC codes for major industries. When including these in the environ-

mental justice analysis, the only coeﬃcients for the treatment eﬀects that are significant are

the average eﬀect, historic emissions, and petroleum refining (which is positive).

   Table A3 reports the robustness of the main nearest neighbors matching results to the

number of neighbors. For the overall eﬀect (period 1 to 4), the results are significant and

qualitatively similar for 1, 2, or 3 neighbors. With more neighbors, the estimates are only

weakly significant. For the trading eﬀects (period 2 to 3), the results are quite similar for 2,

3, 4, or 5 neighbors.




                                               v
Appendix Figures and Tables




Figure A1: Required Ozone Concentration Reductions for Five Californian Air Basins.
Notes: This figure illustrates the ozone concentration reductions required of the five California air basins with the most severe air quality problems. Dotted lines
connect an area's 1990 "design value" with the Federal 1- hour ozone standard in the year the basin is required to achieve compliance. A design value is an air
quality measurement that is used to determine an area's air quality status (in reference to a National Ambient Air Quality Standard). Areas that had relatively high
ozone concentrations in 1990 (and high design values) were given more time to come into attainment with the Federal standard. Compliance deadlines were
established under the CAAA 1990. In 1997, the EPA issued a Federal 8-hour standard of 0.08 ppm. This standard was officially upheld by the courts in 2001.
The broken lines connect an area's 8-hour design standard (measured in 2001) and the Federal 8-hour standard in the year the area must comply with this
standard. Deadlines for compliance with the 8-hour standard can be found at http://www.epa.gov/ozonedesignations/regions/region9desig.htm. Historical data on
ozone design values are available from California Air Resources Board: http://www.arb.ca.gov/adam/php_files/aqdphp/sc8start.php.




                                                                                vi
                     80
   Historic Emissions in Control Group
       20          400           60




                                         0           20                  40              60   80
                                                           Historic Emissions in RECLAIM


Figure A2: Match Quality for Overall Effect on Historic Emissions.
    20
    0
    -20
    -40




                                             RECLAIM Change in Emissions
                                             Control Group Change in Emissions
    -60




                                     0              20                  40              60    80
                                                          Historic Emissions in RECLAIM



Figure A3: k-Nearest Neighbor Regression of Changes in Emissions from Period 1 to
          Period 4 in the RECLAIM and Control Groups on Period 1 Emissions. The
          sample is from the main results shown in Table 4.



                                                                          vii
Table A1: Robustness to Bias Adjustment and Matching Method.
Panel A: No Bias Adjustment
                                               Levels                       Logs
Description of dependent variable           Coef.      Std.Err.         Coef.      Std.Err.       n      treat
Overall (Emit4-Emit1)                      -25.02          (7.63) ***   -0.32       (0.09) ***   1,745   215


Trading (Emit3-Emit2)                       -9.60          (3.85) **    -0.37       (0.08) ***   2,217   255

Panel B: Linear Bias Adjustment
                                               Levels                       Logs
Description of dependent variable           Coef.      Std.Err.         Coef.      Std.Err.       n      treat
Overall (Emit4-Emit1)                      -20.59          (7.63) ***   -0.27       (0.09) ***   1,745   215


Trading (Emit3-Emit2)                       -8.29          (3.85) **    -0.34       (0.08) ***   2,217   255

Panel C: Quadratic Bias Adjustment (main specification)
                                               Levels                       Logs
Description of dependent variable           Coef.      Std.Err.         Coef.      Std.Err.       n      treat
Overall (Emit4-Emit1)                      -17.79          (7.63) **    -0.25       (0.09) ***   1,745   215


Trading (Emit3-Emit2)                       -9.42          (3.85) **    -0.31       (0.08) ***   2,217   255


Notes: EmitX is emissions in period X. All models match on the same variables as in Table 4. For the log
       specification, emissions differences are defined as ln(EmitX+1)-ln(EmitY+1) and all matching is
       on ln(Emit1+1). For each LHS variable, the preferred m from Table 4 is used. The kernel
       matching panel uses a bandwidth of 0.05. We denote significance with *** at the 1-percent level,
       ** at the 5-percent level, and * at the 10-percent level.




                                                    viii
Table A2: Demographic Summary Statistics
Variables for RECLAIM facilities                               n   mean    std dev    min    max
median zip code income (in $1000s) in 1999                   208    45.2      16.3    8.6    98.1
percent of zip code that is black or Hispanic (in 2000)      208    55.2      27.8    4.0    98.8
indicator of whether toxics were measured on site            208   29%        45%     0%    100%
% change in total county employment from period 1 to 4       208   23%        18%    11%     69%
% change in total county payroll from period 1 to 4          208   76%        30%    56%    153%
% change in total county establishments from period 1 to 4   208   17%         7%    13%     35%
Indicator of coastal permits                                 208   70%
Petroleum Refining                                           208     7%
Stone, Clay, and Glass Products                              208     9%
Primary Metal Industries                                     208     9%
Electric and Gas Services                                    208   16%
Variables for control facilities                               n   mean    std dev    min    max
median zip code income (in $1000s) in 1999                   621    45.9      15.4   17.9   120.1
percent of zip code that is black or Hispanic (in 2000)      621    46.7      26.5    3.1   100.0
indicator of whether toxics were measured on site            621   19%        39%     0%    100%
% change in total county employment from period 1 to 4       621   27%        17%     6%    123%
% change in total county payroll from period 1 to 4          621   94%        33%    56%    277%
% change in total county establishments from period 1 to 4   621   14%         8%    -2%     60%
Indicator of coastal permits                                 621     0%
Petroleum Refining                                           621     9%
Stone, Clay, and Glass Products                              621     9%
Primary Metal Industries                                     621     9%
Electric and Gas Services                                    621   16%




                                                             ix
Table A3: Robustness of Average Treatment Effect to Number of Nearest Neighbors.

Dependent Variable: Change in NOx Emissions from Period X to Period Y

Dependent variable            m(1)            m(2)           m(3)            m(4)            m(5)

Overall (Emit4-Emit1)       -27.06 ***      -21.57 ***      -17.79 **       -15.17 *       -15.09 *
                             (8.74)          (8.07)          (7.63)          (7.81)         (8.10)
Sum MSE                        44.30          48.10           42.30           47.90           46.00
Average percent change         -26%            -21%           -17%            -15%            -15%


Trading (Emit3-Emit2)         -7.83          -9.64 **        -9.42 **        -9.38 **        -9.89 **
                             (7.08)         (4.13)          (3.85)          (4.64)          (4.06)
Sum MSE                        17.44          15.13           14.48           15.31           16.02
Average percent change         -16%            -20%           -20%            -19%            -20%


Notes: All matching models match on average NOx emissions during Period 1 (1990-1993) and
       four-digit SIC codes. In addition, the control group is restricted to facilities located in
       counties that, during 1990 and 1993, were not in attainment with the 1-hour ozone
       NAAQS standards. In the first row, the dependent variable is the change in NOx
       emissions from period 1 to period 4 (215 treatment observations of the sample of 2421).
       The second row is the change from period 2 to 3 (255 treated, excluding the 13 facilities
       not complying with RECLAIM, of 2217). m(#) specifies the number of matches to be
       made per observation. The sum of mean squared errors (in millions) is shown for each
       regression (see text for discussion of calculation). The preferred model is in bold. We
       denote significance with *** at the 1-percent level, ** at the 5-percent level, and * at the
       10-percent level.




                                                 x
