NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MODERN MEDICINE AND THE 20TH CENTURY DECLINE IN MORTALITY:
EVIDENCE ON THE IMPACT OF SULFA DRUGS
Seema Jayachandran
Adriana Lleras-Muney
Kimberly V. Smith
Working Paper 15089
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15089

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2009

We are grateful to Melissa Thomasson for sharing her maternal mortality data and to James Trussell,
Noreen Goldman, Ilyana Kuziemko, Ulrich Mueller, participants at the Office of Population Research
seminar at Princeton University, two anonymous referees and the editors for helpful comments and
suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Seema Jayachandran, Adriana Lleras-Muney, and Kimberly V. Smith. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Modern Medicine and the 20th Century Decline in Mortality: Evidence on the Impact of Sulfa
Drugs
Seema Jayachandran, Adriana Lleras-Muney, and Kimberly V. Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 15089
June 2009
JEL No. I10,J11,N32
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the contribution of sulfa drugs, a groundbreaking medical innovation in the 1930s,
to declines in U.S. mortality. For several often-fatal infectious diseases, sulfa drugs represented the
first effective treatment. Using time-series and difference-in-differences methods (with diseases unaffected
by sulfa drugs as a comparison group), we find that sulfa drugs led to a 25 to 40 percent decline in
maternal mortality, 17 to 36 percent decline in pneumonia mortality, and 52 to 67 percent decline in
scarlet-fever mortality between 1937 and 1943. Altogether, they reduced mortality by 2 to 4 percent
and increased life expectancy by 0.4 to 0.8 years. We also find that sulfa drugs benefited whites more
than blacks.

Seema Jayachandran
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
jayachan@stanford.edu
Adriana Lleras-Muney
Department of Economics
9373 Bunche Hall
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
alleras@ECON.UCLA.EDU

Kimberly V. Smith
Princeton, NJ
KSmith@mathematica-mpr.com

1. Introduction
The U.S. experienced unprecedented declines in mortality during the 20th century. The
age-adjusted death rate decreased by 74 percent, and life expectancy increased by 56 percent, or
30 years (Bernard Guyer, Mary A. Freedman, Donna M. Strobino and Edward J. Sondik 2000).
Seventy percent of the increase in longevity occurred during the first half of the century, driven
by a reduction in infectious disease mortality, the leading cause of death at the time. The welfare
gains from this increase in longevity are estimated to be as large as those from per capita GDP
growth over the period (William D. Nordhaus 2002). Understanding what caused these rapid
gains is of historical interest and also relevant for policy in developing countries today where
infectious disease mortality remains high.
Several factors are thought to have contributed to the 20th-century declines in mortality,
including rising living standards, better nutrition, and public health initiatives that improved
water supplies, sanitation systems, and household hygiene (Thomas McKeown 1976, John B.
McKinlay and Sonya M. McKinlay 1977, Robert W. Fogel 1994, Samuel Preston 1996, Preston
and Michael Haines 1991, David Cutler and Grant Miller 2005).
The extent to which medical advances played a role in mortality decline during the first
half of the 20th century is subject to some debate. While studies focusing on the second half of
the century attribute a large share of the decline to medical innovation (Cutler 2004), the
importance of medicine for the earlier period is less well understood. Historical epidemiologists,
such as McKeown, R.G. Record, and R.D. Turner (1975) and McKinlay and McKinlay (1977),
observed that a large share of 20th-century declines in infectious disease mortality preceded the
advent of medical treatments and concluded that the main cause of the advances must be
something other than modern medicine. Other researchers hypothesized that medical innovation

1

in fact was an important contributor to mortality declines, but they did not empirically test the
hypothesis or estimate the magnitude of this contribution (e.g., Irvine Loudon 1987, John
Conybeare 1948, Morton N. Swartz 2004).
The aim of this paper is to shed new light on the contribution of medical innovation to
mortality declines by examining the introduction of sulfa drugs in the mid-1930s, an important
event in the history of modern medicine. Sulfa drugs were the first medicine to effectively treat a
range of potentially-fatal bacterial infections, including streptococcal (strep) infections (most
notably scarlet fever, puerperal sepsis, and erysipelas), pneumonia, and meningitis. Pneumonia
alone accounted for 8% of total deaths in 1936. The production and sales of sulfa drugs grew
rapidly after their discovery; by 1941, 10 to 15 million people were treated with sulfa drugs
annually (Annabel Hecht 1984). The next major medical advance was not until the mid-1940s
when penicillin and other antibiotics became available. Therefore, the period from the mid-1930s
to mid-1940s provides a unique opportunity to examine the effect of a new medical technology
on mortality.
Despite the historical and medical importance of sulfa drugs, there is little empirical
evidence on their contribution to mortality decline. One exception is a study by Melissa A.
Thomasson and Jaret Treber (2008) that finds that hospitalization of childbirth in the U.S. did not
significantly reduce maternal mortality until after sulfa drugs became widely available in 1937.
The limited empirical attention given to sulfa drugs may be due in part to the lack of
disaggregated data on their diffusion, which makes it more challenging to estimate their effect on
mortality.
We confront this challenge by using the timing of the discovery of sulfa drugs—when no
other major factors are known to have affected mortality trends— combined with their rapid

2

diffusion. These facts enable us to provide credible evidence on the impact of sulfa drugs on
mortality despite the lack of data on diffusion. First, we test for structural trend breaks in the
mortality time series. We test both whether the timing of the trend break lines up with the
introduction of sulfa drugs and whether the trend break is statistically significant. For diseases
treated with sulfa drugs (maternal mortality,1 pneumonia, and scarlet fever), we find evidence of
trend breaks in the mortality series around 1937, the first year of large-scale sulfa drug
production.
Our empirical strategy also uses another fact about sulfa drugs: from clinical trials
conducted in the 1930s, we know that they were only effective against certain infectious
diseases. We thus can also examine mortality trends for a major infectious disease that was not
treatable with sulfa drugs, tuberculosis.We find no trend break during the relevant period for this
“control disease.”
We estimate the magnitude of the effect of sulfa drugs on mortality using a difference-indifferences regression approach that compares mortality differences between treated and control
diseases before and after 1937. Our estimates are based on the identifying assumption that post1937 mortality declines for treated diseases, beyond those that occurred for the control disease,
are due to sulfa drugs. The results suggest that sulfa drugs were responsible for a 25-40% decline
in maternal mortality, a 17-36% decline in pneumonia mortality, and a 52-67% decline in scarlet
fever mortality between the pre-1937 and post-1937 periods.2 These declines account for
between 40% and 75% of total declines for these causes of death during this period. In addition,

1

As shorthand, we call maternal mortality (death due to complications from childbirth) a disease, but it is more
precisely a cause of death.
2
Pneumonia (treatable with sulfa drugs) is combined with influenza (not treatable with sulfa drugs) in our mortality
data, as explained in Section 3. When calculating the effect of sulfa drugs on pneumonia, we assume the sulfainduced decline in the combined category is due to a decline in pneumonia mortality.

3

we find larger declines in urban areas, consistent with historical evidence that sulfa drugs
diffused more rapidly in cities than in rural areas.
Finally we compare the effect of sulfa drugs on mortality for blacks and whites. Diffusion
of sulfa drugs was likely slower among blacks, due to the inferior medical care available to them
under segregation and to the high age of southern blacks living in rural areas (Douglas Almond,
Kenneth Y. Chay, and Michael Greenstone 2006, Loudon 1992). More generally, it has been
hypothesized that innovation benefits higher socioeconomic status (SES) groups first (Bruce G.
Link, Mary E. Northridge, Jo C. Phelan and Michael L. Ganz 1998). Consistent with this
hypothesis, we find that mortality from diseases treatable with sulfa drugs fell less for blacks
than for whites.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section presents a brief history of
sulfa drugs. In Section 3, we describe the data. Section 4 presents graphical evidence and tests
for structural breaks. Section 5 estimates the magnitude of the effect of sulfa drugs on mortality.
In section 6, we investigate racial differences in the effect of sulfa drugs. Section 7 concludes.

2. History of sulfa drugs
Sulfa drugs were the first effective antibacterial agents to be produced in a
pharmaceutical laboratory. Before the first sulfa drug was synthesized in 1932, infectious disease
research and treatment was dominated by immunotherapy, which involved the use of either
animal serum containing antibodies to treat patients (passive immunization) or vaccines that
prevent the occurrence of disease by triggering the body to produce antibodies (active
immunization) (Loudon 2002). While serum was not widely used due to the high cost and the

4

high risk of serum-related illness, several important vaccine discoveries were made in the late
nineteenth century, including the rabies vaccine (1885) and the diphtheria antitoxin (1891).
In the late 1920s, German researchers began investigating the antibacterial potential of
textile dyes (Loudon 1991). In 1932, Gerhard Domagk, a German scientist working at the
chemical and dye company I.B. Farben, discovered that a red dye compound, “Prontosil,” was
successful in treating mice injected with streptococci. Domagk’s results, however, were not
published until 1935.3 That same year, the Pasteur Institute in France showed that the active
ingredient in the dye compound was sulfonamide. The structure of sulfonamide had been
documented in the doctoral dissertation of an Austrian chemist, Paul Gelmo, in 1908 and the
patent on it had long expired. Therefore, the technology for making sulfonamide was available,
and anyone could produce it. It was also relatively inexpensive to produce. As a result,
production and clinical testing of sulfonamide began on a large scale soon after its discovery.
The first major clinical trial of sulfa drugs occurred in 1936 at Queen Charlotte’s Hospital
in England when Prontosil was given to 38 women with serious cases of puerperal fever, a
complication from childbirth caused by streptococcal infection that was the leading cause of
maternal mortality at the time. The results, published in the June 1936 issue of the Lancet,
reported a mortality rate of 8% among treated patients versus 24% among the most recent 38
untreated patients (Leonard Colebrook and Maeve Kenny 1936a). The success of sulfa drugs in
treating puerperal fever was replicated, and even surpassed, in subsequent clinical trials in
London, as well as in other parts of Europe (Colebrook and Kenny 1936b, M.A. Foulis and John
B. Barr 1937; G. F. Gibberd 1937). Prontosil was first used in the U.S. in 1935 to treat a child
with meningitis at Babies Hospital in New York (Andrew J. Schuman 2003). Further U.S. testing
3

As a result of his discovery, Domagk was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine in 1939, but due to
the Nazi government’s opposition to such a prize, was not able to accept the award until 1947 (Kiefer 2001).

5

in 1936 at Johns Hopkins University and Western Pennsylvania Hospital showed that sulfa drugs
were effective against scarlet fever and pneumonia (e.g., Perrin H. Long and Eleanor A. Bliss
1937). Over the next several years, clinical tests provided compelling evidence that various sulfa
compounds were effective in treating puerperal fever, pneumonia, scarlet fever, meningitis,
gonorrhea, and erysipelas (S.W. Sappington and G.O. Favorite 1939; Paul H. Hamilton 1938).4
The lay press created immediate and intense enthusiasm for the drugs. Sulfa drugs
became widely-known in the U.S. following a December 1936 New York Times article reporting
that Prontosil cured President Franklin D. Roosevelt’s young son of a deadly streptococcal
infection. By 1939, sulfa drugs were commonly referred to as ‘magic bullets’ and a ‘growing
miracle’ and credited with declines in mortality from childbirth, pneumonia, and other diseases.5
Pharmaceutical companies took advantage of the positive press on sulfa drugs. By as
early as 1937, sulfa drugs were widely available and dispensed in the U.S. That year, output of
sulfa drugs totaled 350,000 pounds; by 1940, it had doubled; and by 1942, production exceeded
14 million pounds (U.S. Tariff Commission, 1936-1950). More than 5000 sulfa compounds were
developed by the early 1940s (though not all of them proved to be effective) (David M. Keifer
2001). Until 1938 sulfa drugs were available without a prescription, but physicians routinely
prescribed them, and beginning in 1938, a prescription was required (Barron H. Lerner 1991).6

4

For many clinical trials, particularly those involving diseases with high fatality rates, concurrent controls were not
used for ethical reasons (Lerner 1991; Loudon 2002). In other cases where disease fatality rates were relatively low,
definitive conclusions about the effect of sulfa drugs on mortality could not always be reached. Nonetheless, the
successful results of repeated clinical testing were still viewed as compelling evidence of sulfa drugs’ effectiveness.
5
New York Times, April 9, 1939; New York Times, August 8, 1941, New York Times, July 19, 1942; New York
Times, April 4, 1940.
6
In 1937, 100 people died from consuming an “Elixir of Sulfanilamide”, an untested liquid sulfa preparation. This
incident led to the passage of the 1938 Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic (FDC) Act that mandated safety testing of
drugs before marketing and prohibited the sale of some non-narcotic drugs without a prescription, including sulfa
drugs. Sulfapyridine, a sulfa compound, was the first important new drug to be reviewed under the FDC Act (Lesch
2007).

6

The rapid diffusion of sulfa drugs was aided by their low price, about $35 to $100 (2009 dollars)
per patient for a full course of the life-saving medicine.7
The fact that sulfa drugs were a sensation and quickly became widely available is very
useful for analyzing their effects. These characteristics of sulfa drugs’ diffusion allow us to look
for sudden changes in outcomes (i.e., mortality) right after sulfa drugs were discovered and
entered into mass production. This approach would be inappropriate for a medical technology
with more gradual adoption, since one could not demarcate a before and after period as sharply.
The subsequent development of penicillin and other antibiotics have largely
overshadowed the revolutionary effect of sulfa drugs on medical practice and research. However,
the ten-year period covering the discovery and widespread use of sulfa drugs was considered
‘epochal’ at the time, and sulfa drugs are credited today with ushering in a ‘therapeutic
revolution’ (Long and Bliss 1939:1; Richard M. Weinshilboum 1987:1). Sulfa compounds are
still used today, but have been largely replaced by antibiotics, which proved to be more effective
and less toxic in the treatment of most infectious diseases.8

3. Data and disease selection
For our analyses, we use U.S. vital statistics data collected at the national-, state-, and
city-level for the period from 1920 to 1950. Data prior to 1930 by state and disease were
collected by Grant Miller and made publicly available through the National Bureau of Economic
Research.9 We collected additional state-level mortality data from 1930 to 1950 on four causes

7

The calculation is based on revenue, production volume, and number of patients treated in 1943, as reported by
Lesch (2007). As a cross-validation, another price estimate is $4.30 per patient per day (converted to 2009 dollars),
suggesting the drugs were taken an average of 8 to 23 days.
8
Today, sulfa drugs are used to treat some antibiotic-resistant infectious diseases, but are more commonly used in
the treatment of urinary tract infections, leprosy, and fungal diseases.
9
See http://www.nber.org/data/vital-statistics-deaths-historical/.

7

of death that were shown to be highly responsive to sulfa drugs in clinical trials: maternal
mortality, pneumonia, scarlet fever, and meningitis. In our analysis, we refer to these four causes
of death as “treated” diseases. The most common cause of maternal mortality, responsible for
roughly 40% of maternal deaths in the mid-1930s, was puerperal fever (also called puerperal
sepsis), caused by streptococcus bacteria, which was responsive to sulfonamide; therefore, we
use maternal mortality as a proxy for death from puerperal fever (Loudon 1988). In 1939,
influenza, which was not affected by sulfa drugs, was combined with pneumonia into a single
category in the vital statistics volumes. In order to achieve a consistent data series, we use the
combined pneumonia/influenza category for all years. For the years when disaggregated data are
available, pneumonia accounts for about 75% of total deaths in the combined category. To
calculate state-level death rates, we use population data from the Census Bureau’s decennial
censuses from 1920 to 1950. For years between censuses, we estimate the population by linear
interpolation within a state.
We also use data on comparison diseases, that is, diseases untreatable with sulfa drugs.
An ideal comparison disease would be an infectious disease that is similar to the infectious
diseases treated with sulfa drugs, with the exception that it does not respond to any sulfa
compound. The disease that meets this criterion is tuberculosis, which we loosely refer to as our
“control” disease (Karl H. Pfuetze 1945).10 We also collected data on three chronic diseases:
diabetes, heart disease, and cancer. While chronic diseases are clearly very different from the
infectious diseases treated with sulfa drugs, they can provide some insight into whether there
were other factors that affected mortality rates for all diseases during the period when sulfa drugs
were introduced.
10

An additional criterion is the availability of a consistent data series for the time period studied. For example,
influenza would have been a possible control disease had it not been combined with pneumonia in the vital statistics
data.

8

In addition to the state-level data, we use national-level data. Age-standardized national
mortality series (using the 1940 population as the standard) are available in vital statistics
volumes, except for scarlet fever mortality and maternal mortality. For scarlet fever, we
aggregated age-specific deaths at the state level and then calculated national age-adjusted
mortality rates using the same direct method of standardization to the 1940 population. Our
analysis examines the maternal mortality ratio (maternal deaths per 100,000 live births) rather
than maternal mortality rate (maternal deaths per 100,000 women of reproductive age), as the
maternal mortality ratio (MMR) is the conventional measure of maternal mortality. The national
MMR is constructed by aggregating total deaths and total births from state-level data and then
calculating the ratio.11
The U.S. death registration system did not include all states until 1933. Therefore, pre1933 national mortality estimates are approximations to complete national rates and, for our
state-level analysis, the number of data points available for each state varies.12 The state results
presented are based on unbalanced panel data, but our results are very similar when we restrict
our analysis to states with complete data series. For the regression sample, we use 1925 as the
beginning of our sample period to minimize the imbalance. The end date for the regression
sample is 1943; beyond this date, the introduction of other medical advances in the mid-1940s
would be a confounding factor.
The city-level mortality data were collected by Thomasson and Treber (2008). These data
have two limitations for our purposes: (1) they cover only 1928 to 1940, and (2) they contain
information on maternal mortality but not other causes of death. During the relevant period,
11

Following convention, the MMR is not age-adjusted. The MMR is preferable to the maternal mortality rate as a
measure of risk because it represents the risk of death once a woman has become pregnant.
12
The annual collection of mortality statistics, known as the death registration system, began in 1900. The death
registration area expanded from 10 states in 1900 to 36 states in 1920 and the entire United States by 1933. Alaska,
Hawaii and the District of Columbia are not included, so there are at most 48 states in a given year.

9

maternal deaths were reported at the city level for each city with a population of at least 10,000
(in states that had entered the death registration system). We focus our analysis on larger cities
with populations of at least 25,000 (as of 1930), of which there are 267.
Table 1 shows age-adjusted national mortality rates for 1920 and 1950. It also reports
summary statistics for the 1925-36 pre-sulfa period and 1937-43 post-sulfa period used in our
regression analyses. The state means are not an exact match to the national data because the
national data series are age-adjusted and because the state averages are not population-weighted.
In 1920, the MMR in the U.S. was about 809 deaths per 100,000 live births, much higher
than in Western Europe, where the MMR ranged from 235 in Denmark to 665 in France (Loudon
1988). The 1920 MMR level in the U.S. is similar to levels found in developing countries such as
Chad and Ethiopia today (Loudon 1988, WHO et al. 2004). The MMR declined by roughly 45%
between the pre-sulfa and post-sulfa periods; similarly large declines occurred in Western
Europe. The pneumonia/influenza and tuberculosis disease categories were responsible for the
largest share of infectious disease deaths between 1920 and 1950 and accounted for
approximately 22% of overall mortality. Deaths due to scarlet fever and other infectious diseases
were much less common. Mortality for the infectious diseases considered here dropped by 34%
to 68% between the pre- and post-sulfa period.

4. The effect of sulfa drugs on mortality in the U.S.: Graphical and time-series evidence
Ideally, to estimate the impact of sulfa drugs on mortality, one would estimate an
equation such as the following:

(4.1)

Log(M)it = β0 + β1 (Sulfa drug availability)it + eit

10

The dependent variable is the natural log of the mortality rate in medical market i and year t.13
The independent variable would be a measure of sulfa drug availability (supply) that is
uncorrelated with the demand for sulfa drugs. The hypothesis is that when sulfa drugs become
more available, mortality falls (β1 < 0). In practice, researchers might define the medical market
as a state and use state-year level data on sales volume or the number of prescriptions issued as a
proxy for sulfa drug availability, but it is worth keeping in mind that such a regression would
suffer from endogeneity bias. For example, sales of sulfa drugs are likely to be higher in places
with higher mortality risk from sulfa-treatable diseases. There is also a data limitation in our
case: there are no data on the availability of sulfa drugs disaggregated by state or other subgroups
for the period examined.
Instead, we use two facts about sulfa drugs to arrive at empirical tests of their effects.
First, we use the fact that the timing of the sulfa drug discovery can be taken as exogenous and
that, because sulfa drugs could not be patented, diffusion was rapid: the first year of large-scale
production and sales of sulfa drugs in the U.S. was 1937 (U.S. Tariff Commission, 1936-1950).
This allows us to use time series techniques to test whether the timing of mortality declines
corresponds to sulfa drugs’ introduction in 1937. Second, there is strong evidence from clinical
trials that sulfa drugs were effective against some infectious diseases but not others. Therefore,
we are able to use infectious diseases that were impervious to sulfa compounds as a comparison
group in our analysis, netting out the effects of other factors that may have coincidentally
lowered mortality around 1937.

13

The reason for modeling the log of the mortality rate is that medical advances are hypothesized to have a
proportional change on mortality rates: if the initial rate of mortality is high, there is more room for mortality
decline, so a medical advance should lead to a larger drop in the level of mortality than if the initial rate is low.
Using proportional changes also facilitates comparisons of mortality change across diseases that have different
levels of mortality initially.

11

Most medical innovations do not have the fortuitous characteristics that the discovery of
sulfa drugs has—that is, fortuitous from the empirical researcher’s point of view. Penicillin was a
revolutionary medical advance, but it was invented in the 1940s at the same time as other major
medical advances (e.g., blood transfusions, refinements in sulfa drugs, and anti-malarial
pesticides), which makes isolating its impact difficult. Moreover, there seems to be no control
disease available, that is, an infectious disease that was unaffected by penicillin or by other
contemporaneous innovations. Hence, we examine the effects of medical innovation in the early
20th century by focusing on sulfa drugs both because sulfa drugs were an important breakthrough
and because other breakthroughs like penicillin do not lend themselves well to an impact analysis
using population data.

Graphical evidence on trend breaks in the mortality time series
Figure 1 plots total mortality between 1920 and 1950, and Figure 2, mortality for the four
sulfa-treated diseases: maternal mortality, pneumonia/influenza, scarlet fever, and meningitis.14
All graphs show mortality on a log scale. The vertical line at 1937 indicates the first year of
large-scale production of sulfa drugs in the U.S. With the exception of meningitis, the mortality
curves for the treated diseases become noticeably steeper after 1936-7.
Meningitis has a very different pattern than the other diseases, with wide fluctuations that
suggest outbreaks. Modeling this type of time-series process requires very different techniques
than those we use for the rest of the diseases in this study, and for this reason we do not pursue
meningitis further in our analysis.

14

Graphs are based on national-level age-adjusted death rates, using 1940 as the standard, except in the case of
MMR, which is based on aggregated state-level data.

12

The mortality rate for pneumonia/influenza also fluctuates in the early years, driven by
outbreaks of influenza (Neil M. Ferguson, Alison P. Galvani, and Robin M. Bush 2003, E.
Lofgren, N. Fetterman, Y.N. Naumov, et al 2007). We will be testing the hypothesis that sulfa
drugs affected pneumonia mortality, not influenza mortality (as noted earlier, influenza was
unaffected by the drugs), so the volatility of influenza mortality is, in effect, noise in our data. As
it affects the dependent variable, this noise will make our pneumonia/influenza results less
precise, but is otherwise not problematic.
In contrast to the treated diseases, mortality trends for the control and chronic diseases
(Figures 3 and 4) do not show any noteworthy changes around the time that sulfa drugs were
introduced. Death rates for our control disease, tuberculosis, are trending downward and chronic
diseases trending upward, with no obvious breaks in the trend lines around 1937, suggesting
there were no factors other than sulfa drugs affecting mortality at this time.15 Since tuberculosis
constitutes a closer comparison group than chronic diseases, for brevity, we exclude the chronic
diseases from the remainder of our analysis.
The graphs also show that between 1935 and 1937 there is a slight increase in overall
mortality as well as mortality from several of the specific causes of death considered here. The
cause of this uptick is a puzzle in the demographic literature and one that we do not attempt to
solve in this paper. Its timing is somewhat unfortunate for our purposes since we are interested in
structural breaks in our mortality series around 1937; however, this uptick exists in the mortality
series for both treated and control diseases (and, to a lesser extent, for chronic diseases). To

15

The decline in tuberculosis appears to steepen around 1945. Penicillin and other antibiotics effective against
tuberculosis were introduced around this time.

13

ensure that our results are not driven by this anomaly, we also check the robustness of our results
to the omission of these years in our estimation.16

Formal tests of trend breaks in mortality time series
The graphs provide visual evidence that mortality declines accelerated when sulfa drugs
were introduced in 1937. We next conduct a more formal test for structural breaks in the
mortality series. Using out-of-sample information that large-scale production of sulfa drugs
began in 1937, one could assume that 1937 is the first year that sulfa drugs would affect
mortality and examine whether there is a statistically significant break for that year. We start
with a stronger test that does not assume knowledge of when the trend break occurs. We test
whether, among all possible break dates, the break is strongest in a statistical sense in or around
1937 and whether the break is statistically significant.
We test for a trend break in year τ using the following model:
(4.2)

Log(M)t –Log(M) t-1 = α + δ0Dt (τ) + et .

The dependent variable, Log(M)t - Log(M)t-1 , is the first difference of log mortality, and Dt(τ) is
an indicator variable equal to zero for all years before τ and equal to one for all subsequent years.
In using first differences, we are testing for a trend break rather than level change in mortality at
year τ.17 To account for serial correlation, we compute Newey-West standard errors and allow
the error structure to be correlated up to two lags.
16

For all diseases except pneumonia/influenza, the data suggest that the mortality uptick is limited to 1935 to 1936.
For pneumonia/influenza, the uptick is between 1935 and 1937. To be conservative, we present results from models
that exclude 1935 to 1937 as our main robustness test. Appendix Table A1 presents results from an alternative test
that excludes only 1935 and 1936. In both cases, dropping the years of the uptick has little impact on our results.
17
The graphs suggest a break in the trend rather than level. Moreover, break tests require the data to be stationary,
which the non-differenced mortality series do not satisfy. Using both Pierre Perron’s 1989 test and Augmented
Dickey Fuller tests, we fail to reject non-stationarity when using levels rather than differences. Results available
upon request.

14

Using national mortality data for 1920 to 1950, we test for a possible break in each year
in the interval 1933 to 1942; that is, we estimate equation (4.2) ten times, with τ taking on each
value between 1933 and 1942. The interval of possible break dates is smaller than the full span
of the data because one needs an adequate number of data points before (after) the earliest
(latest) break point to estimate the regression line before and after the break point.18 For each
estimate, the null hypothesis of no trend break, or δ0 = 0, is tested, and the largest of the resulting
F-statistics is used to determine the best possible break point and the significance of the break.19
We interpret finding a trend break in or around 1937 as evidence that the introduction of sulfa
drugs had an impact on mortality.
Table 2 presents the results of the trend-break test, which confirm the visual evidence.
For each of the treated diseases, the test identifies a structural break in 1937 or 1938.20 The three
treated diseases account for about 12% of total mortality in the pre-period and they were not the
only diseases treated with sulfa drugs, so it is perhaps not surprising that total mortality also
shows a possible trend break in 1937. The short time series leads to relatively low statistical
power, but the trend breaks in 1937 are statistically significant at the 1% level for MMR and
scarlet fever. In contrast, for the control disease, tuberculosis, the test identifies 1942 as when a
trend break possibly occurs (statistically insignificantly).

18

There is little guidance in the literature on how to choose the appropriate test window. A common approach is to
trim 15% from both ends. However, in the case of small samples such as ours, that would leave only three data
points on either side of the test window.
19
This test is the Quandt Likelihood Ratio test, which is, in essence, a sequential Chow Test where the largest F-test
from these sequential tests is used to identify a possible break point (Richard E. Quandt 1960). We use Andrews
(1993, 2003) critical values that account for the fact that many possible break points are being tested and, therefore,
there are many chances to reject the null hypothesis of no structural change (Stock and Watson, 2003).
20
The later break date (1938) for pneumonia/influenza mortality likely reflects the availability of sulfapyridine, a
new sulfa compound more effective in treating pneumonia, beginning in 1938 (Lesch, 2007).

15

5. Regression estimates of the effect of sulfa drugs on mortality
This section uses regression analysis to measure the magnitude of the effect of sulfa
drugs on mortality. Based on the trend-break results above plus out-of-sample knowledge that
1937 was the first year of widespread sulfa use, the regression analysis interprets post-1937
changes in mortality for the treated diseases as the effect of sulfa drugs. We estimate two models,
one that allows for a level change in mortality in 1937 and one that allows for both a level
change and slope change in 1937.21

Post-1937 changes in mortality
Using the national mortality series from 1925 to 1943 (19 observations), we first estimate
a simple model that allows mortality to be a function of an overall linear time trend and a level
shift in 1937:
Log(M)t = β0 + β1Yeart + δ0Post-1937+ et.

(5.1)

The dependent variable, Log(M)t , is the log of mortality in year t, Yeart is a continuous year
variable, and Post-1937t is a dummy variable equal to one if the year is 1937 or after. The
question of interest is whether the coefficient on the post-1937 dummy (δ0) is negative and
significant.
We also estimate a trend-break model that allows for a change in the slope after 1937:
(5.2)

Log(M)t = β0 + β1Yeart + δ0Post-1937 + δ1Post-1937*Yeart + et

21

The time-series tests in the previous section required stationary time series, and because our mortality data are
only stationary once they are first-differenced, we tested for trend breaks using first-differenced data and could not
test for level shifts. The analysis in this section does not require stationarity, so we are able to estimate both level
and slope changes.

16

In this model, we are interested in whether δ0 and δ1 are negative and significant. In both models,
to account for serial correlation we compute Newey-West standard errors that allow the error
structure to be correlated up to two lags.
The first model (equation 5.1) is more parsimonious, which might be preferable given the
short time series; there is limited statistical power to estimate slope changes with a short panel.
However, the second model (equation 5.2) allows for the possibility that the effect of sulfa drugs
starts off small and then accelerates, which one might expect given that technology adoption is
not instantaneous. Indeed, the visual evidence in Figure 2 is consistent with sulfa drugs
accelerating mortality declines and not just causing a one-time drop.22 We present results from
both models, but the slope-change model is our preferred specification.
The results in the first column of Table 3 (based on estimating equation 5.1) suggest that
there was a decline in all-cause mortality after 1937, but the coefficient is not statistically
significant. However, column 2 (based on equation 5.2) shows that there is a negative and
statistically significant change in the slope after 1937. The coefficient in column 1 suggests that
age-adjusted mortality fell by about 2% between the pre-1937 period (1925-36) and the post1937 period (1937-1943). The coefficients from column 2 indicate a larger effect of about 4%.
The total effect size from equation 5.2 is computed as δ0 + 3.5*δ1, where the factor of 3.5 is the
average value of Year for our seven years of post-1937 data.
Table 3 also shows that each of the three diseases treatable with sulfa drugs saw
significant declines in mortality after 1937. The coefficients of interest are negative and
significant for each disease and for both specifications, expect for pneumonia/influenza for
22

When we estimate the post-1937 decline in mortality non-parametrically, by including a dummy for each year
starting in 1937 (in addition to a year trend), the results suggest that the second model (equation 5.2) describes the
time pattern in the effect of sulfa drugs well. The coefficients suggest that the effect of sulfa drugs was increasing
linearly and stabilized around 1942. For MMR, the coefficients suggest that the effect may have been increasing
faster than linearly in the first few years after 1937. Results available upon request.

17

which the intercept, although negative, is not statistically significant. The coefficients suggest a
decline in maternal mortality of 26 to 41%, in pneumonia/influenza mortality of 15 to 29%, and
in scarlet fever mortality of 58 to 75%. (The larger effects are always from (5.2).) On the other
hand, the coefficients for the 1937 break are positive and statistically insignificant for
tuberculosis, our control disease.

Difference-in-difference estimates
Next, we estimate difference-in-difference models that compare pre- and post-1937 levels
and trends between treated diseases and the control disease. The inclusion of tuberculosis as a
control disease accounts for any other factors that may have affected mortality around 1937. We
allow each disease to have its own overall linear trend, so the identifying assumption is that,
conditional on disease-specific trends, any pre- versus post-1937 changes in mortality caused by
factors besides sulfa drugs are the same for the control and treated diseases, and that sulfa drugs
are the only factor differentially affecting the treated diseases beginning in 1937.
We start by presenting results using national level data, examining each treated disease
separately. We stack the data so that there are two observations per year, one for the treated
disease and one for the control disease. We then estimate two models,
(5.3) Log(M)dt = β0 + β1 Treatedd*Post-1937t + β2 Treatedd*Yeart + β3 Treatedd +
β4 Yeart + εdt
and
(5.4) Log(M)dt = β0 + β1 Treatedd*Yeart*Post-1937t + β2 Treatedd*Post-1937t +
β3 Treatedd*Yeart + β4 Treatedd + β5Yeart + εdt.

18

The dependent variable is the log of the mortality rate for disease d and year t. Treatedd is an
indicator variable for whether disease d is a treated disease, Post-1937t is an indicator variable
equal to zero for t between 1925 and 1936 and equal to one for the period 1937 to 1943, and
Yeart is a continuous year variable (centered on 1937). Robust standard errors are reported.
The first model (equation 5.3) examines changes in the level of the dependent variable
after 1937. The coefficient of interest, β1, measures whether the post-1937 reduction in mortality
was larger for treated diseases than for the control disease. The second model (5.4) allows for a
change in both the intercept and the slope after 1937. In this model, the statistical question of
interest is whether β1 and β2 are jointly significantly different from zero. Both models allow for a
different linear time trend for treated and control diseases.
We also present results using state-level data. The coefficients should be similar to those
obtained with national-level data (except for the age-adjustment and the population weighting),
but using state-level data can increase the precision of the estimates since we can control for
state-level covariates (e.g., state-specific trends) that affect mortality but are orthogonal to our
variables of interest. We estimate the following equations with state-level data:
(5.5) Log(M)idt = β0 + β1 Treatedd*Post-1937t + β2 Treatedd*Yeart + β3 Treatedd +
β4 Yeart + γit + εidt
and
(5.6) Log(M)idt = β0 + β1 Treatedd*Yeart*Post-1937t + β2 Treatedd*Post-1937t +
β3 Treatedd*Yeart + β4 Treatedd + β5Yeart + γit + μit*Yeart + εidt.
The dependent variable is the log of the mortality rate in state i for disease d and year t, and
Treated, Post-1937 and Year are defined as before. The equations now include State*Post-1937
fixed effects, denoted by γit, which control for the main effect of Post-1937 and absorb state

19

variation in mortality declines (which is orthogonal to the regressor of interest, but adds noise to
the estimates), and State*Post-1937 fixed effects interacted with Yeart, denoted by μit*Yeart.
Standard errors are clustered by disease-year, since the variable of interest only varies at this
level.23
We estimate the equations separately for each treated disease using mortality data from
1925 to 1943. Table 4, Panel A presents the results of our main specification for the national
data. Panel B shows the results using state-level data. As expected, the coefficients are of similar
magnitude, but the standard errors are somewhat smaller using the state data. The coefficients of
interest are negative and significant using both levels of data and for all three treated diseases
(except for β1 for pneumonia/influenza, which is negative but not significant). These results
suggest that the introduction of sulfa drugs led to significant mortality declines for diseases that
were treatable with the new drugs.
Panel C shows that the results are robust to the exclusion of 1935 to 1937, the years of
the uptick in mortality (we present these using the state-level data for brevity). While the
estimated coefficients in the MMR and scarlet fever models are virtually unchanged, the
coefficients in the pneumonia/influenza model are reduced by roughly a half. That the
pneumonia/influenza point estimates are sensitive to excluding even a few points is not
surprising given that the data are noisier for this outcome and we have a short panel. In all other
cases, however, the estimates are negative and statistically significant.
We can use the difference-in-differences coefficients to assess the magnitude of sulfa
drugs’ effect on mortality. Starting with the first model (equation (5.5), using the coefficients
reported in Panel B, column 1), the MMR coefficient of -0.28 implies that the introduction of
23

We also estimated standard errors clustering by state to correct for possible serial correlation (Marianne Bertrand,
Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan 2004). When we cluster by state, the standard errors are actually smaller
than when we estimate robust standard errors, suggesting that this serial correlation correction is not needed.

20

sulfa drugs resulted in a 25% decrease in MMR in the post period, or 163 (0.25*653) fewer
maternal deaths per 100,000 births between 1925-36 and 1937-43. Sulfa drugs thus appear to
explain 56% of the total decline in MMR during this time period, which fell by about 292 deaths
per 100,000 births between the two periods (Table 1). The estimates also suggest that sulfa drugs
were responsible for a 13% decline in pneumonia/influenza mortality (a decrease of 15 deaths
per 100,000 people) and 39% of total mortality decline in this disease category. If one assumes
the averted deaths in the combined pneumonia/influenza category were from pneumonia, then
sulfa drugs caused a 17% decline in pneumonia mortality. Finally, the scarlet fever results imply
that sulfa drugs led to a 52% drop in scarlet fever mortality, which accounts for 76% of the total
decline in this cause of death between the pre-1937 and post-1937 periods.
The coefficients from the second model, which allows for a break in trend as well as a
level change (Panel B column 2), suggest larger effects: MMR declined by 40%,
pneumonia/influenza declined by 27% (implying a 36% decline in pneumonia) and scarlet fever
declined by 67%. These effect sizes are very similar to those we obtained using the simple
difference estimates in the previous subsection.
Our estimates are quite consistent with clinical trial estimates from the time (G.M. Evans
and Wilfrid F. Gaisford 1938, Colebrook and Kenny 1936a). In clinical trials, sulfa drugs
reduced mortality from pneumonia by 50 to 70%, while we estimate a 17% to 36% decline at the
population level. The larger effect size in clinical trials is not surprising since only a portion of
the population afflicted with pneumonia took sulfa drugs, and drugs are generally more
efficacious in a controlled, clinical setting. Sulfa drugs reduced mortality from puerperal fever,
which was responsible for roughly 40% of maternal deaths in the pre-sulfa period, by about 81%
in clinical trials, implying a 32% reduction in maternal mortality. In comparison, we find a

21

maternal mortality decline of 25% to 40%. It is somewhat surprising that the population-level
effect for maternal mortality is the same size as the clinical-trial effect, but one potential
explanation is that, because the vast majority of births were physician-assisted, sulfa drugs were
administered in a high proportion of puerperal fever cases in the general population (higher than
for pneumonia cases, where a physician may not always have been consulted).24 For scarlet
fever, we do not have estimates from clinical trials to compare with our results.
Using the estimated effect sizes combined with the summary statistics presented in Table
1, we can calculate the contribution of sulfa drugs to the overall mortality decline from 1937 to
1943. We first convert the decline in MMR due to sulfa drugs to a percent decline in maternal
deaths per 100,000 individuals, which we estimate to be 24%. We know that mortality from
maternal causes, pneumonia/influenza, and scarlet fever accounted for 1.1%, 10.5%, and 0.2%,
respectively, of total deaths in the pre-sulfa period. Therefore, we estimate that sulfa drugs,
through their effect on the three treated diseases, were responsible for 1.7% of overall mortality
decline between 1925-36 and 1937-43 (0.24*0.011 + 0.13*0.105 + 0.52*0.002). If we repeat the
calculation using the second model, we find an overall effect on mortality of 4.1%. These
estimates are very similar to the simple post-1937 change in all-cause mortality implied by Table
3.
The impact of sulfa drugs on life expectancy can be estimated with a back-of-theenvelope calculation. Using national-level mortality counts by age (and by cause) for 1936 along
with population estimates, we can compute actual life expectancy in 1936. We can then calculate
a counterfactual life expectancy using the lower mortality rates caused by sulfa drugs for the
treated diseases. We find that sulfa drugs increased life expectancy by 0.38 to 0.76 years of life

24

Another possible explanation is that, given that maternal deaths are difficult to classify, puerperal fever may have
accounted for a larger share of maternal deaths than the 40% figure we assume.

22

(the larger estimate uses results from the second model). Published estimates suggest that life
expectancy increased by about 4.8 years during this period (from 58.5 to 63.3 between 1936 and
1943), so sulfa drugs account for 8-16% of the increase. Note that our estimates do not capture
the full impact of sulfa drugs on life expectancy because we cannot account for the effects of
sulfa drugs on mortality declines after 1943 and because, due to data limitations, we do not study
the effect on other diseases (such as meningitis, erysipelas, and cerebrospinal fever) that sulfa
drugs also treated.25

Urban-rural evidence on maternal mortality
While the above analysis provides strong suggestive evidence that the introduction of
sulfa drugs caused a reduction in mortality starting in 1937, we conduct an additional test to
validate our interpretation that the decline was due to sulfa drugs. Studies of diffusion of medical
technology in the U.S. find that large, urban-based research hospitals are usually the first to
adopt new medical technologies, followed, after the importance of the new technology is proven,
by urban medical facilities and, lastly, by medical centers in rural areas, often after a
considerable delay (Duke University, Medical Technology Assessment Working Group, 2006).
According to historical accounts, clinical testing for sulfa drugs was first carried out at several
urban-based research facilities in the U.S. such as Johns Hopkins University (Baltimore), Babies
Hospital (New York City), and Western Pennsylvania Hospital (Pittsburgh). Therefore, one
validation test is to compare post-1937 mortality reductions in urban and rural areas, with the
expectation that urban areas would benefit from sulfa drugs more immediately than rural areas.

25

Clinical trials also indicate that sulfa drugs reduced morbidity from pneumonia and our other treated diseases.
They were also were effective in the treatment of various infections with low fatality rates, including bacillary
dysentery and gonorrhea. Therefore, the contribution of sulfa drugs to health is greater than what is captured by
focusing on mortality alone.

23

We have urban-only mortality data but not rural-only data. Therefore, we compare urban
mortality to state-level mortality, where state-level data represent the sum of mortality in urban
and rural areas. If the trend breaks are larger in urban areas than in rural areas, then the urban
data should show larger trend breaks than the state-level data that aggregate across urban and
rural populations.
We restrict the urban data to cities with populations of at least 25,000 for two reasons.
First, our hypothesis of a higher rate of diffusion in urban areas is more likely to hold in larger
cities. Second, vital statistics data were not collected in cities smaller than 25,000 people in 1931
and 1932. Recall that our city-level data series includes maternal mortality only, and only covers
the period from 1928 to 1940. Figure 5, which is based on city- and state-level data, shows that
the MMR was higher in cities than at the state level until 1936, after which point an urban
advantage emerges. While the mortality curves for both cities and states become noticeably
steeper around 1936-7, the graph suggests that this slope change occurs earlier in cities.
Because the city-level series end in 1940, we cannot estimate the timing of trend breaks
using the time series methods used above, which require a longer panel. We can, however,
estimate regression models that test whether there is a larger break in urban areas in 1937, using
pooled city- and state-level maternal mortality data. (An observation is either a state-level or a
city-level mortality rate. States with more than one large city will have more than two
observations in a given year). We estimate the following two regressions:

(5.7)

Log(MMR)ict = β0 + β1 Urbanc*Post-1937t + β2 Urbanc + β3 Urbanc*Yeart + β4Year t
+ γit + εict

and
(5.8) Log(MMR)ict = β0 + β1 Urbanc*Post-1937t + β2 Urbanc *Yeart + β3 Urbanc *Year t *Post1937t + β4 Urbanc + β5Yeart + γit + μit*Yeart + ε ict.

24

The dependent variable is the log of the maternal mortality ratio for geographic category c (cityor state-level observation) in state i in year t, Urban is an indicator variable for whether the
observation is a city, Post-1937 is an indicator variable equal to zero in the period from 1928 to
1936 and equal to one in the period from 1937 to 1940, and Yeart is a continuous year variable.
Equation (5.7) includes State*Post-1937 fixed effects and allows for differential time trends in
urban areas. Equation (5.8) also includes State* Post-1937 fixed effects interacted with Yeart.
These equations are analogous to those used before, with the treated-disease dummy replaced
with an urban dummy. The hypothesis is that the interactions with Urban and Post-1937 should
be negative (β1 in Equation (5.7) and both β1 and β3 in Equation (5.8)). As the state-level data are
an aggregate of data from cities and from rural areas, the error terms will be correlated across the
state-level and city-level observations within a given state and year. Therefore, we cluster the
standard errors by state-year.
Table 5 presents the regression results. For both equations, β1 is negative and significant,
suggesting that cities experienced statistically significantly larger declines in maternal mortality
after 1937 compared to rural areas. In addition, in the second model, the slope of the MMR curve
after 1937 is more negative in urban areas (β3 is negative and significant), suggesting that
mortality started to decline faster in cities compared to rural areas after sulfa drugs were
introduced. Panel B again shows that, although the magnitude of these effects changes when the
1935-1937 years are excluded, the substantive conclusions of the analysis do not.

6. Racial differences in the effect of sulfa drugs
We next compare the effect of sulfa drugs for whites and blacks. A growing literature
posits that new medical technologies may increase inequalities in health because they tend to

25

favor, at least initially, the better off who are more able to access and implement health-related
innovations (Sherry Glied and Adriana Lleras-Muney 2008, Dana P. Goldman and Darius N.
Lakdawalla 2005). More broadly speaking, this idea is the basis of the “fundamental causes”
hypothesis, which posits that socioeconomic (SES) gradients in health arise because those with
higher SES use their greater resources to improve their health (Link et al 1998).
There are specific reasons to believe that sulfa drugs may have diffused more rapidly
within the white population. During this period, the majority of blacks lived in lower-income
Southern states and in predominantly rural areas, often at far distances from hospitals and
physicians. Hospital segregation policies and greater resources in white facilities further
contributed to lower health care utilization among blacks (Almond et al., 2006).
In addition, with regard to maternal mortality, the rate of home deliveries by untrained
midwives was still high among black women (and very low among white women) living in the
South during this period, which may have reduced black mothers’ access to sulfa drugs during
and after delivery (Loudon 1992, Almond et al. 2006). Thomasson and Treber (2008) find that in
U.S. cities, greater rates of hospital births were associated with significant and large declines in
MMR for both races after the introduction of sulfa drugs in 1937, but that the effect of hospitals
on MMR in the post-sulfa period was greater for blacks than whites. This may reflect the
relatively worse hospital care received by black mothers in the pre-sulfa drug period.26
If sulfa drugs diffused more rapidly among whites then blacks, then one should observe
larger and steeper declines in mortality for whites than blacks after sulfa drugs’ introduction in
1937. Figure 6 shows mortality by race for our treated and control diseases from 1920 to 1950.

26

In their balanced city panel, Thomasson and Treber (2008) find that greater hospitalization of births in the pre1937 period lowered MMR for whites only, but the effect was larger in the post-1937 period. However, in their
unbalanced panel, the mortality effects of hospital-based deliveries in the pre-sulfa drug period are insignificant for
both blacks and whites.

26

There were clear racial disparities in maternal and pneumonia/ influenza mortality throughout the
period. The gap between blacks and whites in MMR was stable from 1925 to 1935 but widened
after 1937 as a result of steeper declines in MMR among whites. Pneumonia/influenza appears to
follow the same pattern, though the evidence of greater gaps after 1937 is not as clear (though
these data are noisy). Somewhat surprisingly, mortality from scarlet fever was higher among
whites than blacks in the pre-sulfa period, which the medical literature has attributed to lower
susceptibility to scarlet fever among blacks (William M. Welch and Jay F. Schamberg 1905).
Nevertheless after 1937, mortality from scarlet fever falls more rapidly for whites, and the black
advantage is greatly diminished. Meanwhile, for the control disease, tuberculosis, there is no
change in either black or white mortality around 1937.27
We next use regression analysis to estimate the magnitude of post-1937 changes in
mortality for whites and blacks. Using the same difference-in-differences regression approach
outlined in Section 5, we estimate equations 5.5 and 5.6 separately for blacks and whites and
then pool the races and estimate models with race interactions, clustering the standard errors by
disease-year. We use state-level data for this analysis rather than national-level data because by
comparing blacks and whites in the same state, we can hold more factors constant (or closer to
constant) such as the extent of urbanization or the health care system.28 The regressions include
the 18 states in which blacks comprise at least 5% of the total population, which are mostly in
the South.29 The black mortality rate has sizeable measurement error in states that have a small

27

Interestingly, around 1945 when penicillin becomes available, the decline in tuberculosis mortality accelerates for
whites but not blacks.
28
The results using national data, which include whites and blacks from all states and use only one observation per
year and disease and race, are qualitatively similar for both models, although the standard errors are larger. Results
available upon request.
29
These states are Alabama, Arkansas, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi,
Missouri, New Jersey, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, and West Virginia.

27

black population, and as we are running unweighted regressions, we exclude them to avoid
reducing the precision of the estimates and introducing attenuation bias.
Table 6 reports the results. Sulfa drugs appear to have caused a 26% decline in MMR for
whites versus a 12% decline for blacks allowing for a level change after 1937, or 42% versus
27% allowing for both a level and slope change. For pneumonia/influenza, our estimates suggest
that sulfa drugs led to a 21% decline in mortality for whites and an 11% decline for blacks, or
35% versus 25% using the second model. For scarlet fever, we find that sulfa drugs had no
statistically significant effect on scarlet fever mortality for blacks, but resulted in a 55-67%
decline in scarlet fever mortality for whites (the effect size is also much smaller for blacks; the
coefficients imply a 13-21% decline).
To determine whether the differences in the coefficients for blacks and whites are
statistically significant, we pool the race data and estimate fully interacted models. The results
are shown in Panel C of Table 7 and confirm that whites experienced significantly greater
mortality reductions from sulfa drugs than blacks for all of the treated diseases (positive
interaction coefficients imply a smaller decline for blacks than whites). Appendix Table A2
shows that these results are robust to omitting 1935 to 1937 in our estimations.
Blacks were more likely to live in rural areas in this period, and our urban-rural results in
the previous section suggest that location could be one explanation for why sulfa drugs seemed
to diffuse more slowly among blacks. We do not have data at a disaggregated enough level to
explore this hypothesis in the ideal manner, but we can regress state-level mortality on the
percent black and percent rural in the state. We find that percent black is statistically significant
conditional on percent rural, which suggests the smaller effect of sulfa drugs on black mortality

28

is not just a rural effect and likely reflects segregation policies and the inferiority of the health
care available to blacks. (Results available upon request.)30
Thus, whites appear to have benefited more from the introduction of sulfa drugs, in line
with previous work that finds that medical innovation increases health gradients, at least initially.
Sulfa drugs are a particularly interesting case because, unlike most life-saving innovations, they
were inexpensive. The full course of medicine cost less than $100 (2009 dollars). This suggests
that factors other than income were the major barrier to accessing medical breakthroughs for
low-SES groups like blacks.

7. Conclusion
This paper contributes to our understanding of the role that medical advances played in
improving longevity in the first half of the 20th century. Specifically, we examine the effect of
sulfa drugs, whose discovery and rapid diffusion in the 1930s was one of the first major
successes of modern pharmaceutical research. We use time series and difference-in-differences
estimation methods, whereby we compare mortality patterns before and after sulfa drugs were
introduced between treated and control diseases. Our results suggest that sulfa drugs caused
significant mortality declines for the three causes of death included in our analysis: maternal
mortality, pneumonia, and scarlet fever. Sulfa drugs led to a 25-40% decline in maternal
mortality, a 17-36% decline in pneumonia mortality, and a 52-67% decline in scarlet fever
mortality between 1937 and 1943. These findings imply that sulfa drugs reduced age-adjusted

30

More generally, we investigated whether any state-level factors can explain differences in the adoption of sulfa
drugs across states, where adoption was proxied by the level of mortality decline after 1937. Using our differencein-differences setup, we tested for an association between state characteristics—such as income per capita, high
school graduation rates, number of doctors and hospitals per capita, percent of the population in urban areas and
percent black —and mortality declines due to sulfa drugs. Our results were generally inconclusive (in most cases,
not statistically significant and sensitive to specification choice). These results are available upon request.

29

mortality by at least 2-4% and increased life expectancy at birth by 0.4-0.8 years. Thus, sulfa
drugs had a significant impact on longevity, but most of the longevity gains during this era were
due to other (probably non-medical) factors.
In addition, sulfa drugs seemed to benefit whites more than blacks, increasing racial
inequality in maternal and pneumonia mortality and almost eliminating the black advantage in
scarlet fever that existed before sulfa drugs became available. These results suggest that sulfa
drugs diffused more rapidly among whites and support the hypothesis that medical innovation
favors high-SES groups, at least initially. This finding is especially striking given that sulfa drugs
were an inexpensive life-saving drug. Thus, one of the policy implications of our findings, which
may be relevant for reducing infectious disease in developing countries today, is that while
inventing and investing in new medical technology could be a promising way to combat disease,
achieving equitable access to that technology may be a challenge, even for cheap and effective
medical breakthroughs.

30

References
Almond, Douglas, Kenneth Y. Chay, and Michael Greenstone. 2006. “Civil Rights, the War on
Poverty, and Black-White Convergence in Infant Mortality in the Rural South and Mississippi.”
MIT Department of Economics Working Paper 07-04.
Andrews, Donald W.K. 1993. “Tests for Parameter Instability and Structural Change with
Unknown Change Point.” Econometrica 61(4): 821-856.
____. 2003. “Tests for Parameter Instability and Structural Change with Unknown Change Point:
A Corrigendum.” Econometrica 71(1): 395-397.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much Should We
Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1): 249-275.
Colebrook, Leonard and Maeve Kenny. 1936a. “Treatment of Human Puerperal Infections, and
of Experimental Infections in Mice with Prontosil.” Lancet 1:1279-1286.
____.1936b. “Treatment with Prontosil of Puerperal Infections due to Haemolytic Streptococci.”
Lancet 2:1319-1322.
Conybeare, John. 1948. “The Effects on Mortality of Recent Advances in Treatment.” Journal of
Institute of Actuaries 74: 57-81.
Cutler, David M., Your Money or Your Life. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2004.
Cutler, David and Grant Miller. 2005. “The Role of Public Health Improvements in Health
Advances: The Twentieth-Century United States.” Demography 42(1): 1-22.
Duke University, Medical Technology Assessment Working Group. 2006. Assessing the Impact
of Medical Technology Innovations on Human Capital. Phase I Final Report (Part A): State-ofthe-Science Literature Reviews. Durham: Center for Demographic Studies, Duke University.
Evans, G.M., and Wilfrid.F. Gaisford. 1938. “Treatment of Pneumonia with 2-(p
aminobenzenesulphonamide) pyridine.” Lancet 2: 14-18
Ferguson, N. M., A. P. Galvani, and R. M. Bush. 2003. “Ecological and Immunological
Determinants of Influenza Evolution.” Nature 422: 428-43.
Fogel, Robert W. 1994. “Economic Growth, Population Theory, and Physiology: The Bearing of
Long-Term Processes on the Making of Economic Policy.” American Economic Review 84(3):
369-395.
Foulis M.A. and John B. Barr. 1937. “Prontosil Album in Puerperal Sepsis.” British Medical
Journal 1:445-6.

31

Gibberd G.F. 1937. “Prontosil and Similar Compound in the Treatment of Puerperal Haemolytic
Streptococcus Infections.” British Medical Journal 2:695-698.
Glied, Sherry and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2008. “Technological Innovation and Inequality in
Health.” Demography 45(3): 741-761.
Goldman, Dana P. and Darius Noshir Lakdawalla. 2005. “A Theory of Health Disparities and
Medical Technology.” Contributions to Economic Analysis & Policy 4(1)8: 1-30.
Guyer, Bernard, Mary Anne Freedman, Donna M. Strobino, and Edward J. Sondik. 2000.
“Annual Summary of Vital Statistics; Trends in the Health of Americans During the 20th
Century.” Pediatrics 106:1307-1317.
Hamilton, Paul M. 1938. “Round Table Discussion of Sulfanilamide.” Journal of Pediatrics
13(4): 605-617.
Hecht. Annabel. 1984. “Sulfa; Yesterday's Hero is Still Taking Bows.” FDA Consumer 18
(Oct.).
Kiefer, David M. 2001. “Miracle Medicines. The Advent of the Sulfa Drugs in the Mid-1930s
Gave Physicians a Powerful Weapon.” Today’s Chemist at Work 10(6): 59-60.
Lerner, Barron H. 1991. “Scientific Evidence Versus Therapeutic Demand: The Introduction of
Sulfonamides Revisited.” Annals of Internal Medicine 115(4), 315-320.
Lesch, John E. 2007. The First Miracle Drugs: How the Sulfa Drugs Transformed Medicine.
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Link, Bruce G., Mary E. Northridge, Jo C. Phelan and Michael L. Ganz. 1998. “Social
Epidemiology and the Fundamental Cause Concept: On the Structuring of the Effective Cancer
Screens by Socioeconomic Status. Milbank Quarterly 76 (3): 375-402.
Lofgren E., Fefferman N.H., Naumov Y.N., Gorski J., Naumova E.N. 2007. “Influenza
Seasonality: Underlying Causes and Modeling Theories.” Journal of Virology. 81(11):5429-36.
Long, Perrin H. and Eleanor A. Bliss. 1937. “Observations upon the Experimental and Clinical
Use of Sulphanilamode in the Treatment of Certain Infections.” Journal of the American Medical
Association 108: 32-27.
____. 1939. The Clinical and Experimental Use of Sulfanilamide, Sulfapyridine and Allied
Compounds. New York: Macmillan.
Loudon, Irvine. 1987. “Puerperal Fever, the Streptococcus, and the Sulphonamides, 1911-1945.”
British Medical Journal 22: 485-490.

32

____. 1988. “Maternal Mortality: 1800-1950. Some Regional and International Comparisons.”
Social History of Medicine 1: 183-228.
_____. 1991. “On Maternal and Infant Mortality 1900-1960.” Social History of Medicine 4: 2973.
_____. 1992. Death in Childbirth. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
_____. 2002. “The Use of Historical Controls and Concurrent Controls to Assess the Effects of
Sulphonamides, 1936-1945.” The James Lind Library (www.jameslindlibrary.org).
McKeown, Thomas. 1976. The Role of Medicine: Dream, Mirage, Nemesis. London: Nuffield
Provincial Hospitals Trust.
McKinlay, John B. and Sonja M. McKinlay. 1977. “The Questionable Contribution of Medical
Measures to the Decline of Mortality in the United States in the 20th Century.” The Milbank
Memorial Fund Quarterly. Health and Society 55(3): 405-428.
McKeown, T., R.G. Record and R.D. Turner. 1975. “An Interpretation of the Decline of
Mortality in England and Wales During the Twentieth Century.” Population Studies 29: 391–
421.
Nordhaus, William D. 2002. “The Health of Nations: The Contribution of Improved Health to
Living Standards,” in Kevin Murphy and Robert Topel, eds., The Economic Value of Medical
Research, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 2002.
Perron, Pierre. 1989. “The Great Crash, the Oil Price Shock and the Unit Root Hypothesis,”
Econometrica, 57, 1361-1401.
Preston, Samuel. 1996. “American Longevity: Past, Present, and Future” Maxwell School of
Citizenship and Public Affairs, Center for Policy Research, Syracuse University, Working Paper
No. 7/1996.
Preston, Samuel H. and Michael R. Haines. 1991. Fatal Years: Child Mortality in Late
Nineteenth-Century America. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Quandt, Richard E. 1960.“Tests of the Hypothesis that a Linear Regression System Obeys Two
Separate Regimes.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 55 (290): 324-330
Pfuetze, Karl H. 1945. “Present Status of Chemotherapy in Tuberculosis from the Clinical
Standpoint.” Chest. 11: 220-226.
Sappington, S.W. and G.O. Favorite. “Sulfanilamide and Meningitis.” Annals of Internal
Medicine 13: S76-97.

33

Schuman, Andrew J. 2003. “A Concise History of Antimicrobial Therapy (Serendipity and All).”
Contemporary Pediatrics. 20(10): 66-85
Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson. 2003. Introduction to Econometrics. Boston, MA:
Pearson Education, Inc.
Thomasson, Melissa A., and Jaret Treber 2008. “From Home to Hospital: The Evolution of
Childbirth in the United States, 1927-1940.” Explorations in Economic History 45(1): 76-99.
Weinshilboum, Richard M. 1987. “The Therapeutic Revolution.” Clinical Pharamcology &
Therapeutics 42(5): 481-4.
WHO, UNICEF and UNFPA. 2004. Maternal Mortality in 2000: Estimates Developed by WHO,
UNICEF and UNFPA. Geneva: World Health Organization.

34

7
6.8
6.6

Lo g m o rt ality rat e

7.2

7.4

Figure 1: Total mortality rate per 100,000 (in logs), 1920 – 1950

1920

1925

1930

1935

35

1940

1945

1950

Figure 2: Mortality trends (in logs) for treated diseases, 1920 – 1950

L og M M R

4.5

5

5.5

6

6.5

a. Log maternal mortality ratio (deaths per 100,000 live births)

1920

1925

1930

1935

1940

1945

1950

4.5
4
3.5
3

L o g m orta lity ra t e

5

5.5

b. Log influenza and pneumonia mortality rate per 100,000

1920

1925

1930

1935

36

1940

1945

1950

Figure 2, continued: Mortality trends (in logs) for treated diseases, 1920 – 1950

-1
-2
-3
-4
1920

1925

1930

1935

1940

1945

1950

-.5

0

.5

1

1.5

d. Log meningitis mortality rate per 100,000

L og m o rta lity ra te

L og m o rta lity ra te

0

1

c. Log scarlet fever mortality rate per 100,000

1920

1925

1930

1935

37

1940

1945

1950

Figure 3: Mortality trends (in logs) for control disease

4.5
4
3

3.5

L o g of m o rt ality rat e

5

Log tuberculosis mortality rate per 100,000

1920

1925

1930

1935

1940

1945

1950

Figure 4: Mortality trends (in logs) for chronic diseases

3.2
3

3.1

5
4.5
1920

1925

1930

1935

Cancer
Diabetes

38

1940

Heart

1945

1950

Diabetes

5.5

3.3

6

3.4

Log mortality rate (per 100,000) for cancer, diabetes, and heart disease

6.4
6.2
5.8

6

L o g m orta lity m orta lity rati o

6.6

Figure 5: City and state trends in MMR (in logs), 1928 – 1940

1928

1930

1932

1934

City

1936

1938

1940

State

Note: The city series is the unweighted mean of the city-level observations and the state series is the
unweighted mean of the state-level observations.

39

Figure 6: Mortality trends (in logs) by race, 1920 – 1950

4

5

6

7

8

a: Log maternal mortality ratio, by race

1920

1925

1930

1935
White

1940

1945

1950

Black

3

4

5

6

b: Log influenza and pneumonia mortality rate, by race

1920

1925

1930

1935
W hite

40

1940
Black

1945

1950

Figure 6, continued: Mortality trends (in logs) by race, 1920 – 1950

-4

-2

0

2

c: Log scarlet fever mortality rate, by race

1920

1925

1930

1935
White

1940

1945

1950

Black

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

5.5

d: Log tuberculosis mortality rate, by race

1920

1925

1930

1935
White

41

1940
Black

1945

1950

Table 1: National and state-level mortality statistics (deaths per 100,000)
Panel A: National mortality rates
1920

1950

Panel B: Avg. state mortality rate

1925 to 1936

1937 to 1943

1925 to 1936

1937 to 1943

S.D.
66

Mean
1065

S.D.
60

Mean

S.D.

Mean

S.D.

All-cause mortality

1424

842

Mean
1245

Treated diseases
MMR
Pneumonia/influenza
Scarlet Fever

809
213
3.0

86
26
0.02

655
122
1.9

51
20
0.12

361
75
0.6

94
22
0.4

655
118
2.2

153
30
1.6

361
79
0.7

144
26
0.7

Control diseases
TB

119

22

72

13

47

4

70

43

46

24

Chronic diseases
Diabetes
Heart disease
Cancer

20
204
105

14
308
125

23
255
115

2
15
2

25
286
119

1
7
1

19
205
95

7
64
30

23
264
110

8
78
33

39 48

No. of states
By race
MMR - White
MMR - Black
Pneumonia/influenza
- White
Pneumonia/influenza
- Black
Scarlet Fever - White
Scarlet Fever - Black
TB - White
TB - Black

48

760
1281

61
222

585
1068

39
111

312
711

83
139

644
1139

149
322

358
739

112
214

204

23

112

19

67

20

123

19

75

22

319
3.4
0.5
105
274

57
0.2
0.0
17
68

219
2.3
0.6
59
195

34
0.2
0.1
12
26

144
0.7
0.3
37
133

40
0.4
0.08
4
11

241
1.8
0.7
72
219

69
1.1
0.8
19
57

141
0.5
0.3
38
125

40
0.5
0.4
12
40

No. of states
na
na
na
na
na
na
14-18
18
Notes: In Panel A, national mortality rates are age-adjusted (using the U.S. population in 1940 as the standard),
except for MMR (maternal deaths per 100,000 births). The national and state summary statistics in Panels A and B
are for years and states included in the regression analysis presented in Section 5 and 6. The analysis in Section 5
includes all states; the race analysis in Section 6 includes 18 states with black populations greater than 5% of the
total state population. The state-level MMR data by race is only available for 10 of the 18 states in 1925; mortality
rates for other causes by race are available for 14 of the 18 states in 1925.

42

Table 2: Testing for year of trend break in national mortality series

All-cause mortality
Diseases treated with sulfa drugs
MMR
Pneumonia/influenza
Scarlet Fever

Break year

Test statistic

1937

2.97

1937***
1938
1937***

29.23
3.09
17.34

Control disease
TB
1942
1.64
Notes: Dependent variable is the first difference of the log mortality rate.
Trend breaks are estimated using the Quandt Likelihood Ratio test for a
single trend break between 1933 and 1942, using age-adjusted mortality
data from 1920 to 1950 for all diseases except MMR. Newey-West
standard errors are used, allowing for autocorrelation in the error term for
up to two lags. The test statistic is the maximal F-statistic from a sequence
of Chow tests for each possible break date in the test window. Critical
values were obtained from Andrews (2003).

43

Table 3: Effect of sulfa drugs using national-level time series by disease, 1925-1943
All-cause

Post-1937

MMR

Pneumonia/influenza

(1)

(2)

(1)

(2)

-0.0244

-0.00747

-0.304**

-0.148***

(0.023)

(0.019)

(0.140)

(0.032)

Year*Post-1937

(1)

Scarlet fever

TB

(2)

(1)

(2)

(1)

(2)

-0.163

-0.037

-0.862**

-0.495***

0.0151

0.0064

(0.120)

(0.076)

(0.360)

(0.100)

(0.025)

(0.022)

-0.012**

-0.108***

-0.087***

-0.254***

0.0061

(0.005)

(0.009)

(0.026)

(0.033)

(0.006)

Observations
19
19
19
19
19
19
19
19
19
19
Notes: Estimates are based on 1925 to 1943 national-level mortality data. Newey-West standard errors are computed, allowing for autocorrelation in the error term
for up to two lags.
* p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01

44

Table 4: Effect of sulfa drugs on mortality for "treated" diseases, 1937 - 1943
MMR

Dependent variable = ln (mortality)

Pneumonia/influenza

(1)

Scarlet fever

(2)

(1)

(2)

(1)

(2)

-0.163***
(0.041)

-0.178
(0.176)

-0.0521
(0.126)

-0.877**
(0.337)

-0.510***
(0.110)

Panel A: National-level data, all years, 1925-1943
Treated*Post-1937

-0.319**
(0.118)

Treated*Year*Post-1937

Observations
R-squared

-0.108***
(0.009)
38
0.99

-0.087***
(0.031)

-0.254***
(0.036)

38
1.00

38
0.91

38
0.95

38
0.99

38
1.00

-0.144***
(0.035)

-0.143
(0.169)

-0.0413
(0.128)

-0.733***
(0.267)

-0.488***
(0.107)

Panel B: State-level, all years, 1925-1943
Treated*Post-1937

-0.281**
(0.108)

Treated*Year*Post-1937

Observations
R-sq.

-0.103***
(0.010)
1736
0.999

-0.0767**
(0.032)

-0.184***
(0.036)

1736
0.999

1736
0.822

1736
0.839

1720
0.932

1720
0.940

-0.125**
(0.054)

-0.0722
(0.093)

-0.0258
(0.084)

-0.713***
(0.255)

-0.510***
(0.129)

Panel C: State-level, excluding 1935 to 1937
Treated*Post-1937

Treated*Year*Post-1937

-0.288**
(0.134)

-0.117***
(0.013)

-0.0333
(0.025)

-0.146***
(0.037)

Observations
1448
1448
1448
1448
1432
1432
R-sq.
0.999
0.999
0.841
0.847
0.946
0.950
Notes: "Treated" diseases refer to maternal mortality, pneumonia/influenza, and scarlet fever. Tuberculosis
serves as the control disease. Post-1937 is equal to one for years from 1937 to 1943. National estimates (Panel
A) are based on age-adjusted national mortality data from 1925 to 1943; robust standard errors are shown in
parentheses. State estimates (Panels B and C) are based on 1925 to 1943 state-level mortality data; model (1)
includes the main effect of Treated, state*post fixed effects, a continuous year variable, and its interaction with
Treated and model (2) additionally includes state*post fixed effects and their interaction with the continuous year
variable; robust standard errors, clustered by disease-year, are shown in parentheses. In the state analysis, 16
state/year observations are dropped from the scarlet fever model due to zero mortality from scarlet fever.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

45

Table 5: Urban-state differences in the effect of sulfa drugs on MMR
Dependent variable=ln(MMR)

(1)

(2)

-0.158***
(0.042)

-0.093*
(0.048)

Panel A: All years, 1928-1940
Urban*Post-1937

Urban*Year*Post-1937

-0.075***
(0.022)

Observations
R-squared

3966
0.939

3966
0.942

-0.329***
(0.063)

-0.298***
(0.083)

Panel B: Excluding 1935 to 1937
Urban*Post-1937

Urban*Year*Post-1937

-0.024
(0.033)

Observations
3038
3038
R-squared
0.941
0.943
Notes: Estimates are based on 1928 to 1940 mortality data for cities with
populations of at least 25,000 (as of 1930) and for states. Post-1937
equals one for years from 1937 to 1940. Model (1) includes the main
effect of Urban, state*post fixed effects, and a continuous year variable
and its interaction with Urban. Model (2) additionally includes state*post
fixed effects and their interaction with the continuous year variable.
Robust standard errors, clustered by disease-year, are shown in
parentheses.
* p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01

46

Table 6: Racial differences in the effect of sulfa drugs on mortality, 1937-1943
MMR

Pneumonia/influenza

Scarlet fever

(1)

(2)

(1)

(2)

(1)

(2)

-0.301**
(0.115)

-0.169***
(0.044)

-0.230
(0.183)

-0.104
(0.122)

-0.804***
(0.221)

-0.582***
(0.164)

Panel A: Whites
Treated*Post-1937

Treated*Year*Post-1937

Obs.
R-sq.
Panel B: Blacks
Treated*Post-1937

-0.109***
(0.010)
644
0.998

652
0.856

652
0.883

539
0.976

539
0.981

-0.133
(0.096)

-0.029
(0.061)

-0.115
(0.165)

-0.013
(0.132)

-0.134
(0.187)

-0.124
(0.155)

-0.081***
(0.013)

Obs.
644
R-sq.
0.997
Panel C: Fully interacted model

Treated*Year*Post-1937*Black

-0.155***
(0.032)

644
0.998

Treated*Year*Post-1937

Treated*Post-1937*Black

-0.094***
(0.027)

0.168**
(0.068)

-0.076***
(0.027)

-0.032
(0.032)

644
0.997

652
0.788

652
0.826

500
0.983

500
0.984

0.140**
(0.052)

0.115**
(0.052)

0.091**
(0.043)

0.671***
(0.211)

0.458***
(0.157)

0.028***
(0.010)

0.018**
(0.009)

0.123**
(0.048)

Obs.
1288
1288
1304
1304
1039
1039
R-sq.
0.997
0.998
0.918
0.933
0.981
0.983
Notes: Treated diseases refer to maternal mortality, pneumonia/flu, and scarlet fever. Tuberculosis serves as
the control disease. Estimates are based on 1925 to 1943 state-level mortality data. Only states with black
populations greater than or equal to 5% of the total population in 1936 are included (18 states for MMR and
pneumonia/influenza models). In three states, MMR data by race are available four years later than
pneumonia/influenza and scarlet fever data by race, which results in a total of 8 fewer state/year/race
observations in the MMR models for each race. In the scarlet fever models, six states are dropped from the
analysis due to a large proportion of year/state observations with zero mortality for blacks. In Panels A and B,
Model (1) includes the main effect of Treated, state*post fixed effects, a continuous year variable, and its
interaction with Treated; Model (2) additionally includes state*post fixed effects and their interaction with the
continuous year variable. In Panel C, Models (1) and (2) include each of the same variables as in the previous
panels plus their interaction with Black. Robust standard errors, clustered by disease-year, are in parentheses.
* p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01

47

Table A1: Robustness check: difference-in-difference regressions, dropping 1935-1936
MMR

Dependent variable = ln (mortality)
(1)

Scarlet fever
(2)

(1)

(2)

-0.170***
(0.042)

-0.416
(0.330)

-0.391***
(0.114)

Panel A: Effect of sulfa drugs on mortality (Table 4)
Treated*Post-1937

-0.183
(0.147)

Treated*Year*Post-1937

Obs.
R-sq.

-0.106***
(0.010)
1544
0.999

1544
0.999

-0.173***
(0.036)
1528
0.941

1528
0.948

Panel B: Urban-state differences in the effect of sulfa drugs on the MMR (Table 5)
Urban*Post-1937

-0.201***
(0.055)

Urban*Year*Post-1937

-0.157***
(0.049)
-0.084***
(0.026)

Observations
3348
3348
R-squared
0.94
0.94
Notes: Panel A estimates are based on 1925 to 1943 state-level mortality data. Model (1)
includes the main effect of Treated, state*post fixed effects, a continuous year variable, and its
interaction with Treated; Model (2) additionally includes state*post fixed effects and their
interaction with the continuous year variable. Panel B estimates are based on 1928 to 1940
city-level data and state data. Model (1) includes the main effect of Urban, state*post fixed
effects, a continuous year variable, and its interaction with Urban; Model (2) additionally
includes state*post fixed effects and their interaction with the continuous year variable. For all
regressions, robust standard errors, clustered by disease-year, are shown in parentheses.
* p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01

48

Table A2: Robustness check: Racial differences, dropping 1935-1937
MMR

Pneumonia/influenza

Scarlet fever

(1)

(2)

(1)

(2)

(1)

(2)

-0.329**
(0.142)

-0.176**
(0.069)

-0.214
(0.130)

-0.127
(0.108)

-1.281***
(0.307)

-0.971***
(0.155)

Panel A: Whites
Treated*Post-1937

Treated*Year*Post-1937

Obs.
R-sq.

-0.125***
(0.015)

-0.0615**
(0.024)

-0.211***
(0.037)

536
0.998

536
0.998

544
0.876

544
0.885

449
0.978

449
0.983

-0.098
(0.136)

0.025
(0.079)

-0.053
(0.106)

-0.011
(0.093)

-0.470**
(0.201)

-0.377
(0.226)

Panel B: Blacks
Treated*Post-1937

Treated*Year*Post-1937

Obs.
R-sq.

-0.092***
(0.015)

-0.030
(0.020)

-0.060
(0.045)

536
0.997

536
0.997

544
0.846

544
0.859

417
0.983

417
0.985

0.231**
(0.096)

0.201**
(0.081)

0.161**
(0.072)

0.116
(0.069)

0.812**
(0.342)

0.594**
(0.289)

Panel C: Fully interacted model
Treated*Post-1937*Black

Treated*Year*Post-1937*Black

0.0327**
(0.015)

0.0318**
(0.012)

0.151**
(0.069)

Obs.
1072
1072
1088
1088
866
866
R-sq.
0.997
0.998
0.935
0.940
0.982
0.985
Notes: Treated diseases refer to maternal mortality, pneumonia/flu, and scarlet fever. Tuberculosis serves as
the control disease. Estimates are based on 1925 to 1943 state-level mortality data. Only states with black
populations greater than or equal to 5% of the total population in 1936 are included (18 states for MMR and
pneumonia/influenza models). In three states, MMR data by race are available four years later than
pneumonia/influenza and scarlet fever data by race, which results in a total of 8 fewer state/year/race
observations in the MMR models for each race. In the scarlet fever models, six states are dropped from the
analysis due to a large proportion of year/state observations with zero mortality for blacks. In Panels A and B,
Model (1) includes the main effect of Treated, state*post fixed effects, a continuous year variable, and its
interaction with Treated; Model (2) additionally includes state*post fixed effects and their interaction with the
continuous year variable. In Panel C, Models (1) and (2) include the same variables as in the previous panels
plus their interaction with Black. Robust standard errors, clustered by disease-year, are in parentheses.
* p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01

49

