                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   WAR AND RELATEDNESS

                                          Enrico Spolaore
                                         Romain Wacziarg

                                        Working Paper 15095
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15095


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2009




We are grateful to Don Cox, Klaus Desmet, Rajeev Dehejia, Jim Fearon, Michelle Garfinkel, Yannis
Ioannides, Michael Klein, Philippe Martin, Deborah Menegotto, Massimo Morelli, Daniele Paserman,
Vickie Sullivan and seminar participants at Stanford University and UCLA for helpful comments.
We gratefully acknowledge financial support from Stanford University's Presidential Fund for Innovation
in International Studies and from UCLA's Center for International Business Education and Research.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Enrico Spolaore and Romain Wacziarg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
War and Relatedness
Enrico Spolaore and Romain Wacziarg
NBER Working Paper No. 15095
June 2009
JEL No. F51,F52,F54,F55,F59,H56,N10

                                             ABSTRACT

We develop a theory of interstate conflict in which the degree of genealogical relatedness between
populations has a positive effect on their conflict propensities because more closely related populations,
on average, tend to interact more and develop more disputes over sets of common issues. We examine
the empirical relationship between the occurrence of interstate conflicts and the degree of relatedness
between countries, showing that populations that are genetically closer are more prone to go to war
with each other, even after controlling for a wide set of measures of geographic distance and other
factors that affect conflict, including measures of trade and democracy.


Enrico Spolaore
Department of Economics
Tufts University
Braker Hall 315
8 Upper Campus Road
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
enrico.spolaore@tufts.edu

Romain Wacziarg
Anderson School of Management at UCLA
C-510 Entrepreneurs Hall
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
wacziarg@ucla.edu
1        Introduction

Militarized conflicts have been among the most dramatic and costly events in human history, and
at the center of an enormous historical and political literature for centuries.1 In recent years, econo-
mists and political scientists have started to use formal theoretical tools and systematic empirical
analyses to provide insights into the determinants of conflicts and wars.2 Great progress has been
made in our understanding of the eﬀects of economic and political factors - such as trade and
democracy - on the likelihood of international conflict.3 Nonetheless, wars continue to be elusive
phenomena, and fundamental questions about their roots remain open. A key question, which has
not yet received a satisfactory empirical answer, is whether armed conflicts are more or less likely to
emerge between populations that diﬀer along cultural and historical dimensions, such as ethnicity,
language, and religion.

        In this paper we present a new theoretical approach, new data and new empirical findings
shedding light on the determinants of international conflict. We use information about human
genetic distance - a summary statistic of very long-run historical and cultural relatedness between
populations - to explore the relationship between kinship and conflict.4 Genetic distance measures

    1
        For recent salient examples, see Blainey (1988), Keegan (1984), Ferguson (2006) and Nye (2008).
    2
        Classic contributions are Schelling (1960) and Boulding (1962). More recent economic formalizations of conflict
and wars include, for example, Garfinkel (1990), Hirshleifer (1991, 1995), Skaperdas (1992), Hess and Orphanides
(1995, 2001), Jackson and Morelli (2009). Garfinkel and Skaperdas (2006) provide an overview of the economics
literature on conflict. Influential contributions by political scientists on the formal theory of conflict include Bueno de
Mesquita and Lalman (1992), Fearon (1995) and Powell (1999). Systematic empirical work on interstate conflict was
pioneerd by Wright (1942), Richardson (1960) and Singer (1972). For discussions of the recent empirical literature
on the correlates of war see Vasquez (2000) and Schneider, Barbieri and Gleditsch (2003).
    3
        The liberal peace view that trade and democracy should reduce the risk of war goes back to Montesquieu (1748)
and Kant (1795), and has been the subject of a vast literature (e.g., see Oneal and Russett, 1999a and Russett
and Oneal, 2001). Contributions on the empirics of trade and conflict include Polacheck (1980), Oneal and Russett
(1999b), Barbieri (2002), and Martin, Mayer and Thoenig (2008), among many others. On the democratic peace
hypothesis see, for example, Maoz and Russett (1993), Bueno de Mesquita et al. (1999), Gowa (2000), and Levy and
Razin (2004).
    4
        Specifically, we use measures of FST distance between human populations from Cavalli-Sforza et al. (1994).
The measure FST was first suggested by the great geneticist and statistician Sewall Wright (1950). Interestingly,
Sewall was the older brother of Quincy Wright, the professor of international law who pioneered empirical research
on conflict (Wright, 1942). According to Singer (2000): "The story has it that [Sewall] admired Quincy’s scholarship
and his preoccupation with the scourge of war but lamented the lack of methodological rigor in his work and thus


                                                            1
the diﬀerence in gene distributions between two populations, where the genes under considerations
are neutral: they change randomly and independently of selection pressure, and thus do not aﬀect
traits that directly matter for survival and fitness. Most random genetic change takes place regularly
over time, as in a molecular clock (Kimura, 1968). Consequently, genetic distance measures the time
since two populations have shared common ancestors - i.e., since they were the same population.
In other words, divergence in neutral genes provides information about lines of descent: genetic
distance is a summary measure of general relatedness between populations. Heuristically, the
concept is analogous to relatedness between individuals: two siblings are more closely related
than two cousins because they share more recent common ancestors - their parents rather than
their grandparents. Since a very large number of characteristics - including cultural traits - are
transmitted across generations over the long run, genetic distance provides a comprehensive measure
of long-term cultural and historical distance across populations.

       This paper’s main result is that, surprisingly, genetic distance reduces the risk of conflict.
Populations that are more closely related are more likely to engage in interstate conflict and wars,
even after controlling for a wide range of geographic measures, measures of linguistic and religious
distance, and other factors that aﬀect interstate conflict including trade and democracy. These
findings are consistent with a simple theoretical framework in which the degree of genealogical
relatedness between populations has a positive eﬀect on their conflict propensities, because closely
related populations, on average, tend to share common traits and preferences, to interact with
each other more, and to care about a larger set of common issues. In principle, such a conflict-
generating eﬀect could be oﬀset by countervailing forces. More closely related populations could
also have closer ideal points or could be better at coordinating on peaceful equilibria. However,
in the data these other forces, if they exist, do not seem to be strong enough to counteract the
main eﬀect stemming from the greater set of common issues arising among genetically related
populations. In a nutshell, from a long-term world-wide perspective, issues of war and peace are
(unhappy) family matters.5

introduced him to the scientific method - hence the fifteen-year project that culminated in the monumental Study of
War (1942)." We hope that the Wright brothers would appreciate our joining their two lines of research in a study
titled "War and Relatedness." The Wrights were a truly remarkable family. As explained in Stock and Trebbi (2003),
Sewall and Quincy’s father Philip Wright was the inventor of instrumental variable regression (and Sewall might have
contributed to that discovery as well).
   5
       We apologize to Leo Tolstoy for the double plagiarism.



                                                           2
       This paper builds on a large and diverse literature. Broad questions about cultural distance, re-
latedness and conflict are probably as old as wars themselves, but have received increasing attention
following the recent debate over the clash of civilizations (Huntington, 1993) and surging concerns
about ethnic conflict within and across countries. For instance, Maynes (1993, p. 5) writes: "Ani-
mosity among ethnic groups is beginning to rival the spread of nuclear weapons as the most serious
threat to peace that the world faces". Several commentators have wondered whether there may
be a general tendency towards violent confrontation between populations that are culturally and
ethnically distant. For example, Bremer (2000, p. 27), referring to evidence from social psychology,
wonders whether "cultural diﬀerences [...] should lead to misunderstandings, stereotyping, clashes
of values, and so forth, which in turn promote intercultural fights". This debate can partly be
traced back to the sociologist William G. Sumner (1906), who formulated the primordialist view
that ethnic dissimilarity between groups should be associated with war and plunder, while soci-
eties that are culturally related would tend to fight less with each other. In contrast, others have
emphasized instrumentalist views of ethnicity, implying that such diﬀerences should not be closely
correlated with inter-group conflict (e.g., Merton, 1957). A related hypothesis, proposed but not
tested by Gleditsch and Singer (1975), is that the paramount force in conflict is geographical con-
tiguity, and that, controlling for contiguity, one would not find a significant correlation between
cultural relatedness and interstate conflict (see Henderson, 1997, for a review of this debate). At
the same time, the few scholars who have attempted to estimate the eﬀects of common culture,
language or religion on international conflict have found little or no evidence that such variables are
systematically associated with a lower probability of conflict.6 In their influential study on conflict
within states, Fearon and Laitin (2003) also found no evidence that ethnically diverse states would
be more likely to experience civil conflict.

       Our results go further in casting doubts over primordialist theories, as we show not only that
their predictions are falsified when applied to interstate conflict, but that the eﬀect goes into the
opposite direction. The negative eﬀect of genetic distance holds when controlling for a vast range
of geographic measures (contiguity, geodesic distance, latitudinal and longitudinal diﬀerences, and
other measures of geographic barriers), contrary to Gleditsch and Singer’s (1975) hypothesis that

   6
       For example, see Richardson (1960, p. 296), who found no general pacifying eﬀect for either common language or
common religion, and Henderson (1997), who, controlling only for contiguity, found a negative association between a
measure of religious similarity and interstate conflict, and a positive (but insignificant) correlation between a measure
of ethnic similarity and conflict. See also the more recent contribution of Gartzke and Gleditsch (2006).


                                                           3
geographic proximity should be the predominant force in international conflict. It seems that
the paramount eﬀect attributed by some scholars to geographic proximity may in part be due
to its correlation with cultural and historical relatedness. Once genetic distance is taken into
account, geographic variables have smaller eﬀects (although they remain significant). The eﬀect
of genetic distance is even higher - and the eﬀects of geography smaller - when we instrument for
modern genetic distance using genetic distance between ancestor populations of current countries
as of 1500, to account for measurement error and possible endogeneity issues due to post-1500
migrations. The eﬀect of genetic distance is also robust when accounting for other measures of
cultural similarity, such as religious and linguistic distance, and for diﬀerences in income per capita
across countries. Interestingly, religious distance also reduces the likelihood of conflict. This would
be hard to rationalize within a clash-of-civilizations view, but is consistent with the predictions of
our common-issues model.

      Interesting results also emerge when adding measures of trade and democracy, to capture the
central predictions of liberal peace theory: extensive bilateral trade links and the extent of democ-
racy among countries in a pair should reduce their propensity to go to war. Not only are the eﬀect
of relatedness robust to controlling for trade and democracy variables, but the eﬀects of trade
and democracy on conflict hold even after controlling for relatedness. We are therefore able to
address one of the most important criticisms of the empirical work on this subject: observers who
believe that culturally related countries fight less with each other have often questioned whether
there is a direct causal link going from trade and democracy to lower conflict, on the ground that
culturally more similar societies also tend to trade more with each other and to share more similar
political arrangements (such as democratic regimes). Following this reasoning, the observed low
level of conflict might not be the direct eﬀect of trade and democracy, but rather the outcome
of deeper cultural similarities (for discussions of this debate see, for example, Schneider, Barbieri
and Gleditsch, 2003). In contrast, our estimates provide strong evidence that the premise that
closely related populations fight less with each other is incorrect, and hence cannot account for the
pacifying eﬀects of bilateral trade and democracy. In sum, our findings validate the liberal view
concerning the pacifying eﬀects of trade and democracy.

      This paper is the first, to our knowledge, to study the relationship between genetic distance
and the likelihood of international conflict and wars.7 It is part of a small but growing empirical

  7
      In general, there are few formal or empirical analyses of the relations between war and genetic variables. Con-



                                                          4
literature on the connections between long-term relatedness and societal outcomes. In particular,
while human genetic distance is not commonly used in the social sciences, recent work has pointed
out to its usefulness and predictive power in economics and related areas. Spolaore and Wacziarg
(2009) document the relation between genetic distance and diﬀerences in income per capita across
countries, and provide an economic interpretation in terms of diﬀusion of economic development
from the world technological frontier. Desmet et al. (2007) find a close relationship between
genetic distance and cultural diﬀerences measured by the World Values Survey, which supports
our interpretation of genetic distance as a broad measure of diﬀerences in intergenerationally-
transmitted traits, including cultural characteristics.8 More broadly, our paper is related to the
evolutionary literature on cultural transmission of traits and preferences (e.g., Cavalli-Sforza and
Feldman, 1981; Boyd and Richerson, 1985; Richerson and Boyd, 2004; for economic analyses of
cultural transmission, see for instance Bisin and Verdier, 2000, 2001).

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a stylized model of conflict
and relatedness (an extension is included in Appendix 1). Section 3 introduces our data and
methodology. Section 4 discusses the empirical findings. Section 5 concludes.


2        A Model of Conflict and Relatedness

War is a very complex and multi-faceted phenomenon, and the relationship between conflict and
long-term relatedness is also likely to be quite complex. That’s exactly why it is useful to address
this topic with the simplest possible framework we can design, keeping in mind that the main
goal of our theoretical exercise is not to provide a complete and realistic description of actual
interstate wars, but to obtain clear, testable implications that can shed light on the facts we
will document in our empirical section. Therefore, in this section we present a stylized model

tributions by economists are Hirshleifer (1998), who provided a theoretical discussion of the evolutionary motives for
warfare, including the "aﬃliative instinct" (partially related to the primordialist view), and, more recently, Bowles
(2009), who studies whether warfare among ancestral hunters-gathers may have aﬀected the evolution of group-
beneficial behavior.
    8
        Desmet et al. (2007) find that European populations that are genetically closer give more similar answers to
a broad set of 430 questions about norms, values and cultural characteristics, included in the 2005 World Values
Suvey sections on perceptions of life, family, religion and morals. They also find that the correlation between
genetic distance and diﬀerences in cultural values remains positive and significant after controlling for linguistic and
geographic distances.



                                                           5
of conflict, which captures the interrelations among international disputes, probability of violent
conflict and relatedness in a crude but direct way, abstracting from unnecessary complications
while highlighting the simple logic of the main mechanisms. In 2.1 we specify states’ preferences
over sets of issues, and define the concepts of common issues and disputes between states. In 2.2
we model states’ choices over war and peace, and derive the equilibrium conditions under which
disputes are resolved peacefully or violently. In 2.3 we link current preferences over issues to
intergenerational transmissions of characteristics, and derive the relation between probability of
conflict and relatedness.


2.1      Preferences and Common Issues

Consider two sovereign states (1 and 2), facing a set of issues M .9 Each issue k ∈ M can take
values x(k) ∈ X(k), where M and X(k) are sets of real numbers. Each state i’s utility function is:
                                  Z
                           Ui = −      αi (k)|x(k) − x∗i (k)|dk − ci                          (1)
                                                k∈M

where x(k) is the actual outcome for issue k, x∗i (k) is state i’s most preferred outcome, αi (k) ≥ 0 is
the weight that state i attributes to issue k, and ci denotes net costs from conflict (which are zero
if disputes are solved peacefully, positive otherwise). We introduce the following straightforward
definitions:

      Definition 1

      Issue k is a common issue between the two states if both states care about issue k - that is, if
and only if α1 (k) > 0 and α2 (k) > 0.

      Definition 2

      A common issue k is disputed when the two states prefer diﬀerent outcomes x∗1 (k) 6= x∗2 (k),
where ∆(k) ≡ |x∗1 (k) − x∗2 (k)| denotes the diﬀerence between ideal outcomes. We say that the two
states face a dispute when one or more common issues are disputed.


2.2      The Resolution of Disputes

Disputes between the two states are resolved either peacefully or violently. When a dispute is
resolved peacefully, either state bears conflict costs (ci = 0, i = 1, 2), and the outcome for each

  9
      For simplicity we treat a state - or, equivalently, its government - as a unitary agent.



                                                             6
disputed issue k is:
                                             x(k) = βx∗1 (k) + (1 − β)x∗2 (k)                                            (2)

where β denotes state 1’s bargaining power in a peaceful dispute, with 0 ≤ β ≤ 1. In contrast, if a
violent conflict occurs the winner sets all disputed issues according to its preferences. Let P denote
the probability that state 1 will win in a violent conflict and set x(k) = x∗1 (k) for all k ∈ M , while
with probability 1 − P state 2 will win and set x(k) = x∗2 (k).10 Therefore, the expected outcome
of a violent dispute for each k is:

                                             x(k) = P x∗1 (k) + (1 − P )x∗2 (k)                                          (3)

Each state can choose whether to "start a conflict" (strategy C) or "not to start a conflict" (strategy
N C). Peace results if and only if both states choose N C, in which case all issues are settled
peacefully, and the payoﬀs are:
                                                               Z
                                    U1 (NC, N C) = −                    α1 (k)(1 − β)∆(k)dk                              (4)
                                                                k∈M
                                                                    Z
                                       U2 (N C, N C) = −                   α2 (k)β∆(k)dk                                 (5)
                                                                     k∈M

If both states choose C, P = π, with 0 ≤ π ≤ 1, and ci = ψi > 0, and payoﬀs are:
                                        Z
                          U1 (C, C) = −     α1 (k)(1 − π)∆(k)dk − ψ 1                                                    (6)
                                                       k∈M
                                                           Z
                                       U2 (C, C) = −                 α2 (k)π∆(k)dk − ψ 2                                 (7)
                                                           k∈M

If state 1 chooses C while state 2 chooses N C, we assume P = π + σ 1 with 0 < σ 1 ≤ (1− π). σ 1
captures the increased probability of winning that results from a first-mover’s advantage, in the
tradition of Schelling (1960). The costs of conflict are c1 = φ1 ≥ 0 and c2 = φ02 ≥ ψ 2 ,11 and payoﬀs
are:                                               Z
                               U1 (C, N C) = −                 α1 (k)(1 − π − σ 1 )∆(k)dk − φ1                           (8)
                                                    k∈M
                                                       Z
                                                                                              0
                                 U2 (C, N C) = −                   α2 (k)(π + σ 1 )∆(k)dk − φ2                           (9)
                                                       k∈M

  10
       Since utility functions are linear, we will not distinguish between ex-ante (expected) outcomes and ex-post (actual)
outcomes in our notation, and denote both with x(k).
  11
       This assumption means, quite reasonably, that when state 2 enters into a conflict "unwillingly," it will face conflict
costs at least as high as if it had decided to start the conflict willingly (i.e., if it had selected C rather than NC).



                                                                    7
Analogous equations hold for U1 (N C, C) and U2 (N C, C).12

       If one state plays C, the other state is better oﬀ to play C rather than N C, given that σ i > 0
and φ0i ≥ ψ i , which implies:

       Remark 1

       (C, C) is a Nash equilibrium for all values of the parameters.

       However, (C, C) may or may not be the unique Nash equilibrium. If (C, C) is the unique Nash
equilibrium, war occurs with certainty. If (N C, N C) is also a Nash equilibrium, war may be avoided
if both states coordinate on such peaceful equilibrium. Therefore, our model is consistent with
Fearon’s (1995) discussion of war as emerging from an inability to commit to a Pareto-superior
outcome. In our framework both states would be better oﬀ if each could commit to play N C,
but they can do that credibly only if (N C, N C) is also a Nash equilibrium. By substituting
U1 (N C, N C) ≥ U1 (C, N C) and U2 (N C, N C) ≥ U2 (N C, C) with the respective expressions above,
we have:

       Remark 2

       The peaceful outcome (N C, N C) is a Nash equilibrium if and only if:
                                              Z
                                (π − β + σ1 )      α1 (k)∆(k)dk ≤ φ1                                         (10)
                                                       k∈M
                                                       Z
                                      (β − π + σ 2 )         α2 (k)∆(k)dk ≤ φ2                               (11)
                                                       k∈M

These conditions can be simplified by assuming:

       (i) symmetry (σ 1 = σ 2 and φ1 = φ2 ).

       (ii) peaceful bargaining "under the shadow of war," (that is, a state’s bargaining power depends
on its strength should negotiations break up), which implies β = π.13
                                  φ
       To simplify notation, define  ≡ ω. The parameter ω captures the relative cost of starting a
                                  σ
war, increasing in the cost of going to war (φ) and decreasing in the temptation to start a war (σ).
Under (i) and (ii) the results in Remark 2 can be re-written as:

       Remark 3
  12
    When state 1 chooses NC and state 2 chooses C, P = π − σ2 , with 0 < σ2 ≤ π, c1 = φ01 and c2 = φ2 , and payoﬀs
                   U                                                 U
are U1 (NC, C) = − k∈M α2k (1 − π + σ2 )∆(k)dk − φ01 U2 (NC, C) = − k∈M α2k (π − σ2 )∆(k)dk − φ2
  13
       This is a common assumption in the literature. For example, see Alesina and Spolaore (2005).


                                                           8
       The peaceful outcome (N C, N C) is a Nash equilibrium if and only if:
                                        Z
                                  max{       αi (k)∆(k)dk − ω} ≤ 0                                                 (12)
                                        i=1,2   k∈M
                      R
In contrast, if maxi { k∈M αi (k)∆(k)dk − ω} > 0, conflict (C, C) is the unique Nash equilibrium.

       Therefore, for a given relative cost of starting a war (measured by ω), violent conflict is more
likely to be the unique Nash equilibrium the larger are the set of common issues under dispute, and
the extent the two states care about those issues. But what is the probability of observing actual
conflict between states, and how does it depend on long-term relatedness? We will address these
questions in the rest of this section.


2.3       Relatedness and the Probability of Conflict

So far we have taken the set of common issues under dispute as given. Now we will consider the
relationship between common issues and long-term connections between populations. The general
idea is that if preferences over issues are persistent across time, and current populations inherit
such preferences with variation from their ancestors, on average populations that are more closely
related will be more likely to share a larger range of common issues.

       A first step is to assume that each state cares about a mass R of issues denoted by a compact
set of points on the real line: specifically, state i cares about all issues between point ai and point
bi > ai , with bi − ai = R, but does not care about issues outside that range. In addition, assume
that all relevant issues receive equal weight α > 0 - that is, αi (k) = α > 0 if and only if ai ≤ k ≤ bi ,
while αi (k) = 0 otherwise. These assumptions allow to characterize the set of issues that state i
cares about by a single real number vi (to fix ideas, the mid-point in state i’s set of relevant issues),
which we can interpret as that state’s type or fundamental characteristics:

                                                               R        R
                                                vi = ai +        = bi −                                            (13)
                                                               2        2

Therefore, a state of type vi has the following preferences:14
                                                Z   vi + R
                                                         2
                                      Ui = −                 α|x(k) − x∗i (k)|dk − ci                              (14)
                                                 vi − R
                                                      2


  14
       In this simplified analysis we assume that each state is a unified agent, formed by one population with homoge-
neous characteristics vj . In principle, two states can be of the same type - that is, they may care about the identical
set of issues. So we abstract from the possibility that states may include mixed populations with diﬀerent preferences
over issues (however, population heterogeneity within states will be taken into account in the empirical analysis).


                                                                9
Let V (i, j) ≡ |vi − vj | denote the distance between state i and state j in their fundamental charac-
teristics.15 We are now ready to consider conflicts between states over such common issues.


2.3.1       Basic Setting

In what follows we derive the probability of conflict under two simplifying assumptions (we present
an extension relaxing Assumption 1 at the end of this section, while Assumption 2 is relaxed in
Appendix 1):

       Assumption 1

       The extent of disagreement over all issues is constant and normalized to one - that is, ∆(k) = 1
for all k.

       Assumption 2

       When (N C, N C) is a Nash equilibrium, the two states will always coordinate on the peaceful
equilibrium (no coordination failure).16

       An economic interpretation of Assumption 1 is in terms of conflict over rival issues. A good is
rival when (a) any increase in a state’s use of that good reduces the extent of the other state’s use,
and (b) each state’s preferred outcome is to have full and exclusive use of the good. In such context,
outcome x(k) can be conveniently defined as the extent to which state 1 can use the good once the
dispute has been resolved, so that x∗1 (k) = 1 denotes state 1’s ideal outcome (state 1 has full and
exclusive use), and x∗2 (k) = 0 denotes state 2’s ideal outcome (state 2 has full and exclusive use).
Henceforth, ∆(k) = 1 for all rival issues. For instance, rival issues may arise when both states value
the same rival good (say, a religious/cultural center or an oﬀshore natural resource) because they
have similar preferences over consumption and/or share similar production technologies. Rivalry
may also emerge when the two states interact extensively with each other over an international

  15
       Our theoretical framework abstracts from explicit geographical considerations: we study the eﬀects of relatedness
on conflict taking geographical factors as given, i.e. when considering the comparative statics of genetic distance on
conflict, we are implicitly looking at states that are at a constant geographic distance from each other. However,
empirically, geography and genetic distance are connected, and both have eﬀects on the probability of conflict.
We explicitly address these points in the empirical section by controlling for a vast range of geographical distance
measures.
  16
       This assumption is equivalent to limiting the analysis to Coalition-Proof Nash Equilibria, as defined in Bernheim,
Peleg and Whinston (1987). .



                                                            10
policy issue (e.g., labor flows), and each state wants to impose its exclusive control over that issue.
States may also interact with each other over non-rival issues. For example, both states may care
about a common set of international public goods (security against terrorist threats, regulation of
pollution or other externalities), where the use by one state would not reduce the other’s ability to
use the same public good, but may disagree about the ideal features of the public good, captured
by x(k) in our simplified setting. Such more general case where ∆(k) may diﬀer from 1 is analyzed
at the end of this section, while right now we focus on the simpler case ∆(k) = 1.

       How does the probability of violent conflict depend on the distance in fundamental character-
istics V (i, j)? First of all, conflict will never occur if V (i, j) > R. This captures the obvious but
important point that two states which are very distant in the set of issues they care about will have
no reason to fight. In contrast, if V (i, j) < R they will share a range of common issues, and we
have the following:

       Remark 4

       Violent conflict (C, C) is the unique equilibrium if and only if:17

                                                  α[R − V (i, j)] > ω                                                (15)

This simple inequality illustrates a key result: for a given range R of common issues, populations
which are more distant in preferences over relevant issues are less likely to go to war with each
other. In particular, if ω is a random variable distributed uniformly between 0 and ω, we have                         18


       Proposition 1

       The probability of conflict between state i and state j is: 19

                                                                 α
                                          Prob(Conf lict) =        [R − V (i, j)]                                    (16)
                                                                 ω
  17                                                               R        R
    For vi ≤ vj , the common range includes all points between vj − and vi + , and (C, C) is the unique equilibrium
                                                                   2        2
   U v +R
for v i− R2 αdk > ω, (an immediate application of Remark 3). By the same token, if vi ≥ vj , (C, C) is the unique
      j  2
                 U v +R
equilibrium for v j− R2 αdk > ω.
                    i   2

  18                                                                                α
       Without loss of generality, we assume values of the parameters such that       [R − V (i, j)] ≤ 1.
                                                                                    ω
  19
       That is, conflict is increasing in the extent states care about specific common issues (α) and the range of common
issues each state cares about (R), decreasing in the relative costs to start a conflict (ω), and decreasing in the distance
between the two states’ fundamental characteristics V (i, j).




                                                            11
We now go a step further and derive the relation between probability of conflict and explicit mea-
sures of long-term relatedness (genetic distance). If preferences are transmitted intergenerationally
across populations (biologically and/or culturally) with variation, populations that are more closely
related will be more likely to care about the same issues. This can be illustrated with a simple
model of vertical transmission of characteristics. Assume that in period t a population i inherits its
type vit from an ancestor population with type vit−1 , with variation captured by a random shock
εit :
                                                    vit = vit−1 + εit                                            (17)

Without loss of generality, consider only two periods, and assume that εit follow a simple ran-
dom walk, taking value ε > 0 with probability 1/2 and −ε with probability 1/2 (with shocks
independently distributed across diﬀerent populations). Let g(i, j) ("genetic distance") denote the
number of periods since two populations have shared common ancestors (in the empirical analysis,
we use FST genetic distance, a measure that is approximately linear in the time since two pop-
ulations shared their last common ancestors). Populations at g(i, j) = 1 will be at V (i, j) = 0
with probability 1/2 and V (i, j) = 2ε with probability 1/2, and hence at expected distance
E{V (i, j) | g(i, j) = 1} = ε. By contrast, two populations at g(i, j) = 2 (that is, sharing a
two-period-old last-common-ancestor population) will be at a higher expected distance E{V (i, j) |
              1      1    3
g(i, j) = 2} = 2ε + 4ε = ε. Hence:
              2      8    2
        Remark 5

        Expected distance in inherited characteristics V (i, j) is increasing in genetic distance g(i, j):
                                                                                        ε
                           E{V (i, j) | g(i, j) = 2} − E{V (i, j) | g(i, j) = 1} =        >0                     (18)
                                                                                        2
An immediate implication of Proposition 1 and Remark 5 is that genetic distance g(i, j) is inversely
related to their expected probability of conflict:20

        Corollary 1

        The expected probability of conflict between state i and state j is decreasing in genetic distance
g(i, j):
                                                                                                  εα
                E[Prob(Conf lict) | g(i, j) = 2] − E[Prob(Conf lict) | g(i, j) = 1] = −              <0          (19)
                                                                                                  2ω
   20
        The equation in Corollary 1 is derived under the assumption that the parameters are such that V (i, j) < R for
all possible realizations of the shocks. The eﬀect of genetic distance g(i, j) on the probability of conflict could be
even higher if V (i, j) > R - and hence no conflict were to occur - for some realizations of the shocks.


                                                           12
Corollary 1 is our central theoretical result, which we test directly in the empirical section. Even
though this result is obtained under a series of simplifications and abstractions, it highlights the
general logic of the relation among common issues, interactions across states, long-term relatedness,
and probability of conflict. As we will see, this result is indeed consistent with the empirical
evidence.


2.3.2       Extension

We now relax Assumption 1 and extend the analysis to the more general case in which the extent
of disagreement ∆ij (k) = |x∗i (k) − x∗j (k)| is not necessarily equal to 1 for all issues, but may vary
in functions of the inherited characteristics of the two states.21 A priori, the relationship between
inherited characteristics and extent of disagreement can go either way. On the one hand, it is
possible that culturally closer population may face less disagreement over non-rival common issues
(e.g., about the characteristics of specific international public goods), which, other things being
equal, would reduce the probability of conflict. On the other hand, two closely related populations
who care a lot about the same non-rival issue may also have strongly divergent preferences over
the details of how the issue should be settled, and hence be farther away in their ideal points
(for example, two closely related population that care about the same religious or cultural issue
may also greatly diverge in their ideal outcomes). In what follows we present a simple and direct
formalization linking the extent of disagreement to the distance in inherited characteristics, and
study the relation between probability of conflict and genetic distance in this more general setting
(in Section 4 we will present some evidence on voting patterns at the United Nations that empirically
sheds some light on the relation between relatedness and the extent of agreement or disagreement
over international issues).

       Assume that for any set of issues between any two points on the real line, a fraction ρ is rival
and a fraction (1 − ρ) is non-rival, and that the extent of disagreement over non-rival common
issues between state i and state j may depend on the distance in inherited characteristics V (i, j):

                                                  ∆ij (k) = ∆0 + δV (i, j)                                               (20)

where ∆0 ≥ 0 and δ is a parameter measuring the relation between distance V (i, j) and disagreement
∆ij (k), and k is a non-rival issue. The other assumptions of our model are maintained. In particular,

  21
       Clearly if ∆ij (k) is independent of V (i, j) for all issues, the qualitative results from the basic setting will not be
aﬀected.


                                                               13
it is still the case that all states at a distance V (i, j) > R share no common issues, and hence face
no conflict. For states at a distance V (i, j) ≤ R, violent conflict is the only equilibrium if and only
if α[ρ + (1 − ρ)∆0 ][R − V (i, j)] > ω. To simplify notation, we assume that all relevant issues share
the same α (the results would not change qualitatively if we assume that relevant rival issues enter
the utility function with parameter αr > 0 while non-rival issues enter with parameter αnr > 0).
Assuming again that ω is a random variable distributed uniformly between 0 and ω, we now have:

   Proposition 2

   The probability of conflict between the two states is given by:

                      α©                                                                       ª
  Prob(Conflict) =      [ρ + (1 − ρ)∆0 ]R − [ρ + (1 − ρ)(∆0 − δ)]V (i, j) − (1 − ρ)δ[V (i, j)]2 (21)
                      ω
                                                                                             d Prob(Conf lict)
A negative relationship between probability of conflict and distance V (i, j) holds (i.e.,                     <
                                                                                                  dV (i, j)
0) if δ is small enough:
                                                ρ + (1 − ρ)∆0
                                        δ<                                                             (22)
                                             (1 − ρ)[1 − 2V (i, j)]
The above inequality is always satisfied if δ ≤ 0. If δ > 0, the inequality is more easily satisfied the
larger the fraction of rival issues ρ, and the larger the extent of disagreement which is independent
of distance ∆0 . An analogous condition can be stated in terms of expected probability of conflict
and genetic distance. By taking expectations of the above Prob(Conflict), using the facts that
                                                                                             3
E{V (i, j) | g(i, j) = 1} = ε, E{V (i, j)2 | g(i, j) = 1} = 2ε2 , E{V (i, j) | g(i, j) = 2} = ε and
                                                                                             2
E{V (i, j)2 | g(i, j) = 2} = 4ε2 , we have:

             E[Prob(Conf lict) | g(i, j) = 2] − E[Prob(Conf lict) | g(i, j) = 1] =                     (23)
                                              α
                                           − {[ρ + (1 − ρ)(∆0 − δ)]ε + 2(1 − ρ)δε2 }
                                             ω
   which immediately implies:

   Corollary 2

   Expected conflict is decreasing in genetic distance (i.e., E[Prob(Conf lict) | g(i, j) = 2] <
E[Prob(Conf lict) | g(i, j) = 1]) if:

                                                ρ + (1 − ρ)∆0
                                          δ<                                                           (24)
                                               (1 − ρ)ε(1 − 2ε)

Consequently, an inverse relationship between conflict and genetic distance is consistent with a
small or negative eﬀect of distance V (i, j) on the extent of disagreement over non-rival issues,
and/or with a predominance of rival issues in international disputes.

                                                    14
      In general, the net eﬀect of relatedness on conflict depends on the relative size of the diﬀerent
eﬀects, and is therefore an empirical question. As we will see, our empirical findings document
a strong and robust negative eﬀect of genetic distance on the probability of conflict. In other
words, empirically we find that more closely related states fight more with each other, which is the
implication of our basic setting. These findings are therefore consistent with a predominant role
for the common-issue eﬀect, which prevails over possible countervailing eﬀects (such as the "extent
of disagreement" eﬀect presented above or the "coordination failure" eﬀect discussed in Appendix
1).

      The basic results presented in this section could be viewed as the reduced forms of more de-
tailed and micro-founded settings in which specific interactions and common issues emerge from
more complex dynamic processes and decisions. For example, societies with more similar long-
term characteristics might endogenously end up with more similar production systems and/or
consumption patterns, which may induce them to compete over a similar set of resources. Another
(non-mutually exclusive) channel would emerge if genealogically more similar populations face lower
fixed costs to interacting with each other, and therefore have more incentives and opportunities to
interact over all sorts of common issues, multiplying the likelihood that some of those issues will
be disputed. These interpretations are consistent with our simplified framework, as they predict a
negative relationship between genetic distance and the probability of conflict.


3      Data and Methodology

Our model shows that the degree of relatedness between populations has a positive eﬀect on their
conflict propensities due to a larger set of common issues (corollary 1). Genealogical relatedness
may also aﬀect diﬀerences in ideal points (corollary 2) and may aﬀect the likelihood of reaching
peaceful conflict resolution by facilitating coordination (corollary 3 in Appendix 1). Thus, the net
eﬀect of relatedness on conflict is a priori ambiguous. In the remainder of this paper we examine
empirically the determinants of bilateral conflict across states, focusing on the degree of relatedness
between the populations of each pair of countries. We control for other determinants of bilateral
conflict, in particular a wide range of measures of geographic distance.




                                                   15
3.1       Measuring Conflict

We use panel data on interstate conflict between 1816 and 2001 from the Correlates of War Project
(www.correlatesofwar.org).22 We start from a discrete indicator of the intensity of a bilateral conflict
between countries i and j in year t. The indicator takes on a value from 0 for no militarized conflict
to 5 for an interstate war involving more than 1, 000 total battle deaths. Following the convention
in the literature, we define dummy variable taking a value of 1 if the intensity of militarized conflict
is equal to or greater than 3. Our main dependent variable is this binary indicator of conflict,
denoted Cijt . We separately examine the determinants of the intensity of conflict, as well as the
determinants of war (corresponding to a conflict intensity of 5). The database includes several
other useful bilateral variables such as war casualties, an indicator of whether a pair is linked by
an active military alliance, the number of other wars occurring in a given year and the number of
peaceful years in a country pair (i, j) at each time t. We make use of these variables in the analysis
below.


3.2       Measuring Relatedness

To capture genealogical relatedness, we use genetic distance. Since the interpretation and construc-
tion of this measure was discussed in detail in Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009), we provide only a
short overview. Genetic distance is a summary measure of diﬀerences in allele frequencies across a
range of neutral genes (or chromosomal loci). The measure we use mostly, FST genetic distance,
captures the length of time since two populations became separated from each other. When two
populations split apart, random genetic mutations result in genetic diﬀerentiation over time. The
longer the separation time, the greater the genetic distance computed from a set of neutral genes.
In other words, FST genetic distance is a direct measure of genealogical relatedness, resulting from
a molecular clock. The specific source for our data is Cavalli-Sforza et al. (1994), pp. 75-76.23

       Our focus is on a set of 42 world populations for which there is data on bilateral genetic distance,
computed from 120 neutral alleles. Among the set of 42 world populations, the maximum genetic
distance is between Mbuti Pygmies and Papua New-Guineans (FST = 0.4573), and the minimum

  22
       See also Jones et. al. (1996) and Faten et al. (2004).
  23
       Cavalli-Sforza et al. (1994) also provide data on Nei genetic distance, a measure that is diﬀerent but highly
correlated with FST distance. Our results are robust to using Nei distance rather than FST distance. Corresponding
estimates are available upon request.



                                                            16
is between the Danish and the English (FST = 0.0021). The mean genetic distance among the 861
available pairs is 0.1338.

       While the data on genetic distance is available at the level of populations, the rest of our
data is at the country-pair level. It was therefore necessary to match genetic groups to countries.
The procedure to match populations to countries is described in detail in Spolaore and Wacziarg
(2009). To summarize, each of the 42 groups was matched to almost all of the 1, 120 ethnic groups
in Alesina et al. (2003). The same source provides the distribution of these ethnic groups across
virtually all the countries in the world. Thus, we could construct measures of genetic distance
between countries, rather than groups. We constructed two such measures. The first was the
distance between the plurality ethnic groups of each country in a pair, i.e. the groups with the
largest shares of each country’s population. The second was a measure of weighted genetic distance,
constructed as follows: assume that country i is composed of populations m = 1...M and country
j is composed of populations n = 1...N . Denote by s1m the share of population m in country i
(similarly for country j) and dmn the genetic distance between populations m and n. The weighted
FST genetic distance between countries i and j is then:
                                                      M X
                                                      X N
                                        F STijW   =             (sim × sjn × dmn )                                    (25)
                                                      m=1 n=1

where skm is the share of group m in country k, dmn is the FST genetic distance between groups m
and n. This represents the expected genetic distance between two randomly selected individuals,
one from each country. Weighted genetic distance is very highly correlated with genetic distance
based on plurality groups (the correlation is 91.9%), so for practical purposes it does not make
a big diﬀerence which one we use. We will use the weighted FST distance as the baseline mea-
sure throughout this study, as it is a more precise measure of average genetic distance between
countries.24

       The match of populations to countries pertains to the contemporary period, after the great
migrations that followed the conquest of the New World. Hence, for instance, for the current
period the plurality population in Australia is the English population. To address bias resulting
from errors in the match populations to countries for the current period, as well as concerns that
current genetic distance may be endogenous with respect to past wars, we also matched countries

  24
       All our results are robust to using genetic distance between plurality groups rather than weighted genetic distance.
The corresponding estimates are available upon request.



                                                             17
to their 1500 AD populations. Hence, for instance, in the 1500 match, Australia is matched to
Aborigines. Genetic distance between countries using the 1500 match can be used as an instrument
for current genetic distance.25


3.3       Summary Statistics

Table 1 and 2 provide summary statistics that can help to give a sense of the data and provide
clues concerning the relationship between conflict and relatedness.26 The baseline sample is an
unbalanced panel of 517, 251 observations covering 13, 575 country pairs, based on 176 underlying
countries, from 1816 to 2000. Table 1 displays the means of genetic distance, geodesic distance and
a dummy variable for contiguity between the two countries in a pair, conditional on the intensity
of conflict. The mean of genetic distance when there is no militarized conflict (0.102) is greater
than at any other level of the conflict intensity indicator (for hostility levels ranging from 2 to 5,
the mean of genetic distance ranges from 0.050 to 0.063), consistent with Corollary 1. Somewhat
to our surprise, a relatively small portion of full fledged-wars occur between contiguous countries
(18.2%), and the mean geodesic distance separating countries at war is relatively high (5, 562 km).

       Table 2 shows the conditional frequency of both wars and conflicts. Wars are a relatively rare
occurrence, as only 1, 010 pair-year observations are characterized as wars, out of more than half
a million observations. Over a quarter of these wars occurred between countries in the bottom
decile of genetic distance, and almost half of all wars occurred in pairs in the bottom quartile.
Only 44 wars were observed in pairs in the top quartile, of which 32 involved South Africa as
one of the combatants. While South Africa is characterized as genetically distant from European
populations due to the large African majority, a historical examination of wars involving South
Africa reveals that the wars were spurred mainly by conflicts over issues separating European powers
and South Africa’s European power elite. In sum, there are very few wars between genetically
distant populations in our sample. Even wars occurring across large geographic distances typically

  25
       Since we do not have detailed data on ethnic composition going back to 1500, the corresponding match only refers
to plurality groups. The matching of countries to populations for 1500 is more straightforward than for the current
period, since Cavalli-Sforza et al. (1994) attempted to sample populations as they were in 1500, likely reducing
the extent of measurement error. The correlation between weighted genetic distance matched using current period
populations and genetic distance between plurality groups as of 1500 is 0.714 in our baseline sample.
  26
       Appendix 2 provides further summary statistics for the main variables in our study, in the form of means and
correlations, to aid in the interpretation of our empirical results.



                                                           18
involve mostly genetically similar participants - for instance it is still the case that almost half of
the wars occurring between non-contiguous countries involved country pairs in the bottom quartile
of genetic distance. Similar observations hold when we consider more broadly militarized conflicts
rather than wars per se: while there are vastly more of these conflicts (3, 728 versus 1, 010), the
relative frequency by quartile of genetic distance is roughly preserved. Similarly, the proportions do
not change very much when conditioning on geographic distance being large between the countries
in a pair - countries not sharing a common sea or ocean, non-contiguous countries, or countries
that are more than 1, 000 kilometers apart.


3.4   Empirical Specification

While these summary statistics are an informative starting point, we turn to a more formal regres-
sion setup, allowing us to control for a wide range of determinants of interstate militarized conflicts.
As a starting point for our empirical specification, we follow the practice in the existing literature
(for instance Bremer, 1992, Martin, Mayer and Thoenig, 2008) of regressing a binary indicator of
interstate conflict on a set of bilateral determinants. The baseline regression equation is:

                                    Cijt = βXijt + γF STijW + εijt                                  (26)

The vector Xijt contains a series of controls such as a contiguity dummy, log geodesic distance, log
longitudinal and latitudinal distance, several other indicators of geographic isolation, as well as a set
of dummy variables representing whether both countries in the pair are democracies, whether they
were ever in a colonial relationship, whether they belong to an active military alliance, among other
controls. The choice of controls follows the existing literature closely, particularly the contribution
of Martin, Mayer and Thoenig (2008). A major diﬀerence is that we greatly augment the list of
geographic controls compared to existing contributions, in an eﬀort to identify separately the eﬀects
of geographic proximity from those of genealogical relatedness. It is important for our purposes
to adequately control for geographic isolation as genetic distance and geographic isolation tend to
be correlated (for instance the correlation between FST genetic distance and log geodesic distance
in our baseline sample is 0.404). Equation (26) is estimated using probit, clustering standard
errors at the country-pair level. Throughout, we report marginal eﬀects evaluated at the mean
of the independent variables, providing a quantitative assessment of the magnitude of the eﬀects.
Because the proportion of pair-year observations with conflicts is only 0.721%, to improve the
readability of the marginal eﬀects we multiplied all of them by 100 in all tables.

                                                   19
4         Empirical Results

4.1         Baseline Estimates

Table 3 presents baseline estimates of the coeﬃcients in equation (26). We start with a univariate
regression (column 1), showing a very strong negative relationship between genetic distance and the
incidence of militarized conflict. The magnitude of this eﬀect is large, with a one standard deviation
change in genetic distance (0.066) associated with a 0.492 decline in the percentage probability of
conflict (the mean of this variable, again, is 0.721). Obviously, this estimate is tainted by omitted
variables bias, stemming mainly from the omission of geographic factors. Column (2) introduces
eight measures of geographic distance. These measures usually bear the expected signs, and their
inclusion greatly reduces the eﬀect of genetic distance.27 However, this eﬀect remains negative and
highly significant statistically. Its magnitude is still substantial - a one standard deviation shift
in genetic distance is associated with a reduction in the probability of conflict of 12.15% of that
variable’s mean.

         Several other factors have been proposed as correlates of war. Chief among them is the central
tenet of liberal peace theory, namely the idea that democracies tend not to go to war with each
other. A dummy variable equal to 1 if both countries are democracies (defined as a combined
Polity score greater than 5) has a negative and highly significant marginal eﬀect, with roughly the
same magnitude as that of genetic distance. Column 3 includes other controls such as whether
countries in a pair ever had colonial ties, the number of peaceful years prior to the current year,
the number of wars taking place globally at time t, and whether the two countries are members of
the same alliance. All of these bear coeﬃcients with the expected signs. Once all these controls
are included, the coeﬃcient on genetic distance falls further, but remains negative and significant
at the 1% level. The eﬀect of a one standard deviation shift in genetic distance, with the full set
of controls, remains equal to 8.52% of the mean probability of conflict. We continue to condition
on this full set of controls in all the regressions that follow.

         None of these observations change very much when using a logit estimator rather than a probit
estimator (column 4). We continue to use a probit estimator in the rest of this paper. Finally,

    27
         Similarly, excluding genetic distance from the baseline specification generally raises the magnitude of the geo-
graphic eﬀects, particularly that of log geodesic distance (results are available upon request). Thus, the exclusion
of relatedness from past empirical specifications seeking to explain conflict likely led to overstating the quantitative
impact of geographic factors.


                                                             20
in column 5, we instrument for genetic distance using genetic distance between populations as
they were in 1500. The results are very close to those previously reported, but the eﬀect of
genetic distance rises by over 50% relative to the estimates of column 3, suggesting that the latter
understated the eﬀect. It is likely that the higher eﬀect of genetic distance under IV reflects the
fact that measurement error is less prevalent, since arguments about reverse causality or omitted
variables bias would suggest that instrumenting should reduce the eﬀect of genetic distance. To
adopt a conservative approach, we refrain from instrumenting for genetic distance in the bulk of our
analysis, keeping in mid that our reported eﬀect is likely an understatement of the true magnitude.


4.2       Estimates Across Time and Space

To examine if specific periods or regions account for the finding of a negative eﬀect of relatedness on
conflict, we broke down the sample by time period and region. Results are presented in Tables 4 and
5. We find that results are remarkably robust within regions and periods. Table 4 shows that the
coeﬃcient on genetic distance is negative and roughly of the same magnitude whether considering
the pre- or post-1900 periods. The coeﬃcient for the pre-1900 period is not statistically significant,
perhaps because there are many fewer observations in the early periods (only 799 country pairs as
opposed to 13, 175 for the broader sample), and few observations with conflict (436 out of a total
of 3, 728 conflicts in the broader sample). Focusing on the 20th century, the eﬀect is particularly
pronounced and significant for the post 1946 period - in other words our finding is not simply an
artifact of the Second World War, which pitted a lot of European populations against each other.28
In fact, our finding holds even after the end of the Cold War (column 7). The coeﬃcient is negative
whatever the subperiod under consideration.

       Turning to the regional breakdown in Table 5, we again uncover a negative eﬀect of genetic
distance on conflict whatever the region under consideration. Column (2) starts by including a
dummy variable taking on a value of one if both countries in a pair are part of the same continent
(continents are defined as Africa, Americas, Asia, Europe, and Oceania). The concern is that
conflicts occur predominantly among countries located on the same continent (this was the case
for 2, 086 out of a total of 3, 728 conflicts in our baseline sample), and that populations located on
the same continent tend to be genetically close (the mean of FST genetic distance for pairs on the

  28
       2, 053 observations involve militarized conflicts in the post 1946 period, while the 1939-1946 period involved 634
bilateral conflict-years, or 17% of the total number of observations with conflicts between 1816 and 2001.




                                                            21
same continent is 0.066 versus a sample-wide mean of 0.102). However, the inclusion of the same
continent dummy hardly changes the coeﬃcient on genetic distance at all.

       Column (3) presents results for Europe. For this continent, we observe a separate matrix of
FST genetic distances, available for almost all the countries in Europe.29 Despite the paucity of
observations (only 291 country pairs), the eﬀect of genetic distance remains negative and significant
at the 5% level. A one standard deviation change in genetic distance reduces the probability of
conflict by 12.531% of its mean, a magnitude slightly larger than, but roughly in line with, the
results found in the World sample. Columns (4) through (6) provide estimates for Asia, Africa and
the Americas (there were no conflicts within Oceania in our baseline sample, so this category is
missing). The coeﬃcient on genetic distance is consistently negative, and significant at the 10%
level for Asia and Africa, but small and insignificant for the Americas.30 Overall, the regional
breakdown suggests that the negative eﬀect of relatedness on war is remarkably consistent across
space, the results within Europe, where genetic distance is small, being particularly striking.


4.3       Adding Linguistic and Religious Distance

While genetic distance is a precise and continuous measure of the degree of relatedness between
populations and countries, alternative measures exist. The existing literature on interstate conflict
has examined linguistic and religious ties in an eﬀort to tell apart primordialist theories of con-
flict from instrumentalist theories (Richardson, 1960, Henderson, 1997). Thus, it is important to
evaluate whether these variables trump genetic distance, and more generally how their inclusion
aﬀects our main coeﬃcient of interest. Linguistic relatedness is associated with genetic relatedness
because, like genes, languages are transmitted intergenerationally: populations speaking similar
languages are likely to be more related than linguistically distinct populations (Cavalli-Sforza et
al., 1994).31 Religious beliefs, also transmitted intergenerationally, are one type of diﬀerence in

  29
       Details concerning the FST genetic distance matrix for the European continent can be found in Spolaore and
Wacziarg (2009). There are only 5 distinct European populations in the worldwide matrix, so estimates using the
European matrix, where there are 26 distinct genetic groups, are likely to be much more reliable.
  30
       The number of intracontinental interstate conflicts experienced by these continents were 787 (Asia), 252 (Africa)
and 433 (Americas).
  31
       On the other hand, there are many reasons why genetic and linguistic distance are imperfectly correlated. Rates
of genetic and linguistic mutations may diﬀer; populations of a certain genetic make-up may adopt a foreign language
as the results of the edict of foreign rulers, as happened when the Magyar rulers imposed their language on the



                                                            22
human traits that can lead to conflict. In what follows, we evaluate whether the eﬀect of genetic
distance is reduced or eliminated when controlling for linguistic and religious distance, and whether
these variables have an independent eﬀect on the incidence of interstate conflict.32

       Prior to showing the results, we briefly discuss how these measures were constructed. To capture
linguistic distance, we used the data and approach in Fearon (2003), making use of linguistic trees
from Ethnologue to compute the number of common linguistic nodes between languages in the
world, a measure of their linguistic similarity (the linguistic tree in this dataset involves up to
15 nested classifications, so two countries with populations speaking the same language will share
15 common nodes).33 Using data on the distribution of each linguistic group within and across
countries, from the same source, we again computed a measure of the number of common nodes
shared by languages spoken by plurality groups within each country in a pair. We also computed
a weighted measure of linguistic similarity, representing the expected number of common linguistic
nodes between two randomly chosen individuals, one from each country in a pair (the formula is
analogous to that of equation 25).34 Following Fearon (2003), we transformed these measures so
that they reflect linguistic distance (LD) rather than similarity, and are bounded by 0 and 1:
                                        r
                                          (15 − # Common Nodes)
                                  LD =                                                         (27)
                                                      15

Hungarian population. Other salient examples include countries were colonized by European powers, adopting their
language (English, French, Portuguese or Spanish), while maintaining very distinct populations genetically. See
Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009) for an in-depth discussion of these points.
  32
       Pairwise correlations between measures of genetic, linguistic and religious distances appear in Appendix 2, panel
b. These correlations are generally positive, as expected, but not very large. For instance, the correlation between
FST genetic distance and weighted linguistic distance is 0.164. Religious distance bears a correlation of 0.544 with
linguistic distance, and 0.210 with genetic distance.
  33
       As an alternative, we used a separate measure of linguistic distance, based on lexicostatistics, from Dyen, Kruskal
and Black (1992). This is a more continuous measure than the one based on common nodes, but it is only available
for countries speaking Indo-European languages. It captures the number of common meanings, out of a list of 200,
that are conveyed using "cognate" or related words. Summing over the 200 meanings, a measure of linguistic distance
is the percentage of non-cognate words. Using the expected (weighted) measure of cognate distance led to eﬀects of
genetic distance very similar to those obtained when controlling for the Fearon measure, albeit on a much smaller
sample of countries speaking Indo-European languages. These results are available upon request.
  34
       The two measures deviate from each other whenever a country includes populations speaking diﬀerent languages.
Using the measure based on the plurality language or the weigthed measure did not make any diﬀerence for our
results. As we did for genetic distance, we focus on weighted measures.



                                                            23
To measure religious distance we followed an approach based on religious trees, similar to that
used for linguistic distance, using a nomenclature of world religions obtained from Mecham, Fearon
and Laitin (2006). This nomenclature provides a family tree of World religions, first distinguishing
between monotheistic religions of Middle-Eastern origin, Asian religions and "others", and further
subdividing these categories into finer groups (such as Christians, Muslims and Jews, etc.). The
number of common classifications (up to 5 in this dataset) is a measure of religious similarity. We
matched religions to countries using Mecham, Fearon and Laitin’s (2006) data on the prevalence of
religions by country and transformed the data in a manner similar to that in equation (27), again
computing plurality and weighted distances separately.

       Table 6 presents estimates of the eﬀect of genetic distance on the propensity for interstate conflict
when linguistic and religious distance are included. Since the use of these variables constrains the
sample (a loss of some 77, 081 observations, or almost 15% of the sample), we start in column (1)
with the baseline estimates for this new sample: they are in line with those reported above. When
adding linguistic distance and religious distance either alone or together (columns 2-4), interesting
results emerge. First, the coeﬃcient on genetic distance is barely aﬀected. Second, linguistic
distance exerts a null eﬀect when controlling for genetic distance. Third, religious distance is
negatively related with conflict, though the eﬀect is only significant at the 7.6% level, and its
significance level drops to 13% when including linguistic distance along with religious distance.35
This latter finding, while weak, is consistent with the view that religion is one of the vertically
transmitted traits that make populations more or less related to each other, and its eﬀect on
conflict goes in the same direction as that of genetic distance, a broader measure of relatedness.


4.4       Nonlinearities and Determinants of Conflict Intensity

In this subsection, we consider several extensions of our baseline specification. Our goal is to
characterize whether relatedness may operate diﬀerently for diﬀerent pairs of countries, and to
investigate its eﬀect on the intensity of conflict. To do so, we first look for interactive and nonlinear
eﬀects of genetic distance (Table 7). We then seek to evaluate the eﬀect of genetic distance on the
intensity of conflict, rather than on a binary indicator of conflict incidence (Table 8).

  35
       This result contrasts with that in Henderson (1997), who found evidence that religious similarity was negatively
related to conflict. The diﬀerence may stem from a much bigger sample in our work, as well as our inclusion of a
much broader set of controls (Henderson only controlled for contiguity).




                                                           24
   We first isolate countries that are non contiguous. In the baseline sample, 34% of conflicts
occur between contiguous countries, and isolating pairs composed of non-contiguous countries is a
further way to control for geographic proximity. The standardized eﬀect of genetic distance actually
rises modestly, as a one standard deviation increase in genetic distance is associated with a 9.41%
decrease in the mean probability of conflict (versus 8.52% in the baseline regression). This reinforces
our confidence that the eﬀect is not driven by geographic distance or other possibly omitted factors
specific to contiguous countries.

   In columns (3) through (5) of Table 7 we add several interaction terms to the baseline spec-
ification. The eﬀect of genetic distance does not appear quantitatively more or less pronounced
for pairs that are contiguous, for pairs that are geographically proximate (i.e. countries are either
contiguous or separated by a distance less than 2, 500 km), or for pairs that include a major power.
We then allow for a linear spline, i.e. a diﬀerent slope for the eﬀect of genetic distance whether
it is greater than the sample median of 0.095, or lower. Column (6) shows no evidence of such
a diﬀerential eﬀect (varying the spline threshold did not matter greatly). Finally, introducing a
squared term in genetic distance (column 7) does not reveal much evidence of a nonlinear eﬀect.
In sum, we find no evidence that the eﬀect of genetic distance depends on some characteristic of
the pairs, or that it is nonlinear.

   Table 8 seeks to explain the intensity of militarized conflict as opposed to its incidence only. To
do so, we modified the dependent variable in several ways. Column (1) simply uses the measure of
the intensity of conflict from the Correlates of War dataset, rather than the binary transform of this
variable we have been using so far. With least squares estimation, there is evidence that genetic
distance bears a negative relationship with conflict intensity. However, column (2), which limits
the sample to pairs having experienced conflict, demonstrates that genetic distance does not aﬀect
the intensity of conflict (among levels 3, 4 and 5) once we condition on the subsample with conflict.
This result rationalizes our focus on a bilateral measure of conflict rather than on the continuous
measure. In line with results in Table 3, instrumenting for genetic distance based on the current
match of populations to countries using genetic distance based on the 1500 match increases the
estimated magnitude of the eﬀect by 64% (column 3).

   In columns (4) and (5) we consider the determinants of war casualties. We find that genetic
distance reduces war casualties, but again this eﬀect is almost entirely driven by the extensive mar-
gin, since genetic distance has a statistically insignificant eﬀect on war casualties for observations


                                                  25
with nonzero casualties. Our last test is to redefine the dependent variable as a binary indicator
of war, i.e. a dummy variable taking on a value of one if conflict intensity is 5 (corresponding to
conflicts with more than 1, 000 total battle deaths). Genetic distance reduces the propensity for
war in a statistically significant way: a standard deviation increase in genetic distance reduces the
probability of full-blown war by 2.956% of this variable’s mean, an eﬀect quantitatively smaller
than that on conflict more broadly (the underlying probability of a country pair-year being at war
in our baseline sample is relatively low, on the order of 0.195%).

       To summarize, the eﬀect of genetic distance is very robust to using alternative measures of con-
flict, but we uncover little evidence that genetic distance aﬀects the intensity of conflict conditional
on a conflict occurring.


4.5       Analysis for the 1950-2000 period

Several important correlates of war, such as measures of trade intensity and diﬀerences in income,
are missing from our specification due to their lack of availability over the long time period covered
by the baseline specification (1816-2001). In order to incorporate these additional controls, we
focus on the 1950-2000 period for which various measures of trade and income are available.

       A long tradition associated with liberal peace theory, going back to Montesquieu (1748) and
Kant (1795), holds that extensive bilateral commercial links between countries reduces the probabil-
ity of conflict, essentially by raising its cost, since valuable trade links would be lost in a militarized
conflict. In an important paper, Martin, Mayer and Thoenig (2008, henceforth MMT) added an
additional hypothesis: if the countries in a pair trade a lot with third parties, their bilateral trading
link matters less, so controlling for bilateral trade, multilateral trade intensity should increase the
probability of conflict among the countries in a pair. The issue we face is that the omission of
these trade terms may bias the coeﬃcient estimate on genetic distance, to the extent that genetic
distance and trade are correlated.

       We obtained the same data on bilateral and multilateral trade openness used in MMT’s paper,
and included their measures of trade in our baseline specification.36 These measures include a
metric of bilateral trade openness (the ratio of bilateral imports to GDP, averaged across the two
countries in a pair), a metric of multilateral trade intensity (defined as the ratio of the sum of
all bilateral imports from third countries to GDP, averaged between the two countries in a pair),

  36
       The data was obtained from http://team.univ-paris1.fr/teamperso/mayer/data/data.htm


                                                       26
and the interaction of each of these metrics with log geodesic distance. All of these measures were
lagged by 4 years to limit the incidence of reverse causality running from conflict to trade, exactly
as was done in MMT.

      Results appear in Table 9. In column (1), we replicate the baseline specification for the smaller
sample covering 1950-2000. We are able to exactly recover the pattern of coeﬃcients on the trade
terms as the one reported in MMT: bilateral openness reduces conflict, multilateral openness raises
conflict, and these eﬀects are more pronounced quantitatively for pairs that are closer to each other.
Our finding lend further support to liberal peace theory, as recently amended by MMT. The eﬀect of
genetic distance in this sample is slightly smaller than in the 1816-2001 sample: a standard deviation
increase in genetic distance reduces the probability of conflict by 6.612% of this variable’s mean.
Adding the trade terms in column (2), this eﬀect falls further, but remains negative and highly
significant statistically. In column (3), we include additional trade-related variables, a dummy for
whether the two countries in a pair belong to a free trade area, and the number of GATT members
in the pair. The coeﬃcient on genetic distance is barely aﬀected.

      Another omitted variables concern stems from the results in Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009),
where genetic distance was found to be robustly correlated with absolute diﬀerences in per capita
income across pairs of countries. To the extent that diﬀerences in income capture power imbalances,
or the extent of possible spoils of war, they may influence the probability of conflict (this could
go in either direction: power imbalances may make a weaker prey easier to capture militarily, but
also more willing to surrender peacefully). In column (5), we add the absolute value of log income
diﬀerences (the same variable used as a dependent variable in Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2009) to
the specification that includes the broadest set of controls (including trade controls from MMT).37
The coeﬃcient on income diﬀerences is positive and significant, indicating that heterogeneity in
income levels across the countries in a pair is conducive to conflict, but its inclusion does not aﬀect
the coeﬃcient on genetic distance. Finally, column (6) substitutes the absolute diﬀerence in total
GDP instead of diﬀerences in per capita GDP. Heterogeneity in total GDP does not aﬀect conflict
propensity, and its inclusion does not aﬀect the coeﬃcient on genetic distance.

      To summarize, the inclusion of a wide set of trade-related controls and of income diﬀerences,
while confirming past results in MMT, does not change the basic message that relatedness has a
positive eﬀect on conflict.

 37
      The source for the income data is the Penn World Tables, version 6.1 (Heston, Summers and Aten, 2002).


                                                        27
4.6   Analysis of UN voting patterns

In our theoretical framework, Corollary 2 suggests that one way relatedness could aﬀect conflict is
through its eﬀect on the degree of similarity in countries’ ideal points over non rival issues. Stated
simply, related populations may have more or less similar preferences over sets of international
issues, quite apart from the eﬀect of relatedness on the range of issues relevant to the pair, stemming
from past interactions. In the theory section, we remained agnostic as to the possible direction of
this relationship. In this subsection we seek to uncover empirically the direction of the eﬀect by
analyzing the degree of countries’ similarity in stated preferences over global diplomatic issues. To
do so, we use data on their voting patterns at the UN General Assembly. The data comes from
Gartzke (2006), who states that "dozens or hundreds of resolutions appear in each session of the
General Assembly." Most of these votes constitute symbolic position taking by UN members, who
usually do not have a direct stake in the issue they vote on. Another advantage of this data is that
all UN members take positions (including abstaining) on a constant set of issues.

   Based on data on votes themselves, Gartzke constructed an index of the "aﬃnity of nations",
which is simply the bilateral correlation of votes for each country pair in a given year. The measure
ranges from −1 to 1 and is available from 1946 to 2002. Two separate indices are available depending
on whether abstentions are considered a form of position taking, or excluded. We use both indices
as dependent variables to examine the eﬀect of genetic distance on the degree of similarity in
preferences over diplomatic issues considered at the UN General Assembly. We maintain the same
baseline specification used to estimate the determinants of conflicts (Table 3, column 3), regressing
UN vote correlation indices on genetic distance, geographic distance and other controls.

   Estimates suggest that genetic distance is positively associated with UN vote correlations. That
is, countries that are more related have more diﬀerent preferences over issues arising at the UN
Assembly. Column (2) of Table 10 shows this is the case unconditionally. The eﬀect remains
positive and significant when including a set of geographic and historical controls (columns 2 and
3). The eﬀect remains when considering only the 1990-2000 time period where votes were less
likely to be aligned with the major geopolitical blocs of the Cold War era. The eﬀect is also robust
to excluding abstensions from the calculation of UN vote correlations. In terms of magnitude,
using the baseline regression of column (3), a one standard deviation increase in genetic distance is
associated with an increase in the UN vote correlation equal to 10.10% of this variables standard
deviation, i.e. the standardized beta is 10.10%. This standardized measure of magnitude rises to


                                                  28
11.49% when excluding abstentions.

         To summarize, this evidence suggests that any positive eﬀect of relatedness on conflict arising
from the role of past interactions in generating grievances is likely to be reinforced by the negative
eﬀect of relatedness on preference similarity (in the parlance of our model, δ is negative).


5         Conclusion

In this paper, we examined the empirical relationship between the occurrence of international
conflicts and the degree of relatedness between countries. We found that populations that are
genetically closer are more prone to engage in militarized conflicts with each other, even after
controlling for a wide set of measures of geographic distance, income diﬀerences, and other factors
aﬀecting conflict, including measures of bilateral and multilateral trade and diﬀerences in democracy
levels. We also provided a theoretical model of conflict and relatedness that is consistent with these
results. In the simplest version of our model, populations that share a more recent common history
have had less time to diverge in preferences and characteristics that determine the set of common
issues they care about, and over which they are prone to fight.

         To our knowledge, this is the first paper that documents a link between genetic distance and
international conflict, and provides an interpretation in terms of cultural and historical related-
ness. As we have discussed in the introduction, our results provide strong evidence against the
primordialist view that cultural and ethnic dissimilarity should breed war and plunder.

         More broadly, this paper is part of a growing literature in political economy focusing on the
eﬀects of long-term cultural and historical variables on political, economic and institutional out-
comes, both theoretically and empirically. It would be interesting to link our approach to the
extensive literature on ethnic fractionalization and polarization within countries (see Alesina et al.
2003, Fearon, 2003) and to study the eﬀects of long-term genealogical relatedness across groups
on civil conflicts and other intrastate outcomes. A positive relationship between relatedness and
conflict within states would be consistent, for example, with the finding in Fearon and Laitin (2003)
that ethnic fractionalization and civil wars are unrelated. Further research on this question should
focus on reliable subnational data on inter-group relatedness.38

    38
         Another area of research where our approach could be fruitful is the study of national formation and breakup,
and their connections with international conflict (Spolaore, 2004; Alesina and Spolaore, 2005, 2006) and civil conflict



                                                            29
                                                  References


Alesina, A., A. Devleeschauwer, W. Easterly, S. Kurlat, and R. Wacziarg, "Fractionalization",
Journal of Economic Growth, 8 (2003), 55-194.

Alesina, A. and E. Spolaore (2005), "War, Peace and the Size of Countries", Journal of Public
Economics, 89(7): 1333-1354.

Alesina, A. and E. Spolaore (2006), "Conflict, Defense Spending, and the Number of Nations",
European Economic Review 50(1): 91-120

Barbieri, K. (2002), The Liberal Illusion: Does Trade Promote Peace?, University of Michigan
Press, Ann Arbor.

Bernheim, B., B. Peleg, and M. Whinston (1987) "Coalition-Proof Nash Equilibria I. Concepts",
Journal of Economic Theory, 42 (1), June: 1-12.

Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier (2000), "Beyond the Melting Pot: Cultural Transmission, Mar-
riage, and the Evolution of Ethnic and Religious Traits", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105,
955-988.

Bisin, A. and T. Verdier (2001), "The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the Evolution of
Preferences", Journal of Economic Theory, 97, 98-319.

Blainey, G. (1988), The Causes of War, Free Press, 3rd edition.

Boulding, K. E. (1962), Conflict and Defense: A General Theory, New York: Harper.

Boyd, R. and P. J. Richerson (1985), Culture and the Evolutionary Process, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Bowles, Samuel (2009), "Did Warfare Among Ancestral Hunter-gatherers Aﬀect the Evolution of
Human Social Behavior?", Science, June, 324 (5932): 1293 - 1298.

Bremer, S. A. (1992), "Dangerous Dyads: Conditions Aﬀecting the Likelihood of Interstate War
1816-1965", Journal of Conflict Resolution, 36 (2): 309-341.

Bremer, S.A. (2000), "Who Fights Whom, When, Where, and Why?", in J.A. Vasquez, ed. (2000),
What Do We Know About War? Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield.

(Spolaore, 2008). A first attempt to use genetic distance to study the political economy of national borders is Desmet
et al. (2007).




                                                         30
Bueno de Mesquita, B. and D. Lalman (1992), War and Reason: Domestic and International
Imperatives. New Haven: Yale University Press.

Bueno de Mesquita, B., J. D. Morrow, R. M. Siverson, A. Smith (1999), “An Institutional Expla-
nation of the Democratic Peace”, American Political Science Review, 93 (4): 791-807.

Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. and M. W. Feldman (1981), Cultural Transmission and Evolution, Princeton:
Princeton University Press.

Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., P. Menozzi and A. Piazza (1994), The History and Geography of Human
Genes, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Desmet, K., M. Le Breton, I. Ortuno-Ortin and S. Weber (2006), "Nation Formation and Genetic
Diversity", CEPR Discussion Paper 5918, November.

Dyen, I., J. B. Kruskal and P. Black (1992), "An Indo-European Classification: A Lexicostatistical
Experiment", Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, 82, .1-132.

Faten G., G. Palmer, and S. A. Bremer (2004), "The MID3 Data Set, 1993-2001: Procedures,
Coding Rules, and Description", Conflict Management and Peace Science, 21: 133-154.

Fearon, J. (1995), "Rationalist Explanations for War", International Organization, 49: 379-414.

Fearon, J. (2003), "Ethnic and Cultural Diversity by Country", Journal of Economic Growth, 8,
195-222.

Fearon, J. and D. Laitin (2003), "Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War", American Political Science
Review 97(1): 75-90.

Ferguson, N. (2006), The War of the World. Twentieth-Century Conflict and the Descent of the
West, New York: The Penguin Press.

Garfinkel, M. R. (1990), "Domestic Politics and International Conflict", American Economic Review
84 (5): 1294-1309.

Garfinkel, M. R. and S. Skaperdas (2006), "Economics of Conflict: An Overview", in K. Hartley
and T. Sandler (eds) Handbook of Defense Economics, Volume 2, North Holland, Amsterdam.

Gartzke, E. (2006), "The Aﬃnity of Nations Index, 1946-2002", Version 4.0, University of California
San Diego, http://dss.ucsd.edu/~egartzke/ (accessed 06/06/2009).

Gartzke, E. and K. S. Gleditsch (2006), “Identity and Conflict: Ties that Bind and Diﬀerences that
Divide.” European Journal of International Relations, 12(1): 53-87.




                                                31
Gleditsch, N. P. and J. D. Singer (1975), “Distance and International War, 1816-1965”, in Pro-
ceedings of the International Peace Research Association (IPRA) Fifth General Conference (Oslo:
IPRA): 481-506.

Gowa, J. (2000), Ballots and Bullets: The Elusive Democratic Peace, Princeton University Press,
Princeton.

Henderson, E. A. (1997), "Culture or Contiguity. Ethnic Conflict, the Similarities of States, and
the Onset of War, 1820-1989", Journal of Conflict Resolution, 41, 5, 649-668.

Hess, G. D., Orphanides, A., (1995) "War Politics: an Economic Rational-Voter Framework",
American Economic Review 85 (4), 828—846. (September).

Hess, G. D., Orphanides, A., (2001) "War and Democracy", Journal of Political Economy, 776—
810. (August).

Heston, A., R. Summers, and B. Aten, "Penn World Table Version 6.1", Center for International
Comparisons at the University of Pennsylvania (CICUP), 2002.

Hirshleifer, J. (1991), "The Technology of Conflict as an Economic Activity", American Economic
Review 81(2): 130-134

Hirshleifer, J.(1995), "Anarchy and its Breakdown", Journal of Political Economy 103(1): 26-52

Hirshleifer, J. (1998), "The Bioeconomic Causes of War," Managerial and Decision Economics,
Nov./Dec., 19: (7/8): 457-466.

Huntington, S. (1993), "The Clash of Civilizations", Foreign Aﬀairs 72 (3): 22-49.

Jackson M. and M. Morelli (2007), "Political Bias and War", American Economic Review, 97 (4),
September: 1353-1373

Jones, D. M., S. A. Bremer, and J. D. Singer (1996), "Militarized Interstate Disputes, 1816—1992:
Rationale, Coding Rules, and Empirical Patterns", Conflict Management and Peace Science, 15:
163-213

Kant, I. (1795), Toward Perpetual Peace, New Haven: Yale University Press, 2006.

Keegan, J. (1984), A History of Warfare, New York: Vintage.

Kimura, M. (1968), "Evolutionary Rate at the Molecular Level", Nature, 217, 624-626.

Levy, G. and R. Razin (2004), "It Takes Two: An Explanation for the Democratic Peace", Journal
of the European Economic Association, 2 (1), 1-29.



                                               32
Maoz, Z. and B. Russet (1993), “Normative and Structural Causes of the Democratic Peace, 1946-
1986”, American Political Science Review, 89.

Martin, P., T. Mayer and M. Thoening (2008) "Made Trade Not War?", Review of Economic
Studies, 75, 865-900.

Maynes, C (1993), "Containing Ethnic Conflict", Foreign Policy, 90: 3-21.

Mecham, R. Q., J. Fearon and D. Laitin (2006), "Religious Classification and Data on Shares of
Major World Religions", unpublished, Stanford University.

Merton, R. (1957), Social Theory and Social Structure, Glencoe: Free Press.

Montesquieu, C. de (1748), The Spirit of the Laws, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.

Nye, J. S. (2008), Understanding International Conflicts. An Introduction to Theory and History,
Longman, 7th edition.

Oneal, J. R. and B. M. Russett (1999a), "The Kantian Peace: The Pacific Benefits of Democracy,
Interdependence, and International Organizations", World Politics 52 (1): 1-37.

Oneal, J. R. and B. M. Russett (1999b), "Assessing the Liberal Peace with Alternative Specifica-
tions: Trade Still Reduces Conflict", Journal of Peace Research, 36 (4): 423-442.

Polachek, S. (1980), “Conflict and Trade,” Journal of Conflict Resolution, 24, 55-78.

Powell, R. (1999), In the Shadow of Power: States and Strategies in International Politics. Prince-
ton: Princeton University Press.

Richardson, L. (1960), Arms and Insecurity, Pacific Grove: Boxwood.

Richerson P. J. and R. Boyd (2004), Not By Genes Alone: How Culture Transformed Human
Evolution, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Russett, B.M. and J.R. Oneal (2001), Triangulating Peace. Democracy, Interdependence, and
International Organization. Norton: New York

Schelling, T. (1960), The Strategy of Conflict, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Schneider, G, K. Barbieri and N. P. Gleditsch, eds. (2003), Globalization and Armed Conflict,
Lanham: Rowman and Littlefield.

Singer, J. D. (1972), The Wages of War, 1816-1965: A Statistical Handbook, New York: Wiley.

Singer, J. D. (2000), "The Etiology of Interstate War: A Natural History Approach", in J.A.
Vasquez, ed. (2000), What Do We Know About War? Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield.



                                                33
Skaperdas, S. (1992), "Cooperation, Conflict and Power in the Absence of Property Rights", Amer-
ican Economic Review 82(4): 720-39.

Spolaore, E. (2004), "Economic Integration, International Conflict and Political Unions", Rivista
di Politica Economica, September-October, 3-50.

Spolaore, E. (2008) "Civil Conflict and Secessions", Economics of Governance, January, 9 (1):
45-63.

Spolaore E. and R. Wacziarg (2009), "The Diﬀusion of Development", Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics, 124 (2), May.

Stock, J. H. and F. Trebbi (2003), "Who Invented Instrumental Variable Regression?", Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 17 (3), Summer, 177—194.

Sumner, W. G. (1906), Folkways, New York: Ginn.

Vasquez, J. A. (1995), "Why Neighbors Fight? Proximity, Interaction or Territoriality", Journal
of Peace Research, 32(93): 277-293.

Vasquez, J. A. ed. (2000), What Do We Know About War? Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield.

Wright, Q. (1942), A Study of War [1964 abridged ed.], Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Wright, S. (1950), "The Genetical Structure of Populations", Nature, 166 (4215), 247-249.




                           Appendix 1: Coordination Failure

   We can further extend our basic framework by relaxing Assumption 2 (that is, by allowing for
the possibility of coordination failure). As we have noted in Section 2, (C, C) is always a Nash
equilibrium (Remark 1). Nonetheless, both states would be better oﬀ with a peaceful negotiation
than with violent conflict (C, C), because of the costs of war, which are not borne in a peaceful
outcome. As we have seen, if (N C, N C) is a Nash equilibrium, it is the unique coalition-proof
Nash equilibrium, as defined by Bernheim, Peleg and Whinston (1987). But what if states fail to
coordinate on such superior (N C, N C) equilibrium, and end up in the inferior (C, C) equilibrium,
even when the conditions for a peaceful equilibrium are satisfied? And what if such coordination
failure were to be more likely across populations that are genealogically more distant, since their
norms, habits, languages etc. are likely to be more diﬀerent, and they may therefore find commu-
nication and coordination more diﬃcult? If that were the case, such "coordination failure eﬀect"

                                                34
would reduce the negative correlation between genetic distance and probability of conflict (in con-
trast, if coordination failure were more likely between more closely related populations, the eﬀect
of relatedness on conflict would be strengthened).

   A formalization of these ideas can be provided as follows. Let χ(i, j) denote the probability
that state i and state j would fail to coordinate on the peaceful outcome when it is an equilibrium,
and assume that such coordination failure is more likely if the states are distant in their preferences
and characteristics, measured by vi and vj . Specifically, assume that:

                                         χ(i, j) = χ0 + θV (i, j)                                 (A1)

with χ0 ≥ 0 and θ is a parameter measuring the relation between distance V (i, j) and probability of
coordination failure χ(i, j). We also assume that all parameters satisfy the appropriate restrictions
to ensure that 0 ≤ χ(i, j) ≤ 1. Therefore, for V (i, j) ≤ R, and assuming again that ω is a random
variable distributed uniformly between 0 and ω, we have:

   Proposition 3

   The probability of conflict between the two states when all common issues are rival ( ρ = 1) can
be written as:

       Prob{Conf lict} = χ(i, j) Pr ob[α[R − V (i, j)] ≤ ω] + Prob[α[R − V (i, j)] > ω] =         (A2)
                                                α
                       = χ(i, j) + [1 − χ(i, j)] [R − V (i, j)]
                                                ω

The probability of conflict is decreasing in distance V (i, j) if:

                                                  1 − χ0
                                         θ<                                                       (A3)
                                              ω
                                                − R − 2V (i, j)
                                              α
An analogous condition holds for the more general case ρ ≤ 1 (see generalization below).

   The above inequality always holds for θ < 0. For a positive θ, it is more easily satisfied for
smaller χ0 , larger α and R, and larger V (i, j).

   An analogous condition holds regarding the relation between expected probability of conflict
and genetic distance:

   Corollary 3

   Expected conflict is decreasing in genetic distance (i.e., E[Prob(Conf lict) | g(i, j) = 2] <
E[Prob(Conf lict) | g(i, j) = 1]) if:

                                                    35
                                                1 − χ0
                                         θ<                                                   (A4)
                                              ω
                                             [ − R − 2ε]ε
                                              α
Consequently, if observed conflict partly stems from coordination failure, an inverse relationship
between conflict and genetic distance (as the one we actually observe in the data) is consistent with
a small (or even negative) eﬀect of relatedness on the probability of coordination failure (low θ).

   Generalization of Proposition 3 for ρ ≤ 1

   For the more general case ρ ≤ 1, we have:

                  Prob{Conflict} = χ(i, j) + [1 − χ(i, j)] Prob{C, C U nique Eq}                  (A5)

where:

                            α©                                                                        ª
Prob{C, C U nique Eq} =       [ρ + (1 − ρ)∆0 ]R − [ρ + (1 − ρ)(∆0 − δ)]V (i, j) − (1 − ρ)δ[V (i, j)]2
                            ω
                                                                                                 (A6)
By substituting χ(i, j) = χ0 + θV (i, j) and taking the derivative of the probability of conflict with
respect to distance V (i, j), we have the following generalization of Proposition 3:

   The eﬀect of distance V (i, j) on the probability of conflict is negative if

                           (1 − χ0 ) {ρ + (1 − ρ)(∆0 − δ) + 2(1 − ρ)δV (i, j)}
          θ<                                                                                      (A7)
               ω
                 − [ρ + (1 − ρ)∆0 ]R − 2[ρ + (1 − ρ)(∆0 − δ)]V (i, j) − 3(1 − ρ)δ[V (i, j)]2
               α
                                          1 − χ0
which reduces to the condition θ <                     for ρ = 1 (an analogous condition can be
                                     ω
                                       − R − 2V (i, j)
                                     α
obtained for the relation between expected probability of conflict and genetic distance, along the
lines illustrated above).




                                                  36
           Appendix 2 – Summary statistics and correlations for the main variables in the analysis


                                          Panel a – Summary Statistics

            Variable                  # Obs.       Mean       Std. Dev.       Min             Max
 Conflict (%)                         517,251       0.721         8.459                0        100

 War (%)                              517,251        0.195        4.415                0          100

 Fst genetic distance, weighted       517,251        0.102        0.066                0        0.355

 Log geodesic distance                517,251        8.690        0.816         2.349           9.899

 Dummy for contiguity                 517,251        0.026        0.159                0               1

 Religious Distance Index,            443,472        0.811        0.186          .089                  1
 weighted
 Linguistic Distance Index,           440,170        0.944        0.160                0               1
 weighted
 1 - % cognate measure of              76,330        0.531        0.292                0        0.918
 linguistic distance, weighted



                                         Panel b – Pairwise Correlations

                         Conflict    War (%)       FST         Log        Contiguity       Religious       Linguistic
                          (%)                    genetic     geodesic                      distance         distance
                                                 distance    distance
 War (%)                    0.519*           1
                         (517,251)   (517,251)
 Fst genetic               -0.058*     -0.026*           1
 distance, weighted      (517,251)   (517,251)   (517,251)
 Log geodesic              -0.101*     -0.033*      0.404*           1
 distance                (517,251)   (517,251)   (517,251)   (517,251)
 Dummy for                  0.168*      0.043*     -0.148*     -0.391*            1
 contiguity              (517,251)   (517,251)   (517,251)   (517,251)    (517,251)
 Religious Distance        -0.020*       0.001      0.210*      0.243*      -0.175*         1
 Index, weighted         (443,472)   (443,472)   (443,472)   (443,472)    (443,472) (443,472)
 Linguistic Distance       -0.035*      -0.001      0.164*      0.255*      -0.193*    0.544*                      1
 Index, weighted         (440,170)   (440,170)   (440,170)   (440,170)    (440,170) (440,170)              (440,170)
 1 - % cognate,              0.003      0.008*     -0.104*      0.160*      -0.177*    0.632*                 0.823*
 weighted                 (76,330)    (76,330)    (76,330)    (76,330)     (76,330) (67,657)                (67,657)
(# of observations in parentheses)




                                                        37
                  Table 1 – Means of Genetic Distance, Geodesic Distance and Contiguity
                              Conditional on the Overall Level of Hostility *

                                       Fst Genetic          Geodesic Distance,        Contiguity
                                   Distance, weighted              km                  dummy
 Overall Hostility Level = 0
                                                   0.102                  7,635                0.024
 (# of observations = 513,407)
 Overall Hostility Level = 2
                                                   0.050                  3,455                0.284
 (# of observations = 116)
 Overall Hostility Level = 3
                                                   0.054                  3,495                0.372
 (# of observations = 626)
 Overall Hostility Level = 4
                                                   0.055                  3,695                0.408
 (# of observations = 2,092)
 Overall Hostility Level = 5
                                                   0.063                  5,562                0.182
 (# of observations = 1,010)
517,251 pair-year observations from 13,575 country pairs.
* No observations involved an overall hostility level equal to 1 in the sample.
The overall hostility level is defined by COW as the maximum of each country's hostility level within a pair.
Hostility levels are defined in COW as follows: 0=No hostility, 1=No militarized action, 2=Threat to use force,
3=Display of force, 4=Use of Force, 5=War.



                 Table 2 – Conditional Frequency of War (number of pair-year observations
                                       by quartile of genetic distance)

  Conditioning         Bottom       Bottom         Third         Second          Top         Total
   statement:          decile of   quartile of   quartile of    quartile of   quartile of
                       genetic      genetic       genetic        genetic       genetic
                       distance     distance      distance       distance     distance*
                                                 Hostility level = 5 (War)
None                         277           487          178            301            44        1,010

Common sea /                 170           329          129            269            44           771
ocean = 0
Contiguity = 0               175           368          123            291            44           826

Distance > 1000              163           349          155            289            44           837
km
                                              Hostility Level > 3 (Conflict)
None                       1,076         1,937          940            717           134        3,728

Common sea /                 582         1,128          569            553           114        2,364
ocean = 0
Contiguity = 0               537         1,202          520            616           119        2,457

Distance > 1000               512         1,210          780          684            134        2,808
km
Based on 517,251 pair-year observations from 13,575 country pairs.
* 32 of the 44 cases in rows 3-6 involve South Africa as a combatant.

                                                       38
                                   Table 3: Baseline analysis, 1816-2000
                           (dependent variable: dichotomous indicator of conflict)

                                   (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)               (5)
                               Univariate,     Geography        Baseline,       Baseline,        IV probit,
                                 probit         controls,        probit           logit        instrument-
                                                 probit                                           ing with
                                                                                                  1500 GD
Fst genetic distance,               -7.4543         -1.3275             -0.9313        -0.7389        -1.4414
weighted                         (12.297)**       (5.837)**           (8.922)**    (-6.224)**     (-6.511) **
Log geodesic distance                               -0.1577             -0.0735        -0.0435        -0.0531
                                                  (4.842)**           (4.487)**    (-2.964)**     (-2.787) **
Log absolute difference                             -0.0120             -0.0003        -0.0089        -0.0085
in longitudes                                        (0.579)             (0.029)      (-1.189)       (-0.812)
Log absolute difference                             -0.0607             -0.0250        -0.0249        -0.0284
in latitudes                                      (3.276)**           (2.927)**    (-3.909)**     (-3.166) **
1 for contiguity                                      0.8897              0.4227         0.1617         0.4346
                                                  (7.713)**           (7.760)**     (3.675)**      (3.716) **
Number of landlocked                                -0.2088             -0.1197        -0.0875        -0.1219
countries in the pair                             (6.219)**           (7.553)**    (-6.392)**     (-7.012) **
Number of island                                      0.1712              0.0551         0.0468         0.0616
countries in the pair                             (4.312)**           (2.969)**     (3.240)**      (3.255) **
1 if pair shares at least one                        0.0782              0.1029         0.0657         0.1049
sea or ocean                                         (1.900)          (4.501)**     (3.281)**      (3.264) **
Log product of land areas                            0.0986               0.0511        0.0398         0.0532
in square km                                     (13.263)**         (15.762)**    (12.889)**     (11.687) **
1 if both countries are                                                 -0.0935        -0.0816        -0.1012
democracies (polity2>5)                                               (8.670)**    (-8.614)**     (-8.989) **
1 for pairs ever in                                                       0.1478         0.0708         0.1541
colonial relationship                                                 (3.413)**      (2.096)*       (2.272) *
1 if countries were or are                                                0.0444         0.0344         0.0526
the same country                                                         (1.021)        (1.031)        (0.948)
Number of peaceful years                                                -0.0066        -0.0074        -0.0069
                                                                    (13.545)**   (-14.131)**    (-11.182) **
Number of other wars                                                      0.0035         0.0025         0.0039
in year t                                                           (16.748)**      (9.447)**      (9.666) **
Dummy for alliance                                                      -0.0593        -0.0450        -0.0537
active in year t                                                      (4.686)**    (-5.063)**     (-4.591) **
Pseudo-R2                                0.047           0.208             0.300          0.309              -
Robust t statistics in parentheses (clustering at the country pair level);
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
All columns estimated with 517,251 observations from 13,175 country pairs.
Probit marginal effects reported in columns (1)-(3). Logit marginal effects reported in column (4).
For dummy variables, marginal effects are for discrete changes from 0 to 1.
All marginal effects were multiplied by 100 for readability (underlying average probability of conflict is 0.72%)




                                                       39
                                            Table 4: Sample breakdown by historical subperiod
                                  (dependent variable: dichotomous indicator of conflict; estimator: probit)

                               (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)              (6)            (7)
                           1816-2001         1816-1900         1901-2001          1914-1945         1946-2001         1919-1989     1990-2001
                             baseline
Fst genetic                     -0.9313            -0.8059           -0.7590           -0.6467           -0.3915          -0.7591        -0.3555
distance, weighted            (8.922)**             (0.526)       (8.668)**             (0.684)        (7.293)**        (7.372)**      (5.317)**
Log geodesic                    -0.0735            -0.3183           -0.0608           -0.5597           -0.0216          -0.0717        -0.0081
distance                      (4.487)**         (2.887)**         (4.247)**          (5.745)**         (2.919)**        (4.225)**         (1.449)
1 for contiguity                 0.4227             0.8359            0.3893             0.6932           0.2395           0.5238          0.1203
                              (7.760)**         (3.759)**         (7.645)**          (2.585)**         (7.411)**        (7.235)**      (4.851)**
# observations                  517,251             32,292           484,959             50,281          423,790          330,365        139,159
# of pairs                       13,175                 799           13,175              2,027           13,175           10,397         13,175
Pseudo-R2                          0.300              0.186             0.319             0.292             0.346            0.321          0.353
Robust t statistics in parentheses (clustering at the country pair level); * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
Probit marginal effects reported in all columns. For dummy variables, marginal effects are for discrete changes from 0 to 1. All marginal effects
were multiplied by 100 for readability.
Controls: In addition to reported coefficients, every column includes controls for: Log absolute difference in longitudes, log absolute difference in
latitudes, number of landlocked countries in the pair, number of island countries in the pair, dummy=1 if pair shares at least one sea or ocean, log
product of land areas in square km, dummy=1 if both countries are democracies (polity2>5), dummy=1 for pairs ever in colonial relationship,
dummy=1 if countries were or are the same country, number of peaceful years, number of other wars in year t, dummy for alliance active in year t.




                                                                         40
                                                         Table 5 - Regional analysis
                                  (dependent variable: dichotomous indicator of conflict; estimator: probit)

                                (1)                 (2)               (3)               (4)              (5)            (6)
                             Baseline              Same        Europe, with            Asia            Africa         America
                           specification        continent       Europe FST
                                                  dummy          Gen. Dist.
  Fst genetic distance a           -0.9313           -0.9711         -49.5053            -2.1541          -0.6891        -0.2466
                                 (8.922)**         (9.438)**          (1.976)*            (1.824)          (1.755)        (0.383)
  Log geodesic distance            -0.0735           -0.0788           -0.2775           -0.2850           -0.0199       -0.0478
                                 (4.487)**         (4.694)**           (1.878)         (4.087)**           (1.488)        (0.865)
  1 for contiguity                  0.4227            0.4377           -0.0090             0.6151           0.5354         0.5270
                                 (7.760)**         (7.875)**           (0.051)         (3.885)**        (4.252)**      (3.911)**
  1 of both countries are                            -0.0358
  on the same continent                             (2.380)*
  # of observations                517,251           517,251            22,006             28,738           31,017         35,398
  # of pairs                        13,175            13,175                291               866              848            581
  Pseudo-R2                           0.300             0.301             0.266             0.430            0.316          0.296
Robust t statistics in parentheses (clustering at the country pair level); * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
Probit marginal effects reported in all columns. For dummy variables, marginal effects are for discrete changes from 0 to 1. All marginal effects
were multiplied by 100 for readability.
a
  : Weighted genetic distance in all columns except column (4), where FST genetic distance between plurality groups from the European genetic
distance matrix is entered instead.
Controls: In addition to reported coefficients, every column includes controls for: Log absolute difference in longitudes, log absolute difference in
latitudes, number of landlocked countries in the pair, number of island countries in the pair, dummy=1 if pair shares at least one sea or ocean, log
product of land areas in square km, dummy=1 if both countries are democracies (polity2>5), dummy=1 for pairs ever in colonial relationship,
dummy=1 if countries were or are the same country, number of peaceful years, number of other wars in year t, dummy for alliance active in year t.




                                                                         41
                                         Table 6 - Alternative measures of historical distance, including GD
                                      (dependent variable: dichotomous indicator of conflict; estimator: probit)

                                           (1)                 (2)                  (3)                  (4)
                                        Baseline          Add linguistic       Add religious       Add religious
                                      specification         distance             distance          and linguistic
                                                                                                     distances
Fst genetic distance,                        -1.1697               -1.1717             -1.1466             -1.1461
weighted                                   (8.613)**             (8.608)**           (8.501)**           (8.495)**
Log geodesic distance                        -0.0920               -0.0921             -0.0936             -0.0936
                                           (4.301)**             (4.284)**           (4.390)**           (4.390)**
1 for contiguity                              0.5621                 0.5516             0.5219               0.5224
                                           (7.894)**             (7.853)**           (7.676)**           (7.719)**
Linguistic Distance Index,                                         -0.0298                                   0.0028
weighted                                                            (0.539)                                 (0.043)
Religious Distance Index,                                                               -0.0872            -0.0882
weighted, Fearon                                                                         (1.777)            (1.518)
1 - % cognate measure of
linguistic similarity, weighted
# of observations                              440,170              440,170             440,170              440,170
# of pairs                                      10,021               10,021              10,021               10,021
Pseudo-R2                                         0.292               0.292                0.293               0.293
Robust t statistics in parentheses; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
All coefficients multiplied by 100 for readability. The table reports marginal effects from probit estimates.
In addition to reported coefficients, all regressions include controls for log absolute difference in longitudes, log absolute difference in latitudes, number
of landlocked countries in the pair, number of island countries in the pair, dummy for pair shares at least one sea or ocean, log product of land areas in
square km, dummy for both countries are democracies (polity2>5), dummy for pairs ever in colonial relationship, dummy for countries were or are the
same country, number of peaceful years, number of other wars in year t, dummy for alliance active in year t.




                                                                              42
                                                 Table 7 - Nonlinearities and sample splits
                                  (dependent variable: dichotomous indicator of conflict; estimator: probit)

                                (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)              (5)               (6)              (7)
                              Baseline        Excluding         Contiguity         Proximity      Major power           Spline         Quadratic
                                              contiguous        interaction       interaction      interaction
                                                pairs
Fst genetic distance,             -0.9313          -0.6978            -0.9706          -0.9852           -0.9319           -1.0774           -0.3287
weighted                        (8.922)**        (8.332)**          (8.982)**        (8.858)**         (8.882)**         (3.882)**            (0.965)
Log geodesic distance             -0.0735          -0.0865            -0.0750          -0.0700           -0.0592           -0.0731           -0.0743
                                (4.487)**        (6.131)**          (4.703)**        (4.269)**         (4.171)**         (4.414)**         (4.652)**
1 for contiguity                   0.4227                               0.3232          0.4030            0.4536            0.4261             0.4064
                                (7.760)**                           (4.976)**        (7.639)**         (8.202)**         (7.733)**         (7.742)**
Fst Gen.Dist *                                                          0.5419
contiguity                                                             (1.177)
Fst Gen.Dist *                                                                                0.3511
proximity                                                                                    (1.309)
Fst Gen. Dist *                                                                                                 0.1382
major power dummy                                                                                              (0.625)
1 if at least one country                                                                                      0.3043
is a major power                                                                                            (6.256)**
Fst Gen.Dist * dummy                                                                                                         0.1325
for FST GD > median                                                                                                         (0.586)
Squared Fst genetic                                                                                                                           -2.9895
distance, weighted                                                                                                                            (1.915)
# observations                     517,251            503,748            517,251            517,251           517,251      517,251           517,251
# of pairs                           13,175             12,928            13,175              13,175           13,175        13,175            13,175
Pseudo-R2                             0.300              0.250              0.301              0.301             0.311        0.300             0.301
Robust t statistics in parentheses (clustering at the country pair level); * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
Probit marginal effects reported in all columns. For dummy variables, marginal effects are for discrete changes from 0 to 1. All marginal effects
were multiplied by 100 for readability.
Controls: In addition to reported coefficients, every column includes controls for: Log absolute difference in longitudes, log absolute difference in
latitudes, number of landlocked countries in the pair, number of island countries in the pair, dummy=1 if pair shares at least one sea or ocean, log
product of land areas in square km, dummy=1 if both countries are democracies (polity2>5), dummy=1 for pairs ever in colonial relationship,
dummy=1 if countries were or are the same country, number of peaceful years, number of other wars in year t, dummy for alliance active in year


                                                                         43
                                            Table 8 – Regressions explaining the intensity of conflict
                                       (dependent variable and estimator as described in the second row)

                                  (1)                   (2)                  (3)                (4)                       (5)              (6)
                             OLS on conflict      OLS on conflict       IV on conflict     OLS on number           OLS on number Probit on War
                               intensity            intensity in       intensity using        of war                    of war          dummy
                               variable           subsample with       1500 GD as IV         casualties               casualties,       variable
                                                      conflict                                                      sample with         (conflict
                                                                                                                       positive       intensity=5)
                                                                                                                      casualties
Fst genetic                              -0.1685               0.2536               -0.2757             -0.1153              -0.9103          -0.0875
distance, weighted                    (8.290)**               (0.613)            (7.413)**            (8.055)**               (0.611)       (6.001)**
Log geodesic                             -0.0330               0.0032               -0.0263             -0.0161              -0.1013          -0.0061
distance                              (4.245)**               (0.090)            (3.126)**            (3.549)**               (0.463)       (2.663)**
1 for contiguity                          0.2983             -0.0785                 0.2983              0.0881              -1.2939            0.0051
                                      (7.693)**               (1.403)            (7.696)**            (4.982)**            (5.105)**           (1.221)
1 if both countries are                  -0.0297             -0.1377                -0.0317             -0.0187              -0.9759          -0.0113
democracies (polity2>5)              (10.703)**               (1.954)           (10.918)**          (11.204)**                (1.586)       (5.838)**
Number of peaceful years                 -0.0008             -0.0041                -0.0008             -0.0004              -0.0021          -0.0011
                                      (9.996)**            (5.990)**             (9.987)**            (9.438)**               (0.641)       (7.190)**
Number of other wars                      0.0011               0.0063                0.0011              0.0009                0.0075           0.0005
in year t                            (12.483)**           (11.912)**            (12.785)**          (10.544)**             (3.950)**      (16.540)**
Dummy for alliance                       -0.0418             -0.2373                -0.0414             -0.0279              -0.3757          -0.0082
active in year t                      (4.955)**            (6.096)**             (4.906)**            (5.994)**               (1.331)       (5.337)**
# observations                          517,251                 3,844              517,251              516,758                 1,531         517,251
# of pairs                                13,175                  741                13,175              13,175                   394          13,175
                      a
Adjusted R-squared                         0.042                0.135                 0.042               0.013                 0.252            0.311
Robust t statistics in parentheses (clustering at the country pair level); * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
a
  : Pseudo R-squared in column 6.
Probit marginal effects reported in column (6), where: for dummy variables, marginal effects are for discrete changes from 0 to 1; all marginal
effects were multiplied by 100 for readability.
Controls: In addition to reported coefficients, every column includes controls for log absolute difference in longitudes, log absolute difference in
latitudes, number of landlocked countries in the pair, number of island countries in the pair, dummy=1 if pair shares at least one sea or ocean, log
product of land areas in square km, dummy=1 for pairs ever in colonial relationship, dummy=1 if countries were or are the same country.



                                                                          44
      Table 9: Post-1950 analysis, controlling for trade variables and absolute income differences
               (dependent variable: dichotomous indicator of conflict; estimator: probit)

                                  (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)
                              Baseline       Control       Additional    Baseline       Add per       Add total
                                 with       for trade        trade          with         capita        income
                              common          terms          terms       common         income        difference
                               sample                                     sample       difference
 Fst genetic distance,           -0.5223       -0.3247        -0.3098       -0.3119        -0.3531       -0.3240
 weighted                      (7.181)**     (5.810)**      (5.485)**     (4.974)**     (5.386)**      (4.673)**
 Log geodesic distance           -0.0154         0.0047         0.0043        0.0034         0.0018        0.0032
                                (2.107)*        (0.721)        (0.652)       (0.509)       (0.269)        (0.477)
 1 for contiguity                 0.2528         0.2186         0.2134        0.2313         0.2762        0.2326
                              (6.638)**      (7.349)**      (7.326)**    (7.098)**      (7.520)**      (7.160)**
 Log bilateral                                 -0.0414        -0.0395       -0.0403        -0.0360       -0.0400
 openness, t-4                               (4.813)**      (4.546)**     (4.327)**     (4.145)**      (4.306)**
 Log multilateral                                0.0552         0.0595        0.0327        0.0158         0.0306
 openness, t-4                                (1.993)*       (2.191)*        (1.032)       (0.527)        (0.962)
 Log distance * log                            -0.0093        -0.0098       -0.0071        -0.0048       -0.0068
 mult. openness                              (2.656)**      (2.854)**        (1.789)        (1.289)       (1.700)
 Log distance * log                              0.0054         0.0053        0.0053         0.0047        0.0052
 bilateral openness                          (5.095)**      (4.883)**     (4.627)**     (4.398)**      (4.490)**
 Dummy for zero                                -0.0159        -0.0159       -0.0137        -0.0127       -0.0149
 trade, t-4                                   (2.382)*       (2.431)*        (1.898)        (1.748)     (2.034)*
 Free trade area                                              -0.0236       -0.0226        -0.0214       -0.0221
 (full set)                                                 (2.859)**      (2.576)*       (2.310)*      (2.526)*
 # of GATT members                                            -0.0147       -0.0172        -0.0162       -0.0170
                                                            (3.768)**    (4.158)**      (3.888)**      (4.134)**
  Absolute difference in                                                                    1.6297
  log per capita income                                                                 (4.790)**
  Absolute difference                                                                                      0.1909
  in total GDP                                                                                            (0.773)
  # of observations               226,357        226,357       226,357      202,523       202,523        202,523
  # of pairs                         9,127          9,127         9,127       9,127          9,127          9,127
  Pseudo-R2                          0.336          0.350         0.353       0.351          0.356          0.351
Robust t statistics in parentheses (clustering at the country pair level);
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
Probit marginal effects reported in all columns. For dummy variables, marginal effects are for discrete
changes from 0 to 1. All marginal effects were multiplied by 100 for readability.
Controls: In addition to reported coefficients, every column includes controls for: Log absolute difference
in longitudes, log absolute difference in latitudes, number of landlocked countries in the pair, number of
island countries in the pair, dummy=1 if pair shares at least one sea or ocean, log product of land areas in
square km, dummy=1 if both countries are democracies (polity2>5), dummy=1 for pairs ever in colonial
relationship, dummy=1 if countries were or are the same country, number of peaceful years, number of
other wars in year t, dummy for alliance active in year t.




                                                      45
                                        Table 10: OLS Analysis of UN Vote Correlations Data, 1946-2000

                                             (1)                  (2)                     (3)                  (4)                     (5)
                                          Univariate         Add geography         Full specification       1990-2000              Excluding
                                                                controls                                                          abstentions
 Fst genetic distance,                                0.2657           0.2852                     0.2923               0.1500               0.4709
 weighted                                        (13.356)**       (14.140)**                 (14.363)**            (8.033)**           (15.590)**
 Log geodesic distance                                                 0.0240                     0.0276               0.0143               0.0435
                                                                   (5.764)**                   (6.654)**           (4.006)**            (7.406)**
 Log absolute difference                                              -0.0199                    -0.0186             -0.0081               -0.0282
 in longitudes                                                     (8.052)**                   (7.841)**           (3.856)**            (8.251)**
 Log absolute difference                                              -0.0387                    -0.0370             -0.0355               -0.0694
 in latitudes                                                     (26.599)**                 (25.206)**           (24.698)**           (31.779)**
 1 for contiguity                                                      0.0535                     0.0539               0.0300               0.0806
                                                                   (5.271)**                   (5.617)**           (2.962)**            (5.835)**
 Number of landlocked                                                  0.0171                     0.0177               0.0205               0.0177
 countries in the pair                                              (6.661)**                  (6.861)**           (9.460)**            (4.561)**
 Number of island countries                                            0.0298                     0.0301               0.0300               0.0408
 in the pair                                                      (10.593)**                 (10.909)**           (11.194)**            (9.562)**
 1 if pair shares at least                                            -0.0183                    -0.0294             -0.0325               -0.0470
 one sea or ocean                                                   (3.456)**                  (5.643)**           (5.344)**            (6.701)**
 Log product of land areas                                            -0.0061                    -0.0063              0.0001               -0.0097
 in square km                                                     (10.591)**                 (10.759)**               (0.234)          (11.683)**
 1 if both countries are                                                                         -0.0071             -0.0338               -0.0437
 democracies (polity2>5)                                                                        (2.100)*           (9.939)**            (9.332)**
 1 for pairs ever in colonial                                                                    -0.1224             -0.1451               -0.2133
 relationship                                                                                  (9.184)**          (10.500)**           (11.464)**
 Number of peaceful years                                                                         0.0005             -0.0001                0.0007
                                                                                               (7.853)**            (2.111)*            (7.992)**
 Number of other conflicts                                                                        0.0013             -0.0004                0.0023
 in year t                                                                                   (32.156)**           (33.041)**           (46.343)**
 Dummy for alliance active                                                                        0.0614               0.0442               0.1078
 in year t                                                                                   (12.096)**            (6.785)**           (14.887)**
 Constant                                             0.8347                0.9436                0.8311               0.9103               0.6499
                                                (278.491)**            (31.987)**            (26.381)**           (32.921)**           (14.837)**
 Adjusted R-squared                                    0.008                 0.074                 0.100                0.101                0.147
Robust t statistics in parentheses; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; All regressions run on 385,783 observations from 12,655 country pairs;
Note: Ever the same country dummy excluded as regressor as no pair in the sample with UN vote correlations data was made up of countries that
were ever a single country.
                                                                             46
