                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          SKILL DISPERSION AND TRADE FLOWS

                                       Matilde Bombardini
                                       Giovanni Gallipoli
                                        Germán Pupato

                                       Working Paper 15097
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15097


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2009




We would like to thank Paul Beaudry, David Green, Patrick Francois, Thomas Lemieux, Vadim Marmer,
Francesco Trebbi, Jonathan Vogel and seminar participants at CIFAR for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Matilde Bombardini, Giovanni Gallipoli, and Germán Pupato. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Skill Dispersion and Trade Flows
Matilde Bombardini, Giovanni Gallipoli, and Germán Pupato
NBER Working Paper No. 15097
June 2009
JEL No. F12,F16,J82

                                              ABSTRACT

Is skill dispersion a source of comparative advantage? While it is established that a country's aggregate
endowment of human capital is an important determinant of comparative advantage, this paper investigates
whether the distribution of skills in the labor force can play a role in the determination of trade flows.
We develop a multi-country, multi-sector model of trade in which comparative advantage derives
from (i) differences across sectors in the complementarity of workers' skills, (ii) the dispersion of skills
in the working population. First, we show how higher dispersion in human capital can trigger specialization
in sectors characterized by higher substitutability among workers' skills. We then use industry-level
bilateral trade data to show that human capital dispersion, as measured by a standard international
metric, has a significant effect on trade flows. We find that the effect is of a magnitude comparable
to that of aggregate endowments. The result is robust to the introduction of several controls for other
proximate causes of comparative advantage.


Matilde Bombardini                                   Germán Pupato
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
University of British Columbia                       University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall                                   997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1                                Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
CANADA                                               CANADA
also NBER, CIFAR, and RCEA                           pupa08@gmail.com
matildeb@interchange.ubc.ca

Giovanni Gallipoli
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
CANADA
and RCEA
gallipol@interchange.ubc.ca
1        Introduction

One of the mainstays of the theory of comparative advantage is that countries’ factor endow-

ments determine the pattern of trade. An established theoretical framework, the Heckscher-Ohlin-

Samuelson factor proportion theory, and numerous related empirical studies1 identify quantities

such as the stocks of human and physical capital of countries as primary sources of comparative

advantage. In this paper we provide evidence supporting an alternative, and empirically sizeable,

source of comparative advantage: the dispersion of human capital in the working population.2

        Why would the distribution of human capital matter for specialization and trade? We argue

that sectors vary in the degree of complementarity among the skills of workers employed. We

conjecture that for some sectors, for example engine and turbine manufacturing, it is essential to

employ workers of similar skills at every stage of production,3 while for other sectors, like computer

or apparel, the output of a team is sensitive to the presence of extremely skilled individuals, even

if some stages of production are left to workers with lower human capital. Given that sectoral

technologies may vary in this dimension, we investigate the hypothesis that countries with greater

skill dispersion specialize in sectors characterized by higher substitutability among workers’skills.

        The idea that skill dispersion may lead to specialization has been the object of work by Gross-

man and Maggi (2000), henceforth GM, who show that, in a two-country, two-sector model, the

country with a relatively more dispersed skill distribution may specialize in the sector that bene…ts

from matching workers of di¤erent skill levels. This paper builds upon GM’s insight, making two

contributions. First, it proposes a multi-country, multi-sector model where skill dispersion gen-
    1
     Among others, Romalis (2004), testing the predictions of the theory about commodity trade, and Bowen et al.
(1987), Tre‡er (1993), Tre‡er (1995), and Davis and Weinstein (2001), testing the factor content predictions of the
theory.
   2
     Human capital is determined by many factors, among which formal education, family upbringing, underlying
ability and on-the-job training. Throughout this paper we refer to human capital or skills, terms that we use
interchangeably, as a set of attributes that are of productive use in the workplace.
   3
     Using the terminology of Kremer (1993), these sectors exhibit an O-ring technology.



                                                        2
erates testable implications for the pattern of international trade. Second, it provides empirical

evidence that diversity is in fact a strong determinant of specialization. We present evidence that

the dispersion of human capital matters as much as its stock in determining comparative advantage,

a novel …nding to the best of our knowledge.

       A …rst glance at the data reveals that cross-country di¤erences in skill dispersion are con-

siderably larger than di¤erences in the average skills of workers. We employ the distribution of

scores in the International Adult Literacy Survey (IALS), an internationally comparable measure

of work-related skills, as a proxy for the distribution of human capital. Figure 1 reports the mean

and standard deviation of IALS during 1994-1998. The coe¢ cient of variation of the standard

deviation of log-scores is an order of magnitude larger than that of the average log-scores.

       The reasons why countries at similar stages of development di¤er in their skill distribution are

beyond the scope of this study;4 such di¤erences may be due to the degree of centralization in the

education system and curricular control (Stevenson and Baker, 1991), the existence of elite schools,

sorting and segregation,5 early tracking,6 local school …nancing (Benabou, 1996) and the share of

private and public schools (Takii and Tanaka, 2009).7

       The …rst contribution of this paper is a theoretical framework that allows us to investigate the

relevance of skill dispersion for comparative advantage in a multi-sector multi-country environment.

This is related but distinct from the one presented in GM. They show that, if skills are perfectly

observable and the production function is symmetric, CRS and supermodular in the skills of work-
   4
      What is not beyond the scope of this study is a discussion of how the endogeneity of skill dispersion might a¤ect
our empirical results. See Section 4.4.
    5
      The existence of peer e¤ects, as documented for example by Hanushek et al. (2003) and Hoxby and Building
(2000), implies that segregation and sorting might result in even higher inequality of educational outcomes. An
example of this ampli…cation mechanism is provided by Friesen and Krauth (2007).
    6
      Tracking refers to the practice of grouping students in di¤erent schools according to their ability. Woessmann
et al. (2006) show that when grouping happens before age 10, inequality in education outcomes increases at the
country level.
    7
      James (1993) argues that the mix of public and private educational services is due, for example, to the degree of
religious heterogeneity within a country.




                                                          3
ers,8 then diversity is not a source of comparative advantage and there is no trade. Therefore their

main result is that comparative advantage emerges only if there are two sectors, one supermodular

and one submodular.9

       Our modeling choices depart from GM’s in two directions. First, we only consider supermod-

ular production functions that simply vary in the degree of complementarity of workers’ skills.

This choice allows us to link our work more easily to the existing trade literature, in which most

production functions are supermodular. The model features a continuum of sectors that vary in

the elasticity of substitution across workers’ skills. Second, we consider a world where, because

of frictions in the labor market and unobservability of workers’ skills, random matching prevails

between workers and …rms.10 This modeling choice is dictated primarily by tractability (our model

can be easily applied to a world of many countries and many sectors), but it also re‡ects the fact

that a large part of workers’skills is ex-ante unobservable to both workers and employers.11 Ran-

dom matching implies that the skill distribution prevailing in a country is re‡ected at the …rm and

industry level. Recent international evidence (see Iranzo et al., 2008, and Lazear and Shaw, 2008)

suggests that most of wage dispersion is in fact within, rather than between, …rms.

       We embed these features in a model of trade with monopolistic competition for two reasons.

First, monopolistic competition smooths out the sharp trade predictions that would otherwise re-
   8
     Supermodularity implies that the marginal product of a more able worker is increasing in the ability of the
co-worker.
   9
     Trade emerges only conditional on the existence of a supermodular sector, where workers of identical abilities are
paired together, i.e. self-matching prevails, and of a submodular sector, where the most skilled workers are paired
with the least skilled co-workers, i.e. cross-matching prevails. Submodularity of the production function implies that
the marginal bene…t of increasing a workers’skills is decreasing in the skills of the co-worker. In this framework the
country with more dispersed skill distribution specializes in the submodular sector.
  10
     We expand on an element introduced by GM, who consider imperfect observability of skills. At the end of the
paper the authors “note in passing that, with imperfect matching, trade would take place between two countries
with di¤erent educational processes even if tasks were complementary in all production activities”, i.e. all production
functions were super-modular, which is the case we consider. We extend this model to many countries and sectors in
order to derive testable implications.
  11
     In particular, as it will become clear in the empirical section, we refer to skills which are ‘residual’and unrelated
to observable characteristics of the workers.




                                                            4
sult from a perfectly competitive Ricardian model.12 Moreover, similarly to Helpman and Itskhoki

(2009a), Helpman et al.(2008a; 2008b), and for reasons discussed throughout the paper, we intro-

duce simple labor market frictions, which are incompatible with perfect competition.

       We show that, under some conditions, countries that have a more heterogeneous labor force

export relatively more in sectors where the degree of complementarity among workers’ skills is

lower. Since the degree of complementarity across workers’abilities is not directly observable, we

exploit the structure of the model, which delivers a direct link between the unobservable degree of

complementarity and an observable quantity, namely the dispersion of sectoral wages. In our model,

due to labor market frictions, workers hired by a …rm are not interchangeable with workers outside

such …rm; therefore …rms and workers engage in bargaining over the surplus. In the presence of

random matching, the resulting wage distribution uniquely re‡ects the degree of complementarity

among workers’skills. Sectors with higher complementarity are characterized by a more compressed

wage distribution because, for example, workers with skills much higher than the average contribute

to surplus relatively less, a fact re‡ected in their wage.

       The second contribution of the paper is to test the prediction that countries with more dispersed

skill distributions specialize, and therefore export relatively more, in sectors with higher wage

dispersion. In order to bring the empirical analysis in line with the theoretical assumption of

unobservable skills, we purge both our measure of skills (from the IALS) and individual workers’

wages (from the US Census), of any component related to observable characteristics, to obtain

residual scores and residual wages. We adapt the empirical approach of Helpman et al. (2008c),

henceforth HMR, to industry-level trade ‡ows and augment it with our variable of interest. We

show that the interaction of country skill dispersion and sector wage dispersion is a signi…cant and
  12
    One of the points made by Costinot and Komunjer (2007) is that the sharp predictions of Ricardian models can
be smoothed also by introducing random productivity di¤erences across countries within each sector.




                                                       5
economically large determinant of exports, even after controlling for a variety of trade barriers,

exporting country and importing country-industry …xed e¤ects (as dictated by the theory). We

also include determinants of comparative advantage based on aggregate factor endowments as in

Romalis (2004). Our empirical analysis provides robust evidence that skill dispersion matters as

much as the aggregate endowment of skills in the determination of trade ‡ows.

   So far, we have extensively discussed the relation of this paper to its closest predecessor, GM.

Three other papers present interesting alternative theoretical mechanisms for why the skill distrib-

ution matters for trade. Ohnsorge and Tre‡er (2007) propose a model with two-dimensional worker

heterogeneity and show that, when each worker represents a bundle of two skills, the correlation

of the two in the population determines comparative advantage. Grossman (2004) starts from the

premise that, in some sectors, incomplete contracts make it di¢ cult to tie remuneration to an in-

dividual worker’s output. In a country with high skill dispersion highly skilled individuals prefer

to sort into sectors where individual performance is easier to measure, rather than working in an

industry where the common wage is dragged down by workers with relatively low skills. Grossman

(2004) shows that this type of endogenous sorting determines comparative advantage. Finally, in

Bougheas and Riezman (2007) comparative advantage emerges as a result of di¤erential returns to

skills in di¤erent sectors.

   Our …ndings relate to recent literature emphasizing less traditional sources of comparative

advantage. In this literature the endowment of a country, interpreted in its broadest sense, includes

institutional features, such as the ability to enforce contracts (Levchenko, 2007, and Nunn, 2007),

the quality of the …nancial system (Manova, 2008a; 2008b) and the extent of labor market frictions

(Helpman and Itskhoki, 2009a, Cuñat and Melitz, 2007, Tang, 2008). We view our contribution

as related to this ‘institutional endowment’view of comparative advantage because human capital




                                                 6
dispersion in a country is to a large extent the result of the prevailing educational system. This, in

turn, can be considered, if not immutable, a slow-moving attribute of a country.13

         Finally, as already mentioned, this paper also contributes to the large and established literature

on factor endowments and comparative advantage, a topic which still receives a great deal of

attention. For example, in a recent contribution to this literature, Costinot and Vogel (2009) build

a model with a continuum of sectors and a continuum of skill levels and investigate the e¤ect of

trade on inequality in a rich framework.14

         The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 develops the two-country multi-sector model and

delivers the basic prediction about trade ‡ows. Section 3 extends the model to many countries.

Section 4 presents the empirical analysis. Section 5 concludes. All proofs and a detailed data

description can be found in the Appendix.



2         Two-Country Model

This section presents a model of trade between two countries, Home and Foreign, characterized by

di¤erent skill distributions. The two countries may also vary in size, but are otherwise identical.

We denote a country by c where c 2 fH; F g. When it does not create ambiguity we drop the

country subscript. Section 3 extends the model to a multi-country world.


2.1        Preferences

Each country c is populated by a measure Lc of individuals. Utility of the representative consumer

depends on the consumption of a homogeneous good Q (0) and a continuum of di¤erentiated goods
    13
     Glaeser et al. (2004) show that education is signi…cantly more persistent than several other institutional features,
such as the form of government.
  14
     Besides their object of interest being di¤erent from this paper’s, their assignment model yields the result that in
equilibrium a sector employs only workers of a unique skill level, and as such it is not readily comparable to ours.




                                                           7
Q (i) with i 2 I. The utility function U is Cobb Douglas so that a constant share              (i) is spent on

good i:


                                                               Z
                            log U   =       (0) log Q (0) +                 (i) log Q (i) di
                                                                i2I
                                                                        Z
                            with 0 <        (i) < 1 and        (0) +              (i) di = 1
                                                                            i2I



where Q (i) is the consumption index over the set          (i) of available varieties of product i. Preferences

exhibit a constant elasticity of substitution        across varieties of good i:


                                       "Z                           #
                                                                        1
                                                           1
                             Q (i) =             q(!; i)       d!            with     > 1:
                                        !2 (i)


where q(!; i) is the quantity consumed of variety ! of good i. Under these preferences, demand for

a given variety ! is represented by the following equation:


                                                     p (!; i)   (i) E
                                        d (!; i) =            1                                            (1)
                                                         P (i)


where E is total expenditure, p (!; i) is the price of variety ! of i, and P (i) is the ideal CES price

index of aggregate Q (i).


2.2   Production

Good Q (0) is produced under constant returns to scale by perfectly competitive …rms. The tech-

nology is such that one unit of labor produces one unit of output. We choose Q (0) as our numeraire

and we assume that all countries produce the numeraire good in positive quantity, which implies

that the wage in sector 0, w (0), is equal to one.

   Each di¤erentiated sector i is populated by a continuum of identical …rms, each producing a


                                                       8
di¤erent variety !. The market is characterized by monopolistic competition among …rms, with

free entry. There is also a …xed cost of production f . The amount of output produced y depends

on the skill level of each worker hired a, the measure of workers hired h and the distribution of

skills across workers g~ (a). The distribution of skills matters for production because we assume that

di¤erent levels of skills are not perfectly substitutable.15 In particular, the production function of

a representative …rm in a sector depends on the degree of complementarity                      among workers’skills

in that sector and takes the following form:


                                        Z                  1
                                                                          1
                                 y=         a h~
                                               g (a) da        with           <       <1                            (2)



The parameter        measures the degree of skill complementarity, since the elasticity of substitution

                                                                                  1
among skills levels, for a …xed mass of workers h, is given by                1       , which increases with . The

larger , the more substitutable workers of di¤erent skill levels are.16 The key assumption in this

model is that each sector i is characterized by a di¤erent value of                   in production, and therefore by

a di¤erent degree of complementarity among workers’skill levels. Since                      is the only characteristic

that di¤erentiates sectors, in the remainder of the theoretical section we drop the index i and index

sectors by their parameter .

       Two properties of this production function are worth discussing in detail. First, for given mass of

workers h, the function is homogeneous of degree one in the skills of workers. This property stresses

the relative importance of the shape, rather than location, of the distribution of skills. Second,

the production function features increasing returns to the mass of workers, given the distribution
  15
     One possible interpretation is that the skill of each worker is a di¤erentiated input in the production process. An
alternative interpretation, along the lines of the paper by Takii and Tanaka (2009), is that each worker produces a
di¤erentiated intermediate good, in quantity proportional to her skills, and intermediate inputs are aggregated by a
CES production function.
  16
     For a …xed h, this production function is analogous to the one introduced by Grossman and Maggi (2000), p.
1261.




                                                           9
of skills.17 In particular,     also represents the extent of increasing returns to scale (as well as the

degree of complementarity), but this feature plays no important role in the model.18 We restrict

the size of    to guarantee that the …rm’s maximization problem is concave, as described in Section

2.5.


2.3      Labor Market

We introduce labor market frictions in the spirit of Helpman and Itskhoki (2009a), although for

simplicity we assume that there are no frictions in sector 0. Workers look for jobs in the homo-

geneous sector or in one of the di¤erentiated good sectors. Workers are characterized by di¤erent

levels of skills and skill is a continuous variable distributed in the workers’population of country c

according to a density function g (a; c). In the di¤erentiated sectors …rms pay a cost bh to randomly

sample a mass h of workers from the population of workers looking for a job in that sector. The

search cost b depends on the labor market conditions, as described further below.

       We follow Helpman and Itskhoki (2009a) and Helpman et al. (2008a) in making the simplifying

assumption that workers do not know their own skills when looking for a job. As a result the initial

distribution of skills in the worker population will be inherited by the mass of workers looking

for a job in each sector.19 We also assume that worker’s skills are not observable to the …rm

when hiring. The combination of these assumptions yields no sorting between workers and …rms.

Although analytically convenient, these assumptions certainly deserve a discussion. We o¤er two
  17                                                                   1 R             1
     This is easily seen by rewriting the production function as y = h     a g~ (a) da .
  18
     We should note that it is not possible to obtain both constant returns to mass of workers and ability without
confounding the quantity and quality of workers, as for example in a production function of the following type:
       R                 1

y =      (ah~g (a)) da . We give priority to maintaining constant returns to ability because we do not want to
confound the degree of complementarity with di¤erential returns to aggregate ability in di¤erent sectors. Grossman
and Maggi (2000) discuss this as another case in which the distribution of ability matters and Bougheas and Riezman
(2007) explicitly model this aspect in a di¤erent framework.
  19
     An alternative interpretation is that workers are aware of their own ability, but are ex-ante ignorant about the
distribution of wages in all sectors (including the numeraire), except for the expected wage and the probability of
unemployment.



                                                         10
ways of interpreting random matching. First, it might be the case that productivity in a speci…c job

mainly depends on the …rm-worker match and this might be unknown to the worker and to the …rm

until production takes place. Second, skills might be partially observable by both …rms and workers,

which corresponds to the case analyzed by GM. They have shown that if skills are fully observable

and production functions are supermodular, workers of identical skills are matched together, and

countries with di¤erent skill distributions do not trade. If we allowed skills to be partially observable

in our model we would obtain that …rms only hire workers of identical observable skills. Therefore

we can interpret our case of unobservable skills as a residual of overall skills, when we take out the

observable component. For consistency with this, the empirical analysis will employ a measure of

skills purged of all observables.

    Although the distribution of workers’ skills g~ (a) could potentially be sector speci…c, random

matching implies that every …rm, in every sector , in country c inherits the skill distribution in

the general population:20

                                                  g~ (a) = g (a; c)


2.4    Skill Dispersion as Comparative Advantage

Given that …rms and workers match randomly with respect to unobservable skills, in this section

we discuss how di¤erent skill distributions across countries generate comparative advantage in this
                                                                                                           1
world. To facilitate the discussion we rewrite the production function in (2) as y = h A ( ; c)

where A ( ; c) is de…ned as:
                                                        Z                  1

                                         A ( ; c) =          a g(a; c)da

  20
     We do not allow …rms to screen workers as in Helpman et al. (2008a). We note that, contrary to the case described
by Helpman et al. (2008a), with our choice of production function, …rms would not want to screen workers even if the
technology to screen were available, because the marginal product of an additional worker is always positive. This is
the case because of the static problem we are analyzing. In a dynamic framework we would expect …rms to lay o¤
unproductive workers and replace them with potentially more productive ones.



                                                            11
    We loosely refer to A ( ; c) as ‘productivity’, although clearly this is not the result of countries

having access to di¤erent technologies. The magnitude of A ( ; c) depends on a combination of a

country-speci…c skill distribution and a sector-speci…c level of complementarity across skills. We

are interested in how the pattern of comparative advantage, i.e. the relative A’s, are a¤ected by

the distribution of skills.

    The general idea we explore is whether countries with lower dispersion in the distribution of

skills have a comparative advantage in sectors with high degree of complementarity, i.e. where it

is relatively more important to employ workers with similar skills. Since the A’s exhibit constant

returns to skills, a proportional increase in the skills of all workers increases the A by the same

proportion and does not a¤ect comparative advantage. Therefore we concentrate on comparing

A’s across countries that have the same average skills and di¤erent dispersion.21 We …rst state a

general condition for a speci…c pattern of comparative advantage to emerge as a result of di¤erences

in the distribution of skills.

    Property 1 If countries are ordered so that, if c < c0 , then country c0 is characterized by a

skill distribution g (a; c0 ) that is a mean-preserving spread of the skill distribution g (a; c) in country

                                                                               0
c, then A ( ; c) is log-supermodular in          and c, i.e. for           <       and c < c0 :


                                                                 0
                                              A ( ; c0 )   A        ; c0
                                                         <         0                                              (3)
                                              A ( ; c)     A         ;c


    Having stated the general property that we are interested in, we now study under which con-

ditions Property 1 holds. As GM suggest,22 a general result of this type cannot be established.

Because our ultimate goal is to derive empirical implications, we take three di¤erent approaches
  21
     Note that changes in the average ability that are not the result of a multiplicative change in all abilities will
a¤ect the pattern of comparative advantage.
  22
     See p.1271.




                                                         12
to studying this problem. First, we show that comparative advantage can be established for any

distribution if we place bounds on the degree of complementarity . Second, we perform compara-

tive statics assuming speci…c distributions of skills. Third, we construct A ( ; c) using the empirical

distribution of IALS scores, our proxy for skills.

    Our …rst approach yields a general result based on restrictions on the degree of complementarity

and on the upper bound of the support of the skill distribution.23


Proposition 1 Property 1 holds, i.e. a country c0 with a more dispersed skill distribution than

country c has a comparative advantage in sectors with lower complementarity (higher ) under the

following su¢ cient conditions:

    (i) Skill is bounded from above by amax

    (ii) The degree of complementarity is low enough:                     >     where    is de…ned by the following

condition
                                                              2       1
                                               log amax =
                                                              1

    In our second approach to studying Property 1 we relax the conditions on complementarity at

the cost of concentrating on speci…c distributions. We can only consider continuous distributions

that are characterized by at least two parameters (in order to be able to consider mean-preserving

increases in dispersion) and are de…ned on a positive support.


Proposition 2 If skills are distributed according to a Pareto or Log-normal distribution then, if

country c and c0 are characterized by skill distributions g (a; c) and g (a; c0 ) such that g (a; c0 ) has

                                                                          0
equal mean and higher variance than g (a; c) and if               <           then Property 1 holds, i.e. country c0

                                       0
has a comparative advantage in             .
  23
     Imposing an upper bound on a is realistic because it means we do not admit the existence of in…nitely productive
workers.



                                                         13
       While Proposition 2 establishes an analytical result, we have also numerically computed the

A’s for the following distributions: uniform, triangular, gamma, beta and inverse gaussian. For all

these distributions, and for a wide range of parameters, we cannot …nd a violation of the ranking

in (3).24

       In our third approach we compute the A’s for di¤erent countries and sectors employing the

empirical distributions of IALS log-scores. We verify that Property 1 holds. For a grid of 100 ’s in
                                                    A( ;c0 )
the [0; 1] interval, we calculate the ratio of      A( ;c)     where c0 has higher skill dispersion than country

c according to the coe¢ cient of variation of scores. We then regress this ratio on                   and …nd that,

in 169 out of 171 possible pairs of countries, the gradient is positive and strongly signi…cant, in

agreement with equation (3).25


2.5      The Firm Problem and Bargaining

This section analyzes the problem of a representative Home …rm in a given sector. Analogous

expressions can be derived for a Foreign …rm. Firms can sell in the domestic market or export,

facing a transport cost. The transport cost           is of the iceberg type, so that …rms have to ship           >1

units of good in order for one unit to arrive. We denote by xcc0 a variable x originating in market

c and destined for market c0 . We drop the sector index to simplify notation.

       A Home …rm must decide how much to produce for the Home and Foreign market and, since

it maximizes pro…ts, it equates marginal revenues across the two markets. This allows us to write
  24
     A violation of the ranking can be engineered using a result by Ross (1981). The intuition is the following. Ross
(1981) shows that, if we adopt the Arrow-Debreu de…nition of risk aversion, then, starting from a given lottery, we
might …nd the counterintuitive result that a more risk-averse individual is willing to pay less than a less risk-averse
individual to avoid an an increase in risk in the sense of a mean-preserving spread. We can view our A as the certainty
equivalent of lottery g for an individual with Bernoulli utility u (a) = a , 0 < < 1. Individuals with lower are
more risk averse in the Arrow-Pratt sense. In our case we can show, using the example proposed by Ross (1981)
that, with a mean-preserving spread, the certainty equivalent of a more risk averse individual drops proportionately
by less than for a less risk averse individual. Details are available from the authors.
  25
     Numerical results and details of all these exercises are available from the authors.




                                                          14
total revenues of a Home …rm rH as a function of total output:


                                                                         1
                                                       rH = yH               H                                              (4)


                                                                 1                            1
where yH = yHH + yHF ,                  = BH + BF          1         and Bc = Pc Qc for c = H; F .         26   The …rm must
                                H


then simply choose the total amount of output to produce and therefore how many workers to

employ. In this decision it takes into account how much workers are paid.

       Because of the presence of search frictions, once workers are hired they are not interchangeable

with outside workers and we assume that the …rm and all workers employed engage in bargaining

to share the surplus created. We assume that the intra-…rm bargaining is of the type described

by Stole and Zwiebel (1996), with the workers having unemployment as outside option, which we

assume yields a payo¤ of zero. Stole and Zwiebel show that the bargaining solution yields payo¤s

that correspond to the Shapley value. We discuss wages in the following section, while here we

show that the bargaining outcome for a …rm with revenues r is given by sr, where:



                                                      s=                             :                                      (5)
                                                               (1 + )            1


       Given the expression for total revenues in (4), the …rm static problem27 reduces to choosing

how many workers to hire (h) to maximize pro…ts :


                                                 h           1
                                                               i                 1

                                max           = s A ( ; H) h                             H   bh   f:                        (6)
                                    h
                                                  1              1   1
  26
       Total revenues are given by rH = BH yHH + BF yHF                      . The equality of marginal revenues across markets,
                yHH       BH        1
which implies   yHF
                      =   BF
                                        and some algebraic manipulation lead to (4), similarly to Helpman and Itskhoki
(2009a).
  27
     For a dynamic extension of this type of framework see Helpman and Itskhoki (2009b).




                                                                15
       This is a concave problem because of the restriction placed on                 in (2). Since this is a standard

problem we refer to the Appendix for details of the derivation, and report here the main results.

The total output produced by a Home …rm is given by:



                                                      yH = A ( ; H)


                  h                  i1
                         f(   1)
where      ( )=       b(1+(   1) )        . Intuitively, output is increasing in productivity A, the size of the

…xed cost f , and the elasticity of demand , while it decreases with the hiring cost b.28 We assume

that di¤erences in productivity between Home and Foreign …rms in a given sector are not too large,

that is:
                                                  1    A ( ; H)
                                                                         8                                        (7)
                                                       A( ;F)

otherwise the amount produced is zero. Under condition (7) we can derive how much output is

produced for the domestic and export market, yHH and yHF respectively (see Appendix). As

standard with iso-elastic demand, the producer price is constant across markets and for a Home

                                                           +    1
…rm is equal to pH =           AH    where       ( )=f         +1 .   The consumer price in the export market is

the producer price multiplied by :

                                                       pHF =                                                      (8)
                                                                  AH

In the Appendix we derive revenues accruing to …rms in all markets. We focus attention here on

the relative revenues (i.e. value of output sold) of a Home and Foreign …rm in a given market, for

example Foreign:
                                                                             1
                                                 rHF       A ( ; H)
                                                      =                                                           (9)
                                                 rF F      A( ;F)
  28
    The hiring cost depends on tightness of the labor market x, and is assumed to take the same form as in Helpman
and Itskhoki (2009a) and Helpman et al. (2008a): b = 0 x 1 . We refer to these papers for a discussion. We similarly
                                                                                    1
                                                                                  1+ 1
obtain that in equilibrium the hiring cost is constant across sectors, i.e. b =   0      .



                                                            16
Intuitively, relative revenues increase in relative productivity, as predicted by comparative advan-

tage. In the next section we solve for the mass of …rms, which is the …nal step in the determination

of trade ‡ows.


2.6      Trade Flows

In Section 2.5 we derived the amount of output sold by each …rm in the domestic and export market.

In order to determine trade ‡ows we need to calculate the equilibrium mass of …rms for country

c and sector , Mc ( ). The derivation is presented in the Appendix. We remark that, similarly

to other models of monopolistic competition with trade costs (Helpman and Krugman, 1985), the

presence of a home-market e¤ect requires that we restrict the degree of asymmetry in country sizes

                                                                                                                          LH
to prevent all …rms from locating in one country. De…ne relative population in Home as                                    LF .

We impose throughout the restrictions that            low   <   <    up .   If the condition is violated for some

industries, we expect to observe no production and no exports.29 If the condition is satis…ed, then

the following proposition establishes a link between comparative advantage and equilibrium entry.


Proposition 3 Under the condition that country sizes are su¢ ciently similar, i.e.                          low   <   <   up ,

                                                                                                     0
the equilibrium mass of …rms in country H relative to country F in sector                                is higher than in

                                                                                        0
sector    if and only if country H has a comparative advantage in sector                    , i.e.


                                                  0                                 0
                              A ( ; H)   A         ;H     MH ( )   MH
                                       <          0    ()        <                  0
                              A( ;F)     A          ;F    MF ( )   MF
  29
    As equations (A-19) and (A-20) establish, the conditions for a positive mass of …rms depend on size, but also on
comparative advantage. If a country is relatively more productive it can a¤ord to be smaller in size and still have a
positive mass of …rms. In this sense our model also predicts an extensive margin of trade (whether we observe or not
trade between two countries) based on comparative advantage, albeit a very stark one. Di¤erently from models with
heterogeneous …rms, e.g. Helpman et al. (2008c), in this setup the assumption of identical …rms implies that either
…rms exist and export or they do neither.




                                                         17
    Since trade ‡ows are completely determined by the amount sold in the export market by each

…rm and by the number of …rms, we now show that the value of exports is relatively higher in

comparative advantage industries. In the previous section we have established that comparative

advantage is determined by a combination of sector characteristics (the degree of complementarity

 ) and country characteristics (the dispersion of skills in the population). The following proposition

summarizes the previous discussion and represents the main result of this section. We denote the

value of total sales by …rms from country c in market c0 , as Xcc0 . Relative total sales of good    by

Home and Foreign …rms in a given market, for example Foreign, are then equal to:


                                    XHF ( )    rHF ( ) MH ( )
                                             =                                                      (10)
                                    XF F ( )   rF F ( ) MF ( )


Proposition 4 Under Property 1, a country with relatively higher dispersion of skills has a com-

parative advantage, and therefore exports relatively more to any destination, in sectors with high

degree of substitutability .


    The next section provides a bridge to the empirical section by extending the model to a multi-

country world.



3    Multi-Country Model

The goal of this section is to generalize the model to many countries and provide the conditions

under which the main result of the two-country model holds, i.e. countries with relatively higher

dispersion of skills have a comparative advantage, and therefore export relatively more, in sectors

where the dispersion of wages is higher.

    Without loss of generality we consider three countries, so that c 2 fH; F; Gg. Following HMR,



                                                  18
we allow transport costs to be country-pair speci…c and asymmetric, i.e.                 HF   6=   FH.   We …x as

destination market country F and express the value of exports of good                  by country H relative to

country G as follows:
                                         XHF ( )   rHF ( ) MH ( )
                                                 =
                                         XGF ( )   rGF ( ) MG ( )

While the determination of relative revenues of individual …rms rHF =rGF is straightforward, the

equilibrium mass of …rms can be computed, but not easily characterized, with more than two

asymmetric countries. This is a known problem in the home-market e¤ect literature.30 Therefore

in the following proposition we limit ourselves to imposing that the relative mass of …rms be non-

decreasing in relative productivity. This is reasonable if we believe that, in equilibrium, entry is

relatively higher in sectors where a country has a comparative advantage.


                                                                           MH ( )
Proposition 5 Under Property 1, if the relative mass of …rms               MG ( )   is non-decreasing in relative
               A( ;H)
productivity   A( ;G)   then a country with relatively higher dispersion of skills has a comparative

advantage, and therefore exports relatively more to any destination, in sectors with higher degree of

substitutability .


3.1    Wage Distribution and Complementarity

The previous sections establish the direction and magnitude of trade ‡ows based on comparative

advantage, which results from a combination of sector characteristics (the parameter ) and country

characteristics (skill dispersion). While we have measures that approximate the degree of skill

dispersion at the country level, we are not aware of any measures of the elasticity of substitution

among individuals’ skills in di¤erent sectors. Therefore we take the theoretical model as a guide
   30
      Behrens et al. (2009) show that the home-market e¤ect intuition does not easily generalize to the case of more
than two countries. Our case of multiple countries with productivity di¤erences further complicates the problem and
is beyond the scope of this paper.




                                                        19
to …nding a proxy for the degree of complementarity. This section establishes a one-to-one link

between the degree of complementarity and the dispersion of wages in sector                    , which can be

measured in the data.

       We assume that at the bargaining and production stage workers’skills are fully revealed, so that

workers of di¤erent skills receive di¤erent wages as a result of intra-…rm bargaining. Although the

assumption that skill is perfectly revealed only at the production and bargaining stage is stark, we

believe it captures some realistic features of the hiring process, where workers’skills in particular

tasks are di¢ cult to assess until they start working. Moreover, even if skills were partially revealed

at the production stage, as long as the portion revealed were constant across sectors, this would

not substantially change the implications we are about to discuss.

       The Appendix shows the calculation of the Shapley value for a worker of skill a. Since the

average wage also di¤ers across sectors, we normalize the wage of a worker of skill a in sector             by

                                                                          a
                                                       e
the average wage in the sector. The normalized wage is w(a; )=          E (a
                                                                                   , which re‡ects the marginal
                                                                               )
product of a worker of skill a when added to the production team and depends on . The higher

the substitutability across workers the larger the marginal product of a worker with high skills.

In contrast, if     is low, i.e. complementarity is high, a worker of high skills has a relatively lower

marginal product because her skills are very di¤erent from the average skills of her team-mates.

An implication of this wage structure is that workers with identical skills, but employed in di¤erent

sectors, generally receive di¤erent wages, as returns to skills vary across industries.31

       Keeping in mind that the distribution of skills is the same in every industry, the distribu-

tion of wages within a sector depends, in our framework, exclusively on technological factors that

determine the marginal product of workers with di¤erent skills. It therefore does not re‡ect compo-
  31
    The point is made by Heckman and Scheinkman (1987), who show that returns to unobservable characteristics
are di¤erent across sectors.




                                                     20
sitional di¤erences across sectors. The following proposition establishes that there is a one-to-one

correspondence between the dispersion of wages and the degree of complementarity.


Proposition 6 For any non-degenerate distribution of skills g (a; c), the following three measures

of dispersion of sectoral wages are strictly increasing in the degree of substitutability of workers’

skills,       : (i) the Coe¢ cient of Variation; (ii) the Gini Coe¢ cient and (iii) the Inter-Percentile

Ratio32


         Proposition 6 establishes that the more complementary workers are, the more compressed the

wage distribution is. The intuition follows from our discussion of normalized wages.



4         Empirical Analysis

Section 3 extended the two-country model to the case of many countries. The objective of this

section is to assess the empirical relevance of Proposition 5. A di¢ culty comes from the fact that

the elasticity of substitution of individuals’skills at the industry level is not observable in the data.

However, combining results from Propositions 5 and 6, it is possible to derive the following testable

implication of our model:


Corollary 7 Under Property 1, if the relative mass of …rms is non-decreasing in relative produc-

tivity, then a country with a relatively higher skill dispersion has a comparative advantage, and

therefore exports relatively more to any destination, in sectors where the dispersion of wages is

higher.


Proof. Follows immediately from Propositions 5 and 6.
    32                                                                wk
         The Interpercentile-Ratio, IP Rkj , is de…ned as IP Rkj =    wj
                                                                         ,   where wk (wj ) is the wage of the worker at the
kth (j th ) percentile of the sectoral wage distribution and j < k.




                                                            21
       Next we present the estimation framework. Section 4.2 describes the data and section 4.3

reports baseline results. Finally, Section 4.4 discusses identi…cation and presents robustness checks.


4.1       Estimation Framework

As a …rst step to design an empirical test of Corollary 7 we combine equations (1) and (8) to obtain

the following expression for the value of (log) exports of good i from country H to country F ,

XHF (i):33



                  log XHF (i) = (              1) log A (i; H) + log MH (i)      (      1) log    HF                  (11)

                                                                                                        (i)
                                          + log (i) + log EF       (    1) PF (i) + (          1) log
                                                                                                        (i)


where A (i; H) captures comparative advantage of the exporting country, MH (i) the mass of …rms in

the exporting country,             HF   transport costs between the two countries, PF (i) an industry-importer

speci…c price index, EF the importing country total expenditure and                     (i),     (i) and      (i) industry-

speci…c constants. Since we analyze a discrete number of industries, in the remainder of this section

we use subscript i to index variables that vary across industries.

       An ideal test of Corollary 7 would require quantifying the e¤ect of a mean-preserving spread

in the distribution of skills in country H on its relative exports to country F , as a function of

the elasticity of substitution in each sector i. These e¤ects operate through AHi in equation 11.

Although MHi is not observable, the model shows it is also a function of AHi . Therefore, in order

to derive an estimation equation for log XHF i , we assume that (                       1) log AHi + log MHi can be
  33
       The value of total exports of i from H to F is given by:

                                                                   [pHF (i)]1    (i) EF
                              XHF (i) = dHF (i) pHF (i) MH (i) =                        MH (i)
                                                                       [PF (i)]1
                      (i) HF
where pHF (i) =      (i)A(i;H)
                               .




                                                           22
written as an additive function of industry characteristics ( i ), exporter characteristics (                        H ),   an

interaction between a measure of wage dispersion in industry i (W ageDispi ) and a measure of

skill dispersion in country H (SkillDispH ), and other unobservable determinants of comparative

advantage in country H (                 34
                                    Hi ),




                (      1) log AHi + log MHi = W ageDispi               SkillDispH +        i   +   H   +   Hi




     Transport costs are allowed to depend linearly on a vector of observable country-pair bilateral

trade barriers (dHF ) and unmeasured i.i.d. trade frictions (uHF ). A set of industry-importer

speci…c …xed e¤ects (        F i)   controls non-parametrically for the price index PF i , industry constants

 i
     and   i.   Finally, let    HF i    capture measurement errors in trade ‡ows and the e¤ect of other
 i


unobserved determinants of XHF i .

     With this speci…cation, the estimation equation for exports log XHF i takes the following form:



                     log XHF i = W ageDispi             SkillDispH + dHF +         H   +   Fi   + "HF i                    (12)



where "HF i =        Hi +   uHF +     HF i .


     The variable of interest is W ageDispi                 SkillDispH and estimation of its coe¢ cient               allows

us to test Corollary 7. To see why, assume that equation (12) correctly speci…es a model for the

conditional expectation of log XHF i , so that E ["HF i jW ageDispi                SkillDispH ; dHF ;           H ; F i]   = 0.

Then, for any two countries H and G exporting to F , and any two industries i and j, equation (12)

implies:
                             XHF i                  XHF j
                    E log                     log              =    ij W ageDisp       HG SkillDisp                        (13)
                             XGF i                  XGF j
  34
     Note that AHi may also depend on the mean and other moments of the skill distribution of country H and these
could potentially have di¤erent e¤ect on productivity in di¤erent industries, a possibility that we explicitly consider
in the empirical analysis of trade ‡ows. These e¤ects are summarized by Hi .


                                                               23
where    HG SkillDisp    SkillDispH       SkillDispG and    ij W ageDisp   is similarly de…ned. Accord-

ing to (13), Corollary 7 implies   > 0.


4.2     Data

Before presenting the estimation results we brie‡y describe the measurement of the two key explana-

tory variables in the empirical analysis, skill dispersion at the country level and wage dispersion at

the industry level. A detailed discussion of all data can be found in the Appendix.


4.2.1    Skill Dispersion


We use test scores from the International Adult Literacy Survey (IALS) to approximate the skill

distribution within a country. Collaborators in this household survey administered a common test

of work-related literacy skills to a large sample of adults between the ages of 16 and 65 in 19

countries. The IALS focuses on literacy skills that are needed for everyday tasks (e.g. working out

a tip, calculating interest on a loan and extracting information), across three di¤erent dimensions of

literacy: quantitative, prose and document literacy. We combine the results of these three tests into

a single average score for each individual, measured on a scale from 0 to 500. The skill distribution

is proxied by the distribution of log-scores of individuals participating in the labor market and

living in the same country.

   To insure consistency with the theoretical assumption of imperfect skill observability, we con-

struct a measure of residual scores dispersion within countries. For an individual k participating in

the labor market of country H, we obtain the estimated residual d
                                                                kH from the following regression:




                                      log(skH ) = XkH   H   +   kH                                (14)




                                                  24
where skH is the IALS score of k and XkH is a vector of individual demographic information from

the IALS questionnaire. The residual d
                                     kH is then used to compute the skill dispersion measures


used for the estimation of trade ‡ows.

       Table 1 ranks 19 countries according to the coe¢ cient of variation (CV) of IALS scores, and also

reports their rank by mean, standard deviation (St Dev) and standard deviation of residual IALS

(St Dev Resid). The …gures show di¤erent dispersion in countries at similar stages of development:

for example, we observe a more spread distribution of skills in the US, UK and Canada, than in

Sweden, the Netherlands and Germany.35


4.2.2      Wage Dispersion


We use the 5% Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) …les of the 2000 Census of Population

in the United States to construct industry-speci…c measures of wage dispersion to be used as

proxies for the unobserved elasticity of substitution. An advantage of our approach is that we can

match individual wage observations to a detailed industry classi…cation, accounting for the entire

manufacturing sector36 . As shown in table 2, this procedure results in 63 industries for which both

wage dispersion and international trade ‡ows can be computed, at a level of aggregation between

the 3 and 4 digit levels of the 1997 North American Industry Classi…cation System (NAICS).

       As with IALS scores, we focus on residual wage dispersion. We start by removing variation in

wages driven by a set of individual characteristics on which …rms can typically condition employment

decisions. Then, we adapt the correction method proposed in Dahl (2002) to address the possibly

non-random selection of workers into multiple industries. In essence, this procedure controls for
  35
     Brown et al. (2007) report similar variation in skill distributions in a comprehensive study using IALS, the
1995, 1999 and 2003 Trends in International Maths and Science Study (TIMSS), the 2000 and 2003 Programme for
International Student Assessment (PISA) and the 2001 Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS).
  36
     This is not feasible for IALS data, since individual observations are assigned a broad sectoral classi…cation
(e.g. agriculture, mining, manufacturing, construction, etc), while international trade data is available only for
manufacturing industries.



                                                       25
selection e¤ects using di¤erences in the probabilities of being observed in a given industry due to

exogenous variation, such as the state of birth of two people, who are otherwise similar in terms of

education, experience, household structure, race and gender. Details are provided in the Appendix.

       For an individual k employed in industry i, we obtain the estimated residual c
                                                                                    ki
                                                                                       from the

following regression:

                                            log(wki ) = Zki    i   +   ki                                      (15)


where wki is the weekly wage of k and Zki is a vector of observable characteristics. Note that we

run these regressions separately for each industry to allow for changes in the return to observable

characteristics across industries.37 Table 2 shows the ranking of di¤erent industries by standard

deviation of raw and residual wages. It is apparent that dispersion varies signi…cantly across

sectors. For example, in terms of the standard deviation of wages, the three lowest ranked sectors

are non-ferrous metal processing, railroad, and …ber mills. The three highest ranked are cosmetics,

computer and electronic manufacturing.

       The use of U.S. estimates as proxies for within-industry wage dispersion (and skill substitutabil-

ity) in other countries is warranted if they have access to similar production technologies.38 Equal

access to technology implies that the elasticity of substitution in any given industry will be constant

across countries. As a result, the ranking of industries according to wage dispersion will be the

same within each country, a hypothesis that is not easy to verify due to the scarcity of publicly

available microdata with similar sector classi…cation. However, we do perform this exercise for

the U.S. and Canada. We compute the sectoral dispersion of wage residuals in Canada to verify
  37
    Regression results are available upon request.
  38
    The assumption that industry-speci…c characteristics computed for the United States also apply to industries in
other countries is not an unusual one in the recent empirical trade literature on comparative advantage. Examples
include the measurement of …nancial vulnerability (Manova, 2008b), the importance of relationship-speci…c investment
(Nunn, 2007), …rm-speci…c skill intensity (Tang, 2008) and the variance of …rm-speci…c shocks (Cuñat and Melitz,
2007).




                                                        26
whether the ranking is similar to the one prevailing in the US.39 To maximize comparability, we

are careful to control for the same set of observable characteristics of workers in both countries

when computing the residuals, use similar sampling criteria and the same industry classi…cation.

Figure 2 shows the standard deviation of the wage residuals in the two countries by industry. The

positive slope of the …tted line is signi…cant at the 5% level. Clearly, the sectoral ranking of residual

dispersion in the US is strongly correlated to the one observed in Canada. Sectors like computers

and clothing exhibit higher dispersion in both countries, compared to sectors like machinery and

paper manufacturing.


4.3    Baseline Results

This section discusses results of the empirical analysis of trade ‡ows using speci…cation (12). The

dependent variable in tables 3 to 5 is the log of exports from country H to country F in industry

i. Our data set contains the value of exports in year 2000 from 19 exporters to 145 importers in 63

industries. Table 3 reports estimates of the impact of skill dispersion as proxied by the dispersion

of (raw) test scores: we identify this e¤ect through an interaction with (raw) wages dispersion.40

For comparability, all tables report standardized coe¢ cients of the explanatory variables. We show

results based on three alternative measures of dispersion: the 95-5 interpercentile range divided

by the average in column (1), the Gini relative mean di¤erence (i.e. twice the Gini coe¢ cient) in

column (2) and the coe¢ cient of variation in column (3).41 Columns (1)-(3) add exporter, importer

and industry dummies to our variables of interest; columns (4)-(6) include theoretically consistent

exporter and importer-industry dummies, along with a vector of bilateral trade barriers described
  39
     We use the Canadian Labor Force Survey data for May 2000. Details of this exercise are available upon request.
  40
     Raw measures are not purged of the e¤ect of observable characteristics.
  41
     We note that all three measures have a common structure in that the numerator is a measure of dispersion (the
95-5 interpercentile range, the standard deviation and the Gini mean di¤erence) while the denominator is the average
of the variable. Since we are using the logarithm of variables, the reason why we employ measures of dispersion
divided by the average is not for rescaling, but rather to parsimoniously control for the e¤ect that the interaction of
the averages might have on trade ‡ows.


                                                          27
in the Appendix.

    In all speci…cations the estimated interaction W ageDispi                SkillDispH shows a positive e¤ect

on exports, signi…cant throughout at the 5% level. The reported coe¢ cients imply that a one

standard deviation increase in the value of the interaction raises log exports by anywhere between

10:7% and 19:3% standard deviations.42 We postpone a detailed discussion of magnitudes to later

in this Section.

    Table 4 reproduces the structure of table 3 in terms of controls, but it separately reports

the e¤ect of the interaction W ageDispi               SkillDispH (where the measure of dispersion is not

divided by the average), as well as those of the interaction of average scores and average wages,

W ageM eani        SkillM eanH , and of the other two interactions, W ageDispi                    SkillM eanH and

W ageM eani        SkillDispH . The interaction of the averages is expected to capture standard factor

proportions e¤ects: on average, countries with more skilled workers specialize in sectors that employ

skilled workers and have higher average wages. The interaction W ageM eani                          SkillDispH is a

‡exible way to control for possible bias, due to di¤erences in sectoral average wages, in the estimated

e¤ect of our interaction of interest. The interaction W ageDispi SkillM eanH plays a similar role.43

In general, columns (1)-(6) suggest that the coe¢ cient of W ageDispi                 SkillDispH is robust to the

inclusion of all interactions: all estimates are similar to the ones in table 3 and, with the exception

of one case, signi…cant at the 5% level. As for the other interactions, as expected W ageM eani

SkillM eanH has a strong and positive impact on trade ‡ows. Moreover W ageM eani                         SkillDispH

is consistently positive, signi…cant and large, while W ageDispi                SkillM eanH is positive, but not

always signi…cant, particularly in columns (1)-(3).
   42
      In regressions we do not report, we interacted all measures of dispersion for wages and scores with one another
obtaining results qualitatively and quantitatively similar to columns (1)-(6).
   43
      This interaction relates to the theoretical prediction that increases in average skills not resulting from propor-
tional changes also have an e¤ect on comparative advantage. This e¤ect depends on the degree of complementarity,
approximated by W ageDispi .




                                                          28
       Table 5 has a structure similar to tables 3 and 4, but it employs measures of residual wage and

residual skill dispersion, as de…ned in sections 4.2.2 and 4.2.1. In this speci…cation we do not control

for averages, since they are zero by construction. The measures of dispersion employed in table 5

are: the 95-5 interpercentile range in column (1) and (4), the Gini mean di¤erence in column (2) and

(5) and the standard deviation in column (3) and (6). Again, we …nd that W ageDispi SkillDispH

has a positive and signi…cant e¤ect on exports.44 We note that the magnitudes are similar to the

coe¢ cients in tables 3 and 4, indicating a substantial degree of robustness in our results. The

standardized coe¢ cient of W ageDispi                 SkillDispH varies between 10:4% and 23% in the six

speci…cations.

       Finally, we employ the estimated coe¢ cients to gauge the economic magnitude of this source of

comparative advantage. The standardized coe¢ cient of W ageDispi               SkillDispH is similar across

speci…cations. Our baseline estimate is 0.23 (column 4, table 5). Consider two countries, the US

and Canada, and two sectors, ‘computers’and ‘paper mills’. These countries and sectors are chosen

because, going from paper mills’s W ageDisp interacted with Canada’s SkillDisp to computers’s

W ageDisp interacted with the US SkillDisp, the interaction W ageDispi               SkillDispH increases

by approximately one standard deviation. Since the standard deviation of log exports is 2:204 the

relative ratios of US and Canada’s exports to an average importer c in the two sectors are given by

e0:23    2:20 ,   that is:
                                                XU Sc (computers)
                                              XCAN ADAc (computers)
                                                  XU Sc (paper)
                                                                      = 1:66
                                               XCAN ADAc (paper)


This implies that, averaging across destination markets, the US exports of computers relative to

Canada are 66% higher than the US exports of paper products relative to Canada (this number is

26% if we employ the lowest estimate in table 5).
  44
       In column (6) the interaction is signicant at the 6% level.




                                                            29
4.4     Identi…cation and Robustness

In this section we discuss some potential issues related to the identi…cation of the e¤ects quanti…ed

in tables 3, 4 and 5.


4.4.1    The Extensive Margin of Trade: Selection


Tables 3, 4, and 5 report estimation results which do not take into account the fact that a substantial

fraction of bilateral trade ‡ows are zero and that trade ‡ows re‡ect both an intensive margin (the

amount exported by each …rm) and an extensive margin (the number of …rms exporting, possibly

zero). The estimation of (12) requires excluding observations for countries which do not trade

in speci…c industries. These amount to 66.5% of the sample. As discussed in HMR, selection of

trading partners induces a negative correlation between observed and unobserved trade barriers

(dHF and uHF ) that might bias OLS estimates in (12), including .

    In order to correct for selection bias, we implement a two-step estimation procedure: in the …rst

step we account for the discrete export decision using a linear probability model and obtain the

                                                        HF i ; in the second stage, equation (12) is
predicted probabilities of observing positive exports, '[

estimated including a ‡exible polynomial of degree four in '[                                  45 For
                                                            HF i to control for selection bias.


identi…cation not to rely on the non-linearity of '[
                                                   HF i one needs to identify a source of variation


which a¤ects the discrete choice of engaging in exports without changing the intensity of trade ‡ows.

HMR argue that cross-country variation in start-up regulation costs likely relates to the decision to

export, and it has no bearing on the intensive margin. The economic rationale lies in the fact that

start-up costs in the exporting country, as well as in the importing one, a¤ect …xed rather than

variable costs of trade. Di¤erent forces can be at work and the nature and strength of this e¤ect
  45
     We favor using a linear probability model in the …rst stage since its two most common alternatives, probit and logit
models, su¤er di¤erent problems in the current application. The probit model with …xed e¤ects yields inconsistent
estimates. In turn, estimating a …xed e¤ects logit becomes computationally very costly due to the large number of
…xed e¤ects required by our speci…cation of equation (12).


                                                           30
may depend on characteristics of both exporting and importing countries. For example, HMR …nd

that start-up regulation costs are an e¤ective predictor of the extensive export decision and that

the interaction between home and foreign regulation costs has a negative gradient on the likelihood

to export. On the other hand, De Groot et al. (2004) show that di¤ erences in institutional factors,

including di¤erences in regulation and red tape, have large e¤ects on trade ‡ows; their work unveils

an alternative channel through which regulation can a¤ect trade, and stresses the importance of

‘similarity’in institutional frameworks.

    An analysis of the …rst-stage bilateral export decisions (see table 7 in the Appendix) uncovers

strong e¤ects of regulation costs. We use exporter-importer interactions of three proxies of regula-

tion costs: the number of days (RegDaysH             RegDaysF ), number of legal procedures (RegP rocH

RegP rocF ) and relative cost, as a percentage of GDP per capita (RegP rocH                     RegP rocF ), for an

entrepreneur to start operating a business.46 We …nd that these proxies are signi…cant predictors

of selection into exporting and that the direction of the e¤ect changes by country characteristics;

in fact, as might be expected, we …nd that regulatory costs tend to have a direct negative e¤ect

on export choices, but also that relative di¤erences across countries do matter, and can lead to

positive interaction e¤ects.47

    In table 6 we report the second-stage obtained using the selection correction. To facilitate

comparison, column (1) of table 6 is identical to column (4) of table 5, which is the baseline result.

Throughout this table we employ only one of the three measures of dispersion, i.e. the standard

deviation.48 Columns (2)-(6) report the second stage of the selection-corrected estimation. Column

(2) documents the robustness of the e¤ect associated to the interaction W ageDispi                      SkillDispH :
  46
     To test the overidentifying restrictions we performed a Hausman test comparing second stage estimates using all
three instruments to the corresponding estimates using only a subset of them. We tested all possible combinations of
exclusion restrictions and in no case could we reject the null hypothesis that they are valid and, therefore, estimates
with di¤erent restrictions only di¤er as a result of sampling error.
  47
     Additional details available from the authors.
  48
     The same qualitative results emerge if we employ the other two measures of dispersion.


                                                          31
the standardized coe¢ cient is essentially unchanged at 0:212.


4.4.2      Omitted Determinants of Comparative Advantage


A second potential source of bias is due to the omission of other determinants of comparative

advantage, possibly correlated to our variable of interest. Suppose that the true model includes an

additional term ni ZH . If W ageDispi were correlated with ni and SkillDispH were correlated with

ZH , the OLS estimate of         in equation (12) would be inconsistent. As an example, industries with

lower dispersion of wages tend to be capital intensive. Similarly, exporters with low skill dispersion

tend to be relatively abundant in aggregate physical capital.49 In this case, comparative advantage

driven by skill dispersion is correlated with comparative advantage deriving from standard factor

proportions theory.

       Columns (3) to (5) of table 6 show that the estimated e¤ect of the interaction W ageDispi

SkillDispH is robust to a number of controls for other potential determinants of comparative advan-

tage. Column (3) introduces controls for standard Heckscher-Ohlin sources of comparative advan-

tage: the interaction of factor endowment of a country (in particular human capital, SkillEndowH

and physical capital, KEndowH ) and factor intensity of the sector (human capital SkillIntensi and

physical capital, KIntensi ), as in Romalis (2004). Looking at 95% con…dence intervals, the impact

on trade ‡ows of our variable of interest W ageDispi                SkillDispH is quantitatively similar to the

interaction KIntensi KEndowH and slightly larger than SkillIntensi SkillEndowH . In column

(4) we control for the interaction between the standard deviation of …rm size within industry i,

F irmDispi , and SkillDispH . With this interaction we explore a potential alternative mechanism

that might be driving our result. In particular, if entry in sectors with high …rm size dispersion is
  49
    In our dataset, the correlation between the coe¢ cient of dispersion of residual wages and physical capital intensity
across industries is -0.511. In turn, the correlation between the standard deviation of residual IALS scores and physical
capital abundance across exporters is -0.524.




                                                           32
higher in countries with high skill dispersion (because of higher possibility of assortative matching

between …rms and workers) then we would expect a positive e¤ect of F irmDispi        SkillDispH on

trade ‡ows. However, this alternative control does not substantially a¤ect the magnitude and sig-

ni…cance of our variable of interest and has very little explanatory power for trade ‡ows. In column

(5) we introduce the share of individual wages that are top-coded within an industry, T opCodei ,

interacted with SkillDispH , and we show that our result is not driven by the fact that some sectors

rely on ‘super-stars’(those sectors that have a high share of top-coded wages). This suggests that

more than one aspect of the dispersion of the distribution of wages is driving the result, and the

overall shape of the distribution seems to be better captured by broader measures of dispersion.


4.4.3   Reverse Causality


Finally, W ageDispi and SkillDispH might be partly in‡uenced by the pattern of international

trade, potentially resulting in reverse causality. We explore this possibility by examining the rela-

tionship between each of these two variables and the error term "HF i . The orthogonality condition

needed for consistent estimation of   in equation (12) is:



                         E (W ageDisps      SkillDispc    "HF i ) = 0    8s; c                  (16)



By the Law of Iterated Expectations, a su¢ cient condition to obtain identi…cation is:



                          E (W ageDisps      "HF i jSkillDispc ) = 0    8s; c                   (17)



which requires that, for every exporter in our sample, within-industry wage dispersion be uncorre-

lated with unobserved determinants of trade. For example, a violation of (17) would arise if "HF i




                                                 33
contained the unobserved share of exporting …rms in a given sector in H and the proportion of

exporters varied across industries and importers. In a model with heterogeneous …rms, Helpman

et al. (2008a) show that within-industry wage dispersion is a function of the proportion of …rms

exporting in the industry since, on average, exporters pay higher wages than non-exporters.50 How-

ever, as shown in HMR, the correction for self-selection into the export market discussed in section

4.4.1 e¤ectively removes this potential bias.

      Furthermore, since we measure wage dispersion at the industry level using U.S. data, we can

check the robustness of our estimates by removing the U.S. from our set of exporters. To the

extent that the U.S. wage structure is not signi…cantly a¤ected by bilateral trade ‡ows between

other countries, this procedure substantially decreases the likelihood of feedback e¤ects running

from trade ‡ows to W ageDisps . Column (6) in table 6 shows that, also in this case, the coe¢ cient

of our interaction of interest maintains the same magnitude and signi…cance.

      An alternative su¢ cient condition that guarantees (16), and therefore identi…cation of , is



                                E (SkillDispc      "HF i jW ageDisps ) = 0     8s; c



which means that skill dispersion in every exporting country is uncorrelated with the error term

"HF i ,. This condition is satis…ed if unobserved exporting opportunities captured in "HF i are not

signi…cantly related to the dispersion, and overall distribution, of residual skills in a country. There

are several reasons to believe that this is plausible. First, the unobserved exporting opportunities

"HF i must occur at levels other than exporter or importer-industry, which are already captured by

our set of dummies. Moreover, since our skill dispersion measures pre-date trade ‡ows by several

years, the link between "HF i and SkillDispc introduces bias only if: (i) "HF i is a highly persistent
 50
      Exporters do pay higher wages. See, for example, Bernard et al. (1995) and Bernard and Jensen (1997).




                                                        34
shock to exporting opportunities which is not captured by our dummies and also a¤ects the long-

term, ‘residual’skill distribution, and (ii) the skill distribution reacts very quickly in response to

export shocks. In this respect Glaeser et al. (2004) show that the education system is a slow-

changing characteristic of a country. However, skill dispersion is not only the product of the formal

education system, but may change after school through on-the-job training. A number of papers

have established the relatively limited impact of on-the-job training on the overall level of human

capital.51 Nevertheless, we explicitly account for the possibility that re-training is triggered by

exporting opportunities through the inclusion, in the derivation of residual skills, of a control for

whether a worker was re-trained in the previous year.



5         Conclusions

Relative di¤erences in the distribution of production factors are central to the classical theory

of international trade. The Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson factor proportion model stresses the idea

that di¤erences in factor endowments play a major role in predicting trade ‡ows. Comparative

advantage is associated with relatively abundant factors of production: the ‘average’ endowment

of some important factor can be a driving force in determining international specialization. In this

paper we push this idea further and argue that the whole distribution of factor endowments, rather

than just their average, can help rationalize observed trade ‡ows. We focus on human capital and

skills, and use industry-level trade data, to show that factors’dispersion accounts for as much as

relative factors’proportions in the determination of trade ‡ows.

         First, we develop a theoretical framework where, because of frictions in the labor market and

ex-ante unobservable skills, workers and …rms are randomly matched. The skill distribution matters
    51
         See discussion in Carneiro and Heckman (2003) and Adda et al. (2006).




                                                           35
for di¤erent sectors because some industries are more capable to substitute workers of di¤erent skill

than others. All sectors inherit the distribution of (unobserved) skills in the country’s population

and, as a result, …rms in sectors with higher complementarity are relatively more productive in

countries with lower skill dispersion. Our model provides an observable proxy for the otherwise

unobservable degree of complementarity among workers’ skills, that is the dispersion of wages at

the industry level. Detailed data on industry-level bilateral trade ‡ows reveal that countries with

higher skill dispersion specialize in high wage dispersion sectors. This empirical …nding is robust

to a battery of controls and indicates that the dispersion of human capital is not only statistically

signi…cant, but also quantitatively large: in fact we …nd that the magnitude of its e¤ect on trade

‡ows is comparable to that of the aggregate endowment of human capital in a country. Two remarks

about the interpretation of our evidence are in order.

   First, although we provide a theoretical framework alternative to GM’s, our empirical results

are not inconsistent with their model: we …nd that countries with high skill dispersion specialize

in sectors with high wage dispersion. In our model we relate this to technology, in particular

the degree of complementarity among workers’ abilities, which is the only determinant of wage

dispersion, since every sector inherits the distribution of skills in the country’s population and

the labor market is characterized by substantial frictions that prevent workers of identical skills

from earning identical wages. Conversely, in GM, labor markets are perfectly competitive and any

di¤erences in the sectoral wage distribution is due exclusively to industries employing workers of

di¤erent skills. We expect that a multi-country, multi-sector extension of GM would have testable

implications similar to ours. We are not aware of such an extension and we believe it would be

non-trivial.

   Second, we hypothesize that a Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson model of factor proportions with




                                                 36
a large number of factors and di¤erent factor intensities across sectors would potentially yield

testable implications similar to our model. Our results indicate that such a model should encompass

a much …ner level of disaggregation of factors than Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson-type models and

their empirical tests have employed so far.52

       Finally, the theoretical framework developed in this paper has implications for the impact of

trade on overall wage inequality, which are beyond the scope of this study. Our model, taken at

face value, implies that a more disperse skill distribution does not just have a direct e¤ect on the

income distribution, but also an indirect e¤ect, as countries with higher skill dispersion specialize

in sectors with high wage dispersion. Although we consider this e¤ect intriguing, we are aware

that our static, stylized description of the labor market is not sophisticated enough to account for

alternative determinants of overall inequality.


A        Appendix - Proofs
A.1       Proof of Proposition 1
By de…nition of log-supermodularity we need to prove that, if g (a; c0 ) is a mean-preserving spread
of g (a; c) then:
                                    @ log A ( ; c)  @ log A ( ; c0 )
                                                                     :
                                         @                @
The partial derivative has the following expression:
                                     R                                 Z
                  @ log A ( ; c)   1 a log a g(a; c)da       1
                                 =      R                     2 log      a g(a; c)da           (A-1)
                       @                  a g(a; c)da

A mean-preserving spread of g (a; c) increases the second term of the right-hand side of (A-1) by
de…nition, since a is a concave function. A su¢ cient condition for the …rst term of (A-1) to increase
with a mean-preserving spread in g (a; c) is that k (a) = a log a is a convex function which is veri…ed
if its second derivative with respect to a is positive for every value of a. i.e. log a < (12 )1 . Since
the right-hand side of this inequality is continuous and increasing in , it is equal to zero for = 12
and lim !1 (12 )1 = 1 then, if a is bounded above by amax , then there exists a value < 1 such
                    2   1                     @ log A( ;c)
that log amax =             . If   >   then        @         increases with a mean preserving spread of g (a; c).
                   (1   )
  52
    Tests of the factor proportions theory typically involve a dichotomous classi…cation of workers into production
and non-production, or college and non-college educated.




                                                             37
A.2     Proof of Proposition 2
  (i) Pareto Distribution - Under the assumption that skills follow a Pareto distribution with mean
        and standard deviation , A takes the following expression:53
                                                  p                                           p                   !1
                                     2   +   2            2   +        2                 +        2   +   2
                              A=                                                         p                             :
                                                                                    +         2   +   2


       Since A is twice di¤erentiable in and , the result in Proposition 3 is equivalent to A
                                                2
       being log-supermodular in and , that is @@ log
                                                   @
                                                      A
                                                        > 0. The expression for the cross partial
       derivative is the following:
                                                                       p
                                                                                2   +     2
                                   @ 2 log A
                                                 =p                    h                          p               i             (A-2)
                                    @ @               2   +        2           (1        )+           2   +   2


       and    < 1 so A is log-supermodular in                 and .

 (ii) Log-Normal Distribution - If the distribution of skills a is lognormal on the support [0; 1]
      with mean and standard deviation then A takes the following form:
                                                                       1                 2
                                                          log                  log       2 +1
                                                 A=e                       2



       It is easy to show that under this distribution, A is log-supermodular since the following
       expression is always positive:
                                          @ 2 log A
                                                    = 2
                                            @ @          + 2

A.3     Derivation of Firm Output, Prices and Revenues in All Markets
In this section we provide details about the solution to the …rm problem.
    Derivation of revenues (4)
    First, we show how to derive the expression for total revenues in (4). Total revenues of a …rm
in Home are given by:
                                                              1                      1    1
                                         rH = BH yHH + BF yHF                                                                   (A-3)
  53
    The Pareto distribution is characterized by a shape parameter k and location parameter amin , i.e. the cumulative
                                                  amin k
distribution of ability is given by G (a) = 1       a
                                                         with amin > 0 and k > 2. We could have written A as a
function of those parameters:
                                                                   1
                                                             k
                                                A = amin
                                                           k
Since we are interested in a mean-preserving increase in variance, we express the A as a function of                       and , which
are related to shape and location parameters according to the following equations:
                                                      2
                                                                p
                                                        + 2         2 + 2
                                         amin =
                                                         p
                                                       +     2 + 2
                                            k =




                                                                  38
For a pro…t-maximizing …rm marginal revenues have to be equal across markets. Rearranging the
equality of marginal revenue condition leads to the following:

                                        yHH               BH                1
                                            =                                                (A-4)
                                        yHF               BF

From (A-4) yHH can be expressed as a function of yHF and replaced in (A-3) to …nd:
                                                    1    1
                                 rH = BF yHF                     (yHH + yHF )                (A-5)

From (A-5) and its analogous for yHH we can …nd the two following equations:

                              yHH      = rH BH (yHH + yHF )                                  (A-6)
                                                                                    1
                               yHF     = rH BF (yHH + yHF )                                  (A-7)

Adding up (A-6) and (A-7) and rearranging them leads to the expression for revenues reported in
(4):
                                                             1                          1
                                                                                1
                             r = (yHH + yHF )                     BH + BF
   Derivation of output and prices
   The …rst order condition of problem (6) can be written as a function of revenues rH as follows:
                                                         1
                                            s              r H = hH
                                                        b
This …rst order condition, together with the zero pro…t condition derived from free entry, implies:

                                         srH            bhH          f =0

delivers total revenues and employment:
                                                                 f
                                       rH       =
                                                        s(             + 1)
                                                             f(        1)
                                       hH       =
                                                        b(             + 1)

Given the production function, the expression for total output follows:
                                                                                    1
                                                                 f(     1)
                                yH = A ( ; H)                                                (A-8)
                                                          b(            + 1)

Next, we determine how output is divided across the domestic and export market. We employ
(A-6) and (A-7) and their analogous for the Foreign …rm to …nd the relative output of …rms selling
in the same market:
                                yHH               rH (yHH + yHF )
                                        =                                                    (A-9)
                                yF H            rF (yF F + yF H ) 1
                                yF F              rF (yF F + yF H )
                                        =                                                   (A-10)
                                yHF             rH (yHH + yHF ) 1


                                                         39
The expressions above can be simpli…ed using the fact that total revenues are constant in a given
sector: rH = rF = r. Together with (A-8) and its foreign equivalent, (A-9) and (A-10) deliver the
amount of output sold by a Foreign and a Home …rm in every market. The amounts of output sold
in the two markets by a Home …rm are given by:
                                              "                       #
                                                                    1
                                     A ( ; H)          A ( ; H)
                          yHH =            2
                                                1                                          (A-11)
                                      1                A( ;F)
                                                "                    #
                                                                1
                                       A ( ; H)    A ( ; H)
                          yHF =             2
                                                                                           (A-12)
                                       1           A( ;F)

where    =   1   , while the corresponding Foreign …rm expressions are:
                                                 "                     #
                                        A( ;F)           A ( ; H) 1
                              yF F =         2
                                                   1                                                 (A-13)
                                         1               A( ;F)
                                                  "                   #
                                                                 1
                                          A( ;F)     A( ;F)
                             yF H =           2
                                                                                                     (A-14)
                                          1          A ( ; H)

Finally we derive relative revenues for a Home and a Foreign …rm in a given market (9) by expressing
                                                              1
                                           rHF        yHF          1
it …rst as a function of relative output   rF F   =   yF F              , and then replacing the expressions
for yHF and yF F .

A.4     Derivation of the Mass of Firms
Having determined the revenues of a …rm in each market, the mass of …rms in each country has to
be such that, total expenditure on good in a given country is equal to total revenues accruing to
all …rms operating in that market. The two equations below express these equilibrium conditions
for sector :

                           ( ) LH     = MH ( ) rHH ( ) + MF ( ) rF H ( )                             (A-15)
                            ( ) LF    = MF ( ) rF F ( ) + MH ( ) rHF ( )                             (A-16)

It is convenient to rewrite conditions (A-15) and (A-16) as a function of output, rather than of
revenues:

                          LH   = MH                   yHH + MF                    yF H ;
                                           A ( ; H)                    A( ;F)
                          LF   = MF                   y F F + MH                  yHF :
                                           A( ;F)                      A ( ; H)

The solution to this linear system is given by the following expressions for MH and MF :

                                                         (LH yF F LF yF H )
                            MH       = A ( ; H)                             ;                        (A-17)
                                                      (yF F yHH yHF yF H )
                                                        (LF yHH LH yHF )
                             MF      = A( ;F)                               :                        (A-18)
                                                      (yF F yHH yHF yF H )



                                                      40
First, we show that the denominator of MH and MF is always positive. De…ne Home productivity
advantage z ( ) = A(  ;H)                                               yHH    yHF
                   A( ;F ) . The denominator is positive if and only if yF H > yF F , a condition we
can rewrite as z 1 > z and that is always satis…ed since < 1.
    The mass of Home …rms MH is positive if and only if LH yF F LF yF H > 0. This condition
places a lower bound on the relative population, since MH > 0 if and only if:
                                                          1
                                                      z       1
                                               >                                  =     low                                                       (A-19)
                                                     1        z       1


Equivalently, MF is positive if and only if LF yHH LH yHF > 0, a condition that places an upper
bound on the relative population , i.e. MF > 0 if and only if:

                                                     1            z       1
                                               <              1
                                                                                  =     up                                                        (A-20)
                                                     (z                       )

Both low and up are positive under the condition that we imposed in order to guarantee that a
positive amount of output is produced for every market: < z 1 < 1 .

A.5    Proof of Proposition 3
We de…ne the mass of Home relative to Foreign …rms in sector as m ( ) M    MF . We investigate how
                                                                             H

m changes with z, assuming that we are operating in the parameter space where low < < up .
We rewrite the relative mass of …rms, using (A-17), (A-18), the expressions for Home …rm outputs,
(A-11) and (A-12), and the corresponding expressions for the Foreign …rm:

                                               z1     (1 + )                             +       2
                                     m=             1 (1 + )                                     2)
                                               z                                      (1 +

The …rst derivative of m with respect to z takes the following form:

             @m    1                                2z 1+ (1 + ) + z 2                                    +        2       + z2 1 +       2
                = +2 (        1) (1 + )
             @z  z                                                ( z             1          2   +         z           1     1)2

This derivative is positive if the numerator is positive and the numerator can be divided in two
parts, which we show are both positive. The …rst part, denoted by 1 is:

                                 1   =        z 1+ (1 + ) + z 2                              +        2
                                                                                                           ;

while the second part denoted by         2   is:

                                2    =       hz 1+ (1 + ) + z 2 1 +                                   2
                                                                                                               :

It is straightforward to show that 1 > 0 if and only if                                  >           low   and that                2   > 0 if and only if
  < up , conditions we have imposed throughout.

A.6    Proof of Proposition 4
The result follows directly since we have proven that both components of relative sales (10), relative
revenues per …rm rrHH
                    FH( )                              MF ( )
                       ( ) and relative mass of …rms MH ( ) are increasing in relative productivity



                                                              41
A( ;F )
A( ;H) (see (9) and Proposition 3) and relative productivity depends the degree of complementarity
  (proxied by the dispersion of wages according to Proposition 6) and the dispersion of skills
according to the discussion in Section 2.4.

A.7       Proof of Proposition 5
Since the derivation is analogous to the two-country case we simply report the expression relative
revenues:54
                                                     1         1
                               rHF       A ( ; H)         HF
                                     =                            :
                               rGF       A ( ; G)         GF

It follows that, if the relative mass of …rms is non-decreasing in relative productivity, relative exports
are higher in comparative advantage sectors, similarly to the two-country case in Proposition 4.

A.8       Derivation of the Shapley Value
In this section we provide details on how to derive the share of revenues accruing to the …rm and the
wages paid to workers. Stole and Zwiebel (1996) have proved the equivalence of their bargaining
solution to the Shapley value of the corresponding cooperative game not only for the case of identical
workers, but also for the case of heterogeneous workers,55 therefore we calculate the Shapley value
directly.56 The Shapley value of the …rm is heuristically derived as its marginal contribution
averaged over all possible orderings of employees and the …rm itself. The case of heterogeneous
employees is easy to handle under our assumption of a continuum of workers because no matter
how the …rm is ordered, it is preceded by a mass of workers whose skill distribution mirrors the
overall skill distribution in the workers population, so the only variable we have to keep track of
is the mass of workers preceding the …rm, de…ne it n, which varies from zero to h. As discussed
in Acemoglu et al. (2007), since the …rm is an essential input its marginal contribution is equal to
                                                                                   1
                                                                           1
revenues when n workers are employed in production rH (n) = n A                        H.   The Shapley value
of the …rm Sf irm is therefore:
                                           Z    h            1
                                                    1  1
                                Sf irm =              n A        H   dn = srH
                                            0       h

where s is de…ned by (5). As discussed in Acemoglu et al. (2007) the share of revenues accruing
to the …rm depends on the curvature of the revenue function, due to characteristics of the demand
function ( ) and the production function ( ).
    In a similar fashion we calculate the Shapley value of a worker of skill a, by averaging its marginal
contribution across all possible orderings. When a mass n of workers is employed, revenues of the
…rm are:
                                                Z                  1

                                    r (n) = H      a n(a; c)da
                                                       a

where n(a; c) = ng (a; c). The marginal contribution of a worker of skills a is given by the marginal
revenue from an increase in the mass of workers of skill a, n (a; c), conditional on the …rm being
 54
    Details are available from the authors upon request.
 55
    See their Theorems 8 and 9, p. 393.
 56
    The analogous of the Shapley value for a continuum of players is derived in Aumann and Shapley (1974).




                                                       42
ordered before the worker (otherwise the marginal contribution is null):
                                                          Z                          1
                                                                                          1
                            @r (n)                   1
                                   =         H                 n~
                                                                g (a)a da                     a
                            @n(a)                          a

The Shapley value and wage of worker of skill a in industry                        is:
                            Z    h
                        1            n @r (n)                              1                1         1
                                                                                                          1
               w(a; ) =                       dn =       HA (   ; c)                              h           a
                        h    o       h @n(a)                                              1+

Since the average wage also di¤ers across sectors, we normalize wages by the average wage in the
                                                                  w(a; )
                                                        e
sector E [w(a; )]. The normalized wage is denoted by w(a;    ) = E[w(a;  )] and takes the following
form:
                                                     a
                                        e
                                        w(a;   )=
                                                   E (a )
Proof of Proposition 6
  We consider three measures of wage dispersion:

  (i) the Coe¢ cient of Variation of wages w (a; ), directly related to the variance of the normalized
            e
      wage w(a;            e
                  ), V ar (w(a; )), which is given by:

                                                                  E a2
                                                  e
                                            V ar (w(a; )) =                    2     1;                           (A-21)
                                                                  E (a )

 (ii) the Gini Coe¢ cient, de…ned with respect to the Lorenz Curve for normalized wages at the
      sector level (w; ),

(iii) the Inter-Percentile Ratio IP Rkj de…ned as:
                                                                   wk
                                                     IP Rkj =         ;
                                                                   wj

     where wk (wj ) is the wage of the worker at the k th (j th ) percentile of the sectoral wage
     distribution and j < k.

  (i) Coe¢ cient of Variation
     Since the variance of normalized wages is equal to the square of the coe¢ cient of variation we
     prove the result for the former. We start by rewriting (A-21) in an explicit form, dropping
     the country index c to simplify notation:
                                                   R 2
                                                      a g~ (a) da
                                        e
                                  V ar (w(a; )) = R               2  1                        (A-22)
                                                      a g~ (a) da

     The derivative of (A-22) with respect to is non-negative if an only if the following inequality
     is satis…ed:
         Z 1                     Z 1                  Z 1                       Z 1
               2
              a log a g~ (a) da       a g~ (a) da         a log a g~ (a) da          a2 g~ (a) da
          0                             0                              0                                  0
                                                                                                                  (A-23)

                                                          43
    The left-hand side of (A-23), which we denote by L can be rewritten as:
                                   Z 1Z 1
                               L =          a2 log a g~ (a) b g~ (b) dadb
                                                      0    0

    We can divide the region of integration in two parts, delimited by the 45 degree line in the
    plane [0; 1] [0; 1]. It follows that L can be rewritten as:
              Z 1 Z a                                 Z 1 Z 1
                                    2
         L =          b g~ (b) db a log a g~ (a) da +            b g~ (b) db a2 log a g~ (a) da
                      0           0                                                  0             a
                                                                                                                                 (A-24)
    We change the order of integration in the second component of                                           L    so that we can rewrite
    (A-24) it as:
              Z       1   Z   a                                          Z       1       Z    b
                                              2
      L   =                       b g~ (b) db a       log a g~ (a) da+                            a2 log a g~ (a) da b g~ (b) db (A-25)
                  0       0                                                  0            0

    Finally, a change of variable in the second component of (A-25) allows us to express L as:
               Z 1 Z a                                  Z 1 Z a
                                      2
          L =           b g~ (b) db a log a g~ (a) da +         b2 log b g~ (b) db a g~ (a) da
                      0           0                                                  0             0

    If the same decomposition is performed on the right-hand side of (A-23) we can rewrite the
    inequality as follows:
                    Z 1 Z a      h                       i
                            a b     a   b (log a log b) g~ (b) g~ (a) db da 0
                                  0    0

    which is always satis…ed since a                      b    (log a        log b)               0.

(ii) Gini Coe¢ cient
    We proceed by deriving the Lorenz Curve for sectoral normalized wages and showing that
    increasing produces a downward shift in the curve at all points. This is a su¢ cient condition
    for the Gini coe¢ cient to increase with an increase in . The Lorenz Curve (w; ) of
    normalized wages in sector is given by the following expression:
                                               Rw
                                                    a g~ (a) da
                                       (w; ) = R 01
                                                0 a g  ~ (a) da

    The …rst derivative with respect to , @ @(w;                         )
                                                                             is non-positive if and only if the following
    condition is satis…ed 8w:
          Z w                   Z 1                                              Z   w                      Z    1
              a log a g~ (a) da      b g~ (b) db                                         a g~ (a) da                 b log b g~ (b) da
              0                                   0                              0                           0

    The region of integration can be divided into two part on both sides of the inequality, so that




                                                                 44
      the inequality can be rewritten as follows:
               Z w Z w                                   Z w Z 1
                         b g~ (b) db a log a g~ (a) da +           b g~ (b) db a log a g~ (a) da
               Z0 w Z0 w                                 Z 0w Z w1
                         b log b g~ (b) db a g~ (a) da +           b log b g~ (b) db a g~ (a) da
                 0      0                                      0      w

      Simplifying and factorizing leads to the following inequality:
                           Z wZ 1
                                     b a (log a log b) g~ (b) g~ (a) dbda           0
                                0    w

      which is always satis…ed since the range of integration of a is [0; w] while the range of inte-
      gration of b is [w; 1].

(iii) Inter-Percentile Ratio
      It is straightforward to show that IP Rkj increases with            since for any percentile the ratio
      of wages is given by:
                                                       ak
                                            IP Rkj =
                                                       aj
      where ak (aj ) is the skill of the worker at the k th (j th ) percentile.


B     Appendix
B.1    Measuring Skill Dispersion
The IALS microdata used for this paper was compiled by Statistics Canada using the original
data sets collected between 1994 and 1998 in each of the participating countries. Tuijnman (2000)
describes the three dimensions of literacy used to approximate skills. Prose literacy represents the
knowledge and skills needed to understand and use information from texts including editorials, news
stories, brochures and instruction manuals. Document literacy represents the knowledge and skills
required to locate and use information contained in various formats, including job applications,
payroll forms, transportation schedules, maps, tables and charts. Quantitative literacy represents
the knowledge and skills required to apply arithmetic operations, either alone or sequentially,
to numbers embedded in printed materials, such as balancing a chequebook, …guring out a tip,
completing an order form or determining the amount of interest on a loan from an advertisement.
    We employ the logarithm of scores (in conjunction with the log of wages) because the standard
deviation of the logarithm of a random variable is scale invariant. When extracting residual scores
in equation (14), using log-scores on the left-hand side is consistent with the common practice of
obtaining residual wages from a regression of log-wages, as in equation (15). The results of the
empirical analysis are qualitatively similar if we use levels instead of logs.
    Only individuals participating in the labor market are included in the estimation of equation
(15). These individuals were either: (i) employed or unemployed at some time in the 12 months
previous to the survey or (ii) not searching for a job due to skill upgrading (school or work programs)
or a temporary disability.
    The right-hand side vector XkH in equation (14) includes a number of observable individual
characteristics. Education is among them: we include indicators for 7 levels of educational at-


                                                      45
tainment as de…ned by the International Standard Classi…cation of Education (ISCED). The levels
considered in IALS are: ISCED 0 Education preceding the …rst level; ISCED 1 Education at the
…rst level; ISCED 2 Education at the second level, …rst stage; ISCED 3 Education at the second
level, second stage; ISCED 5 Education at the third level, …rst stage (leads to an award not equiv-
alent to a …rst university degree); ISCED 6 Education at the third level, …rst stage (leads to a
…rst university degree or equivalent; ISCED 7 Education at the third level, second stage (leads to
a postgraduate university degree or equivalent); ISCED 9 Education not de…nable by level. The
vector XkH also includes 5 age intervals 16-25, 26-35, 36-45, 46-55 and 56-65, gender, immigrant
status and participation in adult education or training programs 12 months prior to the survey
date. The latter …lters out the e¤ect of skill upgrading on individual residual scores. As explained
in section 4.4, this is an important issue for the identi…cation of the e¤ect of skill dispersion on
trade ‡ows as (unobserved) trade shocks might have an impact on aggregate skill dispersion by
changing incentives for skill upgrading at the individual level. Residual scores dkH are constructed
as dkH   = log(skH  )   X    c
                          kH H  , where  c   is estimated by  OLS. Analyzing  the R-squared  of these
                                          H
country-by-country regressions, we …nd that the variation in residual scores d kH accounts for a min-
imum of 46% of the observed variation in log-scores in Canada, for a maximum of 83% in Germany
and for 70% in Finland, the median country in the sample.57
    As a result of focusing on log-scores, the scale of measurement of IALS scores does not a¤ect the
standard deviation of d   kH or log(skH ). Also note that, since XkH in (14) contains a constant, the
distribution of dkH   has the same (zero) mean in each country. For this reason, we do not normalize
the standard deviation (or any inter-percentile range) by the mean in order to make cross-country
comparisons of residual scores dispersion.

B.2     Measuring Wage Dispersion
Wage inequality measures are computed from a sample of full-time manufacturing workers, 16-65
years old, not living in group quarters, reporting positive wages and industry a¢ liation.58 Following
Dahl (2002), individuals were considered as ‘full-time employed’if in 1999 they: (i) were not enrolled
full time in school, (ii) worked for pay for at least ten weeks, and (iii) earned an annual salary of
at least 2,000 dollars. We focus on the log of weekly wages, calculated by dividing wage and salary
income by annual weeks worked. We use weekly wages as opposed to hourly wages, because it
requires fewer assumptions to calculate it. In the 2000 Census, hours worked are reported as ‘usual
hours’. Using this variable to convert weekly wages into hourly wages would almost certainly result
in the introduction of a source of measurement error. Incomes for top-coded values are imputed by
multiplying the top code value ($175,000) by 1.5.59
    In equation (15), vector Zki includes indicators for 4 categories of educational attainment,60
a quartic polynomial in age, race and gender dummies (plus their interaction), Hispanic and im-
migrant dummies (plus their interaction) and state of residence dummies. Residual wages are
constructed as c  ki = log(wki )  Zki bi , where bi is estimated by OLS.
    Correcting for self-selection into industries is important in estimating equation (15), as the as-
sumption that workers do not selectively search for jobs according to comparative advantage or
unobservable tastes is relevant for Proposition 6. In the presence of self-selection the distribution
  57
     These results are available upon request.
  58
     Manufacturing employment excludes workers in private non-pro…t and government organizations.
  59
     Since top codes vary by state, we follow Beaudry et al. (2007) and impose a common top-code value of $175,000.
  60
     These are: (i) High school dropout, (ii) high school graduate, (iii) some college but no degree, (iv) college degree
or higher.



                                                           46
of residual wages in any given industry would re‡ect not only the degree of skill substitutability
in production but also workers’ skill composition. For this reason, we use a selection estimator
proposed by Dahl (2002). In equation (15), correcting for self-selection is complicated by the fact
that individuals could choose to search for a job in any of the 63 industries of the manufacturing
sector, potentially making the error mean, i.e. E( ki jk is observed in i), a function of the char-
acteristics of all the alternatives. In this case, Dahl (2002) argues that under a speci…c su¢ ciency
assumption,61 the error mean is only a function of the probability that a person born in the same
state as k would make the choice that k actually made (i.e. selecting into industry i), which can be
estimated. The su¢ ciency assumption can be relaxed by including functions of additional selection
probabilities; for this reason, Zki includes a cubic polynomial in the estimated …rst-best selection
probability and in the highest predicted probability for k. Identi…cation in this approach is based
on the exclusion of state of birth by industry of employment interactions from equation (15).
    To estimate selection probabilities, we group individuals into cells de…ned by state of birth62
and a vector of discrete characteristics: 4 categories of education attainment, 4 age intervals (16-
30, 31-40, 41-50, 51-65), race, gender and 2 binary indicators of family status (family/non-family
household and presence of own child 18 or younger in the household). As in Dahl (2002), for every
individual k, we estimate his selection probability into each industry j using the proportion of
individuals within k’s cell that are observed working in j, denoted by pc kj . Individual k’s estimated
…rst-best selection probability is pc                                                       d
                                       ki and k’s highest predicted probability is given by p kj , where
j is such that pd  kj =  maxf c
                              p kj g 8j.
    For the empirical analysis, the Census industry classi…cation was matched to NAICS. It was
not possible to match the trade data to Census codes directly, since the former is originally coded
according to the Standard International Trade Classi…cation (SITC rev.2). However, it is possible
to use NAICS as a bridge between the two classi…cations. We construct a one-to-one mapping
between the Census classi…cation and NAICS by re-coding two or more 4 digit NAICS codes into
a single industry (which does not necessarily match a 3 digit level). This re-coding also involves
cases where two Census codes map perfectly into two NAICS codes -although originally there
was no one-to-one matching between them. Importantly, the resulting mapping (available upon
request) exhausts all manufacturing sectors in NAICS. Finally, the trade data was matched to wage
inequality data using a concordance between SITC rev. 2 and NAICS, available through the NBER
online database.


C      Appendix - Additional Data
In this Appendix we provide a description of additional data sources used in the empirical analysis.
Descriptive statistics for each variable can be found in table 8.
    Bilateral export volumes at the industry level : From Feenstra et al. (2005), for the year 2000.
Sector-level bilateral exports data are categorized at the 4-digit SITC (4-digit rev. 2) level. The
mapping from SITC to NAICS required the concordance available at the NBER website.63
    Bilateral trade barriers: From HMR. This is a set of exporter-importer speci…c geographical,
cultural and institutional variables. 1) Distance, the distance (in km.) between importer’s and
exporter’s capitals (in logs). 2) Land border, a binary variable that equals one if and only if
  61
     See Dahl (2002), page 2378.
  62
     As in Beaudry et al. (2007), we keep immigrants in the analysis by dividing the rest of the world into 14 regions
(or ‘states’of birth).
  63
     http://www.nber.org/lipsey/sitc22naics97/



                                                         47
importer and exporter are neighbors that meet a common physical boundary. 3) Island, the number
of countries in the pair that are islands. 4) Landlocked, the number of countries in the pair that
have no coastline or direct access to sea. 5) Colonial ties, a binary variable that equals one if and
only if the importing country ever colonized the exporting country or vice versa. 6) Legal system, a
binary variable that equals one if and only if the importing and exporting countries share the same
legal origin. 7) Common Language, a binary variable that equals one if and only if the exporting
importing countries share a common language. 8) Religion, computed as (% Protestants in exporter
   % Protestants in importer)+(% Catholics in exporter % Catholics in importer)+(% Muslims
in exporter      % Muslims in importer). 9) FTA, a binary variable that equals one if exporting
and importing countries belong to a common regional trade agreement, and zero otherwise. 10)
GATT/WTO, the number of countries in the pair that belong to the GATT/WTO.
    Start-up regulation costs: From HMR. We use exporter-importer interactions of three prox-
ies of regulation costs: the number of days (RegDaysH RegDaysF ), number of legal proce-
dures (RegP rocH RegP rocF ) and relative cost as a percentage of GDP per capita (RegP rocH
RegP rocF ), for an entrepreneur to start operating a business.
    Factor endowments: Physical capital endowment, KEndow, and human capital endowment,
SkillEndow, are taken from Antweiler and Tre‡er (2002). A country’s stock of physical capital is
the log of the average capital stock per worker. The stock of human capital is the natural log of
the ratio of workers that completed high school to those that did not. The measures used are from
1992, the closest year of which data are available. There’s no data on factor endowments for four
countries in our sample: Switzerland, Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland.
    Factor intensities: From Nunn (2007). Originally coded as 1997 I-O industries, the mapping
to NAICS required a concordance available from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.64 Physical
capital intensity, KIntens, is the total real capital stock divided by value added of the industry
in the United States in 1996. Skill intensity, SkillIntens, is the ratio of non-production worker
wages to total wages at the industry level in the United States in 1996. There’s no data on factor
intensities for two industries: ‘Furniture and related products manufacturing’ and ‘Sawmills and
wood preservation’.
    Proportion of top-coded wages: From the 2000 Census of Population in the U.S. For each
industry, T opCode is calculated as the proportion of workers earning a wage exceeding the top
code value of $175,000.
    Firm size dispersion: From the 1997 Census of manufacturing in the U.S. For each industry, we
calculate F irmDisp, the coe¢ cient of variation in the average shipments per establishment across
bins de…ned by employment size. The employment bins de…ned in the Census are: 1-4, 5-9, 10-19,
20-49, 50-99, 100-249, 250-499, 500-999, 1000-2499 and 2500 employees or more.
 64
      http://www.bea.gov/industry/xls/1997import_matrix.xls




                                                      48
                                                     SWE




       5.7
                                NOR
                       DNK    NLD FIN
                             DEU
                                                                CZE                                BEL                                                                     CAN
       5.6

                                                                                                                                    NZL                         UK
                                                                                                                                                                                                      USA
                                                                                                                                                                       CHE
                                                                                                                                                                     IRL
                                                                              HUN
Mean
5.5




                                                                                                                                                                                             ITA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SVN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               POL
       5.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CHL
       5.3




                 .15                                                     .2                      .25                                                                                                        .3                                                               .35
                                                                                       Standard Deviation


                       Figure 1: Mean and Dispersion in IALS log-scores (1994-1998)
       .5




                                                                                                                                                                        foo
                                                                                                                                                                              d/b
       .45




                                                                                                                                                                                  e   v/t
                                                                                                                                                                                            ob
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ac
                                                                                                                                                                                                      co
                                                                                                                                                                                                           pr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                od


                                                                                                                                                                                                                co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mp
            .4




                                                                              fab                                                                                                                                         ute
                                                                                                                                          ch                                                                                    r/e
                                                                                    ric                                                        em
Canada S.D.




                                                                                        a                                                                                                                                             lec
                                                                                            ted                                                     ica                                                                                     tro
                                                                                                  me                                                      lm                                                                                   nic
                                                                                                        tal                                                    an
                                                                                            no                 wo                                                   ufa prin                                                            mi
                                  em                                                       n-                      od                                                  ctu tin                                                               sc
                                   leacc                                                     me                       pr                                                  rin g a                                                                 ma
                                        ehqin                                                    tal                     od                                                  g   n
                                            ueipry                                                   lic                    uc                                                              dr                                                     cnloufa
 .35




                                                 /am                                                     m                     t                                                                 ela                                                    thictu
                                                   ppapn                                                   ine                                                                                       t   ed                                                ng rin
                                                      li laaus                                                ra                                                                                                                                              /le g
                               pa                           nfcaticc           fur                               l                                                                                                                                               ath
                                  pe                             e tsu a            nit                                                                                                                                                                              e
                                    rm                          tra rend                ure                                                                                                                                                                              r
                                         an                          ntsex rub              an
                                             ufa                        potil be               dr
                                                  ctu                      rte m r                ela
                                                     rin                      e q il                   ted
                                                            g                    ulisp/
                                                                                      m pro
       .3




                                                                                         endu
                                                                                            t ct

                                                                                                  pe
                             pr                                                                        tro
                               im                                                                            /co
                                    ar
                                         ym                                                                        al
                                                                                                                        pr
                                                                                                                                                                               Intercept -0.03 (0.17)
                                              eta                                                                            od
                                                    lm                                                                            uc
                                                                                                                                     ts
                                                                                                                                                                               Slope      0.74 (0.33)
                                                         an
       .25




                                                              ufa
                                                                    ct

                 .48                                .5                                      .52                                .54                                                                .56                                                  .58
                                                                                                                         US S.D.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ®




                       Figure 2: Standard Deviation of Residual Wages by Industry


                                                                                                                              49
                     Table 1 - IALS log-scores

          Exporter            Mean             St Dev      St Dev Resid
CV Rank                    Rank              Rank          Rank

1         Denmark          3         5.671   1     0.150   1      0.134
2         Germany          6         5.654   2     0.162   3      0.151
3         Netherlands      4         5.666   3     0.167   2      0.149
4         Norway           2         5.684   4     0.171   4      0.156
5         Finland          5         5.666   5     0.181   5      0.162
6         Sweden           1         5.717   6     0.184   6      0.168
7         Czech Republic   7         5.636   7     0.190   7      0.171
8         Hungary          15        5.546   8     0.204   9      0.192
9         Belgium          8         5.632   9     0.221   10     0.199
10        New Zeland       10        5.597   10    0.240   13     0.222
11        United Kingdom   11        5.595   11    0.262   19     0.318
12        Ireland          14        5.569   12    0.266   12     0.222
13        Switzerland      13        5.573   13    0.269   8      0.189
14        Canada           9         5.628   14    0.274   11     0.216
15        Italy            16        5.499   15    0.285   16     0.256
16        United States    12        5.587   16    0.289   14     0.227
17        Chile            19        5.355   17    0.302   15     0.230
18        Slovenia         17        5.446   18    0.314   17     0.260
19        Poland           18        5.415   19    0.333   18     0.312




                                50
                                        Table 2 - Wage Dispersion

                                                                    Mean         St Dev      St Dev Res
CV     Exporter                                                   Log Wage      Log Wage      Log Wage
Rank                                                             Rank          Rank          Rank

1      Railroad rolling stock                                    22    6.504   1     0.515   1     0.419
2      Aircraft, aerospace products and parts                    4     6.814   6     0.560   7     0.462
3      Nonferrous metals, exc. aluminum                          25    6.485   3     0.544   2     0.442
4      Fiber, yarn, and thread mills                             56    6.153   2     0.521   3     0.448
5      Pulp, paper, and paperboard mills                         9     6.654   8     0.564   9     0.473
6      Engines, turbines, and power trans. equipment             10    6.620   10    0.570   4     0.455
7      Dairy products                                            38    6.377   5     0.552   6     0.461
8      Veneer, plywood, and engineered wood products             45    6.291   4     0.547   11    0.477
9      Iron and steel mills and steel product                    15    6.583   13    0.573   16    0.490
10     Ship and boat building                                    30    6.443   7     0.564   8     0.467
11     Cement, concrete, lime, and gypsum                        28    6.455   11    0.571   20    0.492
12     Foundries                                                 35    6.391   9     0.565   13    0.485
13     Industrial and miscellaneous chemicals                    5     6.784   30    0.608   25    0.497
14     Aluminum production and processing                        21    6.511   17    0.587   12    0.485
15     Rubber products                                           29    6.454   15    0.584   15    0.488
16     Agric implement, constr., mining and oil …eld machinery   18    6.525   23    0.596   10    0.474
17     Household appliances                                      44    6.339   14    0.579   5     0.461
18     Metalworking machinery                                    20    6.513   22    0.595   23    0.496
19     Machinery, n.e.c.                                         26    6.471   24    0.598   18    0.491
20     Structural metals, and tank and shipping containers       37    6.380   18    0.589   33    0.507
21     Machine shops; turned product; screw, nut and bolt mfg.   32    6.400   19    0.591   44    0.523
22     Ordinance and misc. fabricated metal                      39    6.376   20    0.592   19    0.491
23     Petroleum and Coal Products                               1     6.835   39    0.636   42    0.519
24     Paperboard containers, boxes misc. paper and pulp         31    6.414   27    0.604   22    0.496
25     Glass                                                     42    6.355   26    0.601   34    0.507
26     Animal slaughtering and processing                        61    6.051   12    0.572   26    0.498
27     Furniture                                                 54    6.169   16    0.586   36    0.510
28     Navig, measuring, electromedical, and control instr.      8     6.666   37    0.634   21    0.495
29     Resin, synthetic rubber and …bers, and …laments           14    6.591   35    0.628   17    0.490
30     Cutlery and hand tools                                    41    6.364   29    0.607   14    0.486
31     Sawmills and wood preservation                            51    6.206   21    0.595   37    0.511
32     Animal food, grain and oilseed milling                    27    6.470   34    0.624   38    0.513




                                            51
                                       Table 2 - Continued

                                                                Mean          St Dev       St Dev Res
                                                              Log Wage       Log Wage       Log Wage
                                                             Rank           Rank           Rank


33   Miscellaneous nonmetallic minerals                      36     6.382   33     0.621   39     0.514
34   Commercial and service industry machinery               12     6.613   44     0.646   24     0.497
35   Beverages                                               17     6.537   43     0.641   45     0.532
36   Fabric Mills                                            57     6.123   25     0.601   29     0.502
37   Motor vehicles and motor vehicle equipment              13     6.594   45     0.648   43     0.521
38   Electrical lighting, equipment, and supplies, n.e.c.    33     6.399   36     0.631   27     0.500
39   Plastics                                                47     6.271   32     0.619   31     0.504
40   Textile product mills                                   59     6.089   28     0.605   35     0.509
41   Prefab. wood build., mobile homes and misc. wood prod   53     6.190   31     0.617   48     0.542
42   Agricultural chemicals                                  16     6.579   47     0.657   40     0.518
43   Paint, coating, and adhesive B46                        19     6.523   46     0.652   46     0.534
44   Printing and related support activities                 40     6.370   42     0.639   49     0.546
45   Pharmaceutical and medicine                             3      6.821   56     0.694   50     0.550
46   Pottery, ceramics and structural clay                   48     6.262   40     0.637   47     0.541
47   Fruit and vegetable preserving and specialty food       49     6.239   38     0.635   41     0.518
48   Other transportation equipment                          34     6.394   48     0.658   30     0.503
49   Textile and fabric …nishing and coating mills           52     6.197   41     0.637   32     0.504
50   Tobacco                                                 6      6.728   57     0.705   55     0.558
51   Footwear                                                58     6.116   49     0.659   28     0.500
52   Toys, amusement, sporting goods and misc, n.e.c.        50     6.234   52     0.672   61     0.565
53   Communications, audio, and video equipment              7      6.724   60     0.725   59     0.562
54   Computer and peripheral equipment                       2      6.834   62     0.739   62     0.576
55   Medical equipment and supplies                          24     6.496   58     0.706   53     0.553
56   Bakeries                                                55     6.166   51     0.670   63     0.576
57   Sugar and confectionery products                        46     6.285   54     0.683   51     0.550
58   Leather tanning and products, except footwear           60     6.069   50     0.667   54     0.556
59   Electronic component and product, n.e.c.                11     6.620   61     0.730   57     0.559
60   Seafood and other miscellaneous foods, n.e.c.           43     6.346   59     0.712   52     0.551
61   Cut and sew apparel                                     63     5.876   53     0.677   60     0.564
62   Soap, cleaning compound, and cosmetics                  23     6.503   63     0.754   56     0.559
63   Apparel accessories and other apparel                   62     5.900   55     0.689   58     0.560




                                        52
                          Table 3 - Normalized Raw Scores and Wages



                                (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)       (5)           (6)
Measure
                               St Dev    95-5 IPR                 St Dev    95-5 IPR
of Dispersion                   Mean       Mean     Gini RMD       Mean       Mean      Gini RMD



W ageDispi      SkillDispH    0.168**    0.107*     0.121**      0.193**    0.122**    0.122**
                              (0.048)    (0.046)    (0.047)      (0.046)    (0.046)    (0.046)

Trade Barriers                  No         No          No          Yes        Yes           Yes

Exporter FE                     Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes           Yes
Importer FE                     Yes        Yes         Yes         No         No            No
Industry FE                     Yes        Yes         Yes         No         No            No
Importer-Industry FE            No         No          No          Yes        Yes           Yes

Observations                   58124      58124       58124       58124      58124         58124
R-squared                       0.54       0.54        0.54        0.7        0.69          0.7

The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of exports from country H to country F in industry i.
Standardized beta coe¢ cients are reported. y , * and ** indicate the coe¢ cient is signi…cant at the
10%, 5% and 1% levels. Standard errors clustered by importer-exporter pair in parenthesis.




                                             53
                              Table 4 - Non-Normalized Interactions



                                   (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)          (6)
Measure of
Dispersion                       St Dev    95-5 IPR    Gini MD      St Dev    95-5 IPR     Gini MD



W ageDispi     SkillDispH       0.210**    0.076       0.208*       0.331**   0.176**      0.330**
                                (0.079)     (0.074)     (0.091)     (0.076)    (0.067)      (0.085)

W ageM eani      SkillM eanH    9.132**    10.232**    10.696**     9.626**   10.561**     10.853**
                                (0.602)     (0.590)     (0.708)     (0.504)    (0.503)      (0.595)

W ageM eani      SkillDispH     2.396**    2.972**     3.050**      2.233**   2.726**      2.749**
                                (0.240)     (0.232)     (0.285)     (0.197)    (0.195)      (0.238)

W ageDispi     SkillM eanH      0.777      0.098       1.039        1.669**   0.900y       2.014**
                                (0.487)     (0.481)     (0.568)     (0.485)    (0.461)      (0.550)

Trade Barriers                     No         No           No         Yes        Yes          Yes

Exporter FE                        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes
Importer FE                        Yes        Yes         Yes         No         No           No
Industry FE                        Yes        Yes         Yes         No         No           No
Importer-Industry FE               No         No          No          Yes        Yes          Yes

Observations                     58124       58124       58124       58124      58124       58124
R-squared                         0.54        0.54        0.54        0.70       0.70        0.70

The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of exports from country H to country F in industry i.
Standardized beta coe¢ cients are reported. y , * and ** indicate the coe¢ cient is signi…cant at the
10%, 5% and 1% levels. Standard errors clustered by importer-exporter pair in parenthesis.




                                             54
                    Table 5 - Residual Wage and Residual Score Dispersion

                                  (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)            (6)
Measure of
Dispersion                      St Dev     95-5 IPR     Gini MD      St Dev     95-5 IPR    Gini MD



W ageDispi      SkillDispH      0.224**     0.168**      0.134*     0.230**     0.149**       0.104y
                                (0.051)     (0.050)      (0.058)    (0.046)     (0.049)       (0.056)

Trade Barriers                    No          No           No          Yes         Yes            Yes

Exporter FE                       Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes
Importer FE                       Yes         Yes          Yes         No          No             No
Industry FE                       Yes         Yes          Yes         No          No             No
Importer-Industry FE              No          No           No          Yes         Yes            Yes

Observations                     58124       58124       58124       58124       58124        58124
R-squared                         0.54        0.54        0.54        0.70        0.70         0.69

The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of exports from country H to country F in
industry i. Standardized beta coe¢ cients are reported. y , * and ** indicate the coe¢ cient is
signi…cant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels. Bootstrap standard errors clustered by importer-
exporter pair in parenthesis (50 replications).




                                                55
                                Table 6 - Selection and Other Controls



                                     (1)           (2)        (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)

                                  Baseline     HMR        Heckscher     Firm Size      Top       Without
                                              Selection    Ohlin        Dispersion    Coding       US

W ageDispi      SkillDispH        0.230**      0.212**     0.306**       0.229**      0.377**    0.210**
                                  (0.046)      (0.049)     (0.063)       (0.059)      (0.075)    (0.044)
KIntensi     KEndowH                                       0.250**
                                                           (0.074)
SkillIntensi     SkillEndowH                               0.122**
                                                           (0.018)
F irmDispi      SkillDispH                                                 -0.010
                                                                          (0.023)
T opCodei      SkillDispH                                                             -0.087*
                                                                                      (0.034)

Trade Barriers                       Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes

Exporter FE                          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes
Importer-Industry FE                 Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes

Observations                       58124       52455        41301         52455        52455      48129
R-squared                           0.69        0.69         0.73          0.69         0.69       0.68

The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of exports from country H to country F in industry i.
Standardized beta coe¢ cients are reported. y , * and ** indicate the coe¢ cient is signi…cant at the
10%, 5% and 1% levels. Bootstrap standard errors clustered by importer-exporter pair in parenthesis (50.
replications). The measure of dispersion employed is the standard deviation of residual wages and residual
scores. Column (6) is the same speci…cation of column (2) excluding the observations involving
US as exporter. The regression includes a polynomial in the probability to export, obtained from
the …rst stage, which is signi…cant and we do not report.




                                              56
                              Table 7 - First Stages of Table 6



                                     (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)

                                  HMR         Heckscher    Firm Size      Top        Without
                                 Selection     Ohlin       Dispersion    Coding        US

W ageDispi      SkillDispH         0.025y      0.090**      0.063**      0.118**      0.024y
                                  (0.014)      (0.016)      (0.015)      (0.017)     (0.014)
RegCostsH       RegCostsF         0.013**       0.001       0.013**      0.013**      0.006
                                  (0.004)      (0.006)      (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.003)
RegDaysH        RegDaysF          0.014*        0.020       0.014*        0.014*     0.012*
                                  (0.006)      (0.012)      (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.005)
RegP rocH      RegP rocF          0.029**      0.077**      0.029**      0.029**     0.031**
                                  (0.009)      (0.018)      (0.009)      (0.009)     (0.011)
KIntensi     KEndowH                            0.027*
                                               (0.012)
SkillIntensi     SkillEndowH                   -0.013*
                                               (0.005)
F irmDispi      SkillDispH                                  -0.035**
                                                             (0.005)
T opCodei      SkillDispH                                                -0.055**
                                                                          (0.008)

Trade Barriers                      Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes

Exporter FE                         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
Importer-Industry FE                Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes

Observations                      132867        94794        132867      132867       124740
R-squared                          0.57          0.59         0.58        0.58         0.58

Columns (1)-(5) report the …rst stage estimation results corresponding to Columns (2)-(6) of
Table D. The dependent variable is a dummy that is one if exports from country H to country F
in industry i are positive and zero otherwise. Standardized beta coe¢ cients are reported.
y , * and ** indicate the coe¢ cient is signi…cant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels. Bootstrap

standard errors clustered by importer-exporter pair in parenthesis (50 replications). The
measure of dispersion employed is the standard deviation of residual wages and residual scores.
Column (6) is the same speci…cation of column (2) excluding the observations involving US as
exporter. All estimations were performed with a linear probability model.


                                             57
                   Table 8 - Additional Variables



Variable                  Obs      Mean     Std. Dev   Min      Max

Exports dummy             173565   0.335    0.472      0        1
Exports volume (XHF i )   58124    7.866    2.204      0        17.906
Language                  2755     0.193    0.395      0        1
Legal                     2755     0.217    0.412      0        1
Religion                  2755     0.196    0.257      0        0.973
Land Border               2755     0.019    0.135      0        1
Currency Union            2755     0.002    0.047      0        1
Distance                  2755     4.136    0.806      0.882    5.661
FTA                       2755     0.017    0.131      0        1
Colonial Ties             2755     0.022    0.146      0        1
Gatt / WTO                2755     1.489    0.578      0        2
Island                    2755     0.291    0.494      0        2
Landlock                  2755     0.309    0.509      0        2
RegP rocF                 112      9.679    3.491      2        19
RegDaysF                  112      49.402   38.593     2        203
RegCostsF                 112      90.065   165.785    0        1268.4
RegP rocH                 19       5.947    2.818      2        10
RegDaysH                  19       23.842   16.433     3        61
RegCostsH                 19       7.874    7.190      0        22.9
SkillEndowH               14       -3.435   0.402      -4.522   -2.957
KEndowH                   14       -0.530   0.662      -1.377   0.925
SkillIntensi              61       0.381    0.116      0.166    0.757
KIntensi                  61       0.859    0.464      0.235    2.535
T opCodei                 63       0.009    0.005      0.004    0.030
F irmDispi                63       3.055    1.418      1.015    6.940




                                     58
References
Acemoglu, D., Antràs, P., Helpman, E., 2007. Contracts and technology adoption. American Eco-
  nomic Review 97 (3), 916–943.

Adda, J., Dustmann, C., Meghir, C., Robin, J., Street, G., 2006. Career progression and formal
 versus on-the-job training. IZA Discussion Paper 2260.

Antweiler, W., Tre‡er, D., 2002. Increasing returns and all that: a view from trade. American
 Economic Review, 93–119.

Aumann, R. J., Shapley, L. S., 1974. Values of non-atomic games. Princeton University Press
 Princeton.

Beaudry, P., Green, D., Sand, B., 2007. Spill-Overs from Good Jobs. NBER working paper 13006.

Behrens, K., Lamorgese, A., Ottaviano, G., Tabuchi, T., 2009. Beyond the Home Market E¤ect:
  Market Size and Specialization in a Multi-Country World. Mimeo, University of Tokyo.

Benabou, R., 1996. Heterogeneity, strati…cation, and growth: macroeconomic implications of com-
  munity structure and school …nance. The American Economic Review, 584–609.

Bernard, A., Jensen, J., 1997. Exporters, skill upgrading, and the wage gap. Journal of International
  Economics 42 (1-2), 3–31.

Bernard, A., Jensen, J., Lawrence, R., 1995. Exporters, jobs, and wages in US manufacturing:
  1976-1987. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Microeconomics, 67–119.

Bougheas, S., Riezman, R., 2007. Trade and the distribution of human capital. Journal of Interna-
  tional Economics 73 (2), 421–433.

Bowen, H. P., Leamer, E. E., Sveikauskas, L., 1987. Multicountry, multifactor tests of the factor
  abundance theory. The American Economic Review, 791–809.

Brown, G., Micklewright, J., Schnepf, S., Waldmann, R., 2007. International surveys of educational
  achievement: how robust are the …ndings? Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A
  (Statistics in Society) 170 (3), 623–646.

Carneiro, P., Heckman, J., 2003. Human Capital Policy. NBER Working Paper 9495.

Costinot, A., Komunjer, I., 2007. What Goods Do Countries Trade? New Ricardian Predictions.
  NBER Working Paper 13691.

Costinot, A., Vogel, J., 2009. Matching and Inequality in the World Economy. Mimeo, MIT.

Cuñat, A., Melitz, M. J., 2007. Volatility, Labor Market Flexibility, and the Pattern of Comparative
  Advantage. NBER Working Paper 13062.

Dahl, G., 2002. Mobility and the return to education: Testing a Roy model with multiple markets.
 Econometrica, 2367–2420.

                                                 59
Davis, D. R., Weinstein, D. E., 2001. An account of global factor trade. American Economic Review,
  1423–1453.

De Groot, H., Linders, G., Rietveld, P., Subramanian, U., 2004. The institutional determinants of
  bilateral trade patterns. Kyklos 57 (1), 103–123.

Feenstra, R., Lipsey, R., Deng, H., Ma, A., Mo, H., Drive, O., 2005. World trade ‡ows: 1962-2000.
  NBER working paper 11040.

Friesen, J., Krauth, B., 2007. Sorting and inequality in Canadian schools. Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics 91 (11-12), 2185–2212.

Glaeser, E., La Porta, R., Lopez-de Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 2004. Do institutions cause growth?
  Journal of Economic Growth 9 (3), 271–303.

Grossman, G. M., 2004. The Distribution of Talent and the Pattern and Consequences of Interna-
  tional Trade. Journal of Political Economy 112 (1), 209–239.

Grossman, G. M., Maggi, G., 2000. Diversity and trade. American Economic Review, 1255–1275.

Hanushek, E., Kain, J., Markman, J., Rivkin, S., 2003. Does peer ability a¤ect student achievement?
  Journal of Applied Econometrics, 527–544.

Heckman, J., Scheinkman, J., 1987. The importance of bundling in a Gorman-Lancaster model of
  earnings. The Review of Economic Studies, 243–255.

Helpman, E., Itskhoki, O., 2009a. Labor Market Rigidities, Trade and Unemployment. Harvard
  manuscript.

Helpman, E., Itskhoki, O., 2009b. Labor Market Rigidities, Trade and Unemployment: A Dynamic
  Model. Mimeo, Harvard University.

Helpman, E., Itskhoki, O., Redding, S. J., 2008a. Inequality and unemployment in a global economy.
  Mimeo, Harvard University.

Helpman, E., Itskhoki, O., Redding, S. J., 2008b. Wages, Unemployment and Inequality with
  Heterogeneous Firms and Workers. Mimeo, Harvard University.

Helpman, E., Krugman, P. R., 1985. Market structure and foreign trade. MIT press Cambridge,
  Mass.

Helpman, E., Melitz, M., Rubinstein, Y., 2008c. Estimating Trade Flows: Trading Partners and
  Trading Volumes*. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (2), 441–487.

Hoxby, C., Building, L., 2000. Peer e¤ects in the classroom: Learning from gender and race varia-
  tion. NBER working paper 7867.

Iranzo, S., Schivardi, F., Tosetti, E., 2008. Skill dispersion and …rm productivity: an analysis with
  employer-employee matched data. Journal of Labor Economics 26 (2), 247–285.

                                                 60
James, E., 1993. Why do di¤erent countries choose a di¤erent public-private mix of educational
  services? Journal of Human Resources, 571–592.

Kremer, M., 1993. The O-ring theory of economic development. The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 551–575.

Lazear, E., Shaw, K., 2008. The Structure of Wages: An International Comparison. University of
  Chicago Press.

Levchenko, A. A., 2007. Institutional Quality and Trade. Review of Economic Studies 74 (3), 791–
  819.

Manova, K., 2008a. Credit constraints, equity market liberalizations and international trade. Jour-
 nal of International Economics 76 (1), 33–47.

Manova, K., 2008b. Credit Constraints, Heterogeneous Firms, and International Trade. Stanford
 University mimeo.

Nunn, N., 2007. Relationship-Speci…city, Incomplete Contracts, and the Pattern of Trade*. The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (2), 569–600.

Ohnsorge, F., Tre‡er, D., 2007. Sorting It Out: International Trade with Heterogeneous Workers.
 Journal of Political Economy 115 (5), 868–892.

Romalis, J., 2004. Factor proportions and the structure of commodity trade. American Economic
  Review, 67–97.

Ross, S. A., 1981. Some stronger measures of risk aversion in the small and the large with applica-
  tions. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 621–638.

Stevenson, D., Baker, D., 1991. State control of the curriculum and classroom instruction. Sociology
  of Education, 1–10.

Stole, L. A., Zwiebel, J., 1996. Intra-…rm bargaining under non-binding contracts. The Review of
  Economic Studies, 375–410.

Takii, K., Tanaka, R., 2009. Does the diversity of human capital increase gdp? a comparison of
  education systems. Forthcoming Journal of Public Economics.

Tang, H., 2008. Labor Market Institutions, Firm-speci…c Skills, and Trade Patterns. Mimeo, Hong
  Kong University of Science and Technology.

Tre‡er, D., 1993. International factor price di¤erences: Leontief was right! Journal of Political
  Economy, 961–987.

Tre‡er, D., 1995. The case of the missing trade and other mysteries. The American Economic
  Review, 1029–1046.

Tuijnman, A. (Ed.), 2000. Literacy in the Information Age: Final Report of the International Adult
  Literacy Survey. OECD Paris.

                                                61
Woessmann, L., Hanushek, A., Str, P., 2006. Does educational tracking a¤ect performance and
 inequality? Di¤erences-in-di¤erences evidence across countries. Economic Journal 116 (510),
 C63–C76.




                                            62
