NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO MULTINATIONALS OR DOMESTIC FIRMS FACE HIGHER EFFECTIVE TAX
RATES?
Kevin S. Markle
Douglas Shackelford
Working Paper 15091
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15091

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2009

We appreciate the helpful comments from Rosanne Altshuler, Julian Alworth, Elizabeth Blankespoor,
Kim Clausing, Mihir Desai, Michael Devereux, Scott Dyreng, Kevin Hassett, Michelle Hanlon, Ken
Klassen, Mark Lang, Peter Merrill, Jana Raedy, Nemit Schroff, Joel Slemrod, Martin Sullivan, and
workshop participants at the 2009 Institute for Fiscal Studies/European Tax Policy Forum conference,
the 2009 International Tax Policy Forum/Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center Institution conference,
the 2009 Journal of the American Taxation Association Tax Research Conference, Duke University,
Northwestern University, the University of Michigan, and the University of North Carolina. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Kevin S. Markle and Douglas Shackelford. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Do Multinationals or Domestic Firms Face Higher Effective Tax Rates?
Kevin S. Markle and Douglas Shackelford
NBER Working Paper No. 15091
June 2009
JEL No. F23,H25,K34,M41
ABSTRACT
To our knowledge, this paper provides the most comprehensive analysis of firm-level corporate income
tax expenses to date. We use publicly available financial statement information to estimate firm-level
effective tax rates (ETRs) for 10,642 corporations from 85 countries from 1988 to 2007. We find
that multinationals and domestic-only companies face similar ETRs. We also find that, on average,
ETRs declined by seven percentage points or 20% over the period. German, Japanese, Australian
and Canadian decreases were large. American, British, and French declines were more modest. Nonetheless,
because ETRs were falling worldwide, the ordinal rank from high-tax countries to low-tax countries
changed little. Japanese firms always faced the highest ETRs. ETRs for tax havens and countries
from the Middle East and Asia (ignoring Japan) were always lower than those for the U.S. and European
countries. These findings should provide some empirical underpinning for ongoing policy debates
about the taxation of multinational profits.

Kevin S. Markle
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Kenan-Flagler Business School
Campus Box 3490, McColl Building
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3490
kevin_markle@unc.edu
Douglas Shackelford
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Kenan-Flagler Business School
Campus Box 3490, McColl Building
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3490
and NBER
doug_shack@unc.edu

1. Introduction
This paper estimates country-level effective tax rates (ETRs) using financial statement
information from 10,642 corporations domiciled in 85 countries and having subsidiaries in 195
countries from 1988 to 2007. 1 These ETRs enable us to compare within and across countries the
taxes faced by multinationals and domestic-only firms and to assess the extent to which the
domicile of foreign subsidiaries affects the worldwide tax expense of multinationals. Tests are
conducted across years and industries.
The purpose of this study is to illuminate an ongoing worldwide debate about the taxation
of international commerce. At the beginning of our investigation period (1988), the taxation of
multinationals was an obscure area of the law, understood by few practitioners, rarely mentioned
in policy circles, and largely ignored by academe. Today, globalization has made the taxation of
international commerce relevant to most businesses, central to policy discussions about jobs,
trade, and competitiveness, and an area of interest to scholars in accounting, economics, finance,
law, and related fields.
International tax policy changes are being proposed and implemented around the globe.
In December, 2008, the UK and Japan decided to revamp their international tax law by shifting
from a worldwide tax system to a territorial tax system. 2 In the same month, an advisory panel
formed by the Canadian Minister of Finance recommended multinational-friendly changes to its
international tax law (see Advisory Panel on Canada’s System of International Taxation, 2008).

1

By “domicile,” we mean the location of the firm for tax purposes. There is no standard definition of domicile. For
example, domicile is the legal residence or site of incorporation in the U.S., but the location of operational
headquarters in the UK.
2
In overly simplistic terms, countries with territorial systems only tax the domestic income of companies domiciled
in their country. In contrast, countries with worldwide systems tax all income (domestic and foreign) of their home
companies and provide foreign tax credits to prevent double taxation of foreign profits.

All three countries claimed to be attempting to enhance the competitiveness of their
multinationals.
In May, 2009, the Obama Administration took a different course, proposing controversial
changes that would strengthen the U.S. worldwide tax system. These proposals follow years of
debate over whether longstanding American policy toward the taxation of international business
is in the best interest of the country (see United States House of Representatives (2007), Clausing
and Avi-Yonah (2007), and The President’s Advisory Panel on Federal Tax Reform (2005),
among many others).
This paper examines tax information from the financial statements to provide some
empirical underpinning for these important policy discussions. Although we recognize that
numerous economic, social, and political forces have motivated the need for this documentation,
it is beyond the scope of this paper to list the many changes in investment, technology, trade, and
labor that have accelerated the development of a global economy and exacerbated the inherent
difficulty that any single government faces in attempting to tax companies that service these
multinational markets. Furthermore, it also is beyond the scope of this paper to detail how
countries have revised their tax laws in recent years to continue to collect revenue while
maintaining or increasing their share of the global economy, to list the numerous tax plans
devised in response to these legislative changes, to discuss the difficulties of communicating this
complex area of tax law in the political arena, or to review the literature of international tax
research in accounting, economics, finance and law. Instead, we will mention a few recent
events concerning the taxation of multinationals that should suffice for demonstrating the
current, unprecedented interest in multinational taxation and the contribution that this study

2

makes in providing some empirical facts about the extent to which the domicile of a company
affects the taxes that it pays.
To start, U.S. President Barack Obama ran on a tax plan that included “…reforming
deferral to end the incentive for companies to ship jobs overseas.”
(http://www.barackobama.com/pdf/taxes/Factsheet_Tax_Plan_FINAL.pdf). His election spurred
months of heated debate about the possible elimination of the deferral of U.S. taxes on foreign
profits until dividend repatriation (Weiner, 2009). 3 On May 4, 2009, when the White House put
forth a formal proposal, which calls for deferring some deductions until repatriation and curbing
the “check the box” regulations that enable multinationals to structure their foreign operations in
a tax-favorable manner, President Obama justified the changes, saying “I want to see our
companies remain the most competitive in the world. But the way to make sure that happens is
not to reward our companies for moving jobs off our shores or transferring profits to overseas tax
havens.” Ignoring the merits of the controversial proposed changes, Obama-type policy
statements imply that multinationals somehow benefit unfairly from a tax system with perverse
incentives. 4
In contrast, the managers of many U.S. multinationals assert that the U.S. tax system
places them at a competitive disadvantage compared with multinationals in other countries.

3

A major cost of repealing deferral for some companies would be the deleterious impact on book income. Under
current tax law, APB 23 permits firms to classify foreign profits as permanently reinvested, which enables them to
report no deferred income taxes for any possible U.S. taxes to be paid at repatriation. Repealing deferral would
render this discretion under APB 23 irrelevant. This possibility led Ralph Hellmann, lead lobbyist for the
Information Technology Industry Council, to state that the benefit of APB 23 deferral “…hits the bottom line of
companies more than any other issue right now. We have to defeat it [repeal of deferral].” (Drucker, 2009).
4
Consistent with U.S. multinationals’ exploiting their ability to report profits in locations with more favorable tax
systems than the U.S., the foreign affiliates of American companies reported more of their aggregate net income in
the Netherlands (13%), Luxembourg (8%), and Bermuda (8%) than any country in 2006
(http://www.bea.gov/international/di1usdop.htm). Other locations with profits that far exceeded assets, sales and
employees were Ireland (7%), Switzerland (6%), Singapore (4%), and UK islands in the Caribbean (3%). For
comparison, 7% of the aggregate net income of U.S. foreign affiliates was reported to Canada (the U.S. largest
trading partner) and the UK, while only 2% was reported in Japan and Germany, which are considered among the
most highly-taxed countries.

3

They point to the relatively high U.S. statutory tax rate as evidence of the competitive
disadvantage. 5 They call for reform of the U.S. taxation of multinational profits to reflect current
global business conditions, although no consensus exists in the business community about the
changes that should be made. Furthermore, consistent with claims that companies domiciled
outside the U.S. enjoy more favorable tax conditions (at least for their American operations), the
U.S. Government Accountability Office (2008) recently concluded that U.S. companies owned
by foreigners pay less U.S. tax than do U.S. companies controlled by Americans.
Meanwhile, during much of 2008, British firms were not just complaining about the tax
system, they were abandoning it for domiciles with more favorable tax treatment (The
Economist, 2008). The Henderson Group, Charter, Shire, WPP, and the United Business Media
emigrated to Ireland and the Regus Group to Luxembourg reportedly to escape high taxes on
foreign profits for multinationals domiciled in the UK (Werdigier, 2008 and Faith, 2008).
Kingfisher, Brit Insurance, RSA Insurance, and Prudential, among others, threatened to leave
(Werdigier, 2008, Braithwaite, 2008). In fact, the Financial Times (September 21, 2008) quoted
an anonymous source saying, “As we understand it, half the FTSE 100 is looking at this
[redomiciling outside the UK.].” (Braithwaite, 2008).
One of those exited British firms is Invesco, which moved its domicile to Bermuda (a tax
haven) in December 2007. It was explicit about the influence of international tax considerations.
Although the S&P 500 company is headquartered in Atlanta, it moved its domicile to Bermuda,
5

In the September 26, 2008, U.S. Presidential debate, Republican Presidential candidate Senator John McCain
expressed these views about statutory tax rates, stating “Right now, American business pays the second-highest
business taxes in the world, 35 percent. Ireland pays 11 percent. Now, if you're a business person, and you can
locate any place in the world, then, obviously, if you go to the country where it's 11 percent tax versus 35 percent,
you're going to be able to create jobs, increase your business, make more investment, et cetera. I want to cut that
business tax. I want to cut it so that businesses will remain in—in the United States of America and create jobs.”
His opponent, Senator Barack Obama, countered, “Now, John mentioned the fact that business taxes on paper are
high in this country, and he's absolutely right. Here's the problem: There are so many loopholes that have been
written into the tax code, oftentimes with support of Senator McCain, that we actually see our businesses pay
effectively one of the lowest tax rates in the world.”

4

rather than the U.S. According to Invesco’s Chief Administrative Officer, Colin Meadows,
“…we wanted to make sure the transaction in moving our domicile was tax neutral for our
shareholders. Moving to the U.S. would not have been a tax neutral situation. When it came
down to it, it was a very short list of places that we considered and Bermuda was at the top.”
(Neil, 2007). 6
The recent British departures may be receiving undue attention in the same way that a
few American inversions (reincorporations in low-tax countries with no operational impact)
several years ago became highly controversial (in particular, Stanley Works’ aborted move to
Bermuda in 2002). 7 The more significant losses (both in number and pounds) may be those
newly formed companies that in the past would have established their headquarters in the UK but
instead are domiciling (for tax purposes) outside the UK from their inception. Since these
“departures” are unobservable, they mainly escape attention, though their impact may be larger
and longer-lasting. Furthermore, some companies already domiciled in (perceived to be) taxdisfavored countries, such as the UK and the U.S., claim that they wish that they had never
incorporated there and would leave, except for the high tax, political and other costs of exiting. 8
6

Interestingly, Invesco has 5,500 employees in 19 countries, but neither office nor employees in Bermuda. Desai
(2008) discusses this increasingly common separation of a multinational’s headquarters, tax domicile, and
operations, which he terms the decentering of the global firm. In this paper, we may miscode a country’s domicile
(i.e., tax home) if its domicile differs from the location provided in the company’s financial records.
7
See Desai and Hines (2002) and Voget (2008) for detailed discussions of inversions. Capturing the fiery rhetoric
in 2002 concerning U.S. inversions, Johnston (2002) reported, “Senior senators from both parties used blunt
language today to denounce companies that use Bermuda as a mail drop to reduce their American income taxes by
tens of millions of dollars, calling them ‘greedy’ and ‘unpatriotic’ tax evaders whose actions could not be tolerated
‘in a time of war’.”
8
Their ongoing dissatisfaction is reminiscent of the testimony of Bob Perlman, Vice President of Taxes for Intel
Corporation, before the Senate Finance Committee in March, 1999, where he stated, “…if I had known at Intel's
founding (over thirty years ago) what I know today about the international tax rules, I would have advised that the
parent company be established outside the U.S. This reflects the reality that our Tax Code competitively
disadvantages multinationals simply because the parent is a U.S. corporation.” (Perlman, 1999). Indicative of the
heated nature of this topic, the Senate Finance Committee's ranking Democrat, New York Senator Daniel Patrick
Moynihan retorted, "So, you would have left the United States for the tax shelters of the Cayman Islands. Do you
think that the Marines are still down there if you need them?...So money matters more to you than country?...I am
sure you will reconsider it, but if you do move, well, just keep in check with the American consul. You might never
know." (United States Senate Committee on Finance, 1999, p.17.)

5

Not all developed countries host unhappy multinationals. Dutch multinationals,
particularly following enactment of the 2007 Corporate Income Tax Law, reportedly are paying
little, if any, tax. Of the twenty largest Dutch companies, allegedly fewer than five are paying
any corporate income tax to the Netherlands (Dohmen, 2008). Consistent with favorable
treatment of Dutch multinationals, one international tax expert, Timothy McDonald, Vice
President of Finance and Accounting for Procter & Gamble, recently identified the Netherlands
as having the model system for taxing multinationals (Tuerff, et al., 2008, p.79).
Other countries have recently followed the Dutch lead. In late 2008, both the British and
Japanese governments moved to exempt dividends paid from foreign subsidiaries from home
country corporate income taxes. The changes shift both countries from a worldwide system of
taxation to a territorial system, leaving the U.S. as the only major country with a worldwide
system.
In the UK case, the Treasury stated that “The policy objective is to enhance the
competitiveness of the UK by providing the widest possible exemption.” Chris Morgan of
KPMG called the proposal, “…a decisive shift towards a territorial tax system where the UK
only taxes profits made in the UK.” However, Ian Brimicombe, head of tax at AstraZeneca,
doubted that the change in the law would bring back the firms that had already exited the UK and
noted that companies with intellectual property or finance subsidiaries were still disadvantaged
in the UK. (Houlder, 2008). Nonetheless, UK multinationals widely welcomed the exemption of
foreign dividends.
Favorable tax treatment for multinationals inevitably leads to concerns that smaller
domestic firms are paying a disproportionate share of the taxes. For example, after the HM
Revenue and Customs National Audit Office (2007) reported that a third of the UK’s 700 largest

6

companies paid no tax in the 2005-2006 financial year, Bill Dodwell of Deloitte stated, “That
700 of the largest companies and groups are only paying 54 per cent of corporation tax shows the
giant contribution of small companies. It is probably because many are less international and so
have different planning opportunities.” (Houlder, 2007). With regards to U.S. companies,
Johnston (2008) agrees, stating that “…very few grasp how corporate taxes favor multinationals
over domestic firms.”
Now we have come full circle. Perceptions that multinationals are not paying their fair
share of taxes because they can avail themselves of tax planning opportunities not available to
smaller firms fuel calls for policy changes, such as those recently proposed by the White House.
As this smattering of recent events shows, the taxation of multinationals is controversial and
politically charged with implications for a country’s ability to compete for tax revenue, capital,
investment, and labor. 9 This paper aims to provide facts for the ongoing debate by estimating
worldwide taxes using the ETRs for domestic-only firms, multinationals, and foreign
subsidiaries around the globe and over many years.
To estimate the corporate income taxes paid by multinationals and domestics around the
globe, we regress firm-level ETRs on categorical variables for the domicile of the parent and
whether the company is a multinational. The regression coefficients on the categorical variables
provide estimates of country-level ETRs for both domestic firms, i.e., those operating in the
home country only, and multinationals, i.e., those domiciled in the home country but operating in
at least one other country. These ETR estimates enable us to compare domestics with
multinationals, both within countries and across countries, industries, and years. We then
conduct similar regressions adding categorical variables that denote the location of the firm’s
9

A recent example of the intensity surrounding the taxation of multinationals is the threat by French President
Nicolas Sarkozy to walk out of the April 2009 G20 meeting if the China objected to a listing of non-compliant tax
havens.

7

foreign subsidiaries. These tests enable us to compare the tax expenses attributable to foreign
subsidiaries.
We find that multinationals and domestic firms have similar ETRs. Japanese firms
always face the highest tax rates. The ETRs for companies in tax havens, the Middle East and
Asia (setting aside Japan) are always lower than those for firms domiciled in the U.S. and
Europe. We also find a worldwide decline in ETRs. From 1989 to 2006, ETRs, on average,
dropped seven percentage points or 20%. German, Japanese, Australian, and Canadian ETRs
decreased more than American, British, and French ETRs did. Nevertheless, because the ETRs
were falling for all countries, the ordinal rank from high-tax countries to low-tax countries
changed little. We also find evidence that the location of a foreign subsidiary may have some
effect, though limited, on a multinational’s worldwide tax burden.
To our knowledge, this paper provides the most comprehensive analysis of international
firm-level corporate income tax burdens to date. Collins and Shackelford (1995) studied parent
ETRs for four countries (Canada, Japan, the UK, and the U.S.) and ten years (1982-1991). Their
subsequent study, Collins and Shackelford (2003), added Germany and investigated ETRs from
1992-1997; however, with data for only eight Japanese firm-years and 36 German firm-years,
they were effectively limited to studying three countries. In both studies, they conclude that the
parents of multinationals domiciled in the U.S. and the UK faced similar ETRs, both of which
exceeded the parent ETRs in Canada. In neither study did they have information about the
location of the company’s subsidiaries. Recent advances in computer-readable financial
statement datasets enable us to study far more companies (both at the parent and subsidiary
level), countries, and years than Collins and Shackelford could study.

8

Two other studies have compared ETRs across countries. Lu and Swenson (2000) and
Lee and Swenson (2008) document average ETRs for a wide range of countries for 1995-1998
and 2006-2007, respectively. Using the Global Vantage and Compustat Global databases, they
calculate country-level ETRs and use them as a basis for comparison for the Asia-Pacific
countries that were the focus of their studies. Neither study separates domestic-only and
multinational corporations or has information on the location of firms’ subsidiaries. As a result,
inferences in both studies are limited to cross-country comparisons at the aggregate and industry
levels.
A concurrent study with access to more U.S. companies than our study is Dyreng and
Lindsey (2009). They use text-searching software to collect foreign operations information for
all U.S.-incorporated firms in the Compustat database between 1995 and 2007 and estimate the
average worldwide, federal, and foreign tax rates on U.S. pre-tax income. A limitation of their
study is that they do not have access to data for companies domiciled outside the U.S. In
contrast, our access to financial statement information for thousands of firms from scores of
countries enables us to substantially expand the understanding of corporate tax burdens around
the world. While our findings cannot identify the appropriate international tax policy, the ETR
estimates in this study should prove useful quantitative information as policymakers, business,
and scholars around the globe grapple with the complexities surrounding the taxation of
multinational activities.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 develops the regression equation used to
estimate the ETRs. Section 3 details the sample selection. Sections 4, 5, and 6 present the
empirical findings. Closing remarks follow.

9

2.

Regression Equation
To compare the tax rates of multinationals and domestic firms across countries and to

determine whether multinationals and domestics in the same country face different tax rates, we
estimate a modified version of the pooled, cross-sectional regression equation developed in
Collins and Shackelford (1995): 10

where:

the effective tax rate for firm i in year t.
an indicator variable equal to 1 if firm i is domiciled in country j in year
t, equal to 0 otherwise.
an indicator variable equal to 1 if firm i has a foreign subsidiary in year
t, equal to 0 otherwise.
an indicator variable equal to 1 if firm i is identified as being in
industry k (by two-digit NAICS) in year t, equal to 0 otherwise.
an indicator variable equal to 1 for firm-years for which t = m, equal to
0 otherwise.
the percentile rank of the size of variable n for firm i in year t.
n={Assets, Revenue, Owners’ Equity}.
We suppress the intercept so that the coefficients on the COUNTRY variables can be

interpreted as the marginal cost of domiciling in a country, i.e., the effective tax rate for domestic
10

Collins and Shackelford’s (1995) regression model includes categorical variables indicating whether the firm’s
income statement is consolidated or restated in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We exclude all unconsolidated firmyears from our sample to avoid potentially including both parents and their subsidiaries as separate observations.
We cannot include the restatement variable because our data do not include it.

10

firms. 11 Throughout the paper, we refer to the coefficient on the COUNTRY variable as the
domestic ETR. Suppressing the intercept also means that the coefficient on the COUNTRY*MN
variables is the incremental tax cost for multinationals (as compared with the domestics) in that
country. We test whether this coefficient is significantly different from zero. Positive values are
consistent with multinationals in a country facing higher ETRs than their domestic counterparts
face. Negative values are consistent with domestics in a country facing higher ETRs than their
multinational counterparts face. Throughout the paper, we refer to the sum of the coefficients on
the COUNTRY and the COUNTRY * MN variables as the multinational ETR. 12
The coefficients on INDUSTRY and YEAR are used to determine whether ETRs vary
across industries and time. Since Rego (2003) finds that ETRs are increasing in the size of the
firm, we include three control variables for size (SIZE): the percentile ranks of Total Assets,
Revenues, and Equity. 13
The ETRs are collected from each firm’s financial statements. 14 The numerator for the
ETR computation is the total worldwide income tax expense in the company’s publicly available
financial statements. In subsequent tests, the numerator is current income tax expense.
11

To estimate equation (1), one industry and one year have to be excluded from the regression. To determine which
industry to leave out, we calculate the mean ETR in each industry (two-digit NAICS) and then determine the median
of those means. The industry with the median mean (code 31) is the one left out. We implement a similar
procedure on the years, resulting in 2005 being the excluded year. To improve comparability across estimations, we
exclude the same industry and year from each regression.
12
Note that the magnitude of the domestic and multinational ETRs cannot be directly compared with the actual
ETRs from the financial statements, which serve as the dependent variable. The domestic and multinational ETRs
are the tax rates, conditional on industry, year, and size. That said, our empirical analysis shows that the estimated
ETRs are very similar to the actual ETRs from the financial statements.
13
We use percentile ranks rather than actual values or logarithms to mitigate concerns about the accuracy of the
foreign exchange and unit data. We converted all dollar variables to millions of U.S. dollars using the currency and
unit data in the database. However, there appear to be errors in the data for a few countries, e.g., some of the Italian
data, which the database claims is expressed in Euros, appear to be expressed in Italian Lira. Also in a few cases,
data appear to be expressed in thousands although the database asserts that they are expressed in millions. By using
percentile ranks, we limit the impact of these possible errors on our size controls.
14
Note that the ETRs in this study are not marginal tax rates, as detailed in Scholes, et al., 2009. They ignore
implicit taxes, cannot assess who bears the burden of corporate income taxes, and cannot capture incentives to
employ new capital (see Fullerton, 1980, and Bradford and Fullerton, 1981, for a discussion of marginal effective
tax rates). Neither are they the tax rates related to investment decisions developed in Devereux and Griffith (1998)
and Gordon, et al (2003).

11

Unfortunately, unlike U.S. GAAP, the GAAP in many countries do not require firms to disclose
the current income tax expense. Thus, many companies in our study do not report their current
income tax expense. Nonetheless, for those companies that report both figures, inferences are
the same whether we use total or current income tax expense. Thus, to conduct our primary
tests, we use the total income tax expense because it is available for more firms.
The ETR denominator is net income before income taxes (NIBT). Since financial
reporting rules vary across countries and thus affect the computation of NIBT, we conduct
sensitivity tests using total revenues and an adjusted net income as denominators. 15 Results are
qualitatively the same.

3. Sample
We use the Osiris database to collect a sample of firms for this study. 16 To collect
information about the parents for all firm-years between 1988 and 2007, we access the data
through the Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS) interface. 17 We attempt to mitigate the
impact of outliers and errors in the data by deleting all observations for which any one of the
following are true: (a) ETR exceeds 70%, (b) ETR is negative, (c) the ratio of total income tax
expense to a modification of NIBT (adding back depreciation and research and development

15

To test the sensitivity of our findings to the selection of NIBT as the scalar, we use two other profit measures to
scale the total income tax expense: adjusted net income (NIBT plus certain key expenses) and revenues. Adjusted
net income is intended to add back two key expenses whose accounting rules vary across countries, namely
depreciation expense and research and development expense. The second scalar, revenues, eliminates any crosscountry variation in expenses.
16
Although the number of financial statement variables tracked in Osiris is smaller than that tracked in Compustat
Global, the Osiris database is superior for this study because it allows us to identify the countries in which firms
have subsidiaries.
17
The data used in this study were last updated February 13, 2008. Because very few December year-end firms
would have reported by that time, the number of observations for 2007 is smaller than those for the earlier years.

12

expense) is negative or exceeds 70%. 18 We also eliminate firm-years with (a) missing values for
firm identifier (os_id_number), sales (data13002), tax expense (data13035), and NIBT
(data13034), (b) nonpositive sales, and (c) negative values for depreciation, and research and
development expenses. All missing values for depreciation and research and development
expense are set to zero. We also delete all observations where NIBT plus depreciation and
research and development expense equals zero.
Information about the subsidiaries of these firms is accessed through an Internet interface
with Bureau van Dijk. 19 We obtain information about subsidiaries classified in levels 1 through
10. 20 Thus, if a firm has a domestic subsidiary (level 1), which has a domestic subsidiary (level
2), which has a domestic subsidiary (level 3) and so forth until the domestic subsidiary in level 9
has a foreign subsidiary (level 10), we would treat that firm as a multinational and code that
country as having a foreign subsidiary. Foreign subsidiaries buried beneath ten layers of
domestic subsidiaries will be miscoded, but we doubt that this data limitation will have any
effect on the paper’s inferences. 21
The Osiris subsidiary measure has a serious flaw. Osiris only reports the subsidiary
information as of the most recent updating of the information. 22 We are unable to assess the

18

Inferences are unchanged when we further control for the effects of outliers by deleting from each specification
any observations that are identified as outliers by Cook’s D, studentized residuals, or DFFITS.
19
Bureau van Dijk collects information directly from Annual Reports and other filings. In addition, it obtains
information from several information providers, including CFI Online (Ireland), Dun & Bradstreet, Datamonitor,
Factset, LexisNexis, and Worldbox.
20
Over two-thirds of the firms reported having zero subsidiaries. We crosschecked this information to public filings
of a sample of Canadian and U.S. firms and determined that several of these firms had subsidiaries. Because
accurate identification of domestic and multinational firms is central to our study, we discarded the subsidiary
information of the 28,427 parent firms that reported having zero subsidiaries. We then code any firm that reports at
least one foreign subsidiary as multinational and those that report zero foreign subsidiaries as domestic.
21
We obtain subsidiary information up to level 10 for parents domiciled everywhere, except Canada, New York,
and North Carolina. For unresolved reasons, we were only able to obtain level 1 subsidiary information for firms
domiciled in these jurisdictions. Inferences are unchanged when we drop firm-years from these jurisdictions from
our sample.
22
For example, if a company had no subsidiary in Canada before 2007 (the most recent year in the database) and
then incorporated a subsidiary in Canada in 2007, we would erroneously treat the company as having had a

13

extent to which this data limitation affects the conclusions drawn from this study. However, to
mitigate the potential for miscoding the existence and location of foreign subsidiaries, we limit
the primary tests in this paper to firm-years since 2002. 23 Our logic is that the foreign subsidiary
coding is correct for 2007, has fewer errors in 2006 than in 2005, and has fewer errors in 2005
than in 2004, and so forth. We arbitrarily select the last five years for which we have data as the
cut-off for our primary tests in the hope that the miscoding is of an acceptable level for these
most recent years. In subsequent tests, we present estimated coefficients from one regression
that uses all of the firm-years and from annual regressions for each year. Conclusions are similar
regardless of the sample period.
Our sample selection process yields a main sample of 27,136 firm-years spanning 85
countries, ranging from only one firm-year in seven countries to 7,177 in the U.S. We combine
the countries with the fewest observations based on geography and other characteristics, leaving
nine large countries: Australia 24 (5% of the sample), Canada (3%), China (3%), France (1%),
Germany (1%), India (2%), Japan (24%), the UK (8%) and the U.S.(26%). 25 Because of a
similar history of economic development, we form a group with the four Asian Tigers (Hong
Kong, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan—12% of the sample). We form another group

Canadian subsidiary for all years in our sample. Likewise, if a company had a subsidiary in Canada for all years
before 2007 and then liquidated the Canadian subsidiary in 2006, we would erroneously treat the company as not
having had a subsidiary in Canada for any year in our sample.
23
Another advantage of limiting the analysis to recent years is that it mitigates potential survivorship bias. The
Osiris database is limited to companies presently in existence. Thus, our analysis is limited to firms that have
survived throughout the investigation period. By restricting the sample to firm-years since 2002, we reduce the
deleterious effects of survivorship bias.
24
We include New Zealand with Australia because New Zealand does not fit in any of the geographic groups
described below, does not meet the criteria to be included on its own, and the corporate income tax systems of the
two countries are largely similar. In our main sample, we have 1,138 Australia parent firm-years and 96 New
Zealand parent firm-years.
25
The large countries were selected based on the size of their economy and the number of their firm-years. These
nine countries were the only ones with gross domestic product in excess of one trillion dollars in 2008 (per the CIA
World Factbook) and at least 200 firm-years in the sample.

14

comprised of 17 Tax Havens (3% of the sample). 26 The remaining 57 countries are organized
geographically into five groups: Africa (1% of the sample), Asia (2%), Europe (6%), the Middle
East (2%) and Latin America (2%). 27 All of the tests are conducted and results are reported
using these 16 countries and groups. 28
For the 16 countries and groups, Table 1 reports the firm-year means of Sales, Assets,
Equity, Total Income Tax Expense, and NIBT, dichotomized into 12,778 domestic-only firms
and 14,358 multinationals. 29 Not surprisingly, multinational firms average more sales, assets,
equity, total tax expense and NIBT than domestics do. The next two columns in Table 1 show
the average number of subsidiaries (domestic and foreign) and the average number of
subsidiaries located in foreign countries, respectively.
The final four columns of Table 1 present summary measures of alternative tax rate
measures (all expressed in percentages). In the first of the four columns (“Agg ETR”), the
numerator is the aggregated tax expense for all firms in a group (e.g., all American companies)
divided by the aggregated NIBT for those firms. In the full sample, both domestics and
multinationals have aggregate ETRs of 31%. The next column presents the means of the total
income tax expense divided by net income before taxes. These are the actual ETRs from the
26

Note that though they classify Hong Kong and Singapore as tax havens, we do not include them in the tax haven
group but rather as members of the Asian Tiger group. However, inferences are unaltered if we include Hong Kong
and Singapore in the Tax Havens group and leave South Korea and Taiwan as the only countries in the Asian Tiger
group.
27
No countries are included twice in the groupings. For example, the Asia group only includes Asian countries not
included in other places. Thus, it does not include China, India, Japan, and the Asian Tigers because they are
reported separately.
28
In sensitivity tests, we further divide the Europe group into former Warsaw Pact countries and all other countries.
Inferences are unchanged. Because we have fewer than 200 firm-years for the Warsaw Pact group in our main
sample, we present the results for the aggregated group only.
29
Osiris asserts that its data are recorded in local currency and provides a variable indicating an appropriate
exchange rate for conversion to U.S. dollars and a variable indicating the units in which the data are expressed.
However, some unusually large numbers for a few countries, particularly Italy and Mexico, suggest that at least
some of the figures are stated in a currency different from the one indicated or in units different from the ones
indicated. Since our regression measures are scaled, we doubt that any variation in currency should affect our
conclusions. Consistent with that expectation, inferences are unaltered when all Italian and Mexican observations
are deleted from the study.

15

firms’ financial statements, not ETRs estimated from regression analysis. The domestics
(multinationals) have mean ETRs of 30% (28%). The penultimate column reports the median
ETRs. Domestics (multinationals) have median ETRs of 32% (30%). The final column presents
the average statutory tax rate for the country-years in the sample. 30 The numbers reported are the
weighted average rates, where the weighting was done by number of firm-years. In the full
sample, domestics and multinationals faced identical average statutory tax rates of 38%.
In general, the four tax rate columns paint a similar picture. Countries with high statutory
tax rates tend to have high ETR, whether they are measured in the aggregate or at the firm level.
One notable exception is multinationals domiciled in tax havens. They face the lowest statutory
rates in the study. However, their ETRs are much higher, albeit less than those in most other
countries. This discrepancy between statutory and effective tax rates is consistent with
multinationals in tax havens having extensive foreign operations in high-tax countries. Even
though they face low taxes on their domestic income, they must pay higher taxes abroad.

4. Results from Comparing Domestic-only Firms with Multinationals
4.1. Actual vs. Estimated ETRs
Table 2, Panel A presents the domestic-only ETRs, which are the COUNTRY coefficients
from estimating equation (1). Panel B presents the multinational ETRs, which are the sum of the
COUNTRY and the COUNTRY*MN coefficients.

30

We use the combined corporate statutory tax rate calculated for the 30 OECD countries and available at
www.oecd.org (Table II.1). For the non-OECD countries in our sample, we use the maximum rate in data kindly
provided by Kevin Hassett.

16

The first column in Table 2 reports the actual ETRs from the financial statements. The
second column reports the ETRs from estimating equation (1). 31 There is little difference
between the two columns. 32 We infer from the similarity between the actual and estimated ETRs
that the control variables (for industry, year and size) have little impact on the coefficients of
interest. This pattern holds throughout the paper, suggesting that the inferences drawn in this
study would be similar whether we used the actual ETRs from the financial statements or the
ETRs estimated in the regression. For brevity, we will focus exclusively on the estimated ETRs
in the remainder of the paper.

4.2. Comparing the tax burdens of domestic-only firms across countries
The ETRs in Table 2, Panel A enable us to compare the tax burdens of domestic-only
firms across countries. The estimated regression coefficients for the domestic-only ETRs (in the
second column) range from 10% (Middle East) to 39% (Japan) with mean (median) [standard
deviation] of 24% (24%) [6%]. The Tax Havens (17%) are the only other group with a domestic
ETR under 20%. Japan (39%) is the only country with a domestic ETR above 27%. Throughout
the study this pattern reappears—the Middle East and usually the Tax Havens will have the
lowest ETRs, and Japan’s ETR will far exceed any other country’s ETR.
The domestic ETR for the U.S. is 26%, which is above the worldwide average, the same
as those for the UK and France, and a percentage point less than those for Germany and Europe

31

To illustrate, for Canadian companies, Panel A shows that the mean actual ETR from the financial statements for
domestic-only firms is 22%, while the estimated ETR for domestics is 23%. Panel B shows that the multinational
actual ETR from the financial statement is 26% and the estimated multinational ETR is 24%.
32
The actual domestic ETRs in Panel A average 0.4 percentage points more than the domestic estimated ETRs. The
largest spread in absolute value is 3.1 percentage points for Japan. More importantly, for purposes of comparing
countries, the rank order of the two ETRs columns is nearly identical with a Pearson coefficient of 99%. With the
multinationals in Panel B, the actual ETRs average 2.1 percentage points more than the estimated multinational
ETRs. The largest spread in absolute value is 3.9 percentage points for Africa. The Pearson correlation coefficient
is 99%.

17

(i.e., the remaining European countries, which are grouped together). This order will hold
throughout the study, i.e., the U.S. domestic ETR will be above average, similar to those of the
UK and European countries, but well below that of Japan. Furthermore, ignoring Japan’s high
rates, the Asian ETRs will be less than the American and European ETRs. In fact, all of the
domestic ETRs for France, Germany, the UK, the U.S., and Europe will exceed those for China,
India, the Asian Tigers, and Asia (i.e., the remaining Asian countries) for most of the tests in the
paper.

4.3. Comparing the tax burdens of multinationals across countries
The ETRs in Table 2, Panel B enable us to compare the tax burdens of multinationals
across countries. The mean (median) [standard deviation] of the multinational ETRs in the
second column are 22% (23%) [6%]. As with the domestic ETRs, the Middle East (11%) and
Japan (36%) have the most extreme ETRs. The Tax Havens (15%), China (17%), Asian Tigers
(17%), and India (18%) also are under 20%. Germany (30%) has the second highest
multinational ETR. The U.S. multinational ETR follows at 27%. Once again, the U.S. finds
itself with an above-average ETR and bracketed by its European trading partners with the next
highest ETRs coming from the UK (26%), France (25%) and Europe (24%). As with the
domestic ETRs, the multinational ETRs for France, Germany, the UK, the U.S., and the
remaining European countries exceed those for China, India, the Asian Tigers, and the remaining
Asian countries (excluding Japan). We infer that the general rankings from high-tax countries to
low-tax countries are qualitatively the same for domestics and multinationals.
The difference between the percentages in Panel B and those in Panel A (which is the
coefficient on COUNTRY*MN) is the amount by which the multinational ETRs exceed the

18

domestic ETRs. The mean (median) [standard deviation] for the difference is -1% (-2%) [2%].
This indicates that the multinationals average slightly lower ETRs than their domestic-only
counterparts face.
Interestingly, four of the five groups whose domestics face statistically significant (at the
0.05 level) higher ETRs compared with their multinational counterparts are Asian (India (5%),
China (4%), Asian Tigers (3%) and Japan (3%)). 33 The other one is Europe (3%). The U.S. is
the only country whose multinational ETR is significantly greater than its domestic ETR.
However, the difference is only 1%, leading us to conclude that American domestics and
multinationals face similar ETRs.

4.4. Comparisons using the Current Income Tax Expense
The numerator in our computation of ETR, the total income tax expense, is the tax
expense on current profits, regardless of whether those taxes were paid in the past, are paid in the
current year, or will be paid in the future. The current income tax expense includes only that
portion of the total income tax expense related to taxes that will be paid in the current year.
Thus, current income tax expense should be a better numerator than total income tax expense for
our measure of ETRs. 34
Unfortunately, Osiris does not collect the current income tax expense. However,
Compustat Global does collect it. Thus, to test the sensitivity of our inferences to the use of the
total income tax expense, we merge the Osiris and Compustat Global databases to create a
33

A possible explanation for the lower ETR of Indian multinationals as compared to Indian domestic-only firms is
that India has granted extended tax holidays to software firms over our sample period. 19% of the Indian firm-years
in our sample are in the Computer Programming industry (NAICS 5415). All other industries, except Biotech
Manufacturing (NAICS 3254) at 12%, represent less than 5% of the sample. We thank Mihir Desai for bringing this
information to our attention. We look forward to future research that details similarly rich industry-level differences
that explain some of the differences in the domestic and multinational ETRs of other countries.
34
See Hanlon (2003) for a detailed discussion of both the total and current income tax expenses and problems
associated with using either of them to approximate actual taxes paid.

19

matched sample of 9,185 firm-years from 2003-2007 for whom data are available in both
databases. 35 We then estimate equation (1) using the matched sample and the current income tax
expense. The regression coefficient estimates for COUNTRY and COUNTRY*MN will enable us
to compare domestic and multinational ETRs across countries and within countries and thus
assess whether the inferences, reached using the total income tax expense, hold when we use the
current income tax expense. 36
The third column in Table 2 shows the estimated ETRs using the current income tax
expense and the matched sample. A limitation of the smaller, matched sample is that we have
insufficient observations for some countries, e.g., we have only one domestic African firm-year
that reports a current income tax expense. Thus, we do not report an estimated domestic ETR for
Africa or any other domestic or multinational cell with fewer than 20 observations. This
eliminates domestic and multinational estimated ETRs for Canada and domestic estimated ETRs
for France, India, the Tax Havens, Africa and the Middle East, leaving nine (15) domestic
(multinational) ETRs.

35

The matched sample is smaller for several reasons. First, Compustat Global may track different companies from
those tracked by Osiris. Second, the only firm identifier common to the two databases is the firm name. Slight
variations in the name (e.g., Inc. versus Incorporated) may result in matches being overlooked. Last, an inordinate
number of European firms erroneously show zero current tax expense in 2005 and 2006. Compustat Global has
acknowledged this error but has not corrected it. Consequently, we drop all firm-years from the problematic
countries from our sample. Compustat Global has another shortcoming for purposes of this study. In particular, it
has no foreign subsidiary information. The only item in the Compustat Global database that indicates any foreign
activity is foreign tax expense. Unfortunately, accounting rules vary across countries in the reporting of foreign
income tax expense, rendering cross-country comparisons based on foreign tax expense problematic. In addition, no
foreign income tax expense will be reported by companies that owe no foreign tax, even if they have extensive
foreign activities. To illustrate this shortcoming, 678 (30%) of the 2,276 firm-years in our matched sample in 2006
(the year in which we have the most confidence in our procedure for identifying multinationals using Osiris data) are
classified differently (and we believe erroneously) when we rely on the presence of foreign income tax expense in
Compustat Global to identify multinationals.
36
To establish comparability between the two samples, we first estimate equation (1) with the smaller, matched
sample, but continuing to use the total income tax expense in the numerator of the ETR measure. We find that the
inferences drawn from this regression are similar to the ones drawn from the full sample using total income tax
expense. This provides confidence that any difference between the findings using total income tax expense in the
numerator and those using current income tax expense in the numerator does not arise from sample differences.

20

We find that our high-tax to low-tax rankings are largely indifferent to whether the ETR
numerator is total or current income tax expense. 37 Japan’s current domestic (multinational)
ETR remains substantially higher than any other country’s ETR at 38% (35%). The group with
the next highest ETR is Europe (Germany) at 32% (30%). With no domestic estimates for the
Middle East or Tax Havens, the Asian Tigers and Latin America share the lowest domestic ETR
at 17%. China has the lowest multinational ETR (14%). Ignoring Japan, all of the Asian ETRs
continue to be less than the American and European ETRs.
In summary, the ETRs and the relative rank of the countries are largely unaffected by
whether the numerator in the ETR calculation is total income tax expense or current income tax
expense. Thus, for the remainder of this paper, we will use the sample with total income tax
expense as the numerator because it triples the sample that uses the current income tax expense.

4.5. Comparisons using all Firm-Years from 1988-2007
As discussed above, we exclude pre-2003 firm-years because the Osiris foreign
subsidiary information, which we use to identify multinationals, is only coded for the most recent
Osiris update. Since we do not know when a firm formed its first foreign subsidiary, using all
firm-years undoubtedly results in miscoding some domestic-only firm-years as multinational
firm-years.
To find out if this miscoding of firm-years before 2003 affects the high-tax to low-tax
ranking among the countries in our study, we estimate equation (1) including all firm-years for
which we have data. This adds 41,737 firm-years to our sample. The last column in Table 2
shows the resulting estimated ETRs.
37

Consistent with deferred tax liabilities generally exceeding deferred tax assets, the coefficient estimates for the
ETRs computed with total income tax expense in the numerator exceed the coefficient estimates for the ETRs
computed with current income tax expense in the numerator in 20 of the 25 cases in the third column of Table 2.

21

Despite this substantial increase in observations and the inevitable miscoding of
multinationals introduced by adding the earlier firm-years and the potential survivorship bias
noted above, the inferences are largely unaltered. The rank order of the countries remains
qualitatively unaltered: the Japanese domestic (multinational) ETR is 38% (37%), nine (five)
percentage points greater than that for France (Germany), the country with next highest ETR.
The domestic (multinational) Middle Eastern ETR is the lowest at 11% (12%), seven (two)
percentage points below those of China and Latin America (Tax Havens). Once again, the U.S.
and European countries generally have higher ETRs than Asian countries. All of the domestic
and multinational ETRs for France, Germany, the UK, the U.S., and Europe exceed those for
China, India, the Asian Tigers, and Asia. In short, the high-tax to low-tax rankings are
substantially the same from 1988 to 2007 as they are from 2003 to 2007.

4.6. Year-by-year comparisons from 1988 to 2007
The previous section establishes that the estimates of equation (1) are substantially the
same whether the sample is drawn from recent years (2003-2007) or from the entire investigation
period (1988-2007). In this section we report annual estimated ETRs, using the complete sample
of firm-years to estimate equation (1) for each year. These estimated regression coefficients
enable us to analyze the changes in ETRs over time for each country.
Table 3 reports the annual estimated domestic and multinational ETRs. Percentages are
only presented if there are at least 20 observations, but all available firm-years were included in
the regressions.
We find that the high-tax to low-tax rank across countries has changed little over the two
decades. The order in 1988 (the first year) is similar to the rank in 2006 (the final year with data

22

for all groups). In 1988, the Japanese multinational ETR was the highest at 49% (15 percentage
points ahead of any other country); in 2006, they were the highest at 36% (nine percentage points
higher than those from any other country). In fact, although their rates declined significantly
over time, in every year Japanese domestic and multinational ETRs were higher than those in
any country (note that we report no estimates for Japanese domestics before 1993 because in
these earlier years we do not have at least 20 Japanese domestic observations in a single year). 38
In 1988, the Tax Havens enjoyed the lowest multinational ETR. Since then, they have
averaged three percentage points above the minimum ETR. The Middle East has had the lowest
domestic (multinational) ETRs since 2000 (1999). From 1997 to 2000, India enjoyed the lowest
multinational ETRs.
The U.S. and European countries always had higher ETRs than the Asian countries, with
the notable exception of Japan. In 1998 (the first year with data for all Asian countries), the
multinational ETRs of France, Germany, the UK, the U.S., and Europe averaged 29%. The
multinational ETRs of China, India, Asian Tigers, and Asia averaged 15%. In 2006, those same
Western countries bested their same Eastern counterparts 25% to 18%.
Over the two decades, German multinational ETRs fell more than any other country’s
multinational ETRs. In 1989 they approached Japanese levels in 1989 at 47%. By 2006 they
had tumbled to 27% (although still five percentage points above average). Two other countries
with large declines were Japanese multinationals from 49% in 1988 to 36% in 2006 and
Australian multinationals from 34% in 1988 to 23% in 2006. U.S. ETR declines were modest:

38

Though beyond the scope of this study, Japan’s remarkable ability to sustain substantially higher tax rates than its
trading partners throughout two decades warrants further investigation. Ishi (2001) and Griffith and Klemm (2004)
(among others) document the gap, but we are aware of no study that attempts to ascertain the reasons why the gap
has persisted for such a long period.

23

domestic (multinational) ETRs dropped by only two (two) percentage points. 39 For the ten
groups for which we have data from 1989 to 2006 (British and American domestics and
multinationals and Australian, French, German, Japanese, Tax Haven and European
multinationals), the average decline over the period was 7 percentage points or 20% of their 1989
ETRs.
Interestingly, the ETR declines had a precipitous drop from 1992 to 1994. During those
two years, German multinational ETRs fell 14 percentage points. Australian multinational ETRs
tumbled 11 percentage points. Japanese multinational ETRs dropped 6 percentage points. The
decrease was permanent. ETRs for those three groups never rebounded to their 1992 levels.
From 2002 to 2003, the ETRs for Canadian domestics dropped from 31% to 22% and
multinationals from 27% to 21%. Neither Canadian group has seen its ETR return to its earlier
level.
The only country that showed a substantial increase in ETRs is India, where multinational
ETRs jumped from 8% in 2000 to 20% in 2002 and have remained at roughly that level. The
Europe multinational ETRs remained steady over time. They were 22% in 1989, even lower
than the Tax Havens’ multinational ETR, but because of the dramatic declines in other countries’
ETRs, they were slightly above average by 1999. All other groups had lower ETRs in 2006 than
in 1988.

4.7. Comparisons Across Industries
To assess whether ETRs vary across industries, we estimate equation (1) using industry
groupings. We form the industries using two-digit NAICS codes and the 2003-2007 sample with
39

These findings are consistent with those of the 2008 study by the OECD discussed in Hodge (2008) which
documented that 2008 was the seventeenth consecutive year in which the average statutory corporate tax rate in nonU.S. OECD countries fell while the U.S. rate remained unchanged.

24

total income tax expense in the numerator. We group two-digit codes to ensure that each
reported industry has at least 900 firm-years. All observations are included in the regressions,
but only cells with twenty or more observations are reported. Manufacturers comprise 49% of
the firm-years.
Table 4 shows the resulting ETR estimates. The rank order of the countries is consistent
across industries. For every industry in which they have enough observations, Japanese ETRs
remain higher and Middle Eastern ETRs lower than those from any other country. The U.S. and
European countries continue to have higher ETRs than Asian ETRs (once again, ignoring Japan).
Within-country comparisons reveal substantial variation in most countries/groups, with
an average range (standard deviation) in ETRs of 14 (five) percentage points. The Retail Trade
industry has the highest ETRs. Combining domestic and multinational estimates, the Retail
Trade ETRs are highest for 13 of the 17 countries/groups that reported Retail Trade ETRs. The
U.S. Retail Trade ETR is 34% (35%) for domestics (multinationals), six percentage points higher
than those of the next industry, Manufacturing (Real Estate).
The Information and Professional industries have the lowest multinational ETRs. Six
(four) of the ten (eleven) countries/groups that report a multinational ETR in the Information
(Professional) industry report their lowest ETR in that industry. The domestic ETRs exhibit no
similar pattern. The U.S. Financial (Information) industry has the lowest domestic
(multinational) ETR of 15% (17%), four (two) percentage points less than the Information
(Professional) industry ETR.

4.8. Additional Tests
The data enable us to conduct a battery of additional tests and robustness checks, which
we discuss briefly in this section. In every case, the inferences drawn above hold.
25

One, it is difficult to determine where the profits generated from intangible assets are
earned. As a result, firms with large amounts of intangible assets may be better able to avoid
taxes (see discussions in Huizinga, Laeven and Nicodeme, 2008, Mutti and Grubert, 2007, and
Desai, Foley and Hines, 2006, among many others). To assess whether firms with greater
amounts of intangibles have lower ETRs, we would ideally sort firms based on their levels of
intangible assets. Unfortunately, information about the amount of intangible assets is not
publicly available. Thus, we turn to an observable figure, total research and development
expenses, which, we assume, is positively correlated with the firm’s level of intangibles.
We estimate equation (1) for those firm-years with positive values for research and
development expenses, modifying the equation to include a categorical variable for those firmyears where research and development expenses as a percentage of total assets are above the
median. Consistent with high intangible firms having lower ETRs, we find that the coefficient
on the categorical variable is -2.6% and highly significant.
Two, as mentioned above, many countries have shifted from a worldwide tax system to a
territorial tax system. Furthermore, Japan and the U.K. are in the process of moving to a
territorial system, leaving the U.S. as the sole remaining major worldwide country. Some have
conjectured that a territorial system in the U.S. would collect less revenue than the current
worldwide system. To test the impact of a worldwide system on ETRs, we estimate equation (1),
after adding a categorical variable equal to one if the parent country has a worldwide tax system,
and zero otherwise. We find that the worldwide coefficient is insignificant.
Three, in countries with imputation, the corporate income tax serves as a form of
withholding tax because the corporate tax (or some part of it) can be used to offset shareholders’
dividend taxes. Thus, it is possible that corporate tax planning is less important in imputation

26

countries because firms in those countries have less incentive to lower their ETRs than those do
in classical systems, such as the U.S., where corporate taxes do not offset shareholder taxes. We
test this possibility by modifying equation (1) to include a categorical variable that indicates
whether the firm is domiciled in a country with any form of imputation. We find that the
estimated coefficient on the imputation variable is 6% and significant at the 1% level, consistent
with imputation countries facing higher ETRs.
Four, to assess the impact of cross-country differences in book and tax accounting on our
estimates of cross-country ETRs, we use Atwood, Drake and Myers’ (2009) book-tax conformity
measure (BTC) for 33 countries from 1993 to 2005. Consistent with book-tax conformity
mattering, we find a positive correlation between BTC and the absolute value of the difference
between a firm’s maximum statutory tax rate and its ETR. However, when we modify equation
(1) to include the BTC measure, we find that the coefficient on the BTC measure is insignificant.
This failure to detect a relation between a measure of book-tax conformity and the level of ETRs
provides some comfort that the inferences drawn from this study are not solely an artifact of
cross-country differences in financial reporting.
Five, another cross-country difference is whether tax losses can be carried back to offset
the prior year’s taxable income. 40 When we add a categorical variable indicating whether a
country permits losses to be carried back, we find that the coefficient on that variable is -2.5%
and significant at the 0.01 level, which is consistent with lower ETRs in countries that permit
firms to carry back their losses. 41

40

This information is obtained from International Tax Summaries prepared by Deloitte and available through its
website.
41
We conduct no tests concerning the carryforward of losses because Estonia is the only country that does not
permit them.

27

Six, the corporate income tax is only one of many taxes, and in many countries, it is a
relatively minor source of government revenue. To the extent countries rely on alternative taxes,
they may need less revenue from corporate income taxes, which are the sole tax used to compute
ETRs. Alternatively, high income tax countries may levy high taxes across the board.
Consistent with a trade-off among revenue sources, we find that the value-added tax rate is
negatively correlated with ETRs. 42 However, when we exclude companies domiciled in the U.S.
(the only major country without a value-added tax), the correlation becomes positive, consistent
with countries that have high corporate income taxes also having high value-added taxes. To
determine whether the value-added tax affects the inferences drawn above, we include the valueadded tax rate in equation (1). Inferences are unaltered.
Seven, we include the maximum statutory corporate income tax rate in equation (1). As
would be expected, we find a positive coefficient on the statutory rate. However, the relative
ranks of the sixteen countries/groups’ multinationals, remain largely unchanged with Japan
(Middle East) retaining the top (bottom) rank. This implies that the ETRs are driven by
differences in both tax rates and tax bases.
Eight, the sample excludes all firm-years with losses (i.e., negative NIBT). In this
sensitivity test, we add back the 3,297 firm-years with losses and actual ETRs (from the financial
statements) that equal zero and estimate equation (1). By definition, adding these loss firm-years
lowers the estimated ETRs. We find that the inclusion of loss firm-years has inconsequential
impact on the relative high-tax to low-tax rank across the countries: Japanese domestic
(multinational) ETRs remain the highest by far at 31% (26%), ten (five) percentage points above
the German ETRs. The domestic (multinational) Middle Eastern ETRs are the lowest at 5%
(4%), five (three) percentage points below the Tax Havens. All of the multinational ETRs for
42

We thank Kevin Hassett for providing us with the valued-add tax data.

28

France, Germany, the UK, the U.S., and Europe exceed those for China, India, and the Asian
Tigers.
Nine, the sample includes firm-years with zero ETRs as long as their NIBT was positive.
In this robustness check, we drop those 1,058 firm-years with non-positive ETRs as reported in
the financial statements. By definition, eliminating these zero ETR firms increases the estimated
ETRs. We find that the deletion of non-positive ETRs has inconsequential impact on the relative
high-tax to low-tax rank across the countries: Japanese domestic (multinational) ETRs are 40%
(38%), twelve (six) percentage points above those for Germany, the country with the next
highest ETR. The domestic (multinational) Middle Eastern ETRs are the lowest at 12% (13%),
eight (four) percentage points ahead of the Tax Havens. Once again, the U.S. and European
countries generally have higher ETRs than Asian countries. All of the domestic and
multinational ETRs for France, Germany, the UK, the U.S., and Europe exceed those for China,
India, the Asian Tigers, and Asia.
All in all, we conclude from this series of additional tests that the earlier inferences about
ETRs hold. The remainder of the paper expands the domestic-multinational dichotomy to
consider whether the domiciles of foreign subsidiaries affect ETRs.

5. Results from Comparing Foreign Subsidiaries
5.1. Cross-country comparisons
In Equation (1), we use the presence of a foreign subsidiary to distinguish multinationals
from domestic-only firms. In this section, we replace that single categorical variable with
categorical variables for all locations of foreign subsidiaries. The coefficients on the foreign

29

subsidiary variables enable us to assess the extent to which the location of a foreign subsidiary
affects the tax burdens of its parent. The regression equation is:

where:

an indicator variable equal to 1 if firm i reports a subsidiary in country
k, equal to 0 otherwise.

All other variables are defined the same as in equation (1). The estimated regression coefficient
on SUB is the estimated impact on ETRs arising from having a subsidiary in that foreign country.
We continue to use the same 16 groups as in the previous section. Each group serves as a
COUNTRY variable and a SUB variable. Each firm-year has one country in which its COUNTRY
variable is coded one. However, it has n SUBs coded one, where n is the number of different
countries in which the parent has at least one subsidiary. 43
We begin with the original sample of 27,136 firm-years (from 2003-2007) with total
income tax expense as the numerator for the ETR. We lose 167 firm-years whose companies
indicated that they had a foreign subsidiary (which was adequate for coding it as a multinational
in estimating equation (1)), but did not specify the location of the foreign subsidiary, rendering it
unusable for estimating equation (2). For these remaining 26,969 firm-years, there are 57,966
SUB variables with a value of one. All 16 subsidiary locations have at least 1,200 firm-years.
Europe is the most popular location for foreign subsidiaries with 6,335 firm-years.
Table 5 shows the regression coefficient estimates for COUNTRY in Panel A and SUB in
Panel B. The COUNTRY coefficients from equation (2) should be the same as the COUNTRY
43

For example, if a U.S. parent has subsidiaries in Canada, Germany, and Bermuda,
, and
would be coded one, while all other
and
coded zero.

30

,
,
variables would be

coefficients from equation (1), except to the extent that identifying the location of a firm’s
foreign subsidiaries, as opposed to just identifying the existence of a foreign subsidiary provides
information. It seems plausible that knowing the subsidiary’s domicile would affect inferences
because foreign subsidiaries are not randomly distributed across parents. Multinationals from
some countries might be more likely to have profitable foreign investments or operate in high-tax
countries (e.g., French companies are more likely to have a subsidiary in high-tax Germany than
are Indian companies, which might account for some of the higher ETRs in France.). That said,
we find little evidence that the location of the foreign subsidiary matters. Only two COUNTRY
coefficients are more than two percentage points different from the corresponding COUNTRY
coefficients in Table 2. The domestic German ETR decreases from 30% to 27%, while the
domestic Indian ETR increases from 20% to 23%.
We now turn our attention to Panel B and the SUB coefficients. We expect cross-country
variation in the SUB coefficients to the extent that locating a foreign subsidiary in a country
affects the multinational’s ETR. For example, if a firm can shift profits from a high-tax country
to a tax haven, then its ETR should be lower and the Tax Haven SUB coefficient should reflect
those tax savings. To our surprise, we find little evidence of cross-country variation in SUB
coefficients. The SUB coefficients range from a 1.3 percentage points decrease in ETRs (Asia)
to a 1.2 percentage points increase in ETRs (Australia). The Tax Haven SUB coefficient implies
that a firm with at least one subsidiary in a haven country enjoys a 0.5 percentage point lower
ETR, negative but hardly a substantial amount.

5.2. Parent-subsidiary interactions
The lack of results in the previous section may stem from the fact that foreign
subsidiaries affect the ETRs of their parents differently depending on the domicile of the parent.
31

For example, Australian subsidiaries may lower the high-tax ETRs of Japan parents but increase
the low-tax ETRs of Asian Tiger parents. In the prior section, the two effects of Australian
subsidiaries would have offset each other, potentially understating the impact of Australian
subsidiaries on parent ETRs in both Japan and the Asian Tigers.
In this section, we alter the research design in an attempt to detect any possible parentsubsidiary interactive effects. Specifically, we modify equation (2) by replacing the SUB
variables with interactions between the COUNTRY and SUB variables. We then compare the
coefficients on the interactions to assess the extent to which subsidiaries affect parents
differently, depending on whether the parent is in a high-tax or low-tax country.

Table 6, Panel A presents the estimated interaction coefficients (no coefficients are
shown unless there are at least 100 observations in a cell). We would expect that subsidiaries in
low-tax countries would lower the ETRs of their parents more than subsidiaries in high-tax
countries do. Consistent with this expectations, we find that, across all parents, the subsidiaries
from low-tax countries (China, India, Asian Tigers, Tax Havens, Asian and the Middle East)
have 30 negative interaction coefficients (indicating a reduction in the parents’ ETRs) and only
nine positive interaction coefficients (indicating an increase in the parents’ ETRs). For example,
subsidiaries in Tax Havens reduce ETRs in 7 of the 8 countries with coefficients. Conversely,
subsidiaries located in high-tax countries (France, Germany, Japan, the UK, the U.S., and
Europe) have 23 negative interaction coefficients and 26 positive interaction coefficients.
The interactive coefficient estimates also allow us to compare domestics in a country
with multinationals operating in that country, shedding light on reports, such as the U.S.

32

Government Accountability Office’s (2008) finding that U.S.-controlled U.S. companies pay
more taxes than foreign-controlled U.S. companies. Consistent with the U.S. Government
Accountability Office’s (2008) report, we find that U.S. domestics have a higher ETR (26%)
than multinationals from every country, except Japan. 44 We also find that domestics in China,
India, and the Asian Tigers face lower ETRs than multinationals from all Western countries.
We find a modest -0.1% coefficient on the Tax Haven subsidiaries of U.S. parents, which
is less than Dyreng and Lindsey’s (2009) 1.5% estimate, computed using different data and
methodology. Nonetheless, both estimates imply that the impact of tax havens on U.S. parents'
ETRs is not as substantial as might be implied by some political claims that vast sums of tax
revenue are being lost through havens.
One explanation for both studies’ surprisingly low tax haven estimates is that foreign
subsidiaries cluster and thus coefficients cannot be interpreted independently. For examples, if
tax havens are always paired with subsidiaries in high-tax locations (e.g., Irish subsidiaries
always co-exist with high-tax European subsidiaries), then clustering effects among subsidiaries
may understate the importance of tax havens because the tax haven coefficients are capturing
some of the high-tax countries’ impact on ETRs.
Thorough investigation of the potential effects of clustering on the ETR estimates in this
study is beyond the scope of this paper. However, as exploratory work, we augment equation (3)
with three-way interaction terms. Because of a limited number of observations, we include only
three-way interactions that have as the parent country one of the five groups with the most firmyears (Japan, the UK, the U.S., Asian Tigers, and Europe).

44

To compute the multinational rate, take the domestic ETR and adjust it for the effect of a U.S. subsidiary. For
example, the table shows that the Australian domestic ETR is 24% and the Australian parent-U.S. subsidiary is
1.9%. Thus, Australian companies with U.S. subsidiaries have an average ETR of 22.1%, compared with an
average U.S. domestic ETR of 26%.

33

-

Panel B of Table 6 reports the estimates of

(the coefficient on the two-way

interactions) for each of the five countries/groups from estimating equation (4) on the full
sample. Our hope is that controlling for three-way interactions will result in more precise twoway interactions. Comparing the estimates in Panel B to those in Panel A, we find that the sign
of the two-way interaction coefficients remain the same in 45 of the 54 coefficients. However,
some of the coefficients change enough to suggest that controlling for three-way interactions
affects the inferences drawn on the two-way interactions. For example, the coefficient on Tax
Haven subsidiaries of U.S. parents (-0.1% in Panel A) decreases to -0.7% in Panel B, providing
stronger evidence that tax havens reduce the ETRs of U.S. multinationals even though the
amount remains small.
Ideally, additional interactions (i.e., four-way, five-way, and so forth) would be included
in the regression model. However, insufficient observations limit the extent of such interactions.
We look forward to future work that attempts to grapple with the clustering of foreign
subsidiaries and their impact on ETRs.

6. Closing Remarks
To our knowledge, this paper provides the most comprehensive analysis of international
firm-level corporate income tax expenses to date. Its findings should aid the development of tax
policy by quantifying the effective tax rates faced by multinational corporations around the
globe. The ETRs provide an empirical foundation for the heated debates about the taxes paid by

34

multinationals and domestics around the world and should help to balance rhetoric with
documented empirical facts.
Our primary findings are:
•

Multinationals and domestic-only firms face similar ETRs;

•

Japan consistently has much higher ETRs than any other country;

•

The U.S. has above-average ETRs;

•

Tax havens, and Middle Eastern, and Asian countries (excepting Japan) have
below-average ETRs.

•

ETRs fell worldwide over the last two decades;

•

The average decline in ETRs was about seven percentage points or 20%.

•

German, Japanese, Australian and Canadian ETRs fell more than American,
British, and French ETRs.

•

The ordinal rank from high-tax countries to low-tax countries remained
remarkably constant because all countries reduced their tax burdens.

On this last point, further work is warranted to understand how the tax order of countries
has remained so steady over two decades of radical worldwide changes in tax policy, financial
reporting, economic development, law, politics, technology, and many other areas. Although tax
rates have fallen dramatically over the last 20 years, high-tax countries remain high-tax and lowtax countries remain low-tax. Perhaps globalization permits countries to change their tax
systems but forces a herding effect because tax changes in one country reverberate around the
globe (see Griffith and Klemm (2005) for a discussion of tax competition among OECD
countries). If this is the case, then proposed major international tax changes that would run

35

contrary to current tax policy (e.g., adopting a formula apportionment system in the European
Union or eliminating deferral in the U.S.) may be impossible without worldwide coordination.

36

References
Advisory Panel on Canada’s System of International Taxation, 2008. Enhancing Canada’s
International Tax Advantage. Department of Finance Canada: Ottawa, Ontario.
December
Atwood, T.J., Michael S. Drake and Linda A. Myers, 2009. “Book-Tax Conformity, Earnings
Persistence and the Association between Earnings and Future Cash Flows,” Ohio State
University working paper.
Bradford, David and Don Fullerton, 1981. “Pitfalls in the construction and use of effective tax
rates,” in Depreciation, Inflation, and the Taxation of Income from Capital, edited by C.
Hullen, Urban Institute Press: Washington, D.C., 251-278.
Braithwaite, Tom. 2008 “Kingfisher considers switching tax base,” FT.com, September 21,
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/def9277a-880f-11dd-b114-0000779fd18c.html.
Clausing, Kimberly A. and Reuven S. Avi-Yonah, 2007. Reforming Corporate Taxation in a
Global Economy: A Proposal to Adopt Formulary Apportionment. The Brookings
Institution: Washington DC, June.
Collins, Julie H. and Douglas A. Shackelford, 1995. “Corporate domicile and average effective
tax rates: The cases of Canada, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States,”
International Tax and Public Finance 2:1, May, 55-83.
Collins, Julie H. and Douglas A. Shackelford, 2003. “Do U.S. multinationals face different tax
burdens than do other companies?” in Tax Policy and the Economy 17, edited by James
M. Poterba, National Bureau of Economic Research and MIT Press (Cambridge, MA.),
141-168.
Desai, Mihir, 2008. “The Decentering of the Global Firm,” Harvard University working paper.
Desai, Mihir, Foley, C. F., and James R. Hines, Jr., 2006. “The Demand for Tax Haven
Operations,” Journal of Public Economics 90, no. 3 (March), 513-531.
Desai, Mihir and James R. Hines Jr. 2002. “Expectations and Expatriations: Tracing the Causes
and Consequences of Corporate Inversions,” National Tax Journal 55 No. 3: 409-440.
Devereux, Michael P. and Rachel Griffith, 1998, “The Taxation of Discrete Investment
Choices”, The Institute for Fiscal Studies working paper.
Dohmen, Joep, 2008, “Multinationals betalen vrijwel geen belasting,” NRC Handelsblad,
February 21,
http://www.nrc.nl/economie/article1855259.ece/Multinationals_betalen_vrijwel_geen_be
lasting.
Drucker, Jesse, 2009, “Titans Vow Overseas-Tax Fight,” Wall Street Journal, April 22.

37

Dyreng, Scott D. and Bradley P. Lindsey, 2009. “Using Financial Accounting Data to Examine
The Effect of Foreign Operations Located in Tax Havens and Other Countries on U.S.
Multinational Firms’ Tax Rates.” Duke University and College of William and Mary
working paper.
Faith, Joanna, 2008, “WPP quits UK over foreign profits debate,” International Tax Review,
September 30,
http://www.internationaltaxreview.com/?Page=9&PUBID=210&ISS=24960&SID=7118
08.
Fullerton, Don, 1980. “Which effective tax rate?” National Tax Journal 37(1), 23-41.
Fullerton, Don, 1999, “Marginal effective tax rate,” in The Encyclopedia of Taxation and Tax
Policy, edited by Joseph J. Cordes, Robert D. Ebel, and Jane G. Gravelle, Unban Institute
Press: Washington, D.C., 270-272.
Gordon, Roger, Laura Kalambokidis, and Joel Slemrod, 2003, “A New Summary Measure of the
Effective Tax Rate on Investment”, NBER working paper.
Griffith, Rachel, and Alexander Klemm, 2004, “What Has Been The Tax Competition
Experience Of The Last 20 Years?”, The Institute for Fiscal Studies working paper.
Hanlon, Michelle, 2003. “What can we infer about a firm’s taxable income from its financial
statements?” National Tax Journal LVI, 831-863.
HM Revenue and Customs National Audit Office, 2007, Management of Large Business
Corporation Tax, July 25.
Hodge, Scott A., 2008, “U.S. Corporate Taxes Now 50 Percent Higher than OECD Average.
Fiscal Fact No. 136,” Tax Foundation, August 13, 2008,
http://www.taxfoundation.org/news/show/23470.html
Houlder, Vanessa, 2007. “A third of UK’s big business pays no corporation tax,” Financial
Times, August 27, http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/e42282d6-54ea-11dc-890c0000779fd2ac.html
Houlder, Vanessa, 2008. “Treasury proposes change to corporate taxation,” Financial Times,
December 9, http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/9863b5fa-c63f-11dd-a741000077b07658.html?nclick_check=1.
Huizinga, Harry, Luc Laeven, and Gaetan Nicodeme, 2008. “Capital Structure and International
Debt Shifting,” Journal of Financial Economics 88 (1), April, 80-118.
Ishi, Hiromitsu, 2001. “The Japanese Tax System, Third Edition.” Oxford University Press.

38

Johnston, David Cay, 2002, “Senators Assail Corporate Use Of Bermuda as Tax Shelter,” New
York Times, March 22, 2002.
Johnston, David Cay, 2008, “The Price of Civilization,” Tax Notes, June 23, 1269-1270.
KPMG International, 2008. Corporate and Indirect Tax Rate Survey 2008—Introduction and
Commentary. http://www.kpmg.com/SiteCollectionDocuments/Corporate-and-IndirectTax-Rate-Survey-2008v2.pdf.
Lee, Namryoung and Charles Swenson, 2008, “Are Asia-Pacific Companies Effective in
Managing Their Tax Burdens? A Global Analysis,” Asia-Pacific Journal of Taxation
12:2, Autumn/Winter, 41-53.
Lu, Joe and Charles Swenson, 2000, “Tax Burdens around the World: How Do Asia Pacific
Companies and Countries Compare?” Asia-Pacific Journal of Taxation 4:4, Winter, 97104.
Mutti, John H. and Harry Grubert, 2007, “The Effect of Taxes on Royalties and the Migration of
Intangible Assets Abroad,” NBER Working paper No. 12348.
Perlman, Bob, 1999. Testimony before United States Senate Committee on Finance,
International Tax Issues Relating to Globalization, March 11, 58-70.
Rego, Sonya Olhoft, 2003. “Tax-Avoidance Activities of U.S. Multinational Corporations,”
Contemporary Accounting Research 20:4, Winter, 805-833.
Shackelford, Douglas A. and Terry Shevlin, 2001. “Empirical tax research in accounting,”
Journal of Accounting and Economics 31:1-3, September, 321-387.
Tuerff, T. Timothy, Daniel Shaviro, Douglas A. Shackelford, Timothy M. McDonald, and
Michael Mundaca, 2008, “Session 4: Alternatives for Taxation of Foreign Source
Income,” Taxes—The Tax Magazine, June, 71-86.
The Economist, 2008, “The Other Tax Rebellion,” May 8,
http://www.economist.com/world/britain/displaystory.cfm?story_id=11332895
The President’s Advisory Panel on Federal Tax Reform, 2005. Simple, Fair, and Pro-Growth:
Proposals to Fix America’s Tax System. U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington,
DC, November.
United States Government Accountability Office, 2008, Tax Administration: Comparison of the
Reported Tax Liabilities of Foreign- and U.S.-Controlled Corporations, 1998-2005.
July.

39

United States House of Representatives (2007), H.R. 3970, Tax Reduction and Reform Act of
2007, http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgibin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=110_cong_bills&docid=f:h3970ih.txt.pdf.
United States Senate Committee on Finance, 1999. International Tax Issues Relating to
Globalization, March 11.
Voget, Johannes, 2008. “Headquarter Relocations and International Taxation,” Tilburg
University working paper.
Weiner, Joann M., (2009), “How Obama May Reform International Taxation,” Tax Notes
International 53:13, March 30, 2009, 1150-1153.
Werdigier, Julia, 2008, “British Companies Emigrating Over Taxes,” The New York Times,
September 5, http://www.nytimes.com/2008/09/05/business/worldbusiness/05tax.html.

40

Table 1 - Sample

Full sample
AUSTRALIA
CANADA
CHINA
FRANCE
GERMANY
INDIA
JAPAN
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED STATES
ASIAN TIGERS
TAX HAVENS
AFRICA
ASIA
EUROPE
LATIN AMERICA
MIDDLE EAST

Domestic
Multinational
Domestic
Multinational
Domestic
Multinational
Domestic
Multinational
Domestic
Multinational
Domestic
Multinational
Domestic
Multinational
Domestic
Multinational
Domestic
Multinational
Domestic
Multinational
Domestic
Multinational
Domestic
Multinational
Domestic
Multinational
Domestic
Multinational
Domestic
Multinational
Domestic
Multinational
Domestic
Multinational

n
12,778
14,358
494
740
376
426
534
184
44
333
74
293
80
375
3,929
2,497
749
1,314
2,836
4,341
2,241
972
41
807
128
178
451
167
296
1,264
323
167
110
258

Sales
612
3,513
132
971
423
1,340
176
762
62
8,340
79
8,757
193
508
642
3,875
419
3,340
1,166
4,965
330
2,236
138
1,785
665
1,807
146
356
276
2,719
1,029
1,912
222
358

Assets Equity
847
305
4,290 1,563
307
129
1,185
546
547
274
2,616
963
289
112
1,132
392
290
157
10,275 3,204
199
72
12,990 3,270
243
80
637
303
715
262
4,534 1,642
730
279
3,580 1,295
1,799
582
6,136 2,333
414
177
2,411
918
341
167
1,991
888
753
379
1,438
550
254
119
656
206
583
206
3,416 1,169
1,296
513
2,492
974
463
232
740
334

Total
tax
17
115
7
33
11
67
3
17
3
276
3
200
4
15
14
96
16
135
36
185
7
34
4
43
40
57
6
9
15
100
46
59
4
8

NIBT # Subs
56
13
371
68
27
13
144
49
52
7
218
31
14
11
96
20
32
14
815
241
11
71
628
151
15
2
78
6
35
7
252
42
61
41
426
99
111
25
597
81
33
4
190
19
19
10
199
70
128
5
202
44
24
2
39
19
52
19
313
88
161
7
259
18
48
4
58
18

#
Foreign
subs

30
21
11
6
119
71
5
13
25
38
7
59
20
7
46
4
12

Agg
ETR

31
31
27
23
20
31
21
18
8
34
29
32
27
19
40
38
27
32
33
31
21
18
18
21
31
28
24
27
28
32
28
23
9
14

Mean Median
ETR
ETR

30
28
24
25
22
26
21
18
25
28
26
33
24
20
42
39
26
28
28
30
20
18
20
17
27
27
22
22
27
26
26
26
9
11

32
30
29
29
23
29
19
17
31
30
28
35
27
19
43
40
29
29
36
33
21
17
21
16
29
29
22
22
28
28
27
26
4
5

Mean
Stat
rate

38
38
30
30
36
36
30
30
35
35
39
39
35
35
40
40
30
30
39
39
25
25
23
6
30
30
28
28
28
30
29
29
24
30

This table presents the means of variables in the Osiris dataset for years 2003-2007. All dollar figures are in millions of U.S. dollars.

41

Table 2
Summary of results

AdjR2
N

P anel A - Domestic
AUSTRALIA
CANADA
CHINA
FRANCE
GERMANY
INDIA
JAPAN
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED STATES
ASIAN TIGERS
TAX HAVENS
AFRICA
ASIA
EUROPE
LATIN AMERICA
MIDDLE EAST
P anel B - Multinational
AUSTRALIA
CANADA
CHINA
FRANCE
GERMANY
INDIA
JAPAN
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED STATES
ASIAN TIGERS
TAX HAVENS
AFRICA
ASIA
EUROPE
LATIN AMERICA
MIDDLE EAST

(4)

1988 - 2007
Positive NIBT
Nonnegative ETR

(3)
2003-2007
Positive NIBT
Nonnegative ETR
ETR= Current tax/NIBT

(2)

2003-2007
Positive NIBT
Nonnegative ETR

2003-2007
Positive NIBT
Nonnegative ETR

(1)

0.86
27,136

0.88
9,185

0.87
68,873

Estimate

Estimate

Estimate

24
22
21
25
26
24
42
26
28
20
17
27
22
27
26
8

24
23
21
26
27
23
39
26
26
20
17
25
22
27
24
10

21

23
25
18
29
27
21
38
23
24
19
19
21
22
25
18
11

25
26
18
28
33
20
39
28
30
18
17
26
23
26
25
11

23
24
17*
25
30
18*
36*
26
27*
17*
15
23
22
24*
22
11

Mean

20
25
38
24
28
17

22
32
17

23
14*
23
30
19*
35*
25
27*
15
15
23
19
24*
23*
15

23
25
15*
23*
32*
15*
37*
24
26*
15*
14*
19*
20*
22*
17
12

Column (1) reports the mean ETR for each country/group in the Osiris 2003-2007 sample, as shown in Table 1.
Columns (2) – (4) present the results of estimating
on
samples described in the column headings. Panel A reports the estimate of
for each country/group. Panel B reports the
estimate of ( +
for each country/group. All available observations were included in the estimation, but estimates are only
reported for countries/groups having 20 or more observations. * indicates that is statistically significant at the 5% level.

42

Table 3 Yearly estimates
1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
AdjR2
0.90 0.90 0.90 0.89 0.89 0.89 0.89 0.89 0.88 0.88 0.88 0.87 0.87 0.87 0.86 0.86 0.85 0.86 0.85 0.86
N
1,175 1,288 1,409 1,493 1,694 1,918 2,359 2,679 2,993 3,255 3,463 4,101 4,536 4,394 4,980 5,734 6,567 6,991 7,085
759
Panel A - Domestic
AUSTRALIA
23
26
25
22
20
21
24
23
23
CANADA
33
32
30
29
31
22
22
20
19
CHINA
20
17
16
18
21
20
20
21
21
FRANCE
GERMANY
25
23
INDIA
19
JAPAN
48
43
42
42
44
44
40
42
40
41
38
36
38
39
39
UNITED KINGDOM
30
32
30
28
29
26
26
25
24
24
23
24
24
25
26
25
23
25
26
21
UNITED STATES
28
27
27
26
27
25
25
25
25
26
27
26
26
25
26
24
24
25
26
24
ASIAN TIGERS
32
26
26
24
21
22
21
21
21
21
18
18
19
18
TAX HAVENS
AFRICA
18
18
24
24
23
25
24
ASIA
30
30
28
30
25
13
23
26
25
21
22
20
22
EUROPE
28
30
28
26
26
29
25
26
25
LATIN AMERICA
16
17
14
13
9
13
15
15
21
23
23
25
22
23
24
MIDDLE EAST
13
11
8
8
11
7
9
Panel B - Multinational
AUSTRALIA
34
32
31
27
33
26
26
25
24
24
26
25
25
25
23
21
22
22
23
20
CANADA
28
31
24
26
29
31
31
32
29
29
27
21
22
22
24
CHINA
11
15
14
13
18
16
16
17
17
FRANCE
27
29
26
25
26
22
22
23
23
28
29
28
26
27
26
24
23
23
25
GERMANY
47
46
42
44
36
30
33
33
34
38
37
34
31
32
32
27
29
27
INDIA
9
8
10
8
16
20
18
17
17
18
JAPAN
49
50
47
45
49
45
43
41
41
42
44
39
37
38
38
34
33
33
36
39
UNITED KINGDOM
28
29
28
27
28
24
25
24
25
25
25
24
27
27
29
26
24
25
25
23
UNITED STATES
29
30
30
28
29
27
27
27
28
29
29
29
30
28
27
24
25
25
27
24
ASIAN TIGERS
22
17
19
17
16
19
17
17
15
16
13
14
15
17
TAX HAVENS
21
24
20
19
20
14
14
14
15
16
16
17
15
16
16
14
14
13
15
AFRICA
23
14
20
21
20
19
21
23
22
ASIA
24
22
22
22
21
14
19
20
23
23
20
21
20
EUROPE
23
22
25
21
22
19
21
21
23
24
24
23
26
25
25
22
22
22
23
LATIN AMERICA
18
18
19
14
14
12
13
16
18
18
22
22
19
20
23
MIDDLE EAST
17
15
15
14
11
9
9
11
Results of estimating
for each year in the sample described in Column (6) of Table 2. Panel A reports
the estimate of for each country/group. Panel B reports the estimate of ( +
for each country/group. Estimates are reported for country-years with 20 or more observations.

43

Manufacturing
(31, 32, 33)

Mining
(21)

Professional
(54)

Real Estate
(53)

Retail Trade
(44, 45)

Transportation
(48, 49)

0.86

0.65

0.81

0.86

0.80

0.89

0.86

0.85

0.94

0.88

964

1,181

1,499

13,265

988

4,252

1,743

945

1,376

923

24
23
21
26
27
23
39
26
26
20
17
25
22
27
24
10

23

27
13

14
19

25
24
20

17
17

24
23
23

19

23

27

22

28

22

41
26
30
21

36
24
21
15

40
26
24
12

44
27
34
28

39
25
24
16

20
23

24
23
21

24

15*

32*

22

28

31

35*
27
29*
16
21

44
30
35
24
21
31

35*
20
28*
11

27*
23

21
2*

P anel A - Domestic
AUSTRALIA
CANADA
CHINA
FRANCE
GERMANY
INDIA
JAPAN
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED STATES
ASIAN TIGERS
TAX HAVENS
AFRICA
ASIA
EUROPE
LATIN AMERICA
MIDDLE EAST
P anel B - Multinational
AUSTRALIA
CANADA
CHINA
FRANCE
GERMANY
INDIA
JAPAN
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED STATES
ASIAN TIGERS
TAX HAVENS
AFRICA
ASIA
EUROPE
LATIN AMERICA
MIDDLE EAST

23
24
17*
25
30
18*
36*
26
27*
17*
15
23
22
24*
22
11

36
21
25
16

36
26
15

Information
(51)

Construction
(23)

0.86
27,136

Financials
(52)

Full sample

AdjR2
N

Other
(22, 56, 61, 62, 71,
72, 81, 92, 99)

Table 4 Industries

35
21
19
14

9

31*
19
24
18

28
21

24
13

17
17

12

24
14
30*
18
17
6
9

19

16*

37
31
25*

10

22

28
19
27
25
9

23

19

20
38
25
28
19

24
24
14*
24
31
21
35*
25
26*
16*
15*
23*
22
24*
22
10

24
22
28
27
9
13
17

23*
23

16

27
23
19
32
28
13*
38*
25
30
19
12
24
19
25
26
6

22
19
20
17*
6*
31*
21
19
16

15
20

23
20
11

Results of estimating
for each industry (two-digit NAICS
numbers included in each group are included in parentheses) in the sample described in Column (2) of Table 2. Panel A reports the
estimate of
for each country/group. Panel B reports the estimate of ( +
for each country/group. Estimates are reported for
country-industries with 20 or more observations.
* indicates that is statistically significant at the 5% level.

44

Table 5
Results of Parent/Subsidiary Specification
AdjR2

N

Panel A - Parents
AUSTRALIA
CANADA
CHINA
FRANCE
GERMANY
INDIA
JAPAN
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED STATES
ASIAN TIGERS
TAX HAVENS
AFRICA
ASIA
EUROPE
LATIN AMERICA
MIDDLE EAST
Panel B - Subsidiaries
AUSTRALIA
CANADA
CHINA
FRANCE
GERMANY
INDIA
JAPAN
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED STATES
ASIAN TIGERS
TAX HAVENS
AFRICA
ASIA
EUROPE
LATIN AMERICA
MIDDLE EAST

0.86

26,969

24
24
20
26
30
20
38
26
27
19
17
24
22
25
24
11
1.2
0.5
(0.6)
0.8
(0.6)
0.4
(0.6)
(0.0)
(1.1)
(0.6)
(0.5)
0.8
(1.3)
0.4
(0.3)
(0.3)

This table presents the results of estimating
on a subsample
of the sample described in Table 1 for which we have necessary subsidiary information. Panel A reports the estimate of
for each country/group. Panel B reports the estimate of
for each country/group.

45

LATIN AMERICA

(1.7)

0.4

(0.2)

(7.7)

3.9
3.3
1.8
(0.4)
0.9
0.9
(3.0)
3.0

3.1

MIDDLE EAST

EUROPE

(6.9)
(3.1)
(6.0)
(1.3)
(1.5)

(2.3)

ASIA

(1.6)
(2.6)
(1.2)
0.1

1.2

AFRICA

(1.9)
1.7

TAX HAVENS

0.8

0.6
1.8

ASIAN TIGERS

2.7

UNITED STATES

3.0

UNITED KINGDOM

0.1

JAPAN

0.8

INDIA

GERMANY

CHINA

0.2

FRANCE

CANADA

AUSTRALIA

MAIN

Parents

Subsidiaries

Table 6 Interactions

Panel A
AUSTRALIA
CANADA
CHINA
FRANCE
GERMANY
INDIA
JAPAN
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED STATES
ASIAN TIGERS
TAX HAVENS
EUROPE

24
23
21
26
29
22
39
26
26
19
15
25

5.3

(2.2)

2.4
(1.9)
2.4
0.9

(0.9)
(1.6)
1.0

(2.2)
(0.0)

(2.3)
(0.6)

(3.8)
7.6
2.9

(9.7)
(1.0)
1.4

(1.3)

(3.2)

0.1
(0.2)
(1.6)
(1.2)
(0.0)
(0.2)

2.1
1.2
(0.0)
4.9
(1.5)

(2.8)
0.3
(0.6)
(1.0)
2.7
1.1

1.2
(3.9)
(4.3)
(3.9)
1.1

3.8
(1.6)
(1.7)

(5.6)
(4.7)
2.0

(4.3)

1.4

(0.4)
3.1
(0.5)

(2.3)

(0.2)
(2.5)
(1.5)
0.9
0.9

0.9
(2.7)
(0.6)
0.9

1.4
(0.8)
0.9

(2.9)
(1.6)

(1.3)
(0.2)
1.3

(2.4)
(0.1)
1.4
(1.0)
(0.1)
(3.6)

(0.7)

0.7
1.1

(0.9)
(0.8)

(1.2)

1.3
(0.9)

(2.7)
(4.3)
1.7

6.7
(0.2)
(0.7)

5.2
8.7

(8.6)

(4.6)

(1.4)
(0.5)
(1.6)
(0.7)
1.3
(0.3)

(2.0)
(1.9)
0.4
(1.4)
(0.4)
0.3

(3.0)
(0.7)

2.8

Panel B
JAPAN
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED STATES
ASIAN TIGERS
EUROPE

39
26
26
19
26

(1.4)
1.1

(3.1)

Panel A presents the results of estimating

1 for which we have necessary subsidiary information. Each cell reports the estimate of
example, the estimate of for the interaction term
estimates are only reported for cells with 100 or more observations.

1.6
(2.4)
1.5

(1.5)
(1.5)
0.7
0.5

(2.6)
(0.1)
29.3

1.7
3.5
2.9
(3.7)

(9.2)
(5.9)
1.8
(5.0)
3.4

1.3

on a subsample of the sample described in Table
for the interaction of the given parent and subsidiary variables. For
is 0.2. All interaction terms were included in the estimation, but

Panel B presents the results of estimating
on the
same sample as in Panel A. Only three-way interaction terms with one of the five countries listed in Panel B as the parent were included. Each cell reports the estimate of
for the interaction of the given parent and subsidiary variables. All interaction terms were included in the estimation, but estimates are only reported for cells
with 200 or more observations.

46

