NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ESTIMATING THE IMPACT OF TRADE AND OFFSHORING ON AMERICAN
WORKERS USING THE CURRENT POPULATION SURVEYS
Avraham Ebenstein
Ann Harrison
Margaret McMillan
Shannon Phillips
Working Paper 15107
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15107
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2009

We would like to thank the editor, two anonymous referees, Rajeev Dehejia, Gene Grossman, James
Harrigan and John McLaren for helpful comments on earlier versions of the manuscript. We also thank
seminar participants at the University of Maryland, the University of Virginia and Yale University
for helpful comments. Special thanks to David Autor, Robert Feenstra, Wayne Gray, and Lawrence
Edwards for providing data critical to our analysis. Excellent research assistance was provided by
Catherine Almirall, Revital Bar, Joan Fang, and Michael Freedman. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Avraham Ebenstein, Ann Harrison, Margaret McMillan, and Shannon Phillips. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Estimating the Impact of Trade and Offshoring on American Workers Using the Current Population
Surveys
Avraham Ebenstein, Ann Harrison, Margaret McMillan, and Shannon Phillips
NBER Working Paper No. 15107
June 2009, Revised January 2015
JEL No. F15,F16,F23,J23
ABSTRACT
We link industry-level data on trade and offshoring with individual-level worker data from the Current
Population Surveys from 1984 to 2002. We find that occupational exposure to globalization is associated
with significant wage effects, while industry exposure has no significant impact. We present evidence
that globalization has put downward pressure on worker wages through the reallocation of workers
away from higher wage manufacturing jobs into other sectors and other occupations. Using a panel
of workers, we find that occupation switching due to trade led to real wage losses of 12 to 17 percentage
points.
Avraham Ebenstein
Department of Economics
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Mount Scopus Campus, #4208
Jerusalem, Israel 91905
ebenstein@mscc.huji.ac.il
Ann Harrison
Management Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
2016 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6370
and NBER
annh@wharton.upenn.edu

Margaret McMillan
Tufts University
Department of Economics
114a Braker Hall
Medford, MA 02155
and International Food Policy Research Institute
and also NBER
margaret.mcmillan@tufts.edu
Shannon Phillips
Boston College
Boston, Mass.
phillisg@bc.edu

I.

Introduction
Between 1983 and 2002, the United States economy experienced a boom in offshoring

and a doubling of imports of manufactured goods from low-income countries. Over this same
period, roughly 6 million jobs were lost in manufacturing and income inequality increased
sharply. These parallel developments led some critics of globalization to conclude that “good”
manufacturing jobs had been shipped overseas, putting downward pressure on wages of middleclass American workers. Concern over these developments motivated the US Congress to pass
the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004. Yet the degree to which changes in the US labor
market are related to growth in international trade and offshoring is still the subject of heated
debate.
The standard approach to identifying effects of import competition on wages is to use
variation in the prices (or quantities) of imported goods across industries over time as an
exogenous shock and examine the impact on industry-specific labor market outcomes. This
approach has been used to measure the impact of globalization on industry wage differentials and
to measure the effects of sector-specific import competition on wages and employment. For
example, Feenstra and Hanson (1999) use a two-step procedure, first identifying the impact of
outsourcing and high technology investments on productivity and prices and then tracing through
the impact of induced productivity and price changes on relative wages among production and
non-production workers. Using data for the US manufacturing sector between 1979 and 1990,
they find that the real wages of production workers were probably unaffected by offshoring
activities, while the real wages of non-production workers increased by 1 to 2 percentage points.
Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2006), in the first paper to distinguish between imports from high-

1

income versus low-income countries, find that only low-income imports negatively affected firm
exit, survival, and employment growth.
A key limitation of the previous literature on the labor market effects of globalization is
that it typically focuses on changes within manufacturing. In this paper, we focus on potential
wage impacts across occupations, both within manufacturing and across the broader economy. In
a typical occupation, some workers are in tradeable sectors (e.g. manufacturing), and others are
in non-tradable sectors (e.g. fast food services). To expand our analysis of wage outcomes due to
globalization beyond manufacturing, we begin by defining the concept of occupational exposure
to international trade or offshoring activities.1 Inasmuch as the demand for a particular worker’s
skill is affected by trade, those who are working in either the tradable or non-tradable goods (or
services) sector could be hurt by foreign competition. Also, if occupational tenure and
experience is a more important determinant of wages than industry experience, then focusing on
exposure at the industry level may understate the costs of globalization.
In order to examine this empirically, we link industry-level data on trade and offshoring
with individual-level worker data from the Current Population Surveys. We find a significant
divergence between the impact of occupational exposure and industry exposure to globalization
on wage outcomes. In particular, we find no significant negative effects of either international
trade or offshoring on wages of all types of workers if we measure globalization at the industry
level. When we focus on occupational exposure and include workers in both manufacturing and
services, however, we find large and significant effects. Our analysis indicates that workers in
routine occupations, such as those employed in “blue-collar” production occupations, have
suffered the greatest losses from globalization. These results are consistent with recent empirical
1

We are greatly indebted to Gordon Hanson for suggesting this idea.
2

work demonstrating the importance of occupational tenure and downplaying the importance of
tenure within a particular industry for a worker’s wages (Kambourov and Manovskii 2009a and
2009b).2
We also explore how the impact of globalization has changed over time. A number of
scholars have suggested that wage pressure from developing countries is likely to have increased
during the 1990s. Feenstra (2008) singles out expanded competition from China as having
exerted pressure on US wages, and he is not alone in this view (see also Freeman (1995) and
Krugman (2008)). Empirical evidence for this conjecture is limited, however. 3 We find that
while the impact of trade and offshoring on US wages through the mid-1990s was small in
magnitude and insignificant, the effects became much larger in the second half of the 1990s. By
the end of our sample period in 2002, we find significant and economically important effects of
globalization on wages using our occupational exposure measure. Based on our study, it is likely

2

Kambourov and Manovskii (2009a) find that ”returns to occupational tenure are substantial.”

They also indicate that “when occupational experience is taken into account, tenure with an
industry or employer has relatively little importance in accounting for the wage one receives.
This finding is consistent with human capital being occupation specific.” Their results imply
that switching occupations will have a much greater impact on worker wages than switching
industries.
3

One important exception is Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2012), who exploit differences in US

regional exposure to import competition from China to show significant effects on employment,
unemployment and wages during the 1990 through 2007 period.
3

that the impact of globalization on US wages in the post-2002 period has increased further as
more firms have engaged in offshoring to low wage destinations.4
We examine the impact of globalization on US workers by focusing attention on how
workers are affected by imports, exports, and offshoring to low and high income countries. Our
results indicate that a ten percent increase in occupational exposure to import competition is
associated with nearly a 3.0 percent decline in real wages for workers who perform routine tasks
among workers in our 1984-2002 sample, and a 4.4 percent decline for workers taken from
1997-2002.5 We also find substantial wage effects of offshoring to low wage countries: a ten
percentage point increase in occupation-specific exposure to overseas employment in low wage
countries is associated with a 0.7 percent decline in real wages for workers performing routine
tasks for our entire sample, and a 2.0 percent decline for 1997-2002. For routine occupations
with significant export activity, wages are positively linked to export growth. For these workers,
a ten percentage point increase in export share at the occupation level is associated with a 6.7
percentage point increase in wages over the sample period. For the end of the period (1997-

4

Since the CPS changed its occupational coding scheme in 2003, analysis beyond 2002 is not

attempted in this paper. Analysis by the authors of Bureau of Economic Analysis data indicates
that offshoring to low wage countries has increased markedly since 2002, with employment in
low income countries (e.g. China) exceeding that of high wage countries.
5

This finding is consistent with recent work highlighting the differential impact of offshoring by

worker skill type. Hummels, Jøgensen, Munch and Xiang (2011) use matched worker and firm
data from Denmark and find that offshoring raises skilled worker wages but lowers unskilled
worker wages, while exporting raises the wages of all types of workers.
4

2002), every percentage point increase in export shares for routine workers is associated with a
percentage point increase in wages.
We also find that globalization has put downward pressure on worker wages through the
reallocation of workers away from higher paid manufacturing sectors towards other sectors, and
through a shift of workers out of trade-vulnerable occupations. First, we find that domestic
employment has declined in industries with expansion in low income country employment,
consistent with evidence that multinational firms have shifted production overseas.6 Then, using
a subset of the CPS data where we are able to match the same worker over time, we estimate a
first stage equation with the exposure of an occupation to trade as an instrument for whether or
not a worker switched occupations. In the second stage, we find that occupation switching due to
trade led to real wage losses of 12 to 17 percentage points between 1984 and 2002.7 Any analysis
6

Our results corroborate results on employment declines within manufacturing by Harrison and

McMillan (2011) who use firm-level data on multinational manufacturing firms, but stand in
contrast to Desai, Foley, and Hines (2009). Desai, Foley, and Hines do not distinguish between
high wage and low wage affiliate employment and find that offshoring is unambiguously
positive for US employment.
7

Other scholarship has documented the cost of trade-induced shifts in employment. Menezes-

Filho and Muendler (2011) use a Brazilian trade reform to document significant short run costs
to workers and sticky intersectoral labor reallocation. Artuc, Chaudhuri and McLaren (2010)
develop a theoretical model which shows that adjustment costs for workers are likely to be
significant and can explain why there is likely to be sluggish reallocation and short-term negative
wage effects on workers under trade liberalization. Cosar (2011) also explores sluggish labor
market adjustments by developing a two-sector small open economy overlapping generations
5

of the wage effects of globalization which is restricted to only manufacturing workers would
miss the downward pressure on wages resulting from workers leaving manufacturing and
entering the service sector. The associated distributional implications are potentially important,
given historically large wage premia paid to manufacturing (relative to service) workers in the
United States (see Figure 1 for a graphical exposition) and significant empirical evidence that
industries compensate workers differently.8 It is also worth noting that our results are unlikely to
be explained by the fact that weaker workers are more likely to switch occupations (Trefler and
Lui (2011)). When we control for unobserved differences in worker quality among those who
switch occupations, we continue to find suggestive results that the wage declines associated with
globalization are due to workers switching occupations.
An important limitation of our study (and other papers in this literature) is that we are
unable to fully separate the impact of trade and offshoring from other changes in the labor
market. Two primary identification challenges exist. First, it may be that trade and offshoring are
the result of changes in the domestic labor market. For example, if firms choose to move
operations offshore in response to changes in the domestic labor market (e.g. unions), this
reverse causality would invalidate the causal interpretation of our results. Second, it may be that
technological change is correlated with trade in a manner preventing causal interpretation of our
coefficient estimates. For example, if more routine tasks are more easily performed overseas or
automated, we will be unable to accurately characterize the counterfactual of how wages would
have evolved in the absence of globalization. Insofar as some workers face competitive pressure
model which is calibrated to Brazilian data. The paper finds that human capital is a much bigger
barrier to labor mobility than search frictions.
8

See for example Katz and Summers (1989) and Krueger and Summers (1988).
6

from low-wage workers in foreign countries and automation, it will be difficult to separately
identify the impact of either exposure. We attempt to address these concerns in several ways.
First, by combining industry level trade or offshoring data with individual level information on
wages and worker characteristics, we hope to side-step the issue of reverse causality since it is
difficult for one worker to affect aggregate trade outcomes. Second, we pay considerable
attention to capturing technological change across industries that could influence both worker
wages and globalization outcomes. We include annual measures of total factor productivity,
capital accumulation, the price of investment goods by industry and computer use rates by
industry and occupation, which represents our best attempt to account for technical change that
could potentially affect workers directly. Third, we explore the robustness of our results to
instrumental variable estimation where we exploit factors that should affect the tradability of
certain good, or the desirability of certain offshore locations (results available in online
appendices). These instruments may themselves be endogenous, however. Consequently, we
focus our attention mainly on results that rely on fixed effects by industry and occupation and the
available control variables to measure the impact of globalization on workers. The focus of this
paper is on the importance of occupation versus industry-level measures of exposure to
globalization, and that focus is important irrespective of identification issues, which will
continue to remain a challenge. In the absence of a “clean” natural experiment or a fully
compelling instrument for the tradability of certain occupations, our results must be interpreted
with appropriate caution.9
9

In a recent paper, Jensen and Kletzer (2005) attempt to measure the tradability of service sector

goods using an approach which considers the spatial concentration of service industries and
occupations. They posit that more spatially-concentrated industries or occupations are more
7

The paper is organized as follows. Section II describes our data, documents broad trends
in trade, offshoring, wages and employment, and presents the empirical specification. Section III
presents our main empirical findings regarding the impact of offshoring and trade on domestic
wages and employment at the occupation versus the industry level. Section IV concludes.

II.

Data Description, Empirical Strategy, and Trends

A.

Data Description
Our sample of US workers is taken from the Current Population Survey Merged

Outgoing Rotation Groups for 1983-2002, which provides data for over 3.4 million workers who
are assigned a consistent classification for their industry and occupation during the period.10
Offshore activity in each industry is measured by the total employment of foreign affiliates
among multinational US firms, separated into high and low-income affiliate locations, as

tradable, and find evidence consistent with this hypothesis in US data. We chose not to pursue
this strategy, as geographical concentration may reflect other factors, such as state-specific
regulations that lead to clustering of certain industries or occupations.
10

We would like to express our gratitude to David Autor for providing us with concordances that

provided a consistent coding scheme of industries and occupations for the period. The CPS
occupation and industry codes were reclassified in 2003 to correspond to the North American
Industrial Classification System, which made it difficult to compare data before and after the
change. We begin with 1984 because occupation codes for the 1979 through 1981 period are not
consistent with the classification for later years and we use lags in our empirical specification
which leads us to drop 1983.
8

collected by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).11 Our data on import penetration and
export shares are taken from Bernard at al. (2006), which we recalculated and updated through
2002. Since relative price series for imports and exports are incomplete, we substitute for prices
by using the share of exports in production and import penetration at the four-digit SIC 1987
level.12 We control for productivity changes that could also affect labor demand as well as wages
using the NBER’s calculations of total factor productivity provided by Wayne Gray. This data
source also provides us with measures of the prices of investment goods, capital to labor ratios,
and the real price of shipments by industry and year.13 These are included in our main
specifications to control for technological change that could also affect wage rates. Lastly, we
match our workers to information on computer use rates by industry and occupation from CPS
computer supplements conducted during our sample period (1984, 1989, 1993, 1997, 2000).
Using the available surveys, we interpolate and extrapolate computer use rates for the entire
11

The BEA sample of multi-national firms accounted for 80 percent of total output in

manufacturing in 1980, suggesting that the coverage is fairly extensive. However, using these
data we are unable to distinguish between imports from affiliates (arms-length trade between
firms) and imports from non-affiliates.
12

Results using prices instead of quantities are available in the online appendix. The results are

qualitatively similar to our main results using quantities.
13

These data were aggregated from the 4-digit to 3-digit SIC level using the employment

distribution in 1979. The 3-digit SIC level was converted to our industry classification scheme
using a concordance provided by David Autor that was a census-based scheme that consistently
defined industries for our sample period. A similar method was used to match CPS workers to
the trade data.
9

window.14 Summary statistics for the individual worker sample matched to our offshoring, trade,
technology, and price data are available in Table A1.
We use Autor et al.’s (2003) distinction between routine and non-routine tasks to allow
us to separately identify the impact of different measures of globalization across different types
of workers. To the extent that routine tasks are more easily offshored or replaced with imports,
we would expect globalization to have a larger impact on workers performing these types of
tasks. Autor et al. (2003) describe routine jobs as “tasks that can be expressed using procedural
or ‘rules-based’ logic, that is, codified in a fully specified sequence of logical programming
commands (“If-Then-Do” statements) that designate unambiguously what actions the machine
will perform and in what sequence at each contingency to achieve the desired result.” While
Autor et al. (2003) use routine-ness to designate which jobs can be easily performed by
computers, we would argue that routine jobs are also more readily codified, communicated, and
consequently transferred overseas. Examples of these jobs include attaching hands to faces of
watches, sewing fasteners and decorative trimming to articles, and services tasks that we think of
as offshorable, such as answering telephones.
Following Autor et al. (2003), we aggregate five different measures of the routine-ness of
tasks into a single index for each occupation k. Two indicators, Routine Manual and Routine
Cognitive, measure the routine-ness of tasks by occupation in each of these dimensions. These
range from 1 for tasks that are not routine to 10 for tasks that are fully routine. The three other
measures are: (1) Direction, Control, and Planning of Activities (DCP) which measures non
routine cognitive tasks (2) Eye, Foot, and Hand coordination (EFH) activities which require nonroutine manual task completion and (3) The Math indicator which measures the quantitative or
14

These data were also provided by David Autor and are used in Autor et al. (1998).
10

analytical reasoning skills required. The index of routine-ness by worker education level,
industry, and year is given by:
Routine k 

Routine Cognitive k  Routine Manual k
.
Routine Cognitive k  Routine Manual k  DCPk  EFH k  Math k

The index ranges from 0 to 1.15 The last three terms DCP, EFH and Math refer to
cognitive tasks that are higher order in their complexity, and presumably are associated with
larger costs of performing outside of a firm’s central location.

B.

Empirical Strategy
Our empirical strategy is to regress log wages of worker i in industry j in period t (Wijt) on

lagged measures of exposure to offshoring and international trade (Git-1j) using annual data from
1983 to 2002, first at the industry level and subsequently at the occupation level, which we will
define below. This paper examines the impact of globalization (i.e. offshoring and trade) on
wages, and the domestic labor market response to offshoring and trade in the short run. After
controlling for all observables such as education, age, sex, ethnicity and experience, workers in a
frictionless world could costlessly move from one industry or occupation to another. We test this
hypothesis and find that barriers exist at the occupation but not at the industry level.

15

See Autor et al. (2003) for a thorough description of these variables. Our calculation of routine

is the sum of routine manual tasks (Finger Dexterity) and routine non-manual (Set Limits,
Tolerances or Standards), as a share of those tasks and non-routine manual (Eye, Hand, Foot),
non-routine analytic (General Educational Development, Mathematics), and non-routine
interactive (Direction, Control and Planning) tasks. More details on this classification scheme are
available in the online appendix.
11

We use lagged measures of exposure to offshoring and trade for two reasons. First, since
offshoring requires time to implement, and wage adjustment is not instantaneous, it is unlikely
that the causal effect of offshoring on wages will play out within a single calendar year. Second,
within a given year, offshoring, trade exposure, and wages are likely to be affected by
simultaneous shocks. We use four measures of exposure to offshoring and international trade:
offshoring to low-income affiliate locations, offshoring to high-income affiliate locations, export
shares, and import penetration. To allow for the possibility that offshoring to low-income
locations might have different effects than offshoring to high-income locations, we include as
separate regressors the log of employment in sector j by US-based multinationals in low and
high-income countries.
There are three additional challenges to identifying the causal effect of globalization on
wages. First, the industries that are most likely to globalize may also be those with lower wages
or greater volatility. We address this concern by including industry fixed effects (Ij) in our
specification. Second, globalization and wages may be jointly affected by common time-varying
shocks, such as the business cycle and exchange rate fluctuations. We control for these by
including time fixed effects (dt). Third, we control for time-varying shocks at the industry level
that could be confounded with changes in globalization by adding a number of additional
controls. TFPjt-1 captures changes in productivity by industry and year that could affect demand
for labor.16 We also attempt to capture productivity changes including two (arguably) exogenous
measures, the price of investment goods and computer use rates. The price of investment goods
PINVjt-1 captures in part the role of falling computer prices and the potential impact of labor16

Since total factor productivity is a function of wages, we estimate our equations with and

without total factor productivity. The results are similar with and without controlling for TFP.
12

saving technology on labor market outcomes. We also control for industry factor intensity
(lagged capital to labor ratio KLRATIOjt-1) and computer use rates by industry and year (COMPjt)
to account for contemporaneous changes in an industry’s wage rate based on the ability to
substitute for labor with computers.17 Finally, we control for individual characteristics including
age, sex, race, experience, education, and location (Zijt):
(1a ) Wijt   0 Z ijt   1G jt 1   2 TFP jt 1   3 PINV jt 1   4 KLRATIO

jt 1

  5 COMP jt   6 d t   7 I j   ijt .

To examine the relationship between wages and globalization at the occupation level, we
retain the same setup as in (1a) but modify the G vector to create a measure of occupational
exposure to offshoring or trade. Each variable in the G vector was created from a merged dataset
of BEA offshore employment data, trade data, and CPS monthly outgoing rotation group
individual-level data, by industry and year. We calculate for each occupation its exposure to
trade using the distribution of workers employed in this occupation across industries in 1983.
For each occupation k and industry j, we have:  kj83 

Lkj83
Lk 83

where Lkj83 is the total number of

workers in occupation k and industry j in 1983, and Lk 83 is the total number of workers across all
industries in occupation k. We then calculate occupation-specific import penetration in year t for
occupation k as:
J


j 1

17

kj83

IMP jt ,

Our results are similar if we control for computer use rates in the previous year.
13

where IMPjt is the measure of import penetration for goods in industry j in year t. We continue to
control for technological changes by industry, and set these technological changes equal to unity
for workers outside of manufacturing.18
This leads to a specification of the form:
(1b) Wijkt   0 Z ijkt   1G kt1 

 2 TFP jt 1   3 PINV jt 1   4 KLRATIO

jt 1

  5 COMPkt   6 d t   7 I j   8Occupation

k

  ijkt

where k indexes the worker’s occupation, and workers within the same k occupation may be in
different j industries.19 Our G vector is now an occupation-specific measure for each worker, and
we have added occupation fixed effects to absorb variation specific to time invariant features of
occupations. Note that we also control for variation in computer use rates by occupation and
year, which is meant to account for wage changes driven by the ability of some occupations to
benefit from computer technology (Autor et al. 1998). We will estimate this specification for all
occupations, separately by the degree of how routine the tasks are within a given occupation, and
for samples of workers who switch occupations. One important implicit assumption in our
approach is that barriers to changing occupations are similar across routine and non-routine
occupations. Kambourov and Manovskii (2008) show this to be the case. They also decompose
occupation switching across routine and non-routine occupations and show that between 1968

18

An alternative approach would be to create occupation-specific measures of each of our

control variables. In the online appendix, we estimate models with occupational-specific
measures of TFP, the price of investment goods, and the capital to labor ratio. The results are
qualitatively similar to the results presented in the main text. These are presented in Table A9.
19

For workers outside of manufacturing, the control variables for TFP, PIINV, and REALSHIP

are not available and are therefore assumed constant in our main specifications.
14

and 1997 workers were not able to escape routine occupations by switching into non-routine
ones.

C.

Trends in Offshoring, Trade, Employment, and Wages
In this section we outline broad trends in the data for employment, wages, and the

relationship between wages and measures of globalization. In Figure 1, we compare the trends in
employment and wages in the manufacturing sector alongside the same trends in the service
sector between 1979 and 2002. We present these trends separately for workers performing
routine and non-routine tasks. Total manufacturing employment (using the CPS employment
numbers) fell from 22 to 17 million from 1979 to 2002, with rapid declines at the beginning of
the early 1980s and in the late 1990s. Within manufacturing, the labor force has become
increasingly high-skilled with a large decline of roughly 6 million in the number of workers in
routine occupations, and a modest increase of roughly 1 million in the number of workers
performing non-routine occupations.
In contrast, demand for both types of workers continued to grow in the service sector, and
many of the displaced routine manufacturing workers may have found employment in the service
sector. These trends have important implications for the US wage distribution. As shown in the
bottom of Figure 1, where we report the real hourly wage among CPS workers, manufacturing
workers enjoyed a large wage premium during the entire period among both routine and nonroutine workers. Insofar as manufacturing provided an opportunity to earn high relative wages –

15

even for low-skill workers – its decline might also have played a role in increasing US income
inequality during the period.20
The three panels displaying wage trends exhibit significant differences during the sample
period. Real wages grew in the 1980s, fell or stagnated in the 1990s, and then begin increasing
around 1995-1996. Over the entire period, the gap between manufacturing and service wages
narrowed, particularly from the mid-1990s onwards. These different trends are one factor which
leads us to break our samples into different time periods. We turn now to an examination of how
offshoring and trade may be related to these employment and wage trends within manufacturing
and in the overall economy.
As shown in Figure 2, foreign affiliate employment in low-income countries by US based
multinationals nearly doubled over the entire sample period, while affiliate employment in highincome countries remained roughly constant. The increase in developing country activity has
been accompanied by a reduction in the US workforce for these parents from almost 12 million
workers in 1982 to 7 million workers in 2002.
20

See Autor et al. (2008) for a review of these trends. It is worth noting that while the trends in

Figure 1 are informative, they do not control for other factors that affect income, such as sex,
age, and experience. We redid the trends in wages by educational attainment using wage
residuals. These wage residuals were computed using Lemieux’s (2006) approach for each
educational category separately. We also added industry dummies to control for inter-industry
wage differentials. The wage residuals show similar trends, with falling wage premia for less
educated workers and rising wage premia for more educated workers. Similar results are
observed for wage premia when workers are stratified by routine-ness of occupation. Results are
available from the authors upon request.
16

In Figure 3, we report changes in the distribution of occupation wage residuals across the
476 occupations in the CPS. Each point in the figure represents the occupation-specific wage
premium in 1983 and 2002. The wage premium was calculated by taking the residual in a
regression of real log wages on education category dummies, experience category dummies, an
interaction of education and experience, controls for sex, race, year and state.21 These premia
were then collapsed into one term for each occupation and year. In order to compare the
occupational wage residual changes by their potential exposure to offshoring, we stratify
occupations by whether they are above the median occupation in terms of routine task content.
As shown in Figure 3, over the sample period routine occupations were more likely to experience
declines in wage premiums, possibly because these tasks can be performed overseas at lower
cost. Of 240 routine occupations, 187 experienced wage premium declines and only 53 had
increases in their wage premium. In contrast, among 236 non-routine occupations, 134
experienced increases and only 102 experienced declines.
Before estimating equations (1A) and (1B), in Table 1 we provide a descriptive
regression that is consistent with the results presented in Figure 3. In particular, Table 1 shows
that an industry’s share of routine jobs in 1983 is a good indicator of subsequent offshoring to
low-income locations and increasing import penetration. The dependent variables are the log
difference between 1983 and 2002 in employment offshored to low-income countries (in
columns (1) and (2)) or high-income countries (in columns (3) and (4)) and the change in import
penetration (in columns (5) and (6)). As shown in column (1), an industry’s share of routine jobs
in 1983 is a significant predictor of the subsequent increase in employment offshored to lowincome countries, explaining roughly 7 percent of the variation across industries as a single
21

All data sets and STATA code are available online at the author’s website and at Dataverse.
17

regressor. We estimate that industries with 1 percentage point more routine jobs in 1983
experienced a 5.1 percent increase in offshore employment to low-income countries by 2002,
and this result is statistically significant at the 5 percent level. However, in column (3) there is no
significant relationship with offshoring to high-income countries. The significant relationship
between an industry’s share of routine jobs in 1983 and subsequent offshoring to low-income
countries, which stands in contrast to high income country offshoring, is one reason to maintain
the distinction between offshoring to high and low income countries in the subsequent analysis.
Column (5) shows that the industry share of routine jobs in 1983 is also a significant
predictor of future increases in import penetration. We find a 1.2 percentage point increase in our
import penetration measure among industries with 1 percentage point more routine jobs,
suggesting that industries with more routine jobs have also faced greater import competition. In
columns (2), (4), and (6), we include a range of additional predictors, and continue to find similar
effects for the industry share of routine jobs. Our control variables, which include industry
averages of the price of investment goods, total factor productivity, capital to labor ratios, and
computer use rates, do not qualitatively affect the results.
In the remainder of the paper, we continue to make a distinction between high and low-income
offshore locations, and to differentiate workers by the routine content of their jobs. The patterns
in the figures and Table 1 indicate rising trade and offshoring to low-income countries in
industries with workers whose jobs are characterized by a high routine content.

III.

Offshoring, Trade, and the Impact on Domestic Workers

A.

Wage Impacts of Offshoring and Trade at the Industry versus Occupation Level

18

In Table 2, we present our main results showing how the impact of offshoring and trade
are quite different when using industry versus occupation measures of exposure. In the first four
columns, we present our estimates for equation (1A) which defines exposure to trade or
offshoring at the industry level. In the last four columns, we redo the analysis using our
occupation exposure measure, as outlined in equation (1B). We also present the main results
where we stratify the workers based on the routine content of the worker’s occupation, since we
anticipate that routine tasks are more easily monitored offshore than more complex tasks, and so
domestic workers performing these tasks may be more affected by offshoring and trade
(Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg 2008). Note that the standard errors are clustered by industry and
five year period in columns (1) through (4) and by occupation and five year period in the last
four columns. Industry regressions include industry fixed effects and occupation regressions
include occupation as well as industry fixed effects.
Columns (1) through (4) of Table 2 identify the impact on wages of workers in industries
which were more exposed to international trade or offshoring during the 1984 through 2002
period.22 In these four columns, only workers within the manufacturing sector are included in the
estimation. The results suggest a very limited role for offshoring or trade in explaining log
wages. There is no statistically significant relationship between low-income-affiliate
employment, lagged export share, or lagged import penetration and industry-level wages; indeed,
the point estimates are close to zero. There is a positive and statistically significant relationship
between high-income-affiliate employment and domestic wages, although the magnitude is not
22

Note that we exclude 1983 for consistency with our occupation results, which can only be

estimated from 1984-2002, since occupation was only coded consistently from 1983 and on, and
we are using lagged measures of our independent variables.
19

large: the point estimate suggests that a one percent increase in affiliate employment in high
income countries is associated with a 0.01 percent increase in wages, and this is found even for
workers in the most routine occupations. In these first four columns, which rely on differences in
exposure to trade or offshoring across industries, the evidence suggests that trade has no
substantial negative effect on worker wages.
In columns (5) through (8) of Table 2, we present results from specification (1B) where
we measure exposure to trade or offshoring at the occupation level. The effects of both
offshoring and trade are larger in sign and generally significant at the five percent level, in
contrast to the industry-level results reported in the first four columns. In the first row of column
(5), the coefficient on low-income affiliate employment suggests that a ten percent increase in
employment offshored within an occupation is associated with a 0.4 percent wage reduction for
U.S. workers. For workers in the most routine occupations, we find that a ten percent increase in
low-income affiliate employment abroad is associated with a 0.7 percent decline in domestic
wages, whereas workers in less routine occupations were largely unaffected by offshoring.
Although the magnitude of the effect is small, the results are consistent with an interpretation
that workers in low income locations perform the same tasks that low-skilled workers perform in
the US and are therefore substitutes for workers in the US.
We also find a positive effect of lagged high-income affiliate employment on wages.
Workers in high-income locations appear to perform tasks that are complementary to workers in
the US and so expansion of employment in high-income countries can benefit domestic workers.
These results are robust to a range of specification choices, including whether we use prices of
imported and exported goods instead of quantities, and our chosen set of control variables, such
as controlling for the real price of shipments by sector to account for variation in product

20

demand.23 The results are qualitatively similar to the results presented here, and are available in
the online appendix.
Our results indicate that a ten percent increase in occupational exposure to import
competition is associated with nearly a 3 percent decline in real wages for workers who perform
routine tasks. While some occupations have experienced no increase in import competition (such
as teachers), import competition in other occupations (such as shoe manufacturing) has increased
by as much as 40 percentage points.24 For occupations with significant export activity, wages are
positively linked to export growth. For these workers, a ten percentage point increase in export
share at the occupation level is associated with a 6.6 percentage point increase in wages over the
sample period.
Krugman (2008) and Feenstra (2008) both hypothesize that the effects of international
trade and offshoring may have increased recently relative to earlier decades. In Table 3, we split
the sample into earlier and later time periods. In particular, we allow the impact of globalization
to vary between 1984 and 1991, and 1992 through 2002 when our sample ends. We also explore
23

The results indicate that workers with price decreases in their product market have suffered the

largest wage declines, with this pattern most pronounced in routine occupations. Similar to our
core results, however, this effect is only observed using occupational exposure measures of
import price changes. Special thanks to Lawrence Edwards for generous use of his price series
data on imports. Other specifications we have tested include removing measures of TFP and
controlling for price changes in the service sector using a CPI/PPI index, both of which provide
results similar to those presented in Table 2. Likewise, the results including the real price of
shipments are similar to the results in Table 2.
24

See the online appendix for further information on import exposure by occupation.
21

whether the impact of globalization varied for female workers, unionized workers, across
education levels, and for different age groups. The results in Table 3 suggest that there is no
significant association between log wages and employment in offshore locations in the early
years of our sample (1984-1991, 1984-1996). However, in the later periods (1992-2002, 19972002) worker wages are negatively and significantly associated with increased offshore
employment in low income affiliate locations. In the years 1997-2002, the coefficient estimates
in the fourth row of Table 3 indicate that a 10 percent increase in low-income affiliate
employment is associated with a one percent decrease in domestic wages. These negative
coefficients contrast with the positive coefficients on high income affiliate employment. For
1997 through 2002, a 10 percent increase in high income affiliate employment is associated with
nearly a 1 percent increase in domestic wages.
Table 3 also reports the coefficient on lagged imports and exports, measured at the
occupation level. The point estimates for occupation-specific import penetration are statistically
significant across all time periods, with the coefficients ranging from -0.21 to -0.32. These
coefficients indicate that a ten percentage point increase in import penetration is associated with
a wage decline in the exposed occupation of 2 to 3 percent. The coefficients become larger and
more negative in magnitude in the later time periods. The evidence also points to a positive and
significant association between export share and domestic wages, but the point estimates are
positive and significant for export share only in the later part of the sample period.
In Table 3, we also explore heterogeneity in our results across different demographic
groups. Anecdotes in the popular press and elsewhere suggest that women, union workers, and
older workers may have been disproportionately affected by international competition. If we
restrict the sample to either women or union workers, there is no evidence that their wages were

22

more negatively affected than the rest of the sample. In fact, the wages of unionized workers
appear to have been relatively unaffected by either export activity or import competition.
However, the wages of workers without higher education and older workers do appear to have
been disproportionately affected by offshoring activities, as the point estimates are larger for
these groups of workers. The estimates in Table 3 indicate that all of the negative and significant
effects of offshore employment and import penetration were concentrated on workers with a high
school education or less.
Since the results point to much stronger effects of offshore activities on domestic wages
in the later part of the sample period, we reproduce Table 2 for the 1997 through 2002 period in
Table 4. The results confirm that, for the last five years of our sample, offshoring and
international trade exerted much larger effects on occupation-specific wages than the earlier
years. The results also confirm that over the most recent sample period, industry-level wage
effects are negligible. In columns (1) through (4), all but two of the point estimates are
statistically insignificant and the magnitudes are close to zero, indicating offshoring or trade does
not significantly affect industry-level wage premia.
Columns (5) through (8) suggest that occupation-specific changes in offshoring and trade
are associated with significant wage effects, particularly for workers in the most routine
occupations. For these workers, a ten percent increase in offshoring to low-income countries is
associated with a 2 percent decrease in wages. For the most workers, however, a ten percentage
point increase in high-income affiliate employment is associated with a 1.7 percent increase in
wages. One explanation is that workers in high-income locations perform tasks that are
complementary to routine workers in the US. A one percent increase in export shares is
associated with a one percent increase in wages while a one percent increase in import

23

penetration is associated with a -0.44 percent decline in wages. The effects of these globalization
measures are generally small in magnitude and insignificant for individuals who work in the
occupations with the least routine content.
While we control for a number of observables, there are other shocks which might be
difficult to control for and could affect workers in routine occupations. To verify that our results
are not driven by secular trends in which wage changes, globalization, and technological change
are all moving together over time, we present a falsification exercise in Table 5. In particular, we
regress current period wage changes for 1984 through 1989 on future globalization shocks for
2002. Our future globalization shocks are the logs of low and high income affiliate employment
in 2002, as well as export shares and import penetration in 2002. If the analysis is driven by
spurious trends, then the coefficient on 2002 measures of globalization should be significant in
explaining wages for the 1984 through 1989 period. Table 5 shows that 2002 measures of
globalization do not significantly affect wages in the earlier period. In contrast, 2002 measures of
globalization do significantly affect wages in 1997 through 2002. For example, our offshoring
measure to low income countries is significantly negatively correlated with wage changes among
workers during this later period. This is new evidence that our results are not being driven simply
by a spurious correlation between offshoring and domestic wage changes.25
25

It is worth discussing alternative possibilities that could undermine our interpretations of our

findings. For example, it may be that even if the US had engaged in autarky in this later period,
domestic workers would have been replaced by machines, thereby implicating offshoring when
the workers’ decline was inevitable. This possibility naturally cannot be evaluated in our data.
Also, if our technology control variables are measured with error, it may be that the wage
declines we observe are a byproduct of the substitutability between these workers and capital.
24

B.

Offshoring, Trade, and the Reallocation of Labor Across Sectors
In this section, we try to identify mechanisms for the differences between industry-level

and occupation-level exposure to offshoring and trade. We begin by analyzing the relationship
between offshoring and domestic manufacturing employment. We then examine the wage
consequences of switching industries, sectors, and occupations using a panel of CPS workers
who are followed for more than one period.
In Table 6, we present an analysis of employment trends in manufacturing in response to
offshoring. Our unit of analysis is each education  industry  year cell. There are five education
categories for workers, 67 manufacturing industries, and 19 years of data (1984-2002). In
column (1), we present pooled results for all industries, and in the remaining columns we split
industries by the fraction of an industry’s workforce performing routine tasks. Pooling across all
task types, the results in column (1) indicate that the impact of offshoring depends on whether
affiliate employment is located in high or low-income countries. A one percent increase in
employment in low-income countries reduces domestic employment by 0.02 percent while a one
percent increase in employment in high-income countries increases domestic employment by
0.07 percent. Breaking the results down according to how routine the workforce is, we see that
the negative effects of offshoring to low-income countries are largest for workers in the most
routine industries. The point estimate in column (2), at -0.041, suggests that a one percent

However, we would argue that the strong correlation between the timing of increased offshore
employment and declining domestic wages seems unlikely to be fully explained by stories of this
nature.
25

increase in affiliate employment in low-income locations is associated with a 0.041 percent
reduction in employment of workers in the most routine occupations.
In contrast, greater offshoring to high wage countries is associated with a significant
increase in employment in the U.S. Across all workers, the evidence suggests that a one percent
increase in affiliate employment in high-income locations is associated with a .074 percent
increase in employment at home. For routine workers, the impact is more positive, with a one
percentage point increase in offshore employment in high income countries associated with a .15
to .19 percent increase in U.S. employment. This evidence suggests that offshore employment in
high-income locations is complementary with employment at home. The evidence presented in
Table 6 is consistent with Harrison and McMillan (2011), who use firm-level Bureau of
Economic Analysis data to show that domestic employment of US multinationals is
complementary with their employment in high income locations but that increasing employment
of US firms in low income locations substitutes for employment in the US.26
The coefficients on offshoring in Table 6 are significant but small in magnitude, and
suggest both substitution (in low-income countries) and complementarity (in high-income
locations). In contrast, the coefficients are large and negative but imprecisely estimated for both
import penetration and export activity. For the pooled sample, a one percentage point increase in
26

Our online appendix includes a rich set of robustness checks for these results. Among these are

a set of results based on instrumental variables estimation where we instrument for trade and
offshoring using the variables that capture changes over time in the cost of trade and offshoring.
The instruments are: Internet access, telephone connections including cell phone usage, and the
industry share of routine jobs. The results confirm the negative relationship between offshoring
to low-income countries, import penetration and manufacturing employment.
26

import penetration reduces US manufacturing employment by 0.61 percent. While it is not
surprising that the coefficient on import competition is negative, the negative coefficient on
sectoral export shares is less intuitive and deserves explanation. The negative coefficients may
indicate that export growth was labor-saving for workers with less than a college degree, which
is sensible if a significant degree of offshoring takes place through exports for further processing.
Likewise, the negative and significant coefficient on total factor productivity suggests that
productivity growth has been labor saving for most educational categories.27 Productivity growth
in manufacturing has been achieved in conjunction with falling employment.
The results in Table 6 suggest that productivity growth, export growth, and import
competition have been associated with (sometimes significant) declines in domestic
manufacturing employment and that the effects of offshoring have been smaller in magnitude
and mixed in sign. These results are important insofar as they suggest a fluid labor market where
changes in other factor prices and global competition lead to employment reallocation.
Furthermore, these results provide an explanation for our finding in Table 2 that the withinindustry wage effects of trade and offshoring are smaller than the within-occupation effects. If
trade and offshoring lead some workers to shift sectors (in particular, to exit high wage jobs in
manufacturing), then it is possible that the wages of those who retain their jobs or find new jobs
in the same industry are not significantly affected by offshoring, whereas those who shift sectors
or occupations are more negatively affected.28 We examine this conjecture in Table 7.
27

The results in Table 6 are robust to excluding total factor productivity as a control variable.

28

In results available in the online appendix, we directly assess the wage consequences among

those who switch industries within manufacturing. We find that (1) switching within
manufacturing has mild wage consequences (2) but leaving manufacturing has a more negative
27

To explore the impact of switching out of manufacturing on wage outcomes, we construct
a sample of manufacturing workers observed in CPS samples in consecutive years between 1983
and 2002. We regress the change in log wages between period t and t+1 for a given worker on an
indicator for switching occupation, including a rich set of controls for the worker’s age, sex,
education, race, union status in the first period, and industry in the first period. If switching
occupation is costly, it may explain why the negative impact on wages is so large in our main
results. As shown in Table 7, the data indicate that trade-induced occupation switching does
indeed have serious negative wage consequences for workers. Using our matched sample of CPS
ORG workers who are observed in consecutive years, we compare the wage difference in period
T and T+1 for workers who switch occupations versus those who do not. In Panel A, we examine
workers who switch across 3-digit occupational categories. In column 1, we examine the wage
impact of all occupation switched and find that the impact is negligible; an occupation change is
associated with 0.54 percent increase in wages. One possible explanation for this result is that
some switches are upwards (as measured by average occupational wages), and others are
downward, leaving a mixed result for all switches. This hypothesis is put forward in Trefler and
Liu (2011), who find evidence that switches of both types are common in response to trade.
In order to examine the impact of trade-induced occupational switching on wage
outcomes, we consider a system of equations for estimation. In our first stage, we examine the
impact of occupational exposure on the probability of switching occupations between periods.
We create a dichotomous measure of our instrument. All workers who are employed in
occupations above the median level of offshore exposure from low income countries are
impact and (3) leaving manufacturing is particularly costly for workers who switch occupation.
These were not included in the main text due to space considerations.
28

considered “tradable”. The results, presented in column 2, indicate that a being in a tradable
occupation is associated with a 9.4 percentage point increase in the probability of switching
occupations between periods. In our second stage, we examine the relationship between
switching occupations and wage declines, when this switch is induced by trade. We find that
trade-induced occupation switches are associated with a 12.1 percent decline in wages between
periods. This result is consistent with our earlier results highlighting negative consequences of
globalization on wages of workers who perform tasks that can be performed in low income
countries. In Panel B, we perform a similar analysis but use a broader classification of
occupation. If a more narrow definition of occupation implies that a worker is more likely to be
performing a similar task, these switches will presumably have less important wage
consequences. Consistent with this hypothesis, the results in Panel 2 indicate that trade is less
likely to induce a switch to a new 2-digit occupation (6.9 percentage points) but upon switching,
the negative wage consequences are even more severe: a trade-induced occupational switch
across 2-digit categories is associated with a 17.2 percent decline in wages. These results suggest
that switching occupations is very costly to workers, and provides support for our main results
suggesting that occupational exposure to competition from trade or offshoring has more
significant consequences than industry exposure.
One possibility is that workers who switch occupations in a “downward” manner are less
productive in unobserved dimensions of worker quality. Weaker workers may sort into less
demanding occupations, and this may not be captured by the human capital measures available in
the CPS (e.g. education). While we are unable to observe variation in the quality of workers on
unobserved dimensions, we attempt to address this possibility by adding an additional control to
the wage equation, which is the difference between the inter-occupation wage differential for all

29

workers in a sector, and the inter-occupation wage differential for workers who leave that sector
in the following period. If workers who remain and those who leave a sector are similar, then this
difference should be close to zero and adding it as an additional control should have no impact
on our estimate. The negative impact of switching occupations on wages is unaffected by the
inclusion of the inter-occupation wage differential term (see also Trefler and Liu (2011) for an
application to services). Our results are suggestive that in manufacturing, worker heterogeneity
does not explain the significant decline in wages of workers who leave their occupation due to
trade or offshoring pressures.
Our results are consistent with work by Kambourov and Manovskii (2008, 2009a, 2009b)
who find large wage declines among workers who switch occupations; this evidence suggests an
important role for occupation-specific human capital in a worker’s wage profile. Kambourov and
Manovskii (2008, 2009a, 2009b) also argue that occupation-switching may be an important
cause of the increase in US wage inequality, as younger workers are missing out on the benefits
to occupational tenure enjoyed by workers in previous decades. Insofar as this is partly driven by
competition from overseas, this highlights another mechanism by which offshoring may be
responsible for declining US wages and increasing wage inequality.

IV.

Conclusion
This paper re-examines the impact of trade and offshoring—two primary measures of

globalization—on US workers. Using CPS data which we merge with data on exports, imports,
and BEA data on offshoring, we make three main contributions. First, we draw a distinction
between the impact of globalization on industrial wage differentials and on occupation wage
differentials. Globalization has had small or insignificant effects on industry wage differentials

30

but significant effects on occupation wage differentials. These results are consistent with recent
empirical work demonstrating the importance of occupational tenure and downplaying the
importance of tenure within a particular industry in determining a worker’s wage.
Second, we extend previous analyses which focused exclusively on manufacturing sector
workers to explore the impact of trade and offshoring on all workers. Third, we use a two stage
approach to show that one important avenue through which globalization affects wages is by
pushing workers out of the manufacturing sector to take lower paying jobs elsewhere. Using a
CPS panel of workers and the exposure of an occupation to trade as an instrument for whether or
not a worker switched occupations, we find that occupation switching due to trade led to real
wage losses of 12 to 17 percentage points between 1983 and 2002. The results are robust to the
inclusion of a term from Trefler and Lui (2011) which captures the possibility that the least able
workers are most likely to switch into lower paying occupations.
Our results provide new evidence that the negative consequences of trade on workers are
mediated through a reallocation of labor across sectors and into different occupations. While
older models of trade posited that workers could move in a costless manner to new jobs in the
face of pressure from foreign labor, we identify large and significant wage declines among
workers who leave manufacturing, and the wage decline is particularly pronounced for those
who switch occupations. These results are consistent with new trade models which introduce
frictions into the labor reallocation process, such as Cosar (2011) and Artuc, Chaudhuri, and
McLaren (2010). Our evidence is consistent with greater frictions in moving across occupations
rather than across industries.
We also explored how the impact of globalization on wages has changed over time. Our
different measures of globalization have no significant impact on wages during the first half of

31

our sample. While our sample extends from 1984 to 2002, both offshoring and trade exert
significant effects on wages only in the second half of this period. The effects of these
globalization measures are confined to individuals who work in “routine” occupations, indicating
that much of the brunt of globalization is born by individuals who perform tasks which are easily
copied by workers elsewhere.

32

References
Artuç, Erhan, Shubham Chaudhuri, and John McLaren. 2010. “Trade Shocks and Labor
Adjustment: A Structural Empirical Approach.” American Economic Review, 100(3): 1008-1045.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz and Alan B. Krueger. 1998. “Computing Inequality: Have
Computers Changed the Labor Market?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113: 1169-1213.
Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard Murnane. 2003. “The Skill Content of Recent
Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118: 12791334.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz and Melissa S. Kearney. 2008. “Trends in US Wage
Inequality: Revising the Revisionists.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90: 300-23.
Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2012. “The China Syndrome: Local Labor
Market Impacts of Import Competition in the United States.” University of California, San
Diego, unpublished manuscript.
Bernard, Andrew, J. Bradford Jensen and Peter Schott. 2006. “Survival of the Best Fit: Exposure
to Low-Wage Countries and the (Uneven) Growth of US Manufacturing.” Journal of
International Economics, 68: 219-237.
Cosar, A. Kerem, “Adjusting to Trade Liberalization: Reallocation and Labor Market Policies,”
October 2010. University of Chicago Booth School of Business, unpublished manuscript.
Desai, Mihir, C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines. 2009. " Domestic Effects of the Foreign
Activities of US Multinationals." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 1(1): 181-203.
Feenstra, Robert C. 2008. “Offshoring in the Global Economy.” Presented at the Stockholm
School of Economics, September 17-18 as the Ohlin Lecture. Available for download at the
author’s website.
Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson. 1999. “The Impact of Outsourcing and HighTechnology Capital on Wages: Estimates for the US, 1972-1990.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 114(3): 907-940.
Freeman, Richard. 1995. “Are Your Wages Set in Beijing?” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
9(3) 15-32.
Grossman, Gene M. and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2008. “Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of
Offshoring.” American Economic Review, 98(5): 1978-1997.
Harrison, Ann and Margaret McMillan. 2011. "Offshoring Jobs? Multinationals and U.S.
Manufacturing Emploment." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(3): 857–875.

33

Hummels, David, Rasmus Jørgensen, Jakob R. Munch, and Chong Xiang. 2011. "The Wage
Effects of Offshoring: Evidence from Danish Matched Worker-Firm Data." NBER Working
Paper No. 17496.
Jensen, J. Bradford and Lori G. Kletzer. 2005. "Tradable Services: Understanding the Scope
and Impact of Services Offshoring." Working Paper Series Number WP 05-9.
Kambourov, Gueorgui and Iourii Manovskii. 2008. “Rising Occupational and Industry Mobility
in the United States: 1968-97.” International Economic Review, 49(1): 41-79.
Kambourov, Gueorgui and Iourii Manovskii. 2009a. “Occupational Specificity of Human
Capital.” International Economic Review, 50(1): 63-115.
Kambourov, Gueorgui and Iourii Manovskii. 2009b. “Occupational Mobility and Wage
Inequality.” Review of Economic Studies, 76: 731-759.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Lawrence H. Summers. 1989. “Industry Rents: Evidence and
Implications.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics 1989: 209-290.
Krueger, Alan B. and Lawrence H. Summers. 1988. “Efficiency Wages and the Inter-Industry
Wage Structure.” Econometrica 56 (2): 259-293.
Krugman, Paul. 2008. “Trade and Wages, Reconsidered.” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, Spring, 103-154.
Lemieux, T. 2006. “Increasing Residual Wage Inequality: Composition Effects, Noisy Data, or
Rising Demand for Skill?” The American Economic Review 96 (3): 461-498.
Menezes-Filho, Naércio and Marc-Andreas Muendler. 2011. "Labor Reallocation in Response to
Trade Reform." NBER Working Paper No. 17372.
Trefler, Daniel and Runjuan Liu. 2011. "A Sorted Tale of Globalization: White Collar Jobs and
the Rise of Service Offshoring." NBER Working Paper No. 17559.
United States Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration. 1977.
“Dictionary of Occupational Titles: Fourth Edition.” Washington, DC: US Government Printing
Office.

34

Table 1: OLS Estimates of Change in Offshoring and Import Penetration Given Industry Skill
Composition in 1983
Dependent Variable:
Dependent
Log Difference in Employment Offshored
Variable:
(1983-2002)
Import Penetration
Low Income
High Income
Difference
Countries
Countries
(1983-2002)
(5)
(6)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Industry Share of Routine Jobs in
1983

5.132**
(2.40)

5.501**
(2.59)

-0.980
(2.03)

-0.053
(2.26)

1.217*** 1.237***
(0.34)
(0.33)

Difference in log of price of
investment between 1983 and 2002

-0.262
(0.45)

0.234
(0.40)

-0.079
(0.06)

Difference in total factor productivity
level between 1983 and 2002

0.084
(0.07)

-0.056
(0.06)

0.0242**
(0.01)

Difference in capital to labor ratio
between 1983 and 2002

-0.230
(1.21)

-1.218
(1.06)

-0.249
(0.16)

Difference in computer use rates
between 1983 and 2002

0.441
(0.68)

-0.391
(0.59)

0.028
(0.09)

Number of observations
66
59
66
R-squared
0.07
0.12
0.00
* significant at 10% ** significant at 5%. *** significant at 1%.

59
0.07

66
0.17

61
0.35

Source : Affiliate (or offshore) employment data are taken from the Bureau of Economic Analysis
annual survey of US firms with multinational affiliates for 1983-2002. Low income countries are
defined according to the World Bank income categories. Employment data are taken from all workers
in the Current Population Surveys Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups for the same period. Import
penetration and export share are taken from Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2006). Investment good
prices, total factor productivity measures, and the capital to labor ratio by industry and year are taken
from the NBER productivity database. Computer use rates are taken from October CPS supplements
during the sample period. Details for each of the data sources are available in the data appendix.
Note: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses below the coefficient estimates.

Table 2: OLS Estimates of Wage Determinants using Occupational versus Industry Exposure to Offshoring and Trade, 1984-2002
Dependent Variable: Log Wage

Offshoring and Trade Measured by
Industry-Specific Exposure, Manufacturing Only

Offshoring and Trade Measured by
Occupation-Specific Exposure, All Sectors

All
Occupations

Most
Routine

Intermediate
Routine

Least
Routine

All
Occupations

Most
Routine

Intermediate
Routine

Least
Routine

Lagged log of low income
affiliate employment

0.001
(0.002)

0.002
(0.002)

0.000
(0.003)

0.002
(0.003)

-0.0401**
(0.016)

-0.0702***
(0.016)

0.018
(0.029)

0.072
(0.056)

Lagged log of high income
affiliate employment

0.0143***
(0.005)

0.00793*
(0.005)

0.011
(0.007)

0.0239***
(0.008)

0.0339**
(0.015)

0.0508***
(0.014)

-0.003
(0.026)

-0.045
(0.048)

Lagged export share

0.022
(0.043)

-0.021
(0.058)

0.002
(0.048)

0.047
(0.045)

0.255**
(0.121)

0.667***
(0.157)

0.232
(0.184)

-0.815*
(0.420)

Lagged import penetration

0.077
(0.050)

0.090
(0.061)

0.042
(0.057)

-0.050
(0.074)

-0.290***
(0.091)

-0.296***
(0.099)

-0.761
(0.466)

1.083
(0.750)

Variable

551,528
316,048
150,319
85,161
3,068,095 1,109,835 1,156,208
802,052
Number of observations
0.46
0.39
0.41
0.38
0.50
0.42
0.54
0.40
R-squared
* significant at 10% ** significant at 5%. *** significant at 1%.
Source : See Table 1.
Note : Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses below the coefficient estimates. The workers are taken from CPS samples from
1984-2002, with their lagged values of the independent variables taken from 1983-2001. The standard errors are clustered by industry and 5
year period in columns (1-4), and by occupation and 5 year period in columns (5-8). The classification of occupations into routine categories
is determined by the proportion of tasks which are routine in each occupation, with low being occupations with more than 2/3rd, intermediate
being between 1/3rd and 2/3rd, and high being occupations with less than 1/3rd of tasks designated routine. We also control for the lagged
log price of investment, lagged total factor productivity, and lagged capital to labor ratio among manufacturing workers. Among nonmanufacturing workers, these controls are set equal to unity. Wage specifications control for a worker's gender, age, race, experience, whether
in a union, and include industry, year, education and state fixed effects. The occupation-specific exposure regressions also include 2-digit
occupation fixed effects. Controls for computer use rates are imputed by the worker's industry (columns 1-4) and by occupation (columns 58).

Table 3: OLS Estimates of Wage Determinants using Occupational Exposure to
Offshoring and Trade Among Subsamples of CPS workers, 1984-2002

Dependent Variable: Log Wage
Lagged Log Lagged Log
of Low
of High
Income
Income
Affiliate
Affiliate
Specification
Emp
Emp

Lagged
Export
Share

Lagged
Import
Penetration

Observations

RSquared

1984-1991

0.003
(0.012)

-0.005
(0.01)

0.06
(0.109)

-0.215***
(0.067)

1,390,331

0.52

1992-2002

-0.0558***
(0.013)

0.0449***
(0.011)

0.490***
(0.081)

-0.321***
(0.062)

1,677,763

0.49

1984-1996

-0.015
(0.009)

0.0102
(0.008)

0.181**
(0.076)

-0.261***
(0.057)

2,181,111

0.51

1997-2002

-0.107***
(0.026)

0.0946***
(0.024)

0.478***
(0.118)

-0.306***
(0.093)

886,983

0.48

Female

-0.0477***
(0.013)

0.0434***
(0.012)

0.376***
(0.093)

-0.178***
(0.038)

1,491,461

0.49

Union

0.004
(0.01)

-0.011
(0.009)

-0.104
(0.077)

-0.075
(0.073)

549,055

0.37

High School
or Less

-0.0407***
(0.009)

0.0319***
(0.008)

0.227***
(0.081)

-0.209***
(0.049)

1,475,119

0.44

College or
More

-0.0250**
(0.011)

0.0228**
(0.01)

0.12
(0.073)

-0.116
(0.111)

1,592,975

0.44

Over 40

-0.0560***
(0.01)

0.0482***
(0.009)

0.11
(0.071)

-0.202***
(0.053)

1,262,929

0.48

Over 50

-0.0552***
(0.013)

0.0487***
(0.012)

0.11
(0.088)

-0.287***
(0.064)

550,041

0.48

* significant at 10% ** significant at 5%. *** significant at 1%.
Source : See Table 1.
Note : Each row represents a separate regression. The independent variables are listed in the
column headings, and the subsample of interest is listed in the row heading. Robust standard
errors are clustered by occupation and 5 year period, and are reported in parentheses below the
coefficient estimates. Wage specifications control for a worker's gender, age, race, experience,
whether in a union, imputed computer use rate by occupation and include year, education,
state, industry, and two-digit occupation fixed effects.

Table 4: OLS Estimates of Wage Determinants using Occupational versus Industry Exposure to Offshoring and Trade, 1997-2002
Dependent Variable: Log Wage

Offshoring and Trade Measured by
Industry-Specific Exposure, Manufacturing Only

Offshoring and Trade Measured by
Occupation-Specific Exposure, All Sectors

All
Occupations

Most
Routine

Intermediate
Routine

Least
Routine

All
Occupations

Most
Routine

Intermediate
Routine

Least
Routine

Lagged log of low income
affiliate employment

-0.009
(0.006)

-0.005
(0.008)

-0.0221***
(0.008)

0.002
(0.013)

-0.107***
(0.040)

-0.198***
(0.038)

0.147***
(0.050)

0.330*
(0.165)

Lagged log of high income
affiliate employment

-0.002
(0.009)

-0.014
(0.010)

0.004
(0.013)

0.016
(0.022)

0.0947**
(0.037)

0.169***
(0.035)

-0.140***
(0.042)

-0.299**
(0.143)

Lagged export share

-0.021
(0.072)

-0.111
(0.078)

0.039
(0.092)

0.049
(0.075)

0.478***
(0.178)

0.999***
(0.240)

0.292
(0.271)

-0.808
(0.948)

Lagged import penetration

0.119
(0.073)

0.196**
(0.094)

-0.067
(0.150)

-0.094
(0.176)

-0.306**
(0.146)

-0.437***
(0.160)

-0.035
(0.587)

1.668
(1.419)

Variable

132,104
71,985
36,982
23,137
886,984
291,894
337,057
258,033
Number of observations
0.44
0.35
0.40
0.34
0.48
0.39
0.51
0.37
R-squared
* significant at 10% ** significant at 5%. *** significant at 1%.
Source : See Table 1.
Note : Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses below the coefficient estimates. The workers are taken from CPS samples from
1997-2002, with their lagged values of the independent variables taken from 1996-2001. The standard errors are clustered by industry and 5
year period in columns (1-4), and by occupation and 5 year period in columns (5-8). The classification of occupations into routine categories
is determined by the proportion of tasks which are routine in each occupation, with low being occupations with more than 2/3rd, intermediate
being between 1/3rd and 2/3rd, and high being occupations with less than 1/3rd of tasks designated routine. We also control for the lagged
log price of investment, lagged total factor productivity, and lagged capital to labor ratio among manufacturing workers. Among nonmanufacturing workers, these controls are set equal to unity. Wage specifications control for a worker's gender, age, race, experience, whether
in a union, and include industry, year, education and state fixed effects. The occupation-specific exposure regressions also include 2-digit
occupation fixed effects. Controls for computer use rates are imputed by the worker's industry (columns 1-4) and by occupation (columns 58).

Table 5: Falsification Exercise using Exposure to Offshoring and
Trade in 2002 and Wage Impact by Period
Dependent Variable: Log Wage
Offshoring and Trade Measured by
Occupation-Specific Exposure in 2002
Variable

1984-1989

1997-2002

Log of low income affiliate
employment in 2002

0.015
(0.055)

-0.0862**
(0.042)

Log of high income affiliate
employment in 2002

-0.014
(0.050)

0.0769**
(0.038)

Export share in 2002

-0.079
(0.248)

0.445***
(0.157)

Import penetration in 2002

-0.118
(0.150)

-0.358***
(0.124)

1,036,302
886,958
Number of observations
0.53
0.48
R-squared
* significant at 10% ** significant at 5%. *** significant at 1%.
Source : See Table 1.
Note : Robust standard errors are clustered at the occupation level and
reported in parentheses below the coefficient estimates. The independent
variables reported for the globalization exposure are taken from the
worker's occupational exposure in 2002. The sample in each column
includes workers in all sectors for the listed period. The regressions
include the same controls that are included in the regressions using
occupational exposure in Table 2.

Table 6: OLS Estimates of Employment Determinants in Manufacturing, 1984-2002
Dependent Variable: Log U.S. Manufacturing Sector Employment

All

Most
Routine

Intermediate
Routine

Least
Routine

Lagged log of low income
affiliate employment

-0.0202*
(0.011)

-0.0413**
(0.02)

0.007
(0.021)

-0.046
(0.044)

Lagged log of high income
affiliate employment

0.0736**
(0.031)

0.148**
(0.064)

0.192***
(0.05)

0.013
(0.132)

Lagged log of price of
investment

0.124
(0.093)

0.489***
(0.16)

0.197
(0.209)

-0.094
(0.52)

Lagged total factor
productivity level

0.000
(0.017)

0.0680**
(0.033)

-0.0612***
(0.023)

0.602
(0.632)

Lagged export share

-0.393
(0.258)

-0.555
(0.666)

0.112
(0.321)

-0.216
(1.326)

Lagged import penetration

-0.614*
(0.356)

-0.313
(0.682)

-0.084
(0.338)

0.133
(1.547)

Lagged capital to labor ratio

-0.867**
(0.373)

-0.983
(1.043)

-1.108**
(0.436)

-0.338
(1.504)

-0.036
(0.147)

0.049
(0.269)

-0.122
(0.207)

-0.700
(0.482)

4,248
0.55

489
0.65

Variable

Lagged computer use rates by
industry

Number of observations
6,399
1,662
R-squared
0.86
0.78
* significant at 10% ** significant at 5%. *** significant at 1%.

Source : See Table 1.
Note : Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses below the coefficient estimates, and are
clustered by industry. All models include year and industry fixed effects. Low-income affiliate
employment is defined according to the World Bank income categories. The sample size
corresponds to 5 education groupings X 19 years X 67 industries, less missing values. The results
shown in columns 2-4 are (2) industry and year combinations where more than 2/3 of the tasks
are routine, (3) cells where between 1/3 and 2/3 of tasks are routine, and (4) cells with than a 1/3
of the tasks are routine.

Table 7: Wage Impact of Switching Occupations using CPS Workers in Repeated Samples,
1984-2002
Two-stage
OLS
First-Stage
Least Squares
Log Wage
Difference

Switched
Occupation

Log Wage
Difference

(1)

(2)

(3)

Panel A: Defining an Occupation Switch by Switching 3-digit Occupation
0.0054
Switched Occupations
Between T and T+1
(0.005)
Inter-Occupation Wage
0.281
1
(0.223)
Differential Gap Term

851,467

851,467
18.91

Panel B: Defining an Occupation Switch by Switching 1-digit Occupation
-0.00153
Switched Occupations
Between T and T+1
(0.001)
Inter-Occupation Wage
Differential Gap Term
Tradable Occupation (1=yes)

0.190
(0.252)

0.0942***
(0.022)

Tradable Occupation (1=yes)
Number of Observations
F Test of Instrument

-0.121**
(0.051)

-0.0506
(0.076)

851,467

-0.172***
(0.059)
-0.0594
(0.131)

0.0693***
(0.020)

Number of Observations
851,467
851,467
F Test of Instrument
11.66
* significant at 10% ** significant at 5%. *** significant at 1%.

851,467

Source : Sample is composed of CPS MORG workers observed in two consecutive samples.
Note : Robust standard errors reported in parentheses below coefficient estimates. Standard errors
are clustered by 3-digit occupation. All models include year, state and education level fixed
effects. Other demographic controls are age, sex, non-white, and union status in the first period.
An occupation is defined as tradable if the occupational exposure from low-income countries (as
described in Table 2) is above the median level among manufacturing workers in the sample. This
is used to generate a binary variable for all workers in the sample, and is the instrument for
occupational switches. In Panel A, we define an occupation switch by the worker reporting a
different 3-digit occupation. In Panel B, an occupation switch is defined by a worker reporting a
1
different 1-digit occupation. The Inter-Occupation Wage Differential Gap term is calculated by
regressing the workers' log wage on observable characteristics and a set of occupation dummies
among all workers, and among workers who switch occupations between periods. The difference
in means of these terms is included in our regressions to control for potential selection on
unobservables of those who switch occupations.

Figure 1
Trends in Employment and Wages in the Manufacturing and Service Sectors
50
45

7
6.5

55
50

18
16

40
25

5.5

1980 1985 1990 1995 2000

Non-Routine Occupations
24

15

26

Routine Occupations

16

12.5

18

13

20

13.5

14

22

14.5

18
17
16
15
14

1980 1985 1990 1995 2000

30

40

1980 1985 1990 1995 2000

All Workers
19

35

12
10

6

35

45

14

80
70
60

1980 1985 1990 1995 2000

Real Hourly Wage

Non-Routine Occupations

20

90

21

100

22

Routine Occupations

19
18
17

Service Employment (millions)

All Workers

1980

1985

1990

Manufacturing

1995

2000

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Services

Notes : Employment and wage calculations are based on the Current Population Survey
Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups (MORG). Sample includes all part-time and full-time
workers. Wages are in 2005 dollars. Definition of routine workers is based on occupational
task content. Details are available in the data appendix.

Figure 2

2,000
1,500

7,000

1,000

8,000

9,000

10,000

Affiliate Employment (000s)

11,000

2,500

12,000

Trends in Domestic and Affiliate Employment among Multinational Firms

1980

1985
U.S. Employment

1990

Year

1995

Low Income Employment

2000

2005

High Income Employment

Notes : Author's calculations based on the most comprehensive available data and is based
on firm-level surveys on US direct investment abroad, collected each year by the Bureau of
Economic Analysis (BEA) of the US Department of Commerce. Using these data, we
compute number of employees hired abroad by country and year, and then aggregate
employment by Low (High) Income country according to World Bank income
classifications.

Figure 3
Occupational Wage Premiums in 1983 and 2002 among Routine and Non-Routine Occupations

.5
0
-.5
-1

-1

-.5

0

.5

Occupational Wage Premium - 2002

1

Non-Routine

1

Routine

-1

-.5

0

.5

Occupational Wage Premium - 1983

1

-1

-.5

0

.5

1

Occupational Wage Premium - 1983

Notes : Wage premium are calculated by a standard Mincerian regression of the log wage on education,
experience, age, sex, race, year fixed efffects and state fixed effects among all workers in the CPS MORG
between in 1983 and 2002. Each point in the plot is a separate occupation identified in the CPS (N=464). The
occupations are considered routine if the share of tasks that is routine is greater than the median occupation.
Occupations with higher wage premiums in 2002 than in 1983 are shaded in.

