                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       BUY LOCAL? THE GEOGRAPHY OF SUCCESSFUL AND UNSUCCESSFUL
                      VENTURE CAPITAL EXPANSION

                                            Henry Chen
                                           Paul Gompers
                                           Anna Kovner
                                            Josh Lerner

                                       Working Paper 15102
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15102


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2009




Harvard Business School’s Division of Research provided financial assistance. We are grateful for
able research assistance from Monica Cox. We thank Sue Helper, Olav Sorenson, and William Strange
for helpful discussions. All errors and omissions are our own. The views expressed in this paper are
the authors' and should not be attributed to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Henry Chen, Paul Gompers, Anna Kovner, and Josh Lerner. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Buy Local? The Geography of Successful and Unsuccessful Venture Capital Expansion
Henry Chen, Paul Gompers, Anna Kovner, and Josh Lerner
NBER Working Paper No. 15102
June 2009
JEL No. G24,R12

                                              ABSTRACT

We document geographic concentration by both venture capital firms and venture capital-financed
companies in three cities – San Francisco, Boston, and New York. We find that firms open new satellite
offices based on the success rate of venture capital-backed investments in an area. Geography is also
significantly related to outcomes. Venture capital firms based in locales that are venture capital centers
outperform, regardless of the stage of the investment. Ironically, this outperformance arises from outsized
performance outside of the venture capital firms’ office locations, including in peripheral locations.
If the goal of state and local policy makers is to encourage venture capital investment, outperformance
of non-local investments suggests that policy makers might want to mitigate costs associated with
established venture capitalists investing in their geographies rather than encouraging the establishment
of new venture capital firms


Henry Chen                                           Anna Kovner
Harvard Business School                              Financial Intermediation Function
Baker Library 280                                    Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Soldiers Field                                       33 Liberty Street
Boston, MA 02163                                     New York, NY 10045
hchen@hbs.edu                                        Anna.Kovner@ny.frb.org

Paul Gompers                                         Josh Lerner
Harvard Business School                              Harvard Business School
Baker Library 263                                    Rock Center 214
Soldiers Field                                       Boston, MA 02163
Boston, MA 02163                                     and NBER
and NBER                                             jlerner@hbs.edu
pgompers@hbs.edu
I. Introduction

       From Silicon Valley to Herzliya, Israel, venture capital firms are concentrated in very

few locations. More than half of the 1,000 venture capital offices listed in Pratt’s Guide to

Private Equity and Venture Capital Sources are located in just three metropolitan areas – San

Francisco, Boston, and New York. More than 49% of the U.S.-based companies financed by

venture capital firms are located in these same three cities. This paper examines the location

decisions of venture capital firms and the impact that venture capital firm geography has on

investments and outcomes.

       The location of venture capital firms matters for the development of entrepreneurial firms

because venture capitalists provide more than just risk capital. Venture capital firms typically

invest in early-stage and high-technology companies where informational asymmetries are high.

These are firms have highly uncertain future prospects and the potential for agency conflicts are

severe. Venture capital funding contracts provide for staged financing and venture capitalists are

constantly evaluating their portfolio companies (see, for example, Sahlman (1990), Gompers

(1995), and Kaplan and Stromberg (2003)). Venture capitalists are actively involved in the

governance of the companies they fund through board membership, management recruiting, and

the provision of management incentives.

       The cost of providing this oversight is likely to be sensitive to the distance between

venture capitalists and the firms in which they invest. The ability to monitor the portfolio

company, to coach the management team, and to provide introductions may depend upon the

ability to interact frequently with the company. For example, Lerner (1995) shows that venture

capitalists are more likely to serve on the boards of geographically proximate companies.

Moreover, this involvement is likely to translate into tangible economic progress. Research


                                                                                                    2
shows that venture capital-backed companies outperform their peers on many dimensions: i)

operational growth (Hellmann and Puri (2000)) ii) post-IPO performance (Brav and Gompers

(1997)) iii) innovation and patenting activity (Kortum and Lerner (2000)) and iv) potential for

scale (Puri and Zarutskie (2008)). Similarly, Gompers and Lerner (2001) show that venture

capital-backed companies have, relative to the amount of capital invested, disproportionately

contributed to the creation of jobs, market value, and revenues.

          Reflecting this awareness, states and municipalities are placing increasing emphasis on

encouraging the establishment of venture capital communities in their regions. A 2001 National

Governors Association report stated, “Venture capital is critical to growing the new businesses

that will drive the ‘new economy.’ Finding ways to nurture the culture of entrepreneurs, and the

capital that feeds them, must be the top priority of states.”1 An estimate by the National

Association of Seed and Venture Funds is that state venture capital funds in 2008 totaled $2.3

billion2; meanwhile, an increasing share of the approximately $50 billion that states spend on

industrial incentives is going to venture-backed firms, a trend that is likely to be accelerated by

provisions in the recently enacted stimulus bill favoring clean technologies (Engardio (2009)).

Thus, it is vitally important to understand the geography of venture capital and its association

with success of the underlying portfolio companies.

        In this paper, we proceed in three steps. First, we document the clustering of venture

capital in three metropolitan areas (combined statistical areas or CSAs): San Francisco/San Jose,

Boston, and New York. We call these cities “venture capital centers.” There is a long literature


1
 National Governors Association, Center for Best Practices, “Issue Brief Growing New Businesses with Seed and
Venture Capital: State Experiences and Options,” 2001, http://www.nga.org/Files/pdf/VENCAPITAL.PDF
(accessed April 11, 2009).
2
  http://www.nasvf.org/nasvf/web.nsf/pages/documents.html/$file/3-24-
08%20Table%20of%20State%20Venture%20Funds%20Distributed%20to%20Response%20Group.pdf (accessed
April 11, 2009).

                                                                                                                3
on industrial clustering dating back to Marshall (1920). Some clustering is to be expected, since

the forces that are likely to lead to agglomeration economies (input sharing, labor market pooling

and knowledge spillovers) are likely to be important for venture capital and the types of

companies in which venture capital firms invest. We find, however, a level of venture capital

localization that far exceeds entrepreneurial localization more generally. Glaeser finds that

variation in the self-employment rate is related to variation in demography and industry

concentration, but does not find any correlation between this broad measure of entrepreneurship

and venture capital. We find that a one standard deviation increase in the number of venture

capital offices in a region increases venture capital investments in that area by 49.7%. The C(3)

ratio of self employment was 10.7%3, while the comparable C(3) ratio of venture capital partners

is 60.5%.

        Of course, association does not indicate causation. The localization of venture capital

firms that we identify may simply reflect the localization of industries in which venture

capitalists invest. But which came first – the venture capitalist or the entrepreneurial company?

Mollica and Zingales (2007) find evidence that venture capital may have the primary role in

fostering the entrepreneurial communities in which they are located. They show that venture

capital firms increase both patents and the total number of new businesses, using the size of state

pension funds as an instrument for the number of venture capital firms.

        We examine venture capitalists’ decisions to open offices in new geographies. Instead of

expanding to regions with few VC firms, VCs tend to open satellite offices in the same three

cities that are existing centers for venture capital activity. For example, a Boston-based firm is

more likely to open a San Francisco/San Jose office than they are an office in Austin, Texas. In

3
 C(3) ratio of self-employment calculated using 2000 micro-level Census data from the Integrated Public Use
Microdata Series (IPUMS) at http://usa.ipums.org/usa/.


                                                                                                              4
fact, one of the most important determinants of the number of VC offices in a region is the

success rate for all previous VC investments in that region. The success rate for previous VC

investments explains an additional 10.9% of the variance in the number of offices in a region.

Similarly, the most important determinant of a VC firm’s decision to open a branch office is the

percentage of its investments (relative to its entire investment portfolio) in that area in the past

five years.

       Since the relationship between VC firm location and the location of their investments is

endogenous, we examine the relationship between success and distance from VC investors.

Overall, venture capital firms based in the venture capital centers outperform even after

controlling for firm experience. This may reflect a variety of factors, which are difficult to

disentangle, including the superior experience of these investors, their greater connections with

elite limited partners and corporations, and their superior syndication networks (Sorenson and

Stuart (2001)).

       Surprisingly, much of the VC outperformance in these venture capital centers arises from

their non-local investments. This finding is counterintuitive, since venture capitalists might be

expected to be the most involved and add the most value to the geographically closest

companies. We observe this outperformance of non-local companies in both early- and late-

stage investments. Thus, this wedge in expected returns does not seem to be the result of

established VC firms’ cherry-picking later-stage enterprises are more likely to successfully exit.

The higher rates of return on non-local deals may indicate economically meaningful geographic

differences in the availability of venture capital. One potential explanation for this higher return

to non-local deals is that venture capitalists have a higher hurdle rate (i.e., require a higher




                                                                                                       5
expected rate of return) for investments that have a higher monitoring cost. This higher hurdle

rate may reflect the imputed (personal) cost of traveling to remote locations.

       We find additional evidence that there may be a higher investment or expected return

threshold for non-local deals. If a venture capital firm has done or will do another investment in

the same geographic area, there is a 2% drop in expected success. VCs may lower their

threshold on a potential deal if they have a lower marginal cost of visiting the area, i.e., if the

venture capitalist is already visiting one portfolio company, the personal cost of visiting a second

company is substantially lower.

       Venture capital firms are likely to locate in areas that offer them the highest concentration

of profitable investments since geographically close investments are easier to for the venture

capitalist to monitor. Travel to other geographies is costly and will be undertaken only when an

investment offers prospects for a high enough return to, in expectation, compensate the venture

capitalist for the additional time and money associated with monitoring a distant investment.

The resulting concentration of venture capitalists and entrepreneurs may pose grounds for

concern given the positive public externalities associated with the establishment of new firms.

For example, Gompers, Lerner, and Scharfstein (2005) find that founders of venture capital-

backed startups disproportionately come from prior positions at previously venture capital-

backed companies. If the supply of venture capital is a limiting factor for the establishment of

new firms, policy makers in regions with low concentrations of venture capital may wish to

provide incentives for established VCs based in venture capital centers to invest in their regions.

       This paper is related both to the existing literature on venture capital and on the

importance of geography for economic growth. Several papers document how venture capitalists

monitor and advise their portfolio companies (Barry, Muscarella, Peavy, and Vetsuypens (1990),



                                                                                                      6
Lerner (1995) and Hellmann and Puri (2002)). Bengtsson and Ravid (2009) find VC contracts

are more high-powered as geographic distance increases, indicating that monitoring and soft

information decrease with distance. In economic geography, Zook (2002) argues that the

regional distribution of venture capital investing played a role in determining the location of new

Internet startups.

        More generally, there is an extensive literature documenting the continued importance of

geographic clusters despite increasing globalization (see for example, Porter (1990), Krugman

(1991) and Ellison and Glaeser (1997)) There is evidence for the importance of geographical

clusters in investment management. For example, Christoffersen and Sarkissian (2009) find

evidence of knowledge spillovers and learning in the investment management industry, finding

that mutual funds with experienced managers located in cities that are financial centers

outperform. Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2005) document similarities in trading patterns for

investment managers in the same cities.

        It possible that the clusters we document arise from second-order agglomeration

externalities, that is, VCs co-locate with the highly clustered industries in which they invest.

Saxenian (1994) examines the importance of local industrial systems for entrepreneurial activity

in Silicon Valley and along Route 128 near Boston. The importance of labor market pooling is

found by Fallick, Fleischman, and Rebitzer (2006) who observe high rates of intra-industry labor

mobility in the computer industry in Silicon Valley and Freedman (2008) who finds evidence for

the importance of geographic clusters in a study of the software publishing industry. Evidence

of geographic knowledge spillovers is found in biotechnology by Zucker, Darby and Brewer

(1998) and more recently by Agrawal, Kapur and McHale (2008), who document the importance

of geographic proximity for inventors using patent data. Industry clustering may be even more



                                                                                                   7
pronounced for spin-off firms than other concerns. (See, for example, evidence of geographic

patterns in spin-offs in Gompers, Lerner, and Scharfstein (2005) for venture-backed companies,

Klepper and Sleeper (2005) for the laser industry, and Sorenson and Audia (2000) for the

footwear industry).

       In addition, there is a growing interest in understanding conditions that foster

entrepreneurship. Glaeser (2007) shows that more than half of the heterogeneity in the self-

employment rate can be explained by demographic and industrial variation. Several papers

document the importance of geographic factors such as local birth (Michelacci and Silva (2007))

and entrepreneurial levels of peers (Giannetti and Simonov (2008)). In terms of new product

and new industry development, Duranton and Puga (2001) theorize that new products are

developed in big cities, and production later moves to specialized industry clusters.

Understanding the factors that affect the geographic distribution of venture capital offices and

investment activity provide insights into the forces that drive concentration of industries and new

firm formation.

       The paper is organized as follows. The next section describes the construction of the

data. Section III examines the geography of venture capital firms and geographic factors

associated with the supply of venture capital. Section IV describes the geography of venture

capital-backed companies. Section V reviews the determinants of venture capital investment

success. Section VI proposes some implications of venture capital expansion for policymakers

and Section VII concludes the paper.

II. Data Sources

       We use the Pratt’s Guide to Private Equity and Venture Capital Sources to identify the

location of venture capital firm offices. The annually-updated Pratt’s Guide collects information



                                                                                                   8
about the capabilities, focus, and size of venture capital and buyout organizations throughout the

world. This information was collected by Venture Economics, formerly an independent research

firm and later a unit of Thomson, through a survey annually distributed to private equity firms.

We hand collect information from Pratt’s Guides released between 1974 and 2005 about the

office locations of venture capital firms. This information allows us to determine the location

and year of founding and closing of each venture capital firm’s main office and branch offices.

We only include offices in the United States because that is where the Pratt’s coverage is most

comprehensive.

       We collect each venture capital office’s zip code from Pratt’s Guides and it to a

Combined Statistical Area (CSA). In cases such as San Diego, where a city is not located in a

CSA, we assign venture capital offices in the city to the appropriate Metropolitan Statistical Area

(MSA). Our use of CSA as the unit of location is driven by the narrow definition of certain

MSAs. For example, the cities of Palo Alto/Menlo Park, Berkeley, and San Francisco, CA are

located in three different MSAs. On the east coast, New York City is located in a different MSA

from nearby cities such as Stamford and Greenwich, Connecticut, where New York area

investors often choose to base their operations. Therefore we use CSAs that appropriately assign

Palo Alto and San Francisco to one location and similarly assign New York and Greenwich in

one location.

       We gather information on venture capital financing activity from Thomson’s

VentureXpert (formerly Venture Economics) database. The database was started in 1977 and

has since been back-filled through the 1960s. It provides information about the dates of venture

financings, the investors involved in each financing round, the amounts invested in each round,

and the outcome of each venture capital-backed company in the database. We use these data to



                                                                                                   9
create our main outcome measure of venture capital investment success: whether each venture-

backed company went public through an IPO or has registered for an IPO. In addition to

information on financing rounds and outcomes of venture capital investments, the database also

provides information about the location of each portfolio company. As with the Pratt’s Guide

office location data, we assign portfolio companies to a locale at the CSA level and, in cases

where a portfolio company is located in an MSA that is not located in a CSA, at the MSA level.

For the purposes of this study, we restrict our analysis period to investments made between 1975

and 2005. We drop investments prior to 1975 due to data quality concerns discussed by

Gompers and Lerner (2004) and omit companies receiving initial investments after 2005 to

account for the typical start-up to exit maturation period of venture capital-backed companies.

       We merge the Pratt’s Guide and VentureXpert data and obtain investment information

for 2,039 of the 3,290 venture capital firms cataloged by Pratt’s. Conversely, we were able to

match 80% of VentureXpert investments to firms tracked by Pratt’s. 75% of all venture capital

firms identified by VentureXpert with at least 5 or more investments are matched to the Pratt’s

Guide location data. The remaining unmatched VentureXpert firms are mostly foreign venture

capital firms, corporate VCs, and banking institutions.

       Using venture capital office location information from the Pratt’s Guide merged with

investment and portfolio company information from the VentureXpert database, we are able to

generate variables indicating the location of the venture capital firm relative to the location of the

portfolio company it is investing in. For each portfolio company a venture capital invests in, we

use our merged data set to classify the deal as: 1) Main Office – portfolio company is located in

the same CSA as the investing venture capital firm’s main office (defined as the first office

opened by the investing venture capital firm. If the firm was established with multiple offices,



                                                                                                   10
the CSA in which the firm made the most investments in its first five years of existence is

classified as the main office); 2) Branch Office – portfolio company is located in the same CSA

as one of the investing venture capital firm’s branch offices (defined as any location in which the

firm has an office, other than the main office); 3) Outside – portfolio company is located in a

CSA in which the investing venture capital firm does not have its main office or a branch office.

This classification allows us to examine differences in outcomes based on the proximity of the

venture capital firm to a portfolio company, as well as differences in performance by office type.

       In addition to our venture capital data, we collect state-level information on

characteristics related to employment and innovation. Information about the level of educational

attainment in a state is from annual editions of the Statistical Abstract of the United States. Each

state’s Gross Product is taken from the Department of Commerce’s Bureau of Economic

Analysis. To measure the business environment of each state, we obtain information on state

marginal income tax rates and long-term capital gains tax rates from the National Bureau of

Economic Research’s TAXSIM model. Finally, we collect information about local innovation

and patenting rates from the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.



III. Geography of Venture Capital Firms

       Table I reports the location of venture capital firms by CSA across time. The three

centers of venture capital activity, San Francisco/San Jose, New York City, and Boston, are

home to more than half of all venture capital offices in all years reported. Over time, the three

venture capital centers have maintained their numerical advantage despite an approximately

three-fold increase in the number of venture capital firms and branch offices between 1985 and

2000. Also notable is the paucity of venture capital offices located in smaller CSAs. Less than a



                                                                                                    11
third of all venture capital main offices and branch offices are located outside of the top nine

CSAs. In contrast, approximately 80% of the working-age population lived outside of the top

nine CSAs in 2000. 4

        In Table II, we compare the lifespan of main offices and branch offices. We calculate a

simple measure of longevity, the number of years between the office’s opening and closing. In

cases where the office remains open through the end of our sample in 2005, we calculate the

number of years between the office opening and 2005. Since the data is right censored, more

recently opened offices will have lower life spans. Therefore we construct a second measure,

potential lifespan, in which we normalize the age of each office by dividing the age of the office

by the number of potential years the office could have been open. Potential years are defined as

the number of years between office opening and 2005. On average, a main office’s lifespan is

2.2 years greater than the lifespan of a branch office. This difference is statistically significant;

the result is similar when using the potential lifespan measure. The relatively longer longevity of

main offices is true in the venture capital centers as well, although branch offices located in the

venture capital centers have longer relative life spans than other branch offices.

        The finding that main offices are longer-lived than branch offices suggests that venture

capital firms are more likely to close branch offices. Venture capital offices in the venture

capital centers (main or branch) are longer-lived than offices in other locales. This longevity

may reflect differences in deal flow (supply of venture capital investments) between these

locations, or differences in preferences of investors (limited partners) to invest in funds with

offices in these cities. Other factors contributing to longevity may include issues we document




4
 Calculated using 2000 micro-level Census data from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) at
http://usa.ipums.org/usa/.

                                                                                                            12
in later sections: the concentration of portfolio companies located in the venture capital centers

and the outperformance of venture capital firms based in those areas.

       In Table III, we take a multivariate approach to analyzing the determinants of venture

capital firm location. We estimate a series of six models in which the dependent variables

measure the number of total, main, and branch venture capital offices in a CSA in a given year.

All regression models are estimated at the CSA-Year level and we restrict the analysis to CSAs

where at least one main or branch office existed between 1975 and 2005. In some CSA-Years,

the number of offices can equal zero. For example, this can occur in the case where a venture

firm opens an office in a remote area such as Sioux City, Iowa in 1995 and closes it in 2000.

Prior to 1995 and after 2000, the number of offices reported in Sioux City would equal zero.

       A key explanatory variable of interest is the success rate of all VCs in the CSA over the

past five years. This variable is constructed by calculating the percentage of all venture capital

investments in the CSA over the past five years that led to an Initial Public Offering. The results

are similar when this success is defined as the investment either leading to an Initial Public

Offering or a merger or acquisition. We also include controls for local characteristics which may

be associated with venture capital investments. These controls include the log gross state

product per capita, the state’s marginal income tax rate, and the state’s long-term capital gains

tax rate in the year prior to the investment. In order to capture an area’s potential for innovation,

we control for the percentage of population with a college degree in that CSA, as well as the log

number of patents per capita issued in the state in the previous year. We include year fixed

effects to control for changes in the supply of venture capital and investment opportunities.

Finally, all standard errors are robust and calculated after clustering at the CSA level.




                                                                                                     13
       The three principal findings of these regression models are as follows: 1) venture capital

offices are concentrated in locales where venture capital investments have previously been

successful; 2) regions with high concentrations of venture capital offices are in states with higher

levels of gross state product per capita; and 3) venture capital offices are concentrated in areas

with high levels of innovation as measured by the number of patents per capita issued in the

previous year. Focusing on the first column, where the dependent variable measures the log

number of total venture capital offices, moving from the 25th percentile of the regional success

rate for venture capital investments over the past five years to the 75th percentile of the regional

success rate increases the number of offices in a CSA by 2.3. Increasing log gross state product

per capita from the 25th percentile value to the 75th percentile value increases the number of

offices in a CSA by 4.1. Finally, with respect to innovation, a CSA in a state at the 75th

percentile of innovation as measured by patents per capita will have 1.2 more offices than a CSA

in a state at the 25th percentile level of innovation. Relative to an average of 11.5 venture capital

offices in a CSA-year, these factors are economically and statistically associated with the number

of venture capital offices in a CSA. The results for the remaining regression models, which

utilize dependent variables representing the log number of main offices and branch offices yield

similar results. These findings appear consistent with findings about the development of venture

capital ecosystems (Saxenian (1994)). Prior successes and innovation attract additional venture

capital to a region and aid in the development of a self-sustaining environment for entrepreneurs.

Similarly, as Gompers, Lerner, and Scharfstein (2005) show, the feedstock for future venture

capital-backed startups come from prior venture capital-backed companies.




                                                                                                     14
       The results also highlight the “catch 22” issue in venture capital branch offices. A high

level of existing venture capital activity and success induce entry into a market. Yet a nascent

startup market may find it difficult to attract venture capital investors.

       We next explore the determinants of each venture capital firm’s decision to expand by

opening a branch office. Branch offices are an interesting subset to consider, since they may be

more responsive to local conditions. Cities which are not venture capital centers may be

interested in encouraging branch offices, since branch locations benefit from the expertise and

connections of a strong head office. The dependent variable in these probit models is one in the

year that the venture capital firm opens an office in the CSA. In years prior to the opening of the

office the dependent variable is equal to zero. If the venture capital firm never opens an office in

the CSA, all of its Firm-CSA-Year observations will have the dependent variable equal to zero.

In order to reduce the choice set to a more likely subset of firm expansion areas, we only include

Firm-CSA-Year observations in regions in which the venture capital firm has at least one

investment in that CSA prior to the year in question. The firm will then have observations in the

CSA beginning in the year that it makes its initial investment until the earlier of the year it opens

an office in the CSA or 2005. This methodology results in over-sampling of larger firms and

firms with longer histories, since they may have invested in more regions or are in the sample for

a longer period. We include fixed effects at the VC firm level to control for any differences in

firms’ predisposition for expansion. Results are similar if we include all possible cities as

choices for firm expansion.

       Table IV presents summary statistics for the characteristics of venture firms for each

Firm-Year and Firm-CSA-Year analyzed. Branch office expansion is quite rare. In our sample,

firms open branch offices in CSAs where they have previously invested in only 0.4% of Firm-



                                                                                                   15
CSA-Years. Venture capital firms exhibit a strong local bias. We define local bias as the

percentage of a venture capital firm’s investments that are made in a CSA over the past five

years divided by the percentage of all venture capital investments that are made in the CSA over

the past five years. Average local bias is 5.79, implying that the share of investments in a

venture capital firm’s portfolio made in a given CSA over the past five years is nearly six times

greater than one would expect based on aggregate venture capital investment patterns. The

average five-year success rate of a venture capital firm in a CSA is 18.6%. On average, firms

have made 49 previous venture capital investments. Because there is a time trend and the

number of investments a venture capital firm makes will increase over the course of the firm’s

lifespan, we follow our previous work (Gompers, Kovner, Lerner and Scharfstein (2008)) and

calculate a measure of adjusted venture capital firm experience. This measure is equal to the log

of one plus the number of previous investments made by the venture capital firm minus the log

of one plus the number of prior investments the average venture capital investor has made as of

the year in question. The average adjusted experience of VCs in our sample is -0.44 (with one

observation per each year the firm was in existence), reflecting the relative inexperience and

short lifespan of the average firm.

       We test to see if a firm’s organizational structure affects the decision to expand to a new

geographic location. Our first measure of organizational structure is industry diversification.

We calculate a Herfindahl-Hirschman Index, using the nine major industries identified by

Gompers, Kovner, Lerner and Scharfstein (2008). The Herfindahl is equal to the sum of the

squares of the percentage of the firm’s investments over the previous five years in each of the

nine industry classifications. A firm with a Herfindahl value of 1 has invested in only one of the

industries over the past five years. The average Firm-Year Herfindahl is .44, implying that over



                                                                                                  16
the past five years the average firm made at least 46% of all its investments in a single industry.

Our second measure of organizational structure is size, as measured by the number of partners at

the firm. The average venture capital firm is small and employs 5.4 individuals; 3.4 of whom are

General Partners.

       Table V reports the results of estimating probit models of the determinants of opening a

venture capital branch office at the Firm-CSA-Year level. We examine the factors associated

with opening a branch office for 7,328 Firm-Years and 42,302 Firm-CSA-Years. Each

specification includes venture capital firm-year fixed effects. Because CSAs appear in the

regressions multiple times in each year, we calculate robust standard errors clustered by CSA.

The success rate for all VC investments in a CSA over the past five years is important to the

firm’s decision to open a branch office. Using the coefficients from specification 2, we find that

a 10% increase in the overall success rate of venture capital investments in a CSA increases the

likelihood of a new branch office in that region by approximately 35%. This implies that venture

capital firms are chasing the success they observe others experiencing in CSAs. Interestingly,

while overall industry success in the area is important, we do not find evidence that a venture

capital firm’s own success in a CSA over the past five years is associated with opening an office:

the firm’s own success rate in a CSA does not play a significant role in the decision to open a

branch office in the CSA. The results seem to indicate that the overall environment is what

attracts new offices, not the personal experience of a firm.

       Surprisingly, we find that experienced venture capital firms are less likely to open branch

offices. Moving from a firm at the 25th percentile of adjusted VC firm experience to a firm at the

75th percentile of adjusted VC firm experience actually decreases the likelihood of opening a

branch office in a year by 35%. This is initially puzzling, since the most experienced and



                                                                                                  17
successful firms likely have the easiest access to additional capital for expansion. Perhaps the

most successful firms are already seeing the most interesting investment opportunities, regardless

of the geographic region of the company. Even after controlling for experience, firms based in

the San Francisco/San Jose CSA are 50% less likely to open branch offices than are venture

capital firms based in other locales. Well-known San Francisco/San Jose firms with a single

U.S. office include Kleiner, Perkins, Sequoia Capital, Accel Partners, and U.S. Venture

Partners.5 Given the high concentration of portfolio companies in the San Francisco/San Jose

CSA we document in the following section, this result is not unexpected.



IV. Geography of Venture Capital-Backed Portfolio Companies

           Much like venture capital firms, venture capital-backed portfolio companies are heavily

concentrated in three cities. Table VI presents a distribution of the geography of portfolio

companies from our combined Pratt’s Guide/VentureXpert data set. As with venture capital

offices, approximately half of all venture capital-backed portfolio companies are located in San

Francisco/San Jose, New York, or Boston. 49% of all investments in venture capital-backed

companies (54% of VC-company observations) are made in companies located in these three

cities. Moving beyond the three central cities, 79% of all portfolio companies are located in the

top 12 CSAs and 81% of all venture capital investments are made in companies in the top 12

CSAs.

           We examine the location of portfolio companies in relation to the offices of their venture

capital investors. Of the 12,358 investments in the sample that involve a venture capital investor

located in the same CSA, 80% of these are in one of the three venture capital centers. More than

60% of San Francisco/San Jose companies have their venture capital investor located in their
5
    Many leading firms, however, have opened overseas offices or established affiliate relationships in recent years.

                                                                                                                        18
region, while less than 15% of companies headquartered in Philadelphia can say the same.

Overall, most investments (57%) are made by venture capital firms outside of their home CSA.

Despite the importance of monitoring in venture capital, many venture capitalists do invest

outside of their home region. San Francisco/San Jose and New York are the only two CSAs in

which a majority of the venture capital-backed companies were investments made by local

venture capitalists (main or branch).

       In Table VII, we explore the determinants of the number of new venture capital financed

companies in each CSA year. We include “new” companies only once, in the year in which we

observe the first investment by any venture capital firm in VentureXpert. We exclude CSAs in

which no venture capital investment has ever been observed. Similar to Table III, these models

are estimated at the CSA-Year level, include year fixed effects, and report robust standard errors

are calculated after clustering for CSA. On average, 4.2 portfolio companies are formed in a

given CSA-Year. In the third regression column, we estimate that the number of venture capital

firms in a CSA is positively associated with the number of venture capital-backed companies.

Moving from the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile of venture capital offices in a CSA

increases the number of venture capital-backed companies formed annually by 1.8 companies.

This result indicates that increasing the number of venture capital firms in a CSA, and hence the

availability of capital in a CSA, should be associated with an increase in the number of

innovative startup companies in the CSA that are venture-capital backed. Interestingly, we also

predict that five additional venture capital-backed portfolio companies will be formed in San

Francisco/San Jose versus another CSA that shares the other observed features. All else equal,

venture capital firms still invest in a greater number of San Francisco/San Jose portfolio

companies than in other CSAs. Finally, we observe that more venture capital-backed companies



                                                                                                 19
are formed in CSAs with greater levels of past success. Moving from a CSA at the 25th percentile

of the previous success rate to a CSA at the 75th percentile previous success rate increases the

number of venture capital-backed companies formed by 0.4 companies. These results support

the findings of Gompers, Lerner, and Scharfstein (2005), who find that regions with previously

successful venture capital-backed companies that went public are more likely to spawn

additional venture capital-backed companies.



V. Determinants of Venture Capital Investment Success

       It is natural to wonder whether there are any performance consequences of the

geographic concentration we observe. In essence, if there is a venture funding gap in other

cities, i.e., if supply of good ideas exceeds the availability of capital, remote venture capital

locations may have greater success rates than firms in the three leading venture capital markets.

We next compare the performance of firms based in and outside of the venture capital centers.

Table VIII compares the mean success rates of venture capital center-based firms and firms

based outside of those centers. Overall, firms based in the venture capital centers have an

average success rate that is 4.4% higher than venture-backed firms based outside those centers.

Central VC firms outperform other VC firms, whether we examine main office, branch office, or

outside investments. These differences are all statistically significant at the 1% level. VC firms

from the venture capital center cities appear to outperform, when restricting our sample to

investments made inside the venture capital center cities (17.3% vs. 14.2%) or to those outside of

the venture capital center cities (19.0% vs. 13.1%). This outperformance also persists when we

restrict the sample to early-stage (15.1% vs. 11.3%) or late-stage deals (20.7% vs. 15.7%).

These bi-variate analyses provide strong suggestive evidence that VC firms from the venture



                                                                                                    20
capital center cities outperform VC firms based outside of the central cities. To confirm these

results, we analyze the determinants of success using a multivariate approach.

       Table IX reports summary statistics for variables used in the multivariate analyses of the

determinants of venture capital investment success. 66.4% of the investments in the sample are

made by VC firms based in one of the three venture capital center cities. The overall investment

success rate is 16.4%. Interestingly, investments in the main office region appear to

underperform relative to other geographies. Average success rates for investments in the main

office regions are 14.5%, while the branch office and outside office investment success rates are

both approximately 17%, a difference that is statistically significant at the 1% level. Of course,

our success measure is relatively blunt, and does not distinguish between home runs and singles

(investments that return ten times vs. two times invested capital). Of course venture capital firm

quality may vary and be associated with geography and outcomes. We proxy for quality with

experience: the average adjusted VC firm experience in the sample is 0.48, indicating that the

average VC making an investment is more experienced than the average VC firm in that year.

This is not unexpected because more successful VC firms tend to make more investments.

Another important variable is the stage of the company at the time of investment. In terms of

company stage at financing, more than half (51%) of venture capital investments in the sample

are made in the initial round of investment. A greater proportion of main office investments

(56.6%) are made in the initial round versus 44.5% of branch office investments and 47.9% of

outside investments. Finally, industries may have different geographic patterns and success

rates. Venture capital investments in the sample are heavily concentrated in three industries:

computers and internet (45.3%), biotech and healthcare (21.3%), and communications (17.6%).




                                                                                                  21
       Table X uses a multivariate approach to analyze the factors associated with successful

venture capital investments. All regression models control for the quality of the venture capital

firm (using adjusted experience), year of investment, the round of investment, the industry of the

portfolio company, and the location of the portfolio company. The first column reports a key

finding of the paper. The coefficient on the dummy variable indicating that the VC firm is based

in one of the three venture capital centers (CENTRAL), which is statistically significant, indicates

that venture capital firms based in the venture capital centers have a 3.1% higher probability of

succeeding. Controlling for location, branch office investments and outside investments have an

approximately 2.0% higher probability of success than main office investments.

       To identify the source of excess performance of venture capital firms based in the venture

capital centers, we add interactions between CENTRAL and the branch office investment and

outside investment dummy variables in the third column of Table X. After adding these

interaction variables, the coefficient on CENTRAL falls from 0.031 to 0.010 and is no longer

statistically different from zero. As expected, venture capital firm experience continues to have a

positive and statistically significant association with investment success. At the means of the

other variables, venture capital firms at the 25th percentile of adjusted VC firm experience have a

predicted success rate of 12.0%, versus a predicted success rate of 13.4% for firms at the 75th

percentile of adjusted VC firm experience. However, the interaction of CENTRAL and adjusted

VC firm experience is not statistically different than zero. This indicates that firm experience is

not mediated through the firm being located in a venture capital center.

       The coefficient on the interaction of CENTRAL and outside investment is 0.029 and

statistically significant at the one percent level. Investments made by venture capital firms from

the venture capital centers in portfolio companies located in CSAs not local to the venture capital



                                                                                                    22
firm’s offices have a 2.9% higher probability of succeeding. The coefficient on the interaction of

CENTRAL and branch investment is 0.021, not statistically different than zero. The drop in

value of the coefficient on CENTRAL and the statistical significance of the interaction between

CENTRAL and outside investment provide evidence that the outperformance of venture capital

firms based in the venture capital centers can be attributed to their outsized performance in

investments made outside of the venture capital firms’ office locations.

       In the fourth column, we present evidence that venture capital firms may lower the

threshold for investment quality in areas where they invest multiple times. The coefficient on the

dummy variable indicating that the venture capital firm has made one or more investments in the

CSA in the two years before or after the date of investment is -0.021. When a VC firm has

recently invested or will invest in the near future, its investments have a 2.1% lower probability

of success. Perhaps venture capital firms lower the bar on a new investment if they have a lower

marginal cost of visiting the company. A general partner may be willing to make an investment

in a company with less promising prospects than the average company she invests in if another

investment already takes her to the CSA on a regular basis.

       Finally, we test to see if a local co-investor matters. If non-local investors can delegate

monitoring to a local investor, this should mitigate the estimated effect of distance. The fifth

specification of Table X includes a dummy variable indicating if there are one or more local

investors in the syndicate. The coefficient on this dummy variable is not statistically different

from zero, and the coefficient on the interaction of CENTRAL and outside investment remains of

the same magnitude. This result suggests that local co-investors may not be adequate

monitoring substitutes for venture capital center-based VC investors. It is also evidence that




                                                                                                     23
increasing the number of local VCs may not necessarily impact the decision of VCs in venture

capital centers to invest in a region.

        Another concern with the analysis was that we looked only at whether the investments

were successful, not how successful they were. For a subset of 5,109 investments for which we

were able to find valuation information from SDC or Factset, we looked at the scale of

investment success. We calculate exit multiples on venture capital investments as the exit value

of the portfolio company divided by paid-in capital. While branch office investments and

outside investments are more likely to IPO, exit multiples are similar across main office

investments, branch office investments, and outside investments.

        In unreported specifications, we tested to see if the number of airplane departures from

the location of a portfolio company to venture capital centers is associated with success, but did

not find any relationship. We also tested to see if the number of airplane departures between the

location of the venture capital firm investor and the location of the portfolio company but found

no relationship. This may be because airplane departures are not a good proxy for personal costs

of venture capitalist travel.

        To the extent that location is important because venture capital firms are actively

monitoring the businesses they invest in, we would expect location to be particularly important

for early-stage businesses. Table XI restricts our regression models to include only early-stage

investments, with of course a reduced sample size. The control variables in Table XI are

identical to the controls in Table X, with the exception that we omit investment round controls

from the specifications in Table XI. In the first column, we again find that venture capital firms

from the three leading venture cities outperform venture capital firms based in other locales. The

coefficient on CENTRAL, which is statistically significant, is 0.014, indicating that venture



                                                                                                   24
capital firms based in the central cities have a 1.4% higher probability of succeeding than venture

capital firms based outside of the three central cities. This difference in probability of success

between these and other firms is lower than the difference for the entire sample, but still

represents a significant level of outperformance. Furthermore, we find that branch office

investments have a 2.5% higher probability of success versus main office investments and

outside investments have a 1.5% higher probability of success versus main office investments.

       Similar to the specifications in Table X, we add interactions between CENTRAL and

branch investment and CENTRAL and outside investment in the third column of Table XI and

obtain similar results to those shown in Table X. In column four, we find that the coefficient on

the dummy variable indicating that the venture capital firm has made one or more investments in

the CSA in the two years before or after the date of investment is also similar. In column five,

we continue to estimate no impact of a local co-investor. Thus, even in early-stage investments,

we find evidence of lower success rates in regions where VCs are located and in regions where

VCs make multiple investments.

       The results presented in Tables X and XI are robust to a number of alternative

specifications, including broadening the definition of success to include the investment being

merged or acquired in addition to an initial public offering, excluding investments made during

the years of the technology bubble (1998-2000) and including CSA fixed effects. The findings

are also similar if estimated only using the first fifteen investments of a venture capital

organization, suggesting that the results are not merely artifacts of past success. They are also

robust to excluding investments made during 1999 and 2000, the years most closely associated

with the technology bubble.




                                                                                                     25
VI. Implications

       The concentration of venture capital firms that we document may be a rational allocation

of scarce resources. Many venture capital investments are in industries where geographically

localized knowledge spillovers are likely to be important. Accordingly, venture capital firms

locate to maximize benefits from these spillovers. A virtuous cycle of co-location is maintained

as entrepreneurs choose to locate their businesses closer to funding sources, pools of talented

employees, and academic researchers. The higher success rate for companies based in the

venture capital centers suggests that these may be optimal geographies for founding new

venture-backed businesses.

       However, this allocation of resources may not be desirable from the perspective of local

governments and other cities that seek local employment growth and consequent spillovers. Our

results on the determinants of branch office openings suggest that anything that policy makers do

that contributes to an increase in the number of successful venture-backed investments in a

region will also increase the probability of a venture branch office opening in that region. If

local governments want to encourage venture capital investing, our results suggest that they

should consider supporting the efforts of funds such as Village Ventures, which is based in

Williamstown, Massachusetts and focuses on new ventures outside of the leading venture areas,

or Draper Fisher Jurvetson, which has a network of smaller affiliated firms located in diverse

geographies such as Houston, Texas and Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

       Our results that non-local investments made by firms based in the venture capital center

cities outperform suggest that venture capital groups based in these cities may be focusing on

“home runs” when doing non-local deals. This may be because they have less access to

proprietary deal flow and there may be higher personal costs associated with monitoring these



                                                                                                  26
companies. Since experienced venture capital firms achieve consistently higher success rates in

these investments, if policy makers outside of the central cities wish to encourage development,

they may wish to provide incentives for more experienced firms to invest outside of their home

areas. Finally, since we find evidence that a venture capital firm’s existing investments in a

region affect expected success on other deals in that region, bringing first-time venture capital

investors to a region may be more effective than subsidizing existing investors.



VII. Conclusion

           We document the geographic concentration of venture capital firms in three \areas, San

Francisco, New York, and Boston. We find the success rate of venture capital investments in a

region is an important determinant of venture capital firms’ decisions to open new branches.

While venture capital firms located in these three cities outperform, that outperformance is not

driven by local investments. Interestingly, some of the performance disparity between local and

non-local investments disappears when the venture firm does more than one investment in a

region, suggesting that as the marginal monitoring cost falls, venture capital firms may reduce

their expected success rate for investment in a distant geography. Our findings are informative

both to researchers in economic geography, and to policy makers who seek to attract venture

capital.




                                                                                                    27
References
Agrawal, Ajay, Devesh Kapur, John McHale, 2008, How Do Spatial and Social Proximity
Influence Knowledge Flows? Evidence from Patent Data, Journal of Urban Economics 64, 258-
269
Barry, Christopher, Chris Muscarella, John Peavy, and Michael Vetsuypens, 1990, The Role of
Venture Capital in the Creation of Public Companies: Evidence from the Going-Public Process,
Journal of Financial Economics 27, 447-72.
Bengtsson, Ola and S. Abraham Ravid, 2009, The Importance of Geographical Location and
Distance on Venture Capital Contracts, working paper. Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1331574.

Brav, Alon and Paul A. Gompers, 1997, Myth or Reality? The Long-Run Underperformance of
Initial Public Offerings: Evidence from Venture and Nonventure Capital-Backed Companies,
Journal of Finance 52, 1791-1821.

Christoffersen, Susan E.K., and Sergei Sarkissian, 2009, City Size and Fund Performance,
Journal of Financial Economics 92, 252-275.

Duranton, Gilles and Diego Puga, 2001, Nursery Cities: Urban Diversity, Process Innovation,
and the Life Cycle of Products, American Economic Review 91, 1454-1477

Engardio, Pete, 2009, Rebuilding America’s Job Machine, Business Week, February 9, 2009.

Ellison, Glenn and Edward L. Glaeser, 1997, Geographic Concentration in U.S. Manufacturing
Industries: A Dartboard Approach, Journal of Political Economy 105, 889-927.

Fallick, Bruce, Charles A. Fleischman, and James B. Rebitzer, 2006, Job-Hopping in Silicon
Valley: Some Evidence Concerning the Microfoundations of a High-Technology Cluster, Review
of Economics and Statistics 88, 472-481.

Freedman, Matthew L., 2008, Job Hopping, Earnings Dynamics, and Industrial Agglomeration
in the Software Publishing Industry, Journal of Urban Economics 64, 590-600.

Giannetti, Marissunta, and Andrei Simonov, 2008, Social Interactions and Entrepreneurial
Activity, working paper. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=370180.

Gompers, Paul A., and Josh Lerner, 2001, The Money of Invention, Boston: Harvard Business
School Press.

Gompers, Paul A., and Josh Lerner, 2004, The Venture Capital Cycle, 2nd edition, Cambridge:
MIT Press.

Gompers, Paul, Josh Lerner, and David Scharfstein, 2005, Entrepreneurial Spawning: Public
Corporations and the Genesis of New Ventures, 1986 to 1999, Journal of Finance 60, 577-614.

                                                                                              28
Hellmann, Thomas, and Manju Puri, 2000, The Interaction between Product Market and
Financing Strategy: The Role of Venture Capital Review of Financial Studies 13, 959-984.

Hellmann, Thomas, and Manju Puri, 2002, Venture Capital and the Professionalization of Start-
Up Firms: Empirical Evidence, Journal of Finance 57, 169-97.

Hong, Harrison, Jeffrey D. Kubik, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2005, Thy Neighbor’s
Portfolio: Word-of-Mouth Effects in the Holdings and Trades of Money
Managers, Journal of Finance 60, 2801-2824.

Kaplan, Steven N. and Per Strömberg, 2003, Financial Contracting Theory Meets the Real
World: Evidence from Venture Capital Contracts, Review of Economic Studies 70, 1-35.

Klepper, Steven, and Sally Sleeper, 2005, Entry by Spinoffs, Management Science 51, 1291-
1306.

Krugman, Paul, 1991, Geography and Trade. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Kortum, Samuel, and Josh Lerner, 2000, Assessing the Contribution of Venture Capital to
Innovation, RAND Journal of Economics 31, 674-692.

Lerner, Josh, 1995, Venture Capitalists and the Oversight of Private Firms, Journal of Finance
50, 301-18.

Marshall, Alfred, 1920, Principles of Economics: An Introductory Volume. 8th ed. London:
Macmillan.

Michelacci, Claudio, and Olmo Silva, 2007, Why So Many Local Entrepreneurs? Review of
Economics and Statistics 89, 615-633.

Ottaviano, Gianmarco, and Jacques-François Thisse, 2004, Agglomeration and Economic
Geography, in Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics 4, edited by J. Vernon Henderson
and Jacques-François Thisse. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Porter, Michael E., 1990, The Competitive Advantage of Nations. New York: Free Press.

Puri, Manju, and Rebecca Zarutskie, 2008, On the Lifecycle Dynamics of Venture-Capital- and
Non-Venture Capital- Financed Firms, EFA 2007 Ljubljana Meetings Paper; US Census Bureau
Center for Economic Studies Paper No. CES-WP-08-13. Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=967841.

Ruggles, Steven, Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken, Patricia
Kelly Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander. 2008. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series:
Version 4.0 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center.



                                                                                                 29
Saxenian, Annalee, 1994, Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and
Route 128, Cambridge, MA, and London: Harvard University Press.

Sorenson, Olav, and Pino Audia, 2000, The Social Structure of Entrepreneurial Activity:
Geographic Concentration of Footwear Production in the United States. 1940-1989, The
American Journal of Sociology 106, 424-62.

Sorenson, Olav and Toby Stuart, 2001, Syndication Networks and the Spatial
Distribution of Venture Capital Investments, American Journal of Sociology 106, 1546–88.

Venture Impact: The Economic Importance of Venture Capital Backed Companies to the US
Economy, 2007, NVCA mimeo, (available at http://www.nvca.org/)

Zook, Matthew, 2002, Grounded Capital: Venture Financing and the Geography of the Internet
Industry, 1994-2000, Journal of Economic Geography 2, 151-177.

Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby, and Marilynn B. Brewer, 1998, Intellectual Human Capital
and the Birth of U.S. Biotechnology Enterprises, American Economic Review 88, 290-306.




                                                                                             30
 Table I. Geography of Venture Capital Firm Offices
                                                                                            Year                                            Share of Offices
 CSA
                                                                           1985     1990     1995    2000     2005           1985       1990        1995        2000       2005
 San Jose-San Francisco, CA - Main Offices                                    65      78       97     234      230         15.0%       15.1%      15.9%        17.6%     21.6%
 San Jose-San Francisco, CA - Branch Offices                                  17      32       36      44       33          4.0%        5.9%       6.7%         6.3%      2.8%
 New York, NY - Main Offices                                                  91      96       96     205      196         21.4%       16.9%      15.7%        16.1%     18.4%
 New York, NY - Branch Offices                                                 4       9       13      15       14          0.4%        1.1%       1.7%         1.3%      1.2%
 Boston, MA - Main Offices                                                    44      54       52      93       83         10.1%       10.1%       9.3%         8.6%      7.4%
 Boston, MA - Branch Offices                                                   5      11       13      15       10          0.9%        1.6%       2.1%         2.0%      1.1%
 Washington, DC - Main Offices                                                12      16       17      54       51          3.1%        3.0%       2.4%         2.9%      4.8%
 Washington, DC - Branch Offices                                               0       5        5      13        7          0.0%        0.7%       0.7%         1.3%      0.5%
 Chicago, IL - Main Offices                                                   13      23       26      41       35          2.9%        3.9%       4.5%         4.6%      3.3%
 Chicago, IL - Branch Offices                                                  1       4        6       7        2          0.2%        0.7%       1.2%         0.9%      0.2%
 Dallas, TX - Main Offices                                                    11       8       12      27       34          4.8%        4.6%       2.8%         3.0%      3.1%
 Dallas, TX - Branch Offices                                                   6       7        5       5        5          0.2%        1.2%       1.2%         1.2%      0.3%
 Los Angeles, CA - Main Offices                                               21      23       13      37       34          2.4%        1.2%       1.7%         1.3%      2.8%
 Los Angeles, CA - Branch Offices                                              1       7        6       8        3          1.1%        1.1%       0.7%         0.3%      0.4%
 Seattle, WA - Main Offices                                                    6       8        9      29       28          1.3%        1.4%       1.2%         1.3%      2.3%
 Seattle, WA - Branch Offices                                                  1       4        5       1        1          0.2%        0.7%       0.7%         0.0%      0.1%
 Atlanta, GA - Main Offices                                                    7      12       10      23       23          1.8%        1.8%       1.6%         1.4%      2.0%
 Atlanta, GA - Branch Offices                                                  1       3        4       5        0          0.0%        0.5%       0.5%         0.3%      0.3%
 Other - Main Offices                                                        115     138      141     298      273         27.1%       25.2%      23.0%        22.9%     23.8%
 Other - Branch Offices                                                       16      20       34      52       47          3.1%        3.2%       6.2%         6.8%      3.6%
 Total Main Offices                                                          385     456      473    1041      987         88.1%       81.7%      78.8%        86.3%     89.0%
 Total Branch Offices                                                         52     102      127     165      122         11.9%       18.3%      21.2%        13.7%     11.0%

Sample consists of 2,039 unique venture capital firms in existence between 1975 and 2005. Geographic locations are assigned at the Combined Statistical Area (CSA) level. In
cases where a city is not located in a CSA, we assign venture capital offices in the city to the appropriate Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA). Main Offices are defined as the first
office opened by the investing venture capital firm. If the firm was established with multiple offices, the CSA in which the firm made the most investments in its first five years of
existence is classified as the main office. Branch Offices are defined as any location in which the firm has an office, other than the main office. Share of offices is defined as the
percentage of total venture capital offices located in the CSA.




                                                                                                                                                                                    31
 Table II. Venture Capital Firm Office Lifespans
                                                       Average Lifespan                          Average Lifespan                           Number
                                                           (Years)                             (% of Potential Years)
                                                                    Statistical                                Statistical
 CSA                                         Main      Branch       Difference            Main   Branch        Difference              Main      Branch
 San Francisco/San Jose, CA                   7.95       7.08                             0.805      0.598            ***               400        93
 New York, NY                                 7.73       6.44                             0.684      0.622                              417        32
 Boston, MA                                   8.05       5.10            **               0.681      0.506            **                180        42
 All venture capital centers                  7.88       6.46            ***              0.732      0.580            ***               997        167
 All other cities                             6.87       4.35            ***              0.671      0.408            ***              1,042       267
 Total                                        7.36       5.16            ***              0.701      0.473            ***              2,039       434

Sample consists of 2,039 unique venture capital firms in existence between 1975 and 2005. Lifespan is defined as the number of years between the office
opening and closing. In cases where the office remains open through the end of our sample in 2005, we calculate the number of years between the office opening
and 2005. Potential lifespan is equal to lifespan divided by the number of potential years the office could have been open. Potential years are defined as the
number of years between office opening and 2005. Geographic locations are assigned at the Combined Statistical Area (CSA) level. In cases where a city is not
located in a CSA, we assign venture capital offices in the city to the appropriate Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA). Main Offices are defined as the first office
opened by the investing venture capital firm. If the firm was established with multiple offices, the CSA in which the firm made the most investments in its first
five years of existence is classified as the main office. Branch Offices are defined as any location in which the firm has an office, other than the main office.
Venture capital centers are defined as San Francisco/San Jose, New York, and Boston.

There also exist statistically significant differences at the 1% level in lifespan and potential lifespan between main offices located inside and outside the elite
cities and between branch offices located inside and outside the venture capital centers.

***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.




                                                                                                                                                                      32
 Table III. Factors Associated with the Geographic Concentration of Venture Capital Firm Offices
                                        Log Number of Offices in            Log Number of Main              Log Number of Branch
                                                year                           Offices in year                  Offices in year
                                                      OLS                             OLS                              OLS
                                             [1]               [2]           [3]               [4]             [5]              [6]
 Success rate of all VCs in CSA,            3.117             3.108         1.626             1.618           0.539             0.530
 past five years                          [5.86]***         [5.86]***     [5.17]***         [5.16]***      [3.89]***         [3.88]***
                                            1.461             1.455         0.727             0.724           0.204             0.200
 Log GDP per Capita
                                          [3.30]***         [3.22]***      [2.57]**          [2.48]**        [1.74]*           [1.66]*
 Percent of population with college         0.017             0.018         0.021             0.022           0.014             0.015
 degree or higher                           [0.62]            [0.66]        [1.49]            [1.55]        [2.06]**          [2.22]**
                                            0.347             0.349         0.169             0.172           0.055             0.058
 Log patents per capita
                                          [2.64]***         [2.63]***      [2.25]**          [2.25]**        [1.74]*           [1.76]*
 State long-term capital gains tax          0.331                           0.599                             0.618
 rate                                       [0.11]                          [0.34]                            [0.65]
                                                             -0.275                          0.058                            0.002
 State income tax rate
                                                             [0.10]                          [0.04]                           [0.00]
 Includes year dummies                       Yes               Yes           Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
 Observations                               2,256             2,256         2,256            2,256           2,256            2,256
 R-squared                                   0.26              0.26         0.28              0.28           0.13              0.12

Sample consists of 2,256 CSA-Year observations for 197 CSAs where at least one venture capital office existed between 1975 and 2005. The dependent variable
is the natural logarithm of the number of venture capital offices plus one in the CSA-Year in columns 1 and 2, the natural logarithm of the number of main
offices plus one in the CSA-Year in columns 3 and 4, and the natural logarithm of the number of branch offices plus one in the CSA-Year in columns 5 and 6.
Geographic locations are assigned at the Combined Statistical Area (CSA) level. In cases where a city is not located in a CSA, we assign venture capital offices
in the city to the appropriate Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA). Main Offices are defined as the first office opened by the investing venture capital firm. If
the firm was established with multiple offices, the CSA in which the firm made the most investments in its first five years of existence is classified as the main
office. Branch Offices are defined as any location in which the firm has an office, other than the main office. Success rate of all VCs in CSA, past five years
measures the percentage of all venture capital investments in the CSA over the past five years that led to an Initial Public Offering. Log GSP per Capita is the
natural logarithm of the state’s gross product per capita plus one in the previous year. Percent of population with college degree or higher is the share of the
state population that has graduated from college. Log patents per capita is the number of patents per capita plus one issued in the state in the previous year.
State long-term capital gains tax rate and state income tax rate are average state marginal tax rates in the previous year.

Standard errors are clustered at the CSA-level. Robust t-statistics are in parentheses below coefficient estimates.

***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.



                                                                                                                                                               33
 Table IV. Summary Statistics for Factors Associated with the Venture Capital Firm Branch Office Opening Decision
 Measure                                               Observations       Mean         S.D.         P25     Median                          P75            P90    Unit of observation
 Firm-Year-CSA controls
     Opened a branch office in CSA                                  42,032        0.0042       0.0648        0.0000        0.0000        0.0000         0.0000      Firm-Year-CSA
     Local bias                                                     42,032        5.7907      18.5012        0.9783        1.9320        4.4846        11.0720      Firm-Year-CSA
     Percentage of firm's deals in CSA, past five years             42,032        0.0894       0.1076        0.0303        0.0556        0.1034         0.2000      Firm-Year-CSA
     Percentage of all deals in CSA, past five years                42,032        0.0526       0.0718        0.0128        0.0259        0.0538         0.1175      Firm-Year-CSA
     VC's success rate in CSA, past five years                      42,032        0.1857       0.0760        0.0000        0.0000        0.2500         1.0000      Firm-Year-CSA
     Success rate of all VCs in CSA, past five years                42,032        0.1452       0.0760        0.0825        0.1307        0.2000         0.2500      Firm-Year-CSA
 Firm-Year controls
     VC firm experience                                              7,328      48.7690       68.6850       13.0000       25.0000       59.0000       113.0000         Firm-Year
     Adjusted VC firm experience                                     7,328      -0.4379        1.0611       -1.1540       -0.4892        0.3241         0.9383         Firm-Year
     Firm's industry diversification, past five years                7,328       0.4376        0.2172        0.2800        0.3750        0.5372         0.7715         Firm-Year
     Size of firm, prior year                                        7,328       5.4349        4.9258        3.0000        4.0000        7.0000        10.0000         Firm-Year
     Size of firm, number of partners, prior year                    7,328       3.4425        3.6964        1.0000        3.0000        4.0000         7.0000         Firm-Year
     Firm based in San Francisco/Silicon Valley                      7,328       0.2403        0.4273        0.0000        0.0000        0.0000         1.0000         Firm-Year
     Firm based in Boston                                            7,328       0.1288        0.3350        0.0000        0.0000        0.0000         1.0000         Firm-Year
     Firm based in New York City                                     7,328       0.0797        0.2708        0.0000        0.0000        0.0000         0.0000         Firm-Year

Sample consists of 42,032 Firm-Year-CSA observations for 7,328 Firm-Years between 1975 and 2005. Only Firm-CSA-Year observations in regions in which a venture capital
firm has at least one investment in that CSA prior to the year in question are included in the sample. Geographic locations are assigned at the Combined Statistical Area (CSA)
level. In cases where a city is not located in a CSA, we assign venture capital offices in the city to the appropriate Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA). Opened an office in CSA
is an indicator variable that takes on the value of one if the venture capital firm opened a branch office in the CSA-Year and zero otherwise. Local bias is the percentage of a
venture capital firm’s investments that were made in a CSA over the past five years divided by the percentage of all venture capital investments that were made in the CSA over
the past five years. Percentage of firm’s deals in CSA, past five years measures the percentage of the venture capital firm’s investments that were made in the CSA over the past
five years. Percentage of all deals in CSA, past five years measures the percentage of all venture capital investments that were made in the CSA over the past five years. VC’s
success rate in CSA, past five years measures the percentage of venture capital firm’s investments in the CSA over the past five years that led to an Initial Public Offering. Success
rate of all VCs in CSA, past five years measures the percentage of all venture capital investments in the CSA over the past five years that led to an Initial Public Offering. VC firm
experience measures the number of prior investments the venture capital firm has made. Adjusted VC firm experience is equal to the log of one plus the number of previous
investments made by the venture capital firm minus the log of one plus the number of prior investments the average venture capital investor has made as of the year in question.
Firm’s industry diversification is a Herfindahl-Hirschman index equal to the sum of the squares of the percentage of the firm’s investments over the previous five years in each of
nine industry classifications identified by Gompers, Kovner, Lerner and Scharfstein (2008). Size of firm, prior year is defined as the number of individuals working at the venture
capital firm in the previous year. Size of firm, number of partners, prior year reports the number of partners at the venture capital firm in the previous year. Firm based in San
Francisco/Silicon Valley, Boston, and New York City variables are indicator variables that take on the value of one if the venture capital firm is based in the named city and zero
otherwise.

                                                                                                                                                                                   34
 Table V. Factors Associated with the Venture Capital Firm Branch Office Opening Decision
                                                                   Opened an office in CSA
                                                                             Probit
                                                            [1]         [2]            [3]                    [4]
 Firm's industry diversification, past five years        -0.0008     -0.0002        -0.0023                -0.0016
                                                          [0.50]      [0.14]         [1.43]                 [0.24]
 Size of firm, prior year                                -0.0001     -0.0001         0.0000                0.0000
                                                          [1.29]      [1.15]         [0.33]                 [0.14]
 Local bias                                               0.0000      0.0000         0.0000                0.0000
                                                        [4.16]***   [4.00]***     [3.82]***               [3.77]***
 VC's success rate in CSA, past five years                0.0001      0.0002         0.0002                0.0002
                                                          [0.10]      [0.18]         [0.20]                 [0.14]
 Success rate of all VCs in CSA, past five years          0.0152      0.0148         0.0150                0.0146
                                                        [3.93]***   [3.96]***     [4.01]***               [3.97]***
 Firm based in San Francisco/Silicon Valley                          -0.0025                               -0.0021
                                                                    [4.05]***                             [3.27]***
 Firm based in Boston                                                 0.0002                               0.0004
                                                                      [0.22]                                [0.46]
 Firm based in New York City                                         -0.0004                               -0.0001
                                                                      [0.53]                                [1.02]
 Adjusted VC firm experience                                                        -0.0012                -0.0010
                                                                                  [3.73]***               [3.11]***
 Firm-Year Fixed Effects                                   Yes         Yes            Yes                    Yes
 Observations                                             42,032      42,032         42,032                42,032

Sample consists of 42,032 Firm-Year-CSA observations for 7,328 Firm-Years between 1975 and 2005. The
dependent variable is an indicator variable that takes on the value of one if the venture capital firm opened a branch
office in the CSA-Year and zero otherwise. Only Firm-CSA-Year observations in regions in which a venture capital
firm has at least one investment in that CSA prior to the year in question are included in the sample. Geographic
locations are assigned at the Combined Statistical Area (CSA) level. In cases where a city is not located in a CSA,
we assign venture capital offices in the city to the appropriate Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA). Firm’s industry
diversification is a Herfindahl-Hirschman index equal to the sum of the squares of the percentage of the firm’s
investments over the previous five years in each of nine industry classifications identified by Gompers, Kovner,
Lerner and Scharfstein (2008). Size of firm, prior year is defined as the number of individuals working at the
venture capital firm in the previous year. Local bias is the percentage of a venture capital firm’s investments that
are made in a CSA over the past five years divided by the percentage of all venture capital investments that are made
in the CSA over the past five years. VC’s success rate in CSA, past five years measures the percentage of venture
capital firm’s investments in the CSA over the past five years that led to an Initial Public Offering. Success rate of
all VCs in CSA, past five years measures the percentage of all venture capital investments in the CSA over the past
five years that led to an Initial Public Offering. Firm based in San Francisco/Silicon Valley, Boston, and New York
City variables are indicator variables that take on the value of one if the venture capital firm is based in the named
city and zero otherwise. Adjusted VC firm experience is equal to the log of one plus the number of previous
investments made by the venture capital firm minus the log of one plus the number of prior investments the average
venture capital investor has made as of the year in question.

Standard errors are clustered at the CSA-level. Robust z-statistics are in parentheses below coefficient estimates.

***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.




                                                                                                                      35
 Table VI. Geography of Venture Capital-Backed Portfolio Companies
                                     Portfolio Company               Main Office                Branch Office             Outside Investment          Share of Investments in CSA
                                          Location               Investment Location         Investment Location               Location
                                                  % Share                     % Share                      % Share                     % Share          Main      Branch
 CSA                                  Number      of Total        Number      of Total         Number      of Total        Number      of Total         Office     Office     Outside
 San Jose-San Francisco, CA             4,063        29.01           5,462       53.91            1,584       71.13           2,612       16.25          56.55      16.40       27.04
 Boston, MA                             1,634        11.67           1,511       14.91              288       12.93           1,770       11.01          42.34       8.07       49.59
 New York, NY                           1,224         8.74           1,012        9.99               50        2.25           1,049        6.53          47.94       2.37       49.69
 Los Angeles, CA                          851         6.08             184        1.82               39        1.75           1,319        8.20          11.93       2.53       85.54
 Washington, DC                           584         4.17             214        2.11               65        2.92             742        4.62          20.96       6.37       72.67
 San Diego, CA                            494         3.53              77        0.76               43        1.93           1,028        6.39           6.71       3.75       89.55
 Dallas, TX                               411         2.93             129        1.27               70        3.14             558        3.47          17.04       9.25       73.71
 Seattle, WA                              383         2.73             138        1.36                2        0.09             653        4.06          17.40       0.25       82.35
 Denver, CO                               369         2.63             166        1.64                4        0.18             562        3.50          22.68       0.55       76.78
 Atlanta, GA                              348         2.48             123        1.21                2        0.09             475        2.95          20.50       0.33       79.17
 Chicago, IL                              303         2.16             144        1.42                4        0.18             321        2.00          30.70       0.85       68.44
 Philadelphia, PA                         302         2.16              71        0.70               11        0.49             468        2.91          12.91       2.00       85.09
 Other                                  3,040        21.70             900        8.88               65        3.01           4,519       28.11          16.41       1.19       82.40
 Total                                 14,006       100.00          10,131      100.00            2,227      100.00          16,076      100.00          35.63       7.83       56.54

Sample consists of 28,434 venture capital investments in 14,006 portfolio companies for 2,039 venture capital firms between 1975 and 2005. Geographic locations are assigned at
the Combined Statistical Area (CSA) level. In cases where a city is not located in a CSA, we assign portfolio companies in the city to the appropriate Metropolitan Statistical Area
(MSA). Main office investment is defined as a portfolio company investment in a CSA in which the investing venture capital firm has its main office. Branch office investment is
defined as a portfolio company investment in a CSA in which the investing venture capital firm has a branch office. Outside investment is defined as a portfolio company
investment in a CSA in which the investing venture capital firm does not have its main office or a branch office. % Share of Total equals the percentage of portfolio companies or
investment type located in the CSA. Share of investments in CSA is defined as the percentage of portfolio company investments in the CSA that are main office investments,
branch office investments, or outside investments.




                                                                                                                                                                                 36
 Table VII. Factors Associated with the Geographic Concentration of Venture
 Capital-Backed Portfolio Companies
                                     Log Number of Portfolio Companies receiving
                                              initial investment in year
                                                         OLS
                                       [1]          [2]          [3]        [4]
 Log Number of VC firms in            0.740       0.740        0.696       0.696
 CSA                               [14.43]*** [14.25]*** [18.90]*** [18.98]***
 Success rate of all VCs in CSA,         1.110          1.101          1.148         1.144
 past five years                       [6.85]***      [6.78]***      [7.21]***     [7.24]***
 Log GSP per Capita                      -0.306         -0.312         -0.281        -0.290
                                        [2.02]**       [2.07]**       [1.84]*       [1.90]*
 Percent of population with              0.038           0.039          0.039         0.040
 college degree or higher              [3.98]***      [3.97]***      [3.98]***     [3.96]***
 Log patents per capita                  -0.025         -0.023         -0.028        -0.027
                                         [0.58]         [0.53]         [0.64]        [0.62]
 State long-term capital gains tax       0.344                         -0.401
 rate                                    [0.23]                        [0.29]
 State income tax rate                                  -0.252                       -0.736
                                                        [0.18]                       [0.54]
 CSA is San Francisco/San Jose                                         1.242          1.243
                                                                     [7.31]***     [7.88]***
 Year fixed effects                       Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
 Observations                            2,256          2,256          2,256          2,256
 R-squared                               0.74            0.74           0.75           0.75

Sample consists of 2,256 CSA-Year observations for 197 CSAs where at least one venture capital investment has
been made between 1975 and 2005. The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of the number of venture
capital–backed portfolio companies in the CSA plus one receiving an initial investment in the current year.
Geographic locations are assigned at the Combined Statistical Area (CSA) level. In cases where a city is not located
in a CSA, we assign venture capital offices in the city to the appropriate Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA). Log
Number of VC firms in CSA is the natural logarithm of the number of venture capital firm offices in the CSA in the
current year. Success rate of all VCs in CSA, past five years measures the percentage of all venture capital
investments in the CSA over the past five years that led to an Initial Public Offering. Log GSP per Capita is the
natural logarithm of the state’s gross product per capita plus one in the previous year. Percent of population with
college degree or higher is the share of the state population that has graduated from college. Log patents per capita
is the number of patents per capita plus one issued in the state in the previous year. State long-term capital gains tax
rate and state income tax rate are average state marginal tax rates in the previous year.

Standard errors are clustered at the CSA-level. Robust t-statistics are in parentheses below coefficient estimates.

***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.




                                                                                                                      37
 Table VIII. Comparison of Venture Capital Investment Success Rates by Type of Investment and Portfolio Company Location
                                 All investments:                             Companies in VC Centers:                      Companies outside VC Centers:
                                     VC                                          VC
                                  Center          All     Significance         Center       All    Significance              VC Center           All       Significance
                                 based VC      Other      of Difference       based VC     Other   of Difference             based VC           Other      of Difference
 Main Office Investment
      Success Rate                 0.154        0.115          ***               0.154         --            --                   --            0.115            --
      % Deals                      41.31        21.55                            64.92         --                                 --            33.04
 Branch Office Investment
      Success Rate                 0.212        0.152          ***               0.225       0.160          ***                 0.151           0.124
      % Deals                      10.20        17.41                            13.11       38.13                              5.11             6.36
 Outside Investment
      Success Rate                 0.193        0.137          ***               0.197       0.131          ***                 0.192           0.140           ***
      % Deals                      48.50        61.04                            21.98       61.87                              94.89           60.60
 All Deals
      Success Rate                  0.179       0.135          ***               0.173       0.142          ***                 0.190           0.131           ***
      Number                       18,888       9,546                           12,018       3,320                              6,870           6,226

                                 Early Stage investments:                     Late Stage investments:
                                    VC                                           VC
                                  Center         All      Significance         Center        All      Significance
                                 based VC      Other     of Difference        based VC      Other     of Difference
 Main Office Investment
      Success Rate                      0.136        0.103       ***                 0.177      0.133         ***
      % Deals                           46.39        26.46                           36.07      16.72
 Branch Office Investment
      Success Rate                      0.196        0.129       ***                 0.227      0.175         ***
      % Deals                           9.76         17.69                           10.64      17.14
 Outside Investment
      Success Rate                      0.158        0.112       ***                 0.224      0.158         ***
      % Deals                           43.85        55.85                           53.29      66.14
 All Deals
      Success Rate                      0.151        0.113       ***                 0.207      0.157         ***
      Number                            9,586        4,732                           9,302      4,814
Sample consists of 28,434 venture capital investments in 14,006 portfolio companies for 2,039 venture capital firms between 1975 and 2005. Main office investment is defined as
a portfolio company investment in a CSA in which the investing venture capital firm has its main office. Branch office investment is defined as a portfolio company investment in
a CSA in which the investing venture capital firm has a branch office. Outside investment is defined as a portfolio company investment in a CSA in which the investing venture
capital firm does not have its main office or a branch office. Success Rate equals the percentage of investments that led to an Initial Public Offering (IPO). % Deals equals the
percentage of deals that are main office investments, branch office investments, or outside investments. VC centers are defined as San Francisco/San Jose, New York, and Boston.
***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.


                                                                                                                                                                              38
 Table IX. Summary Statistics for Factors Associated with Venture Capital Investment Success
                                                               Investment Type                                            Investment Type Differences
                                                     [1]              [2]           [3]                                                                                   Overall mean
                                                 Main Office     Branch Office   Outside                         [1] vs. [2]        [1] vs. [3]       [2] vs. [3]
 Variable                                       mean      s.d.   mean     s.d. mean     s.d.                    Diff.     Sig.     Diff.     Sig.    Diff.     Sig.       mean      s.d.
 Success Rates
      Success                                   0.145 0.352 0.176 0.381 0.175 0.380                             -0.030    ***     -0.029     ***     0.001                0.164    0.370
 Firm Characteristics
      Adjusted VC firm experience               0.475 1.106 0.938 0.972 0.418 1.113                             -0.463    ***     0.057      ***     0.520     ***        0.484    1.112
      Venture Capital Firm based in VC
                                                0.793 0.405 0.575 0.494 0.604 0.489                             0.218     ***     0.189      ***    -0.029     ***        0.664    0.472
 Center
 Investment Characteristics
   Stage
    Initial investment in first round           0.566 0.496 0.445 0.497 0.479 0.500                              0.121    ***      0.088     ***    -0.033     ***        0.507    0.500
    Initial investment in second round          0.186 0.389 0.211 0.408 0.189 0.392                             -0.025    ***     -0.004             0.022     **         0.190    0.392
    Initial investment in third round           0.099 0.298 0.147 0.354 0.119 0.324                             -0.048    ***     -0.020     ***     0.028     ***        0.114    0.318
    Initial investment in fourth round or later 0.131 0.337 0.180 0.384 0.188 0.390                             -0.049    ***     -0.057     ***    -0.008                0.167    0.373
   Industry
    Computers and Internet                      0.504 0.500 0.466 0.499 0.420 0.493                              0.038    ***      0.084     ***     0.046     ***        0.453 0.498
    Communications                              0.184 0.387 0.235 0.424 0.162 0.369                             -0.051    ***      0.022     ***     0.073     ***        0.176 0.380
    Business and Industrial                     0.018 0.132 0.016 0.126 0.021 0.144                              0.002            -0.003      *     -0.005                0.020 0.139
    Consumer                                    0.047 0.211 0.031 0.173 0.059 0.236                              0.016    ***     -0.013     ***    -0.028     ***        0.053 0.223
    Energy                                      0.038 0.191 0.036 0.187 0.043 0.204                              0.001            -0.006     **     -0.007                0.041 0.198
    Biotech and Health Care                     0.170 0.376 0.176 0.381 0.244 0.429                             -0.006            -0.074     ***    -0.068     ***        0.213 0.409
    Financial Services                          0.018 0.134 0.021 0.142 0.024 0.153                             -0.002            -0.006     ***    -0.003                0.022 0.146
    Business Services                           0.012 0.109 0.011 0.103 0.015 0.122                              0.001            -0.003     **     -0.004                0.014 0.116
    Other                                       0.009 0.097 0.009 0.092 0.011 0.106                              0.001            -0.002            -0.003                0.010 0.102
 Number of Observations                             9,948            2,227        16,076                                                                                      28,434

Sample consists of 28,434 venture capital investments between 1975 and 2005. Main office investment is defined as a portfolio company investment in a CSA in which the
investing venture capital firm has its main office. Branch office investment is defined as a portfolio company investment in a CSA in which the investing venture capital firm has a
branch office. Outside investment is defined as a portfolio company investment in a CSA in which the investing venture capital firm does not have its main office or a branch
office. Success is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the investment led to an Initial Public Offering. Adjusted VC firm experience is equal to the log of one plus the
number of previous investments made by the venture capital firm minus the log of one plus the number of prior investments the average venture capital investor has made as of the
year in question. Venture Capital Firm based in VC Center is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the investing venture capital firm is based in San Francisco/San
Jose, New York, or Boston and zero otherwise. Initial investment round variables are indicators that report the initial round in which the venture capital firm made an investment
in the portfolio company. Industry variables are indicators that report which of the nine major industries identified by Gompers, Kovner, Lerner and Scharfstein (2008) the
portfolio company is classified under.

***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.


                                                                                                                                                                                      39
 Table X. Factors Associated with Venture Capital Investment Success
                                                                                                      Success, IPO
                                                                                                          Probit
                                                                                [1]           [2]        [3]         [4]            [5]
 Portfolio company outside VC's office CSAs                                  0.0221         0.0222     0.0029     -0.0013         0.0004
                                                                            [4.44]***     [4.44]***    [0.30]      [0.13]         [0.04]
 Portfolio company in CSA of VC's branch office                              0.0231         0.0232     0.0049      0.0016         0.0037
                                                                            [2.74]***     [2.75]***    [0.32]      [0.11]         [0.24]
 Adjusted VC firm experience                                                 0.0099         0.0091     0.0092      0.0089         0.0091
                                                                            [4.99]***      [2.52]**   [2.55]** [2.45]**          [2.52]**
 VC based in VC Center                                                       0.0313         0.0311     0.0100      0.0069         0.0087
                                                                            [6.80]***     [6.66]***    [0.97]      [0.67]         [0.82]
 VC based in VC Center * Adjusted VC Firm Experience                                        0.0012     0.0011      0.0014         0.0012
                                                                                            [0.29]     [0.26]      [0.33]         [0.28]
 VC based in VC Center * Portfolio company outside VC's office                                         0.0293      0.0323         0.0305
 CSAs                                                                                                 [2.42]** [2.66]***         [2.49]**
 VC based in VC Center * Portfolio company in CSA of VC's branch                                       0.0206      0.0239         0.0219
 office                                                                                                [1.09]      [1.26]         [1.16]
 One or more investment in the CSA in the two years before or after                                               -0.0209
 the date of investment                                                                                          [3.05]***
 One or more local investor in syndicate                                                                                         -0.0041
                                                                                                                                  [0.66]
 Includes year controls                                                        Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes             Yes
 Includes round controls                                                       Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes             Yes
 Includes portfolio company location controls                                  Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes             Yes
 Includes industry controls                                                    Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes             Yes
 Observations                                                                 28,434       28,434     28,434      28,434          28,434

Sample consists of 28,434 venture capital investments between 1975 and 2005. The dependent variable is Success an indicator variable that takes on the value of one if the
portfolio company went public and zero otherwise. Portfolio Company outside VC's office CSAs is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the portfolio company
receiving investment is located in a CSA in which the venture capital firm does not have its main office or a branch office and zero otherwise. Portfolio Company in CSA of VC's
branch office is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the portfolio company receiving investment is located in a CSA in which the venture capital firm has a branch
office and zero otherwise. The omitted investment type category is Portfolio Company in CSA of VC's main office. This category includes all deals in which the portfolio
company receiving investment is located in a CSA in which the venture capital firm's main office is located. Adjusted VC firm experience is equal to the log of one plus the
number of previous investments made by the venture capital firm minus the log of one plus the number of prior investments the average venture capital investor has made as of the
year in question. VC based in VC Center is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the investing venture capital firm is based in San Francisco/San Jose, New York, or
Boston. One or more investment in the CSA in the two years before or after the date of investment is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the venture capital firm has
made one or more investments in the CSA in the two years before or after the date of investment. One or more local investor in syndicate is an indicator variable that takes the
value of one if one or more of the venture capital firms investing in the portfolio company is local to the portfolio company.

Robust z-statistics are in parentheses below coefficient estimates.

***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.


                                                                                                                                                                                   40
 Table XI. Factors Associated with Venture Capital Investment Success, Early Stage Investments
                                                                                          Success, IPO
                                                                                              Probit
                                                                        [1]        [2]         [3]       [4]                     [5]
 Portfolio company outside VC's office CSAs                           0.0154     0.0155     -0.0069 -0.0107                   -0.0091
                                                                    [2.61]*** [2.63]***      [0.63]    [0.95]                  [0.76]
 Portfolio company in CSA of VC's branch office                       0.0245     0.0247     -0.0125 -0.0150                   -0.0142
                                                                     [2.40]**   [2.42]**     [0.71]    [0.86]                  [0.81]
 Adjusted VC firm experience                                          0.0072     0.0051     0.0064     0.0063                  0.0066
                                                                    [2.82]***    [1.13]      [1.40]    [1.36]                  [1.43]
 VC based in VC Center                                                0.0144     0.0140     -0.0128 -0.0155                   -0.0115
                                                                     [2.46]**   [2.37]**     [1.03]    [1.23]                  [0.91]
 VC based in VC Center * Adjusted VC Firm Experience                             0.0030     0.0015     0.0016                  0.0017
                                                                                 [0.56]      [0.27]    [0.30]                  [0.31]
 VC based in VC Center * Portfolio company outside VC's office                              0.0350     0.0381                  0.0327
 CSAs                                                                                      [2.35]** [2.54]**                  [2.19]**
 VC based in VC Center * Portfolio company in CSA of VC's branch                            0.0545     0.0583                  0.0524
 office                                                                                    [2.14]** [2.26]**                  [2.06]**
 One or more investment in the CSA in the two years before or after                                   -0.0169
 the date of investment                                                                               [1.92]*
 One or more local investor in syndicate                                                                                          0.0015
                                                                                                                                  [0.20]
 Includes year controls                                                          Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
 Includes round controls                                                         Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
 Includes portfolio company location controls                                    Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
 Includes industry controls                                                      Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
 Observations                                                                   14,043        14,043    14,043      14,043        14,043
Sample consists of 14,043 early stage venture capital investments between 1975 and 2005. Early stage investments are investments in portfolio companies that are developing
their product or have begun initial marketing, manufacturing, and sales activities for their product. The dependent variable is Success an indicator variable that takes on the value
of one if the portfolio company went public and zero otherwise. Portfolio Company outside VC's office CSAs is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the portfolio
company receiving investment is located in a CSA in which the venture capital firm does not have its main office or a branch office and zero otherwise. Portfolio Company in CSA
of VC's branch office is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the portfolio company receiving investment is located in a CSA in which the venture capital firm has a
branch office and zero otherwise. The omitted investment type category is Portfolio Company in CSA of VC's main office. This category includes all deals in which the portfolio
company receiving investment is located in a CSA in which the venture capital firm's main office is located. Adjusted VC firm experience is equal to the log of one plus the
number of previous investments made by the venture capital firm minus the log of one plus the number of prior investments the average venture capital investor has made as of the
year in question. VC based in VC Center is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the investing venture capital firm is based in San Francisco/San Jose, New York, or
Boston. One or more investment in the CSA in the two years before or after the date of investment is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the venture capital firm has
made one or more investments in the CSA in the two years before or after the date of investment. One or more local investor in syndicate is an indicator variable that takes the
value of one if one or more of the venture capital firms investing in the portfolio company is local to the portfolio company.

Robust z-statistics are in parentheses below coefficient estimates.

***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.

                                                                                                                                                                                   41
