                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              TAX REFORM, DELOCATION AND HETEROGENEOUS FIRMS

                                          Richard Baldwin
                                          Toshihiro Okubo

                                        Working Paper 15109
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15109


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2009




¸˛We thank three anonymous referees and seminar participants at CES-Ifo and Kobe for helpful comments
  and suggestions, and Dany Jaimovich and Pierre-Louis Vézina for editorial assistance. The first draft
  was written in 2005 while Okubo was a PhD student at the Graduate Institute supported by NSF Grant
  No. 100012-105675. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
  reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Richard Baldwin and Toshihiro Okubo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Tax reform, delocation and heterogeneous firms
Richard Baldwin and Toshihiro Okubo
NBER Working Paper No. 15109
June 2009
JEL No. H32,H73,R12

                                              ABSTRACT

The standard international tax model is extended to allow for heterogeneous firms when agglomeration
forces are important thus allowing us to study the relocation effects of taxes that vary according to
firm size. We show that allowing for heterogeneity permits a given tax scheme to have an endogenously
different effect on the location decision of small and big firms, with the biggest firms being endogenously
more likely to relocate in reaction to high taxes. We show that a reform which flattens the tax-firm-size
profile can raise tax revenue without inducing any relocation.


Richard Baldwin
Graduate Institute, Geneva
Cigale 2
Lausanne Switzerland 1010
and CEPR
and also NBER
baldwin@graduateinstitute.ch

Toshihiro Okubo
RIEB Kobe University
2-1, Rokkodai cho, Nada-ku, Kobe,
657-8501 JAPAN
okubo@rieb.kobe-u.ac.jp
                                                                                                      2


I.           INTRODUCTION
     International tax competition has been an important concern for decades, but the heightened

     mobility of firms in recent years has drawn renewed interest. The theoretical literature has

     responded by broadening the range of models with which the effects of international tax

     differences can be studied.


     The purpose of our paper is to contribute to this broadening by developing an analytically

     tractable model in which we can study the effects of differential international taxes when the

     tax schemes have firm-specific dimensions as well as nation-specific dimensions.

     Specifically, our economic model allows for agglomeration economies and firm

     heterogeneity. The former allows us to consider a situation where big economies maintain

     higher taxes in equilibrium (Ludema and Wooton 1998, Kind, Midelfart-Knarvik and

     Schjelderup 2000, Andersson and Forslid 2003, and Baldwin and Krugman 2004). The latter

     allows us to consider tax schemes where the tax rate varies by firm size.


     That corporate taxation varies by firm size has been widely documented since the famous

     “Zimmerman hypothesis” (Zimmerman 1983) which asserted that political costs explained

     why large US corporations paid higher effective tax rates (ETR). See Wilkie and Limberg

     (1990) for an evaluation of the early empirical work on US data. Recent empirical research

     reveals that the corporate-size-ETR link is complex – varying across nations, time periods and

     sectors. OECD (2003), using micro-data from Canada and Belgium, found that smaller firms

     had significantly lower ETRs. Similar links to size have been documented by Ahmed (2004)

     and Holland (1998) for the UK, and Crabbé (2006) for Italy. Using Belgian firm-level data,

     Vandenbussche, Janssen and Crabbé (2006) show larger firms have higher ETRs. Detailed

     data has been used to establish similar facts for developing nations (Baer, 2002; Shome, 2004;
                                                                                                                 3

Auriol and Warlters, 2005).2


Given that this link between firm size and tax rates exists in nations’ tax policy, it would seem

useful to extend the theory to allow consideration of the location effects of taxes linked to

firm size.3 Such reforms cannot be fully explored theoretically in the classic international tax

competition model as it assumes homogenous firms. In particular, we show that allowing for

heterogeneity permits a given tax scheme to have an endogenously different effect on the

location decision of small and big firms, with the biggest firms being endogenously more

likely to relocate in reaction to high taxes.


More specifically, the inclusion of firm heterogeneity permits three extensions of the

theoretical analysis in the literature. First, it allows the model to capture the possibility that

large/profitable firms are endogenously more likely to re-locate internationally for tax

reasons. Second, it allows us to consider the revenue implications of reforms by the high-tax

country that tilt the size-tax-burden profile in a setting where there is a smooth trade-off

between raising tax rates and keeping firms at home. Third, since firm-size is associated with

firm-level productivity in our model à la Melitz (2003), tax reform has an impact on the

average productivity of firms in each nation. In particular, a reform that flattens the firm-size-

ETR link tends to bring the most productive firms ‘back home’, thus raising average industry

productivity.


The inclusion of heterogeneous firms is not entirely new to the international tax literature,

since it has been already analysed by the important papers of Burbidge, Cuff and Leach

2
  For instance, as shown in Baer (2002), 0.4% of taxpayers account for 61% of total domestic tax collection in
Kenya and 57% in Colombia. According to Shome (2004), large taxpayers account for 80-90 percent of the tax
revenue in Asian and Latin American countries. To reflect this phenomenon, an attempt to widen the profit tax
base is one of the most possible ways of raising tax revenue in developing countries. A narrow tax base comes
from higher opportunity costs and entry costs for small firms. Auriol and Warlters (2005) found that a 1%
increase of the entry sunk cost increases the informal sector by 14% and suggested that reducing market entry
fees in developing countries could enlarge their tax base.
3
  Indeed, many nations include firm size as one of the elements in their micro-simulation tax model (Ahmed
2006), reflecting, inter alia, the pervasive use of special tax provisions for small and medium enterprises.
                                                                                                      4

  (2004, 2006). Their model, however, is quite different from ours, being a more

  straightforward extension of the basic tax competition model (Wilson 1986) in that it assumes

  perfect competition. Moreover, firm productivity differences are both firm-specific and

  location-specific, so a firm’s productivity changes as it re-locates internationally; the authors

  assume some firms have a comparative advantage in one country, while other firms have it in

  the other. This firm-level-nation-specific productivity differences create a quasi-rent that can

  be taxed up to a point without firms relocating away from the higher tax. As a result, tax rates

  could be higher in one nation without driving out all firms – even with perfect competition.


  The focus of Burbidge, Cuff and Leach (2006) is also different. They concentrate on the study

  of tax regimes and the provision of public goods, rather than tax reforms and firm location

  with trade costs as in our model. A related paper is Haufler and Schjelderup (2000) which is a

  theoretical study concerning optimal tax systems in the presence of profit shifting (via transfer

  pricing) related to foreign direct investment (FDI). They suggest that the optimal tax reform is

  to reduce tax rates so as to prevent firms from shifting their profits to foreign nations when

  FDI is allowed.


  Our paper is organised in six sections. The next introduces the application of the basic model.

  Section 3 studies the impact of taxation on firm relocation. Section 4 explores implications of

  a simple tax scheme where the ETR varies with firm size. Section 5 considers the impact of

  globalisation (i.e. freer trade). The last section provides our concluding remarks.


II.      THE HETEROGENEOUS MOBILE FIRMS MODEL
  This section introduces the basic economic model with internationally mobile heterogeneous

  firms. It is best thought of as a marriage of the Meltiz (2003) model and the ‘footloose capital’

  model of Martin and Rogers (1995). Specifically, we assume two nations (North and South),

  two sectors (manufacturing, M, and the numeraire sector, A) and two factors (Capital and
                                                                                                 5

Labour). The manufacturing sector consists of firms that each produce a differentiated variety

and compete in a monopolistic competition setting.


The tastes of the representative consumer in each nation are quasi-linear:



                                                      
                                                        1/(1-1/  )
       U   ln CM  C A , CM            ci1-1/  di                 ,    1   0    (1)
                                    i




where CM and CA are, respectively, consumption of the composite of manufacturing sector

varieties and consumption of the numeraire (good A);  denotes the constant elasticity of

substitution between any two M-sector varieties, μ reflects the strength of preferences for

manufactured goods, and  is the set of all varieties consumed.


Quasi-linear utility preferences are a well-known artifice for removing income effects. In

economic geography models, such effects result in what is called ‘expenditure switching’ and

demand-linkages that can greatly complicate the analysis – often to the extent that the model

becomes analytically intractable. Since such effects merely amplify the agglomeration effects,

quasi-linear preferences are useful in that they allow us to leave expenditure switching aside

while we concentrate on core interactions.


These preferences also allow us to deal simply with issues of tax revenue. We assume all tax

revenue is returned lump-sum to citizens. With quasi-linear preferences, it is spent only on the

numeraire A-good on the margin, so the international division of tax revenue has no impact

on the relative market size (manufactures) that matters for firms’ location decisions.


Firm heterogeneity in our model stems only from differences on the supply side. Each

manufacturing firm requires a unit of capital as its fixed cost (a ‘blueprint’) and uses only

labour in the variable costs. However, firms have heterogeneous efficiency; each blueprint

implies a firm-specific marginal production cost (even though the Dixit-Stiglitz varieties are

symmetric in the utility function). Thus firm i’s marginal cost is given by the wage rate ‘w’
                                                                                                               6

times its firm-specific unit-labour coefficient, denoted as ‘ai’ (‘ai’ is the inverse of the firm-i’s

efficiency). As the ‘ai’ is associated with the firm’s blueprint, a firm’s marginal cost does not

vary with location (i.e. the unit-labour input coefficient is firm-specific, not nation-specific).


Each nation’s endowment of labour and capital is fixed, as are all of the firm-level ai’s. To be

concrete and to keep the analysis tractable, we assume each nation’s distribution of ai’s is

described by the Pareto distribution:


                             G[ a ]  ( a / a 0 )  ,     1  a 0  a  0,     1                      (2)


Here  is the shape parameter and a0 is the scale parameter, i.e. the highest possible a; we

normalise a0 to unity by choice of units.


The thrust of our analysis concerns the impact of taxes on firms’ location decisions. Since we

do not want to conflate technology-driven effects on location with those of taxes, we assume

the G[a] is identical for the two nations. Moreover, to avoid capital movement that is driven

by unequal capital-labour ratios, we assume that the nations have identical capital-labour

ratios even though North is bigger, i.e. North has proportionally more of both L and K, so

nations differ only in size. Figure 1 shows the distribution of a’s in North and South.

Recalling that there is one unit of capital per firm, so each nation’s mass of M-sector firms

equals its capital stock, the distribution in the North is K G[a]; in the South it is K*G[a],

where K and K* are the North’s and South’s endowment of capital.4


The numeraire sector is as simple as possible; it is marked by constant returns, perfect

competition, costless trade, and it employs only labour. Trade in manufactures, by contrast, is

subject to ‘iceberg’ trade costs; firms must ship  > 1 units of their good in order to sell one



4
 Since we take the range of varieties to be continuous, we speak of the ‘mass’ of firms with a particular
marginal cost. We assume that the mass is the same for every level of marginal cost (this is demonstrated in
Melitz (2003) as the outcome of an endogenous entry/exit process).
                                                                                                                  7

unit in the other nation.


                                                         KG[a]

    frequency                                            K*G[a]


      1                                                  G[a]


                                                                  ‘a’ (marginal
          0                                            a0         costs)
Figure 1: Endowed distribution of capital and marginal costs in North and South.

Finally, we describe our assumptions on factor mobility, the determination of factor rewards,

and firms’ location decisions. The wage in each nation is set in a competitive labour market,

but the reward to each firm’s unit of capital is determined by the firm’s Ricardian rent (i.e.

operating profit). Due to firm heterogeneity, different firms earn different equilibrium rewards

on their capital/blueprint. As in Melitz (2003), the most efficient firms sell the most and earn

the highest reward on their capital.5 Thus in our model there is no distinction between a

manufacturing firm’s operating profit and the reward to its capital; a tax on a firm’s income is

a tax on its firm-specific capital.


In keeping with the classic tax competition setup (Wilson 1986), capital is assumed to be

mobile internationally. Capital, however, is owned by immobile labour (specifically, workers

hold a globally diversified portfolio of all firms). Plainly we could relax many of these

assumptions and still solve the model, but doing so would force us into numerical simulation

of the equilibrium.


Recalling that each firm is associated with a particular unit of capital, capital mobility is



5
 Melitz (2003) shows that the aggregate level of capital can be endogenised such that the average reward to
capital equals the discount rate, but allowing for this would unduly complicate our model. Instead, we take the
nations’ capital stocks and G[a] as part of the nations’ endowments.
                                                                                                     8

synonymous with firm mobility. To maximise their owners’ income, capital/firms seek to

locate in the nation that offers the highest post-tax reward to capital (which is the highest

post-tax operating profit in our simple model). The capital/firm location choice is independent

of cost of living considerations since capital owners are not internationally mobile and thus

face the same equilibrium cost of consumption regardless of their capital’s location.


Intuition for the basic agglomeration forces
Most of the basic forces in the model are not directly related to the heterogeneity of firms.

The manufacturing sector is marked by Dixit-Stiglitz competition, increasing returns at the

firm-level and trade costs. As is well-known from the international trade and economic

geography literature, this combination of assumptions generates both agglomeration and

dispersion forces. The agglomeration force stems from the fact that firms want to locate in the

big market (other things equal) to reduce their trade costs. This agglomeration effect is

countered by a dispersion force known as the ‘local competition’ effect. That is, while

locating in the big market allows firms to save on trade costs, the presence of many firms also

implies tougher competition. Since firms want to be far from their competitor (other things

equal), this is a dispersion force. The location equilibrium is marked by an international

division of firms that just balances the agglomeration and dispersion forces.


Firm heterogeneity introduces new effects since the balance of agglomeration and dispersion

forces varies according to firm size. The ultimate source of firm-level heterogeneity in our

model is firm-level differences in marginal cost (productivity), which implies that firms with

low marginal costs charge a low price and thus sell more and earn higher operating profit.

Since different firms sell different amounts, the balance of agglomeration and dispersion

forces varies by firm size. In particular, the trade cost saving aspect of big-market location is

especially attractive to big firms that sell a lot. The thrust of this is that large firms tend to

agglomerate preferentially in the large nation (all else equal). In other words, the equilibrium
                                                                                                                   9

tends towards a spatial separation of firms by size with the big market tending to have a

disproportionate share of large, highly productive firms. This feature of the model is the key

to our novel tax analysis, since it means that changes in the tax gap between the big and small

markets will lead to changes in the spatial segmentation by firm size.


Intermediate results
Utility maximisation generates the familiar CES demand functions in the manufacturing

sector. For example, the demand for variety j in the North market is:

                                                                         1 /(1 )
                                              E
                                          B  1 , P    pi1 di 
                               ~          ~
                  c j  p j  B ;                                                 , E                   (3)
                                             P            i         


where B can be thought of as the “per-firm demand” that firms take as given under Dixit-

Stiglitz competition; E =  is expenditure (we use E for notational convenience), and P is the

usual CES price indices in the Northern market ( is the set of all varieties consumed).

South’s demands are isomorphic.


The simplified numeraire sector facilitates the analysis substantially. Constant returns, perfect

competition and zero trade costs equalise nominal wage rates across nations and we choose

the units of labour such that w=w*=1.6 Consequently, all differences in manufacturing firms’

marginal costs stem from their a’s; wage costs are never an issue in firms’ location decisions

in our simple model.


As is well-known, Dixit-Stiglitz monopolistic competition implies that the profit-maximising

producer price of a typical firm with marginal cost aj is: p j  a j /(1  1 /  ) , and that ‘mill

pricing’ is optimal, so the price of variety-j in the other market is just  times the producer



6
  This holds for all possible equilibriums only if the size difference between the nations is not too great. One easy
sufficient condition is that the small nation is big enough to accommodate all industry and still have some labour
leftover to employ in the numeraire sector.
                                                                                                                     10

price pj. A second well-known property of Dixit-Stiglitz competition is that operating profit of

firm-j equals 1/ times the firm’s revenue.7 The firm-specific revenue of a typical North-

based firm in the Northern market is just the consumption given by (3) times the firm-specific

price. Using similar calculations for operating profit earned on Southern-market sales, the

firm-specific operating profits for a North-based firm is:


                                             ~       ~
                               [ p]  p1 B  B * /  ;             0     1  1                      (4)

            ~                                     ~
where B * is the Southern version of B in (3), and  is the parameter that gauges the

‘freeness’ of trade (recalling that 1- < 0,  ranges from zero when iceberg trade costs are

prohibitive, i.e.  = , to unity when the trade costs are zero, i.e.  = 1).


Four features of (3) and (4) play important roles in the subsequent analysis. First, all firms

earn positive operating profit in equilibrium (this is their reward to capital, i.e. Ricardian

rent). Second, since  > 1, the most efficient firms – i.e. those with low marginal cost and

thus with low prices – are the most profitable. Third, a North firm that finds it optimal to

charge p when it is located in the North would find it optimal to charge the same p if it

relocated to the South, so its operating profit when located in the South is:


                                                              ~    ~
                                             * [ p]  p1 B  B * /                                       (5)


The difference between operating profit when the firm is North-based, (4), and South-based,

(5), is driven by the trade cost as reflected in the freeness of trade parameter . Fourth,

                                                                                                                 ~
comparing (4) and (5), it is clear that a firm’s profit depends upon its location as long as B
        ~
and B * are not identical.




7
    A typical first order condition is p(1-1/)=wa; rearranging, the operating profit, (p-wa)c, equals pc/.
                                                                                                                   11


Locational equilibrium with capital mobility but no taxes
Firms’ locational responses to taxes are at the heart of the model, so it is useful to consider

relocation tendencies in the absence of taxes. To study relocation, we start from the initial

situation without relocation, and allow capital/firm mobility. From (4) and (5), the firm-

specific difference between operating profit earned when located in the North and the South

is:


                                                                      ~    ~
                                   [ p]   * [ p]  p1 (1   ) B  B * /                             (6)

                                                                                                              ~
Plainly the sign of the gap turns on whether the per-firm demand in the Northern market, B , is
                                                                           ~
bigger than the per-firm demand in the Southern market, B * . These, in turn, depend upon the
                                                         ~
location of firms as per the definition of the B ’s since trade costs imply that competition is

somewhat localised; see (3).


Starting from an initial situation where no firms have moved yet, the masses of firms located
                                                                                               ~
in the North and South are K and K* respectively. To calculate the P’s and B ’s, we change

variables of integration so that the Northern CES price index integral is:

                                               1
                                      1
                                                       Ka                     
                                                     1
                           1                                1-
                          P         1                             K *a1- dG[a ]                      (7)
                                                  a 0




Using (2) to solve the Northern integral and its Southern counterpart, we get:

                1                                           1
           1                                       1                                          
P 1
         1       K   K  , (P )
                              *           * 1
                                                   1              K  K *  ;                 0         (8)
                                                                                        1-   


where  is a collection of parameters that is positive assuming a regularity condition, namely

  (1- +) > 0, which we maintain to ensure the integrals converge.

To sign the profit gap in (6), we use (8) and the fact that North is a scaled up version of South,
                                                                                                              12

so that its share of world expenditure equals its share world capital (denoted as s).

Rearranging:


                         B 1   s /(1  s)                          E      K
                                               1;            s                                      (9)
                        B * 1   (1  s) / s                      E  E* K  K *


The inequality holds as long as the North is bigger, i.e. s > ½. Thus, in the initial situation

where no firms have yet moved, the per-firm demand is larger in the big Northern market, i.e.

B > B * .8 Intuition for this result (which is well known in trade theory) is simple. If E is 10%

bigger in terms of expenditure than E* and there are 10% more firms located in the North,

then the per-firm expenditure would be equal if there were no international trade. Trade evens

out the differences in competition so although competition is somewhat tougher in the North,

it is less than 10% tougher so per-firm demand is larger in the North with trade but immobile

firms. The trade literature has explored this issue extensively in the context of homogenous

firms. There, the received wisdom is called the Home Market Effect (e.g. see Krugman 1980,

and Davis and Weinstein, 1999, 2003), which notes that some of the firms will relocate from

the small South market to the big North market. However, as firms shift to the big market,

they produce a counterbalancing shift in local competition. The Northern market becomes

more competitive and the South market less competitive. Without taxes, relocation goes on

until the operating profit gap is pushed to zero, i.e. B = B * .


When firms are heterogeneous as in our model, an additional question arises: Which firms

relocate first? The key is to note that large firms sell a great deal more than small firms, so

large firms are most interested in reducing trade costs. More formally, the profit gap in (6) is

greater for more efficient firms that charge a lower price and thus sell more. Following the



8
 Note that our assumption that the North is bigger, but is endowed with the same capital-labour ratio, means that
E/K=E*/K* .Consequently, we can use (8) to rewrite B as (E/K)/(1+K/K*) and B * as (E*/K*)/(+K/K*).
Since 0<<1 and K>K* we see that B > B * .
                                                                                                               13

usual logic (as suggested by standard quadratic cost adjustment mechanisms), the Southern

firms with the most to gain move first, i.e. the largest, more efficient South firms are the first

to relocate to the big Northern market.9


                                                                            KG[a]


                                (K*+K)G[a]
    North (big)



                                                                                     a
                    0                aR                                    a0=1




                                                                            K*G[a]
    South (small)



                                                                                     a
                    0                aR                                    a0=1
Figure 2: Geographic distribution of firm efficiency with capital mobility; no tax case.


The relocation ends when B equals B * and all firms are just indifferent to their equilibrium

location, but with a range of the most efficient Southern firms having moved to the North.

Formally, the range of firms that move northward is [0…aR] where aR is the threshold

marginal cost defined by:

                                                  ~          ~
                                              1  B[ a R ] / B * [ a R ]                                (10)


Figure 2 illustrates the equilibrium distribution of firms when capital mobility is allowed.

What we see is that the North has a disproportionate share of the world’s industry, and a

disproportionate share of the world’s most productive firms.


9
 For details, see the analysis in Baldwin and Okubo (2006a,b).The basic idea is that if there are quadratic
adjustment costs or other forms of congestion, then the firms with the most to gain would leave first.
                                                                                                              14


Note that the B ’s depend upon the E’s and the P’s. The E’s are invariant to firm relocation

due to our simplifying assumptions, but the P’s adjust with firm location. For the Northern

index for example:


             P1  1  1/        K  a
                                   1       1

                                             0
                                                 1
                                                                     0
                                                                      aR                 1
                                                       dG[a]  K *{ a1 dG[a]    a1 dG[a]
                                                                                         aR           (11)


Here the three integrals reflect, respectively, the local prices of Northern firms, the local

prices of Southern firms that are now based in the North, and the prices of South-based firms

exporting to the North (recall that a = a0 = 1 is the maximum marginal cost). Using (2) to

solve the integrals:


              P 1  (1 
                             1
                             
                                                      
                                 )  1  K  K * a R   (1  a R ) ;            1    0   (12)


Notice that since  < 1 and  > 0, the Northern price index falls as aR rises. This means that

Northern welfare tends to fall as firms relocate to the South; a fact that will come into play

when considering government motives. Using this solution for P and the corresponding

formula for P*, (10) becomes:


                                          E / K  K * a R  K * (1  a R ) 
                                   1
                                         E * /  ( K  K * a R )  K * (1  a R ) 
                                                                                                      (13)


Solving this tells us that aR equals:


                                                              2            1
                                             aR                       (s  )                        (14)
                                                        (1   )(1  s)     2


where ‘s’ is the North’s endowment share of world expenditure and capital/firms.


From (14) it is clear that for sufficiently free trade, i.e.  near 1, aR will be 1, i.e. all firms will

have left the South. To keep the analysis interesting, we restrict our investigations to levels of
                                                                                                     15

    that do not result in all firms being in the North. Simple calculation reveals the threshold 

   is (2s 1) /{(1   )(1  s)} <1. We turn now to including capital taxation.


III.              CAPITAL TAXATION AND EQUILIBRIUM LOCATION OF
   INDUSTRY
   Large highly industrialised nations typically have higher tax rates than smaller poor, less

   industrialised nations. This section introduces capital taxation that reflects this outcome and

   sets the stage for consideration of the impact of tax reform. To simplify, the South’s capital

   tax rate is zero so the Northern tax rate can be thought of as the tax difference.


       rate
                                                         Marginal rate ‘t’

                                                       Average rate


                                                                     Firm
              0
                      D                                              operating
                                                                     profit ()
   Figure 3: Marginal and average tax rates by firm size.


   Corporate taxation is extremely complex. To link firm-size and effective tax rates as simply

   as possible in the model, we assume a very simple tax scheme involving a flat tax rate, t, that

   is applied to a firm’s operating profit beyond a given deductible, D, according to the source

   principle (namely, firms pay the tax rate of the nation in which they are producing and pay it

   on operating profits earned worldwide). Thus the Northern tax applies to all firms located in

   the North regardless of their capital’s nationality. Plainly there are many other tax schemes

   we could consider, but we postpone that analysis to future work. Recall that each firm is

   associated with a unit of capital and capital’s reward is the firm’s operating profit, so this tax

   scheme is both a capital tax and a highly simplified corporate income tax.
                                                                                                                      16

Specifically, taking account of t and D, the tax paid by a typical North-based firm with

marginal costs of ‘a’ is:


                                        tax[a]  max  [a]  D  t , 0                                   (15)


Plainly the tax paid is increasing in the size of the firm (i.e. decreasing in its marginal cost, a)

assuming D > 0; the effective tax rate increases with firm size but sufficiently small firms pay

no tax. The implied marginal and average tax rates are illustrated in Figure 3.


Tax revenue is returned lump-sum to workers; this has no effect on market sizes due to the

quasi-linear preferences.


Taxation without a deductible
To fix ideas, we first work through the simpler case where D = 0. Recall that the North can

charge a higher tax rate and not lose any of its firms, since the big market is characterised by

agglomeration rents as in Andersson and Forslid (2003), and Baldwin and Krugman (2004).

Formally, the tax rate that prevents all relocation (so the number of firms in each market is

fixed by K and K*) is:


                                                0   (1  t nr )   *                                     (16)


where tnr is the no-relocation tax rate. The aim is to analyse the trade-offs facing a typical

high tax nation, i.e. a nation that can only raise its tax rate at the cost of losing some firms to

tax-driven relocation. For this reason, we start with a tax rate that is somewhat higher than the

rate that would lead to no relocation of firms.10


Specifically, consider a tax that is tnr plus  > 0. In this case, the post-tax profit gap

 [ a ](1  t nr   )   * [ a ] will be negative and some firms would move to the South to escape


10
  By solving an equation like (17) for t, imposing no relocation, i.e. aL = 0, we see that tnr is given by the very
simple expression /(s(1-2)+2).
                                                                                                                17

the tax which now exceeds the agglomeration rent in the big Northern market. The firms that

have most to gain from leaving are the ones that sell the most and thus earn the greatest

profits. To see this, consider what post-tax profit gap firms would face if none moved. By

definition of tnr, the post-tax profit gap,  [ a ](1  t nr   )   * [ a ] , equals  [a] so it will be

negative for all firms. However, it is more negative for the most efficient/profitable firms

(since they have higher  [a] ’s). This is why the most efficient firms leave first. As these firms

leave, they make the Southern market more competitive and the Northern one less, and the

exodus continues until post-tax profits are re-equalised in the two nations for the marginal

firm.


More formally, all firms with a’s below a lower threshold, denoted as aL, would move to the

South to escape the tax, where aL is defined by:


                                                               
                   0  a 1L B  B * (1  t )  a 1L B  B * ;
                                      E /                               E* /                        (17)
                   B                                   B *
                                                            
                                           
                        K (1  a L )   Ka L  K *
                                                      ,
                                                             K (1  a L )  Ka L  K *

                ~
where B is like B but without the constant mark-up term. Using the fact that North has a

share s of both the world’s K and E, and defining the tax factor as T  1-t, we can solve for aL,

i.e. the end of the relocation range:


                    
                 aL 
                                                          
                         T (1  s) 2  2  s(1  s   )   2 s 2  ( s   )(1  s)
                                                                                                      (18)
                                s(1   )T s(1   )     1  (1   ) s 


The situation is illustrated in Figure 4. We take this as the starting point of our reform

analysis since it reflects an interesting trade-off; a situation where the large market has a tax

rate set sufficiently above the small nation rate, so that some firms have relocated to escape

the tax. At this point, the big Northern market faces a continuous trade off between raising the

tax rate and losing more firms. Formally, the range of firms that relocate is those with a
                                                                                                    18

[0,aL]; this range widens as t increases (i.e. T falls), as inspection of (18) reveals.


                                                                       KG[a]



 North (big)




                 0                                                               a
                                    aL                            a0=1


                                                                       K*G[a]
 South (small)       (K*+K)G[a]



                                                                                 a
                 0
                                    aL                            a0=1
Figure 4: Distribution of firm efficiency, tax without deductible case.




Taxation with a deductible
Next we introduce a deductible that affects firms’ location decisions. Before the deductible,

all firms would have preferred the North – but for the tax. With the deductible, sufficiently

small firms (those with high a’s) pay no tax in North, so they clearly prefer being in the

North. This introduces a second relocation threshold defined by the deductible; firms with

sufficiently high marginal costs that earn profits that are less than D and thus escape taxation

in either market consist of those with a  [aU,1] where:


                                             E/                            E* / 
        D  aU1 ( B  B * ) ;   B                      ,   B*                           (19)
                                        a L  (1  a L )
                                           
                                                                      a L   (1  a L )


normalising K+K*=1 without loss of generality. Notice that the K’s disappear from the

equilibrium B’s since firms separate spatially according to the level of their efficiency. All the

most efficient firms – those with a’s less than aL – move to the South to escape taxation. All

firms with a’s above this threshold move to the North to take advantage of the larger market.
                                                                                                               19

The firms big enough to be liable for taxation in the North are unaffected directly by the

deductible, but they are indirectly affected by the relocation that D induces. We turn now to

finding the threshold for this relocation, with D > 0, namely aL.


For firms big enough to pay tax in the North, the new post-tax profit gap is   (  D )t   * ,

                                                                
which can be written as a1 B(T   )  (1  T ) B*  (1  T ) D . If no relocation took place,

the term in curly braces would be negative. 11 Yet the (1-T)D term is positive, so we know that

making D positive while not changing t will make the post-tax profit gap strictly negative for

the most efficient firms (those with very low a’s). The lower threshold that divides firms into

those that now prefer the North from those that prefer the South is:


                                                                      
                                0  a1L B(T   )  (1  T ) B*  (1  T ) D                         (20)


Another way to understand why complete sorting occurs is to note that with D, the effective

tax rate depends upon firm-efficiency, with the firm-specific rate rising with the firm’s

efficiency level (i.e. the ETR rises as a firm’s ‘a’ falls). The effective-tax-rate for firms with a

marginal cost equal to the threshold aL is:


                                                           D
                                                  (1             )t                                    (21)
                                                          [ aL ]


Firms that face an effective rate above this – those with a’s below aL – locate in the South

since the advantages of producing in the large North are not sufficient to outweigh the tax.

For firms facing effective rates below this, the North market is attractive despite the taxation.

The location equilibrium and Northern tax base are illustrated in Figure 4.


It is important to note that firms are not, in equilibrium, just indifferent to their location –



11
  Before D > 0 was introduced, (17) indicated that the {B(T-)-(1-T)B*} was zero. Since the deductible
induces some firms to move to the North, B falls and B* rises, so the term in curly braces must be negative.
                                                                                                  20

except of course, the marginal firms which we define as those whose a’s equal aL. Firms that

are smaller (i.e. those with a > aL), strictly prefer North, either because they can enjoy easy

access to the large market and pay no tax (those with a’s above aU), or because they find that

the advantages of accessing the large market without trade costs more than outweigh the tax

disadvantages (those with a’s above aL but below aU). The most efficient firms (those with a’s

below aL) strictly prefer the South since the trade-cost disadvantages they face when selling to

the large market are more than outweighed by the tax advantages of producing in the South.




                                                       (K*+K)G[a]



 North (big)


                                    Tax base

                 0                                                  a
                               aL               aU         a0=1

                                     (K*+K)G[a]
 South (small)



                                                                    a
                 0
                               aL                          a0=1
Figure 5: Distribution of firms with tax and deductible.
To summarise, we write:


Result 1: Taxation with a deductible leads to spatial sorting; all firms that are

sufficiently efficient move to the tax-free country while all others concentrate in the

high-tax nation. The threshold is defined implicitly by (20) with the B’s from (19).


This spatial sorting has obvious effects on the average industrial productivity of the two

nations. In particular, all the most productive firms have escaped Northern taxes by moving to

the South.
                                                                                                    21

  Result 2: The spatial sorting reduces the average productivity of firms in the taxed

  country and raises it in the other nation.


  Turning to tax revenue considerations, recall that sufficiently small firms pay no tax (due to

  D) with the threshold size characterised by the upper threshold on marginal cost aU; see (19).

  Firms that are sufficiently large pay no taxes since they are located in the South, where the

  threshold size is characterised by the threshold marginal cost aL is defined by (20). The

  Northern tax base is thus the range of firms with a’s between aL and aU, so tax revenue is:


                                            aU        B  B*         
                          Tax    Revenue    a1 (         )  tD dG[a ]               (22)
                                            aL
                                                                     


  where B and B* are defined as in (19). We next consider a tax reforms that lowers the rate and

  the deductible thus flattening the firm-size-ETR relationship.


IV.       WIDER-BASE-LOWER-RATE TAX REFORM
  We consider a very stark tax reform, one that leaves unchanged the effective tax rate facing

  marginal firms, i.e. those with a’s equal to the threshold aL. Specifically, the reform changes

  D and t such that the effective rate on the marginal firm, namely (21), is unchanged. In

  studying the effects, it is useful to re-write the location condition (20) as:


                                      0   [aL ]   *[aL ]  tax[aL ]                      (23)


  where tax[a] is the function defining the tax paid as a function of marginal cost and tax[aL]

  indicates the tax that a marginal firm would pay. The reform is illustrated in Figure 6.


  In reading the diagram, the first point is that the tax rate on marginal firms is unchanged by

  construction. This implies that the reform will induce no relocation of firms, and this, in turn,

  implies that the B’s in the definition of aU, (19), will not change. The second point is that the

  Northern tax is only paid by firms that earn profits between D and [aL]. Firms earning less
                                                                                                22

than D earn less than the deductible while firms earning more than [aL] are located in the

South and so pay no Northern tax.


 Effective tax rate
                                            Average rate (pre)

                                             Average rate (post)




                                                       Firm
       0
                D’ D             [aL]                operating
                                                       profit ()
Figure 6: Rate lowering base widening reform.


Given this, it is clear that this reform will lead some North-based firms to begin paying taxes;

they will not leave since they were not just indifferent to location before the reform. It is

immediately obvious from the diagram that this specific tax reform raises tax revenue without

inducing any firms to relocate to the low-tax nation. More formally, this is obvious from (22)

since the average tax rate rises on all the firms paying taxes (those with a’s between aL and

aU) and it increases the range of firms paying tax since D falls. To summarise:


Result 3: A rate-lowering with base-widening tax reform that keeps the effective rate

constant on the marginal firm always increases tax revenue.


What is the government’s objective function?
The analysis up to this point has been entirely positive in the sense that it would be valid

regardless of government objectives. Taxes were not chosen by governments in our analysis.

It may be useful, nevertheless, to clarify whose welfare we have in mind when discussing the

impact of the reform. Theorists have a wide range of choices when it comes to government

objective functions, but the simplest is the utilitarian approach where the government is

concerned with the welfare of the representative citizen. The Northern indirect utility function

corresponding to (1) is:
                                                                                                                           23

              V   (ln   1)  Y  ln P ;
                                                                                                                   (24)
              Y  L  K   [ a ]  tax[ a ]dG[ a ]  K        tax[a ]dG[a ]  K  tax[a ]dG[a ]
                           1                                     1                       1
                                                            *
                           0                                    0                        0


where Y is Northern income consisting of labour income (first term), post-tax domestic capital

income (second term) and taxes (third and fourth terms). Taxes paid by domestic capital, K,

are a wash (recall that tax revenue is returned to the representative citizen who owns all the

labour and capital), so reforms will be welfare improving to the extent that they boost

Northern taxation of Southern capital, K*, or lower the Northern price index.


For the situation at hand, with an initial tax equal to t and deductible equal to D, and a reform

that changes these to leave the ETR for marginal firms unchanged, we have complete spatial

separation of firms by size. This enables simple analytic solutions. Recalling that the

denominator of B is the Northern price index raised to the 1-, and employing the B from

(19), (2) and (22) but weighted only by the mass (number) of Southern firms located in the

North, we solve the integrals to get:12


                                                                                 *                 aU  a L
     P  a L  1  a L 1 , R *  K * (
                               1
                                                                                               tD )               (25)
                                                a L  1  a L          a L   (1  a L )            


where R* is tax collected from Southern firms located in the North. In the case at hand

(complete spatial segmentation and a reform that does not change the range of Southern firms

in the North), we can by inspection see that the specific reform improves the Northern

government’s objective function (i.e. Northern welfare). Specifically, the reform increases the

range of Southern firms that pay tax (by raising aU) without altering the number (mass) of

Southern firms in the North.


Given the critical role of R* it is worth pointing out that Figure 5 and Figure 6 can be used to




                                                      E/              E * /           aU
12
     The expression to integrate is R *  (                                         )
                                                 a L  (1  a L ) a L   (1  a L ) L
                                                                                   a
                                                                                            a 1 dG[a]
                                                                                                               24

illustrate the international capital flows. Figure 5, together with the fact that we have complete

spatial separation, shows that the Southern capital that flows to the North is all the South

firms/unit-of-capital that have a’s above aL. The exact mass of the capital flows is, using (2),

aLK*. Figure 6 shows that the reform, by construction, does not produce any new capital

flows.


General tax reforms
More generally, we consider the location impact of changing the tax rate, t, and the deduction,

D, separately. Inspection of (20) shows that we cannot find a closed form solution for aL, so

the analysis must be by implicit differentiation. Totally differentiating the location condition

(20) with respect to aL, t and D yields:


                                                                         dB               dB *  
                                                              
                  aL (1   ) B (T   )  B * (T   1)  aL  (T   )
                                                                            daL
                                                                                 (1  T  )        daL
                                                                                             daL  
                                                                                                         (26)
                                  a   1
                                        L                       
                                              ( B   B )   D dT
                                                      *
                                                                           T  dD  0

where


dB      E (1   )                                        dB*        E* (1   )
              
                     a 1  0,                                           
                                                                                    a 1  0
daL [(  1)aL  1]2 L
                                                          daL    [(1   )aL   ]2 L




As long as the tax is not too high, so that T- > 0, the coefficient on daL is positive.13 Again if

the tax is not too high, some firms will be paying tax so we know aL is less than aU, so from

(19) the coefficient on dT must be positive.14 The coefficient on dD is also negative.


Combining these results on the signs of the coefficients, we have:




13
  The term (1-T)D is positive, so B(T-)-(1-T)B* must be negative if the sum is to add to zero and since  > 1,
the first term of the coefficient is negative; given the signs of dB/daL and dB*/daL, the second terms is also
negative if T > .
            1                                                      1
     Since aU ( B   B )   D  0 , and aU  a L , then aL ( B   B )   D  0 since  > 1.
14                         *                                                    *
                                                                                                    25

                                      da L          da L
                                            0,          0                                  (27)
                                       dt           dD

This says that raising the marginal tax rate will induce additional firms to relocate to the

South to escape the higher taxes. Reducing the deductible has the opposite effect since it

lowers the effective tax rate on the marginal firm. Consequently, it is possible to find a

combination of a lower marginal rate teamed with a lower deductible that attracts more

efficient/large Southern firms to the North while narrowing the range of small/inefficient non-

tax payers. It is plain therefore that the inflow of Southern efficient firms to the North induced

by the tax reform could raise the average efficiency of Northern industry.


The most productive firms are in the low-tax South so a Northern tax reform that lowers aL –

i.e. that encourages some of the Southern firms to relocate to the North – will have the rather

unexpected effect of raising average productivity in both nations. The reason is that the

marginal firm is the most efficient firm in the high-tax North when it moves, but was the

lowest-productivity firm in the South before it moved. To summarise:


Result 4: Tax reforms that induce relocation into the high-tax nation increase average

productivity in both countries.


Implications for the government objective function
By inspection of (24) and (25), we see that anything that lowers aL, i.e. reduces the range of

firms located in the South for tax reasons, will lower the Northern price index and thus boost

welfare. As some of the firms that would relocate to the North when aL falls are Southern

firms, there will also be implications for R*. Lowering aL, however, requires a reduction of

the ERT on the marginal firm and this will tend to lower the taxes collected from firms

already in the North. There is, therefore a fundamental trade off between attracting many

firms to lower the price index and gathering a lot of revenue from foreign firms. This trade-

off is not in any way novel – it is just the usual struggle between tax base and tax rate.
                                                                                                             26


V.       GLOBALISATION AND TAX REFORMS
 Our model provides a framework for considering a wide range of interactions and tax

 reforms. The previous section analytically proved that a specific, rate-lowering-base-widening

 tax reform would raise tax revenue without inducing additional relocation. Here we examine

 what happens to revenue when the tax scheme is unreformed in the face of freer trade

 (globalisation).


 One of the key points in Andersson and Forslid (2003) is that agglomeration forces produce

 taxable quasi-rents with the size of the quasi-rents varying with the level of trade freeness in a

 hump-shaped manner. The quasi-rents are low when trade is either very closed or very open,

 reaching their maximum at intermediate levels of trade freeness. Since the same basic

 agglomeration forces are in effect in our model, we also see a hump-shaped variation in quasi-

 rents. However, in our model firms relocate in reaction to such changes. In relocating, they

 alter the tax base and thus tax revenue. The net result is that globalisation – as measured by

 greater trade freeness (higher ) – has a hump-shape impact on tax revenue for a given tax

 scheme (i.e. fixed t and D).


 Numerical simulation of the tax-revenue impact of freer trade is shown in Figure 7 for a

 constant t and D.15 The bottom curve shows the impact for an initial level of D and t. Starting

 from a low level, a rise in trade freeness  would increase the agglomeration rents in the

 North if there were no firm relocation to the Northern market. The incipient profit shift,

 however, induces more firms to move to the big, high-tax Northern market, so the net result is

 a wider tax-base and higher tax revenue as shown. Specifically, the offsetting relocation

 implies that the level of profitability changes little in the North, so the tax base’s upper




 15
   The parameters we choose for the simulation are  = 2,  = 2, E = 0.6, E* = 0.4. The initial tax scheme
 involves t = 0.3 and D = 2; the reformed tax scheme involves t = 0.2 and D = 1.
                                                                                                              27

threshold, aU, changes little, but aL falls.16


     Tax Revenue

                          Small D and Small t (t’’)




                                                      Large D and Large t (t’)




                                                                    
                                         ’ ”
Figure 7: Globalisation and hump-shaped tax revenue.

The rising attractiveness of the North in the face of freer trade, however, begins to fade for

sufficiently high levels of . This is where the agglomeration rents in the North would begin

to decline if there were no offsetting relocation. As before, the relocation induced by the

incipient change in profitability reduces the tax base and results in lower tax revenue. The

figure shows that for sufficiently high ’s (which we can show is equal to 1-t) there is no

advantage to being in the big, high-tax nation for any tax-paying firm, so they all leave (i.e. aL

equals aU) and Northern tax revenue drops to zero.



Tax revenue

          Small 



        Large 




                                                      Tax rate
                                     t
                    Tax cut

Figure 8: Firm heterogeneity and tax revenue.

One of the crucial features in our model is firm heterogeneity, so we briefly consider the

16
  Freer trade affects both thresholds but has a much large impact on aL since aL depends upon the difference in
profitability in the two nations, while aU depends only upon profitability in the North.
                                                                                                   28

  impact of varying the degree of heterogeneity as measured by ρ. We focus on the impact of

  heterogeneity on the link between tax-rate cuts and tax revenue. The numerical results, shown

  in Figure 8, are generated for the same parameter values as those in footnote 15.


  According to the well-known properties of the Pareto distribution, (2), firms become more

  heterogeneous as ρ falls. What the diagram shows is that greater heterogeneity increases the

  responsiveness of revenue to rate changes. Intuitively, a low  means that a higher fraction of

  industry output and profits is concentrated in the hands of the most productive firms. Thus as

  the tax rate attracts more firms back to the North, it has a bigger impact on the tax base and

  thus on revenue. In short, in industries where firms are more heterogeneous, tax reforms are

  more effective in the sense of boosting tax revenue.


VI.      CONCLUSION
  We have proposed a simple model in which agglomeration forces are present and firms are

  heterogeneous. Both extensions are useful in allowing the theoretical international tax

  literature to consider a broader range of effects than has hitherto been possible, specifically in

  studying the impact of a very simple tax scheme where firm-specific effective tax rates

  depend upon firm size. The presence of agglomeration forces allows consideration of the

  international trade competition issues raised in Andersson and Forslid (2003) and Baldwin

  and Krugman (2004) in the context of identical firms, but extends them to allow for

  heterogeneous firms. Allowing for firm heterogeneity permits a given tax scheme to have a

  different effect on the relocation decision of small and big firms, with the biggest firms being

  the most likely to relocate to escape high-taxes imposed in the big nation.


  The theoretical policy experiments we conduct in this paper concern: 1) the impact of a rate-

  cutting-base-widening reform, and 2) the impact of freer trade (i.e. globalisation) on the tax

  competition. The model should also help inform future empirical research concerning the
                                                                                           29

impact of tax reforms on tax revenue, firm location and average productivity using firm level

data sets.


        REFERENCES

Ahmed, S. (2004), Modelling corporate tax liabilities using company data, Cambridge

        Working Papers in Economics No. 412.


Andersson, F. and R. Forslid, (2003), Tax Competition and Economic Geography, Journal of

        Public Economics; 5 (2), pp 279-303.


Auriol, E. and M. Warlters, (2005), Taxation base in developing countries, Journal of Public

        Economics, Elsevier, vol. 89(4), pp 625-646.


Baer, K., (2002), Improving large taxpayers’ compliance a review of country experience,

        IMF Occasional Paper. IMF.


Baldwin, R. and P. Krugman (2004), Agglomeration, Integration and Tax Harmonisation,

        European Economic Review 48 (1): pp1-23.


Baldwin, R. and T. Okubo (2006a), Heterogeneous Firms, Agglomeration and Economic

        Geography: Spatial Selection and Sorting, Journal of Economics Geography 6:

        pp.323-346.


Baldwin, R. and T. Okubo (2006b), Agglomeration, Offshoring and Heterogeneous Firms,

        CEPR Discussion Paper 5663.


Burbidge, J., K. Cuff and J. Leach (2004), Capital tax competition with heterogeneous firms

        and agglomeration effects, CESifo Working Paper Series.


Burbidge, J., K. Cuff and J. Leach (2006), Tax competition with heterogeneous firms,
                                                                                             30

       Journal of Public Economics, 90 (3), pp.533-549.


Crabbé, K. (2006), Strategic Corporate Tax Competition in Italy, manuscript, Katholieke

       Universiteit Leuven, in mimeo,

       www.econ.kuleuven.be/public/ndbae84/On_going_work/ETR_Italy_2.pdf.


Davis, D. and D. Weinstein (1999), Economic Geography and Regional Production Structure:

       An empirical investigation European Economic Review 43 (2), pp379-407.


Davis, D. and D. Weinstein (2003), Market Access, Economic Geography, and Comparative

       Advantage: An empirical assessment, Journal of International Economics 59 (1):

       pp1-23.


Haufler, A. and G. Schjelderup (2000), Corporate tax systems and cross country profit

       shifting, Oxford Economic Papers 52, pp 306-325.


Holland, K. (1998), Accounting policy choice: the relationship between corporate tax burdens

       and company size, Journal of Business Finance & Accounting, 25(3) & (4),

       April/May 1998.


Kind, H., K.H. Midelfart-Knarvik, and G. Schjelderup (2000), Competing for Capital in a

       lumpy world, Journal of Public Economics 78, pp253-274.


Krugman, P. (1980), Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade,

       American Economic Review, vol. 70(5), pages 950-59.


Ludema, R. and I. Wooton (1998), Economic geography and the fiscal effects of regional

       integration, Journal of International Economics 52 (2): pp331-357.


Martin, P. and C. Rogers (1995), Industrial location and public infrastructure, Journal of

       International Economics 39: pp335-351.
                                                                                        31

Melitz, M. (2003), The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate

       Industry Productivity, Econometrica, Vol. 71, November 2003, pp. 1695-1725.


OECD (2003), Using Micro-Data to Assess Average Tax Rates, Tax Policy Studies No. 08,

       OECD Publishing, Paris.


Shome, P. (2004), Tax Administration and the Small Taxpayer, IMF Policy Discussion

       Paper, 04-2.


Vandenbussche H., Janssen B., Crabbé K. (2006), Regional tax competition. Firm level

       evidence for Belgium, De Economist, vol. 153 n° 3, pp 257-276.


Wilson, J. (1986), A Theory of Interregional Tax Competition, Journal of Urban Economics

       19, 296-315.


Zimmerman, J. L. (1983), Taxes and firm size. Journal of Accounting and Economics, 5,

       119–149.
