                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      DEFAULT, FRAMING AND SPILLOVER EFFECTS:
                     THE CASE OF LIFECYCLE FUNDS IN 401(K) PLANS

                                          Olivia S. Mitchell
                                          Gary R. Mottola
                                          Stephen P. Utkus
                                         Takeshi Yamaguchi

                                        Working Paper 15108
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15108


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2009




This research is part of the NBER programs on Aging and Labor Economics and was undertaken
 pursuant to a grant from the US Social Security Administration (SSA) to the Michigan Retirement
Research Center (MRRC). This research support is gratefully acknowledged along with that of the
Pension Research Council at The Wharton School and Vanguard. The authors also acknowledge Vanguard’s
efforts in the provision of recordkeeping data under restricted access conditions. They benefited from
the suggestions of Brigitte Madrian, Alexander Muermann, and Stephen Shore. Opinions, errors, and
conclusions are solely those of the authors and do not represent the views of the SSA, any agency
of the Federal Government, Vanguard, the MRRC, the NBER or any other institution with which the
authors may be affiliated.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Olivia S. Mitchell, Gary R. Mottola, Stephen P. Utkus, and Takeshi Yamaguchi. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Default, Framing and Spillover Effects: ¸˛The Case of Lifecycle Funds in 401(k) Plans
Olivia S. Mitchell, Gary R. Mottola, Stephen P. Utkus, and Takeshi Yamaguchi
NBER Working Paper No. 15108
June 2009
JEL No. G11,G2,G23,H3,H55,J14,J26

                                             ABSTRACT

Important behavioral factors such as default and framing effects are increasingly being employed to
optimize decision-making in a variety of settings, including individually-directed retirement plans.
Yet such approaches may have unintended “spillover” effects, as we show with regard to the introduction
of lifecycle funds in U.S. 401(k) plans. As anticipated, lifecycle funds do reshape individual portfolio
choices through large default and framing effects. But unexpectedly, they also create a new class of
investors which holds these funds as part of more complex portfolios. Our results are directly relevant
to those interested in retirement plan design and retirement security; they also highlight the importance
of assessing such spillover effects in other consequential settings where behavioral economics techniques
may be employed.


Olivia S. Mitchell                                  Stephen P. Utkus
University of Pennsylvania                          Vanguard Center for Retirement Research
Wharton School                                      100 Vanguard Boulevard, M38
3620 Locust Walk, St 3000 SH-DH                     Malvern, PA 19355
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302                         steve_utkus@vanguard.com
and NBER
mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu                          Takeshi Yamaguchi
                                                    Wharton School,Univ. of Pennsylvania
Gary R. Mottola                                     3620 Locust Walk, St 3000 SH-DH
Vanguard Center for Retirement Research             Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
100 Vanguard Boulevard, M38                         tyamaguc@wharton.upenn.edu
Malvern, PA 19355
gmottola@vanguard.com
                                                                                                                    1




                          Default, Framing and Spillover Effects:
                         The Case of Lifecycle Funds in 401(k) Plans
          Olivia S. Mitchell, Gary R. Mottola, Stephen P. Utkus and Takeshi Yamaguchi

I. Introduction

         Default options and framing techniques have both emerged as useful strategies for

remedying numerous apparent deficiencies in individual decision-making. For example, in the

case of U.S. defined contribution (DC) plans, the U.S. Treasury in 1997 introduced an opt-out or

automatic enrollment regime in an effort to boost worker retirement saving. This design change

dramatically improved saving by low-wage and younger workers. The success of automatic

enrollment has in turn prompted a broader discussion of the role that "choice architecture" might

play in optimizing decisions in other domains, such as the environment, consumer protection,

and health care (Thaler and Sunstein, 2008).

         Following on this earlier success, the U.S. Department of Labor in 2007 sanctioned a new

class of default investments for DC retirement plans (known as qualified default investment

alternatives or QDIAs) under the Pension Protection Act. The aim of this new policy was to

improve portfolio allocations among defaulted participants. One popular type of QDIA, known

as lifecycle or target maturity funds, are pension investment options that radically simplify

portfolio allocation decisions.1 With a lifecycle investment offering, plan participants select a

portfolio based only on an expected year of retirement. The fund’s portfolio manager is

responsible for all portfolio construction decisions, including initial allocations, daily rebalancing

and portfolio changes over the lifecycle. When offered on a voluntary (non-automatic) basis,

lifecycle funds might be expected to appeal to individuals with little or no experience with
1
 In this paper we reserve the term “lifecycle fund” for the lifecycle concept. The term "lifecycle" is sometimes
broadened to include risk-based static allocation (SA) funds, such as conservative, moderate or aggressive funds.
SA funds are increasingly referred to as “lifestyle” funds.
                                                                                                   2



portfolio allocation decisions – we refer to this as the investment framing effect, as it reframes a

complex portfolio choice decision as a simpler one. When these are designated by the plan

sponsor as a default investment, lifecycle funds would be expected to alter portfolio allocations

because of inertia – a default effect. But as we show in this paper, default and framing effects

are an incomplete account of the behavioral impact of changing the “choice architecture” in

retirement plans. Drawing on a rich dataset of nearly a quarter-million 401(k) participants

covered by over 250 plans in a variety of default and voluntary choice settings, we find that the

introduction of lifecycle funds also produces an unexpected result: it prompts the growth of a

sizeable new class of investors which uses these funds in unanticipated ways. This unanticipated

change in behavior we refer to as a “spillover” effect.

       Our paper builds on an important literature regarding default effects in retirement plans,

particularly with respect to savings decisions (Madrian and Shea, 2001; Choi et al., 2003, 2005,

2006; Nessmith, Utkus and Young, 2007). It also builds upon an extensive body of literature on

portfolio allocation and trading choices, both in retirement plans and personal accounts

(O’Donoghue and Rabin, 1999; 2001; Benartzi, 2001; Benartzi and Thaler, 2001, 2002; Ameriks

and Zeldes, 2004; Agnew, Balduzzi, and Sunden, 2003; Mitchell, Mottola, Utkus, and

Yamaguchi, 2006a and 2006b; Benartzi, Peleg and Thaler, 2007; Calvet, Campbell and Sodini,

2009). We also draw directly from earlier findings that retirement plan investment menus frame

individual portfolio allocation decisions in sizeable ways, either as a result of inertia or naïve

decision-making (Benartzi and Thaler, 2001, 2002; Huberman and Jiang, 2006; Brown, Liang

and Weisbenner; 2006) or in reaction to excessive complexity, also known as “choice overload”

(Iyengar, Huberman and Jiang, 2004; Iyengar and Jiang, 2006). Two of these studies (Benartzi,

2001; Choi et. al., 2003) demonstrate similar unintended consequences among individuals who
                                                                                                                     3



are affected by default designations. But our results offer a more expansive understanding of the

effects of changes in decision architectures. As with prior studies, we confirm that default and

framing effects reshape individual choices and help explain many behavioral effects. But these

factors do not account for the full range of outcomes: indeed, as we show here, large unexpected

or spillover effects arise among individuals making voluntary choices, and in the case of

lifecycle funds, the latter can be as significant as the original intended default effects.

        In what follows, we begin by describing our dataset and the rich complexity that arises

with the introduction of lifecycle funds in 401(k) plans. The empirical approach first considers

models of lifecycle fund adoption; next we analyze the impact that such adoption has on

portfolio characteristics. We conclude with a discussion of the implications of our findings for

retirement policy and more broadly for models of behaviorally-influenced decision-making.



II. Data and Descriptive Statistics

        To assess how the introduction of lifecycle funds affects 401(k) decision-making, we

investigate a unique panel dataset covering 258 defined contribution plans drawn from

Vanguard’s 401(k) recordkeeping system. The full sample used to explore adoption patterns

includes over 252,000 active participants in plans that introduced lifecycle funds during 2003-05;

all participants entering and leaving the plans due to normal workforce turnover are included in

the full sample.2 Variables available for empirical analysis include a wealth of detail on 401(k)

account balances, investment holdings, and account contributions,3 as well as key socioeconomic




2
  Active 401(k) participants are those who are currently contributing to their employer’s retirement plan.
3
  We focus our portfolio analysis on 401(k) contributions rather than fund balances because contributions are more
reflective of forward-looking intentions and unbiased by prior holdings.
                                                                                                                        4



characteristics including age, sex, household income, and non-retirement financial wealth.4 Also

available are important features about each plan’s offered investment menu, including the

number and types of investment funds offered and other plan design details. In addition, our

dataset includes monthly returns for all investments offered over an eight-year period (including

the three-year period under analysis as well as the five years preceding it).

         Table 1 outlines the key attributes of the lifecycle funds introduced by our employers

over the period under study. Each lifecycle fund is named according to its target maturity date;

each involves a different mix of passively-managed US equity (including large-, mid- and small-

capitalization stocks), international equity (both developed and emerging markets), and US high-

quality bonds. Panel A indicates that total equity exposure in the funds for the younger

participants averages 89 percent (in the 2035 and 2045 Funds) versus 29 percent for older

participants in the Income Fund intended for those in their 60s and beyond. Panel B of Table 2

depicts how the lifecycle funds were introduced. In 45 percent of the plans lifecycle funds were

introduced de novo while in 55 percent of the plans, the participants had been previously offered

static allocation (SA) or risk-based funds. In this latter group, one set of plans added lifecycle

funds to a menu that included pre-existing SA funds, while the other group switched or

“mapped” the plans from SA to lifecycle funds.5 Finally, in some cases, the employer designated

the new lifecycle funds as the plan default. The default option influences mainly new hires who

are automatically enrolled (or who enroll on a voluntary basis but failed to submit an investment

election with their enrollment).

4
  Household income is imputed based on zip codes as is non-retirement financial wealth, and is provided by the IXI
Company.
5
  In the case of mapping from SA to lifecycle funds, sponsors could either switch all participant SA balances and
contributions into the new lifecycle funds, or allow existing balances to remain undisturbed while switching future
contributions into lifecycle funds. In both cases, the new lifecycle allocations would reflect the sponsor’s decision
to move the money, rather than representing an active employee election.
                                                                                                                5



Table 1 here

        Table 2 summarizes characteristics of the plans and covered workers.                             There is

substantial diversity by age, income, 401(k) account balance, and non-retirement financial wealth

in our full sample (Column 1). Nearly one-fifth are new hires. The mean 401(k) balance is just

over $64,000.

Table 2 here

        From this aggregate sample, we draw a group of lifecycle adopters for use in a

difference-in-difference (D-D) analysis of portfolio effects. This subset consists of lifecycle

adopters who were continuously employed in our panel during the 2003-2005 period; in other

words, it excludes new hires. Because default designations in our sample overwhelmingly apply

only to new hires, this group excludes defaulted new hires, and only consists of participants who

voluntarily chose lifecycle funds once they were introduced into their 401(k) plans. Comparing

these lifecycle participants with the full sample (Columns 1 and 2), we see that (non-defaulted)

lifecycle adopters tend to be younger, more female, and earn less than the full sample; they also

have lower 401(k) balances.

        Lifecycle funds by their nature are intended as a single or complete portfolio. In keeping

with this intent, almost half (n = 10,750 or 44 percent) of those in the D-D sample are “pure”

adopters and direct their entire contributions to lifecycle funds (Column 3). The remainder of the

adopters (n = 13,862 or 56%) utilize lifecycle funds in an unexpected way: they contribute to

lifecycle funds along with other investment options in their portfolio (Column 4).6 Pure (non-

default) adopters are younger and more female compared to mixed (non-default) adopters, and



6
 Over 95% of pure adopters contribute to only one lifecycle fund; mixed adopters contribute to 4.5 funds on
average.
                                                                                                     6



they have lower 401(k) balances and non-retirement financial wealth. By comparison, mixed

(non-default) adopters tend to be older, more affluent males.



III. Factors Influencing the Adoption of Lifecycle Funds

       Retirement plan participants may come to invest in lifecycle funds in a variety of ways.

First, the employer may designate the lifecycle funds as a default investment. As a result,

participants who are automatically enrolled (or who voluntarily decide to contribute but fail to

submit an investment election) are directed by design into an appropriate age-based fund, thus

eliciting a so-called default effect. Second, lifecycle funds may be offered to participants on a

voluntary (non-default) basis. The lifecycle funds examined here add neither new asset classes

nor investment management styles to the retirement plans we examine. As a result, participants

electing them on a non-default basis would presumably be doing so because the funds simplify

the portfolio allocation decision – what we refer to as the investment framing effect. But third,

in the voluntary choice setting that characterizes 401(k) investment decision-making, participants

may choose to invest in lifecycle funds using a more complex portfolio strategy, combining them

with other plan investments. This is the unintended spillover effect.

       To assess the factors associated with each of these three outcomes—default, framing and

spillover effects—we begin with a straightforward Probit analysis of lifecycle fund adoption. In

equation (1), LCAdopteri,j,t refers to the probability that the ith participant holds a lifecycle fund

in the jth plan in month t as follows:

        LCAdopteri , j ,t  PARTICIPANT  βPLAN  TREATMENT   i   t   j   i , j ,t (1)
                                                                                                                        7



where the dependent variable takes a value of 1 if the participant invests in a lifecycle fund in

month t, and 0 otherwise. The mean value of this time-weighted adoption rate is 15.1%.7 For

this analysis we use the full data (as described in Table 2), which includes both continuously

employed participants as well as new hires entering the plan for the first time. The

PARTICIPANT vector includes a New Entrant identifier indicating whether the participant

entered the plan after the lifecycle funds were offered (0 otherwise). The TREATMENT vector

measures aspects associated with the way in which lifecycle funds were introduced: for instance,

a Default indicator indicates whether the new lifecycle funds were designated as the default

investment option. We also interact Default and New Entrant to reveal the effect of new plan

entrants being defaulted into the lifecycle funds. 8 In addition, we control on the number of

months since lifecycle funds were introduced, Time Count (and that same variable squared), to

indicate the time path of impact of lifecycle adoption. The model also incorporates participant

socioeconomic characteristics including age, income, sex, and non-retirement financial wealth.

To control on cross-plan differences, the PLAN vector indicates the number of fund choices on

offer, a dummy indicating company stock is available in the 401(k) plan, and an indicator of loan

availability. For reasons noted above, we also control on SA_Before which indicates whether

static allocation funds had been previously offered.9




7
  The mean value of lifecycle adoption is not 10% (in Table 1, 24,612 lifecycle adopters divided by 252,980
participants) because our measure is weighted according to the months in which lifecycle funds were offered. For
example, if lifecycle funds were offered in a given plan during 18 months of our analysis period, and a participant in
that plan contributed to those funds over nine months, his adoption rate would be 50%.
8
  Not all new entrants are new hires. Many of the plans in our sample allow immediate eligibility for the plan to
new hires though a minority imposes a six- or twelve-month waiting period.
9
  The econometric models correct for plan-level heteroskedasticity ( i ), time fixed effects (  t ), and industry fixed
effects, along with missing data controls.
                                                                                                   8



       Table 3 reports estimated coefficients and marginal effects for the Probit regression. The

most prominent finding is the strength of the default effect: if an employer designates lifecycle

funds as the default investment, the likelihood of participants adopting the funds surges by 10.9

percentage points, an increase of 66% in the mean adoption rate. (This might be called the “PPA

effect,” a measure of how much participation in lifecycle funds rises as a result of employers’

decisions to designate lifecycle funds as plan default investments under the 2006 Pension

Protection Act.) The default effect for new participants is even higher, indicating that newly

eligible employees are 14.5 percentage points more likely to elect lifecycle funds when the

employer offers these as the default investment.

Table 3 here

       While the default effect is strong, lifecycle funds also prove to attract participants making

voluntary choices. This framing effect is quite powerful among new hires: even when the fund is

not the default, new hires are still 6.6 percentage points more likely to adopt lifecycle funds. In

addition, lifecycle funds are also more likely to be adopted by participants with characteristics

typically associated with low levels of financial literacy (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007). In our

regression results, young and female participants, as well as those with low 401(k) balances and

low levels of non-financial retirement wealth, are more likely to invest in lifecycle funds on a

voluntary (non-default) basis. With their ultra-simple decision framework, lifecycle funds

eliminate the need to make complex portfolio construction decisions.

       Two other subtleties are associated with the framing effects of lifecycle funds. Voluntary

adoption of the funds appears to evolve linearly with time, such that each month following the

introduction of the funds boosts adoption rates by 0.4 points. In other words, the framing effect

becomes more attractive to participants with time. Also offering more funds in the 401(k) menu
                                                                                                    9



slightly reduces participation in lifecycle funds. The effect is small (having 10 additional funds

means a two percentage point lower chance of holding lifecycle funds) but it does suggest that

the appeal of lifecycle funds is contingent on the breadth of the other investment offerings.

       The results summarized in Table 3 combine pure investors (adopting only a single

lifecycle fund) with mixed investors (combining lifecycle funds with other investments). These

mixed investors are evidence of our unintended or second-order spillover effect. To further

disentangle differences between pure versus mixed lifecycle adopters, Table 4 reports marginal

effects calculated from a multinomial Logit model where the dependent variable equals 1 if the

participant is a mixed adopter; 2 if he is a pure adopter; and 0 if he is a nonadopter (the reference

group). The explanatory variables are the same as in the prior Probit model. Measured on a time-

weighted adoption basis, there are somewhat more pure adopters (8.6 percent of the sample)

versus mixed (7.7 percent).

Table 4 here

       For the pure investors, we see a default effect similar in magnitude to the prior Probit

model: the default designation raises adoption by 5 points on a time-weighted adoption rate base

of 8.6 percent, or 58 percent on a relative basis. The framing effects for pure investors are also

similar: new entrants are more likely to be pure adopters, as are young, female, low income, low

401(k) balance and low non-retirement wealth participants. The prevalence of pure adoption

also rises over time. By contrast, mixed adopters are unlike pure adopters along a number of

dimensions: for instance, they are less influenced by the plan's default fund designation

compared to pure adopters. Also the impact of the default designation on new hires is actually

negative: new hires who are defaulted are more likely to be pure adopters and less likely to be

mixed adopters. Demographically, mixed investors are likely to be younger and female, but
                                                                                                                 10



relatively less so than pure adopters. Moreover, they tend to be middle income and middle-

wealth participants compared to non-adopters. Mixed investors, in other words, do not appear to

possess the types of demographic characteristics or default behavior typically associated with

low levels of financial sophistication. It is true that they could simply be a group of middle-

income and middle-wealth participants plagued by naïve diversification, combining lifecycle

funds with other options at random (Benartzi and Thaler, 2001). But another possibility is that

they are engaged in a more sophisticated approach to investing.10 Additional survey research is

needed to elicit the types of motivations driving the construction of these mixed portfolio

strategies. But at least from our data set, we can ascertain that the motivations, whether rational

or naïve, are disproportionately linked to middle-income and middle-wealth participants.

        In sum, introducing lifecycle accounts have differential default and framing effects across

pension plan participants. Altering the 401(k) choice architecture generates both intended and

unintended consequences: default and framing effects are statistically and economically

meaningful among pure investors, but the spillover effect is sizeable and results in the creation of

a new class of mixed investors.



IV. Portfolio Changes Arising from the Introduction of Lifecycle Funds

        We turn next to an assessment of how participant portfolios respond to changes in the

choice architecture of 401(k) plans. Life cycle funds are structured so that portfolio risk levels

decline with age following a so-called "equity glide path": younger participants intending to

retire further in the future will have a higher equity fraction and less fixed income, while older


10
  For example, mixed adopters may only want to have a portion of their portfolio to be automatically rebalanced, or
they may be engaging in a “core/satellite” strategy of having the lifecycle fund as a core holding, supplemented by
satellite funds.
                                                                                                                  11



investors in these age-linked funds would hold less risky portfolios. In a rational agents’ world,

we would not expect the introduction of lifecycle funds to alter the age structure of equity

allocations. But if participants are swayed by default and framing and spillover effects, we might

expect that lifecycle funds will alter the equity gradient among participants. It is also worth

noting that the lifecycle funds in our sample are passive or index-based, and the participants in

our sample could have accessed a broad-based market index portfolio on their own, separate

from the lifecycle funds. As a result, in a world in which 401(k) decision-makers are unduly

influenced by behavioral biases, we might anticipate that the introduction of low-cost indexed

lifecycle funds would reduce the share of idiosyncratic risk in portfolios.

           We use a difference-in-difference model to evaluate the impact of lifecycle fund adoption

on portfolio characteristics. Since we must observe a "before” portfolio (before lifecycle funds

were introduced), as well as an “after” portfolio, we omit new entrants and hence new workers

who were directly defaulted into lifecycle funds. For this reason, our difference-in-difference

analysis is based on the subset of approximately 25,000 participants who adopted a lifecycle

fund on a voluntary (non-default) basis, and focuses on framing and spillover (but not default)

effects.

           Table 5 describes investment attributes of lifecycle adopter portfolios before and after

lifecycle funds join the menu, specifically, one month prior to adoption (time t-1) and six months

later (time t+6).11 Panel A summaries the allocation of participant contributions by major asset

class including cash (money market or guaranteed investment contracts), bonds, balanced or

lifecycle (and/or lifestyle) funds, US equities, employer stock, and international equities.

11
  Because we observe participants six months after lifecycle funds are offered, both the full sample and subset of
adopters include only plans which introduced lifecycle funds by 6/05. The lifecycle adopter subset has 7 fewer
plans because these had no lifecycle adopters as of December 12/05. Of the 252,000 participants in the full dataset,
189,968 were included in their plan both one month before and six months after the lifecycle funds were introduced.
                                                                                                                    12



Overall, lifecycle adopters held more cash, bonds, and equity funds before the introduction of the

lifecycle funds; afterwards, their balanced and lifecycle holdings rises by 12 percent. It is also

interesting that many lifecycle adopters contributed to balanced or static allocation funds before

the new lifecycle funds were introduced; these funds account for 79 percent of pure adopters’

and 35 percent of mixed adopters’ contributions. This finding points to the importance of

controlling on the prior presence of the pre-existing menu design in order to evaluate the impact

of lifecycle funds on participant behavior. Pure lifecycle adopters cut their cash position by

almost five percent and their pure US equity holdings by 11 percent, and increase by 21 percent

their ownership of balanced funds; the impact is smaller for mixed lifecycle adopters.

Table 5 here

         Panel B of Table 5 displays three portfolio attributes measured for lifecycle adopters,

again on a pre/post basis. The first attribute is the percent of the portfolio held in equities,12

where we see that, before the menu changed, the average lifecycle adopter directed two-thirds of

his contributions to equities. After the introduction of the lifecycle fund, equity allocations rise

by 1.4 percent for all adopters, with pure adopters devoting somewhat less and mixed adopters

somewhat more to equity. The second column of Panel B illustrates how participant portfolios

change in terms of overall systematic or risk-adjusted return. A participant’s systematic return is

the sum of the risk-free rate during the period, r f , and each participant’s factor return, or rie,t ,

derived from a three-factor asset pricing model.13 The results show that expected returns rise


12
   Equity allocation is equal to the percentage of contributions directed to US equity funds, international equity
funds, company stock, and a percentage of balance/lifecycle funds. The equity percentage for balanced/lifecycle
funds was calculated based on each fund’s investment policies and varies from fund to fund.
13
   Factor returns are computed using a three-factor model based on US equities, US bonds, and international equities
because, as noted earlier, the lifecycle funds in our dataset are composed of index-based funds mirroring these three
asset classes. To calculate portfolio returns we construct a risk-loading matrix for all k investment options in our
dataset by regressing the excess return (over Treasury bill returns) for each of the k assets in our universe on three
                                                                                                                                               13



across the board for all adopters as well as for pure and mixed adopters (before controlling on

other factors including time effects; we say more on this below). Also the difference in expected

returns between pure and mixed adopters is small. For example, on a “before” basis, mixed

adopters held 15 percent more equity than pure adopters (70.7 is 15 percent higher than 61.4),

but their returns were only two percent higher (6.52 is two percent greater than 6.38). This

suggests that those who later become pure lifecycle investors had successfully constructed more

efficient portfolios with lower equity exposure but similar expected returns, mainly through

static allocation (lifestyle) and balanced fund holdings.14

          A third portfolio attribute reported in Table 3 is the ratio of idiosyncratic portfolio risk as

a fraction of total portfolio variance, NSR / TVi ,t . 15 This measure describes how much of portfolio

variance is explained by nonsystematic or non-market factors. By definition, nonsystematic risk

should be zero when all of a participant’s contributions are directed to index-based lifecycle


market indices: the value-weighted CRSP portfolio, the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index (LBA), and the
Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI) Europe, Australia and Far East (EAFE) Index. The systematic return
for each 401(k) investment option is simply its factor exposure times the average factor returns over the period; the
participant’s factor return is simply the weighted average return of his or her factor exposures over the period. The
mean returns of our three factors (CRPS, LBA and EAFE) over the 96-month period are given by:
 r f  (rCRSPRF ,t , rLBARF ,t , rMSCIRF ,t ) . The systematic return associated with the kth asset is its factor exposure times
the average factor returns over the 96 months, namely: rk  bk r f . The ith participant’s excess return reported in
                                                                e           '

                                N
                        ri    k ,t rk , where i ,k ,t is the weight of the kth fund in the ith participant’s
                          e               e
Panel B of Table 3 is
                               k 1
contributions made in month t.
14
 Virtually all of the SA funds in our sample included broad exposure to US and international equities, as well as
US bonds. Many of the balanced funds did as well, although some were exclusively US-focused.
15
   NSR / TVi ,t  ˆ idio
                     i    / ˆ i . We estimate the variance-covariance matrix for all assets ̂ , which in turn is used to
estimate the total portfolio variance for the ith participant, ̂ . 
                                                                    ˆ ˆ ' ˆ 
                                                                        i
                                                                               ˆ  Dˆ , where D̂ is a diagonal matrix
                                                                                   f

with elements computed as the square of the ˆk estimated in equation (2). The asset variance can be decomposed
into systematic risk, 
                      ˆ sys  
                              ˆ 'ˆ f 
                                      ˆ and idiosyncratic risk D̂ idio . Individual portfolio variance can be decomposed
                                                 ˆ i  i ,k ,t ˆ i ,k ,t  i ,k ,t (ˆ
into its systematic and idiosyncratic component: 
                                                                    '              '         sys
                                                                                                    Dˆ idio )i ,k ,t  ˆ isys  ˆ idio
                                                                                                                                      i    .
                                                                                                  14



funds. Not surprisingly, given that all of our funds are index-based, this measure of risk is

eliminated for pure lifecycle adopters and it falls substantially for mixed adopters.

       In a multivariate analysis of portfolio effects, we examine factors associated with the

same three portfolio characteristics, namely the individual’s allocation to equities, his systematic

returns, and his nonsystematic risk. The dependent variables are represented in a vector of

portfolio characteristics, PORTFOLIOi,j,t , , with the model taking the following form:

            PORTFOLIOi , j ,t  PARTICIPANT  βPLAN  TREATMENT

                                         i   t   j   i , j ,t .   (2)

Model A includes just these terms, while Model B adds interaction terms to test whether specific

groups display differential treatment patterns when lifecycle funds are introduced. For example,

LC_Treat*Young allows us to examine the differential impact of lifecycle treatment on

participants under age 35.

       Table 6 summarizes estimates for the equity allocation models, differentiating results for

pure and mixed adopters. The variable LC_Treat in Model A captures the simple change in

equity allocation after controlling for differences in participant and plan features, timing and

industry fixed effects, and plan-level heteroskedasticity. All else constant, pure adopters devote

less to equity (1.8 percentage points) but no change is seen for mixed adopters. Model B adds

treatment interactions for participant and plan characteristics, the most important of which is

with respect to age. Here it is clear that for pure and mixed adopters, younger workers invest

more in equity after lifecycle funds are introduced (LC_Treat + LC_Treat*Young), whereas

middle-aged and older people reduce their equity share. Figure 1 summarizes the age effects; the

old-young difference increases by 8-10 percentage points. It is also worth noting that the
                                                                                                                    15



changes in equity shares by age remains meaningful for mixed adopters, who on average direct

one-third of their portfolio contributions to lifecycle funds.

Table 6 and Figure 1 here

         Not only does the overall age variation in equity exposure change when lifecycle funds

are introduced, but the distribution also becomes markedly less disperse (see Figure 2). 16

Whereas many participants had previously held equity holdings at two focal points (0 and 100

percent), and another group held a mid-range of equities (61-65 percent, a typical allocation in

many balanced funds), adopters’ portfolios change dramatically after the new funds are offered.

For pure adopters (Figure 2A), their revised equity holdings now concentrate around the key

target percentages underlying the lifecycle fund offerings. For mixed adopters (Figure 2B), the

zero and all-equity allocations are again mostly eliminated, though the changes are smaller.

Overall the cross-sectional standard deviation of equity allocations is reduced.

Figure 2 here

         Next we consider the impact of lifecycle fund introduction on portfolio efficiency

measures. As shown in the first two columns of Table 7, pure adopters can expect higher

systematic returns of 19-21 basis points per year when they shift to an all-lifecycle portfolio.

The change in the age gradient of equity allocations results in a change in age-related returns:

young pure adopters see returns rise by an annualized 13 basis points (.0019-.0006), while older

pure adopters can returns fall by 25 basis points (.0019+.0006) per year, partly due to their




16
  Corresponding statistics measuring the dispersion of equity allocations are presented in the Appendix, both for
plans offering the funds de novo or in substitute for static allocation funds.
                                                                                                                     16



having been shifted to more conservative allocations at older ages. 17 For mixed adopters,

depicted in the next two columns of Table 7, changes in returns are not statistically significant.

Table 7 here

        The second half of Table 7 indicates how portfolio nonsystematic risk shares (NSR)

change when lifecycle funds are introduced. Not surprisingly, nonsystematic risk virtually

disappears for pure adopters who switch their contributions to an all-index life cycle fund. It

accounted for 6 percentage points of total variance before lifecycle fund adoption and the

marginal effect of shifting to lifecycle funds is a negative 5.1 percentage points. The NSR share

falls less for younger participants (-2.9 percentage points) than for older participants (-6.2

percentage points). Changes for mixed adopters are more notable: after moving to lifecycle

funds, their NSR risk share declines by over 40 percent (a marginal effect of -8.3 on a mean of

19.9 percentage points). Accordingly, even middle-income mixed adopters who use lifecycle

funds for only portion of their portfolios will still experience a meaningful reduction in

nonsystematic risk exposure. In effect, we have another measure of the spillover effect: a

reduction in idiosyncratic risk intended for the pure adopter spills over into a broader population

of investors.

        These results highlight the power of framing effects on the structure of portfolio

decisions. For pure investors electing lifecycle funds on a voluntary basis, adopting the lifecycle

offerings boosts equity exposure with age, eliminates extreme asset allocations, enhances

portfolio efficiency, and reduces nonsystematic risk exposure. Our results also identify


17
   Pure lifecycle investors generally liquidate cash investments and shift their fixed income to bonds. Cash
investments have zero excess returns by definition, while over our study period, bonds earned excess returns of 23
basis points per month. Our younger pure adopters moved from a cash exposure of 3% to 0% when moving to
lifecycle funds, while older participants moved from 9% to 0%. For mixed adopters, younger participants reduced
equity holdings slightly, from 8% to 6%, while older participants moved from 11% to 9%.
                                                                                               17



meaningful and interesting spillover effects for mixed adopters, where introducing life cycle

funds compresses the variability in equity holdings, reduces extreme allocations, and curtails

nonsystematic risk – even when they do not move entirely into the lifecycle options. Spillover

effects, in other words, extend beyond adoption outcomes to reshape portfolio risk and return

characteristics.



V. Discussion

        Default, framing, and other behaviorally-based strategies have been proposed in several

domains as a possible alternative to the need for enhanced consumer protection. In the pension

environment, this approach has prompted policy reforms including automatic enrollment and the

creation of a new class of designated default investments for 401(k) plans. Our paper considers

whether default and framing effects are a sufficient explanation for the behavioral outcomes that

arise from a change in the choice architecture. We use the introduction of lifecycle funds into

401(k) plans as a consequential decision-making environment for assessing this question.

        Our findings demonstrate that changes in a given choice architecture, while having

expected default and framing effects, can also have important unanticipated or spillover effects.

Specifically, we find, as anticipated, strong evidence of default and framing effects: adoption

rates among pure investors, investing as intended in a single lifecycle fund, are nearly 60%

higher when the funds are designated as a default investment option. Also, in voluntary (non-

default) settings, the funds are chosen by individuals with characteristics often associated with

low levels of financial experience, namely young, low-income, and low-wealth investors.

Because the lifecycle funds add no new asset classes to the retirement plans we examined, this
                                                                                                  18



effect measures the appeal of the unique decision framing offered by a lifecycle fund—replacing

the portfolio construction process with the choice of an expected retirement date.

       But the introduction of lifecycle funds also produces a large spillover effect, namely, the

creation of a large group of mixed investors who utilize lifecycle funds in a more complex

approach to retirement saving. While this was an unexpected result from lifecycle fund

introduction, the effect is sizeable: the group of mixed investors is only slightly smaller than the

pure investors. Moreover, "mixed" adopters are typically middle-income and middle-wealth

investors, not characteristics typically associated with low levels of sophistication or naive

diversification. The spillover effect does result in meaningful changes to these mixed adopter

portfolios. These include less extreme portfolio allocations, more age-based variation in equity

exposure, and less idiosyncratic risk.

       These results are directly relevant for retirement policymakers and plan sponsors seeking

to influence investment patterns in 401(k) plans. To the extent that the simplified framing of

lifecycle funds appeals to participants with characteristics indicative of low financial

sophistication, the designation of such funds as a default can markedly enhance portfolio

allocations for the least-informed group. Also lifecycle funds have been proposed for the federal

government employee Thrift Savings Plan, some state defined contribution schemes, and a

defined contribution plan suggested for the US Social Security system. Other countries such as

Chile currently use lifecycle-type funds as the default in their national defined contribution

systems.

       Our analysis also holds implication for "choice architects" in other domains seeking to

remedy perceived deficiencies in individual decision-making with a range of behaviorally-

informed strategies. While default and framing do have a powerful role in altering individual
                                                                                               19



behavior, these are an incomplete explanation of the impact of changing the decision

environment. Thus, when altering choice architectures, it is critical to understand the potential

spillover effects that might occur, the magnitude of such effects, and whether their impact might

be judged to be detrimental or benign.
                                                                                                    20




References
Agnew, Julie, Pierluigi Balduzzi, and Annika Sunden. 2003. “Portfolio Choice and Trading in a Large
       401(k) Plan,” American Economic Review, 93(1): 193-215.

Ameriks, John and Stephen Zeldes. 2001. “How Do Household Portfolio Shares Vary with Age?”
       TIAA-CREF Institute Working Paper 6-120101.Working Paper.

Benartzi, Shlomo. 2001. “Excessive Extrapolation and the Allocation of 401(k) Accounts to Company
       Stock.” Journal of Finance. October. 56(5). 1747-1764.

Benartzi, Shlomo and Richard H. Thaler. 2001.          “Naïve Diversification Strategies in Defined
       Contribution Savings Plans.” American Economic Review.      March. 91(1): 79-98.

Benartzi, Shlomo and Richard H. Thaler. 2002. "How Much Is Investor Autonomy Worth?" Journal of
       Finance. August. 57(4): 1593-1616.

Benartzi, Shlomo, Ehud Peleg, and Richard H. Thaler. 2007. "Choice Architecture and Retirement
       Savings Plans.” Working paper. http://ssrn.com/abstract=999420.

Brown, Jeffrey R., Nellie Lang and Scott Weisbenner. 2007. “Individual Account Investment Options
       and Portfolio Choice: Behavioral Lessons from 401(k) Plans.” NBER Working Paper 13169
       June.

Calvet, Laurent E., John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini. 2009. “Fight or Flight? Portfolio Rebalancing
       by Individual Investors.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 124: 301-348.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2003. "Optimal Defaults."
       American Economic Review. 93:180-185.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. 2004.       "Plan Design and 401(k) Savings
       Outcomes." National Tax Journal. 57:275-298.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2006. “Saving for Retirement
       on the Path of Least Resistance.” Ed McCaffrey and Joel Slemrods, eds., Behavioral Public
       Finance: Toward a New Agenda. 304-351.

Huberman, Gur and Wei Jiang. 2006. “Offering vs. Choices in 401(k) Plans: Equity Exposure and
       Number of Funds.” Journal of Finance. XLI(2): 763-801.

Iyengar, Sheena, Gur Huberman and Wei Jiang. 2004. “How Much Choice is Too Much? Contributions
       to 401(k) Retirement Plans.” In Pension Design and Structure: New Lessons from Behavioral
       Finance, Olivia S. Mitchell and Stephen P. Utkus, eds. Oxford: Oxford University Press: 83-96.
                                                                                                    21



Iyengar, Sheena, and Wei Jiang. 2006. “The Psychological Costs of Ever Increasing Choice: A Fallback
       to the Sure Bet.” Working paper.

Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2007. “Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The Role of
       Planning, Financial Literacy and Housing Health.      Journal of Monetary Economics. 54(1)
       January: 205-224.

Madrian, Brigitte, and D.F. Shea. 2001. “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation and
       Savings Behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116: 1149-1525.

Mitchell, Olivia S., Gary R. Mottola, Stephen P. Utkus, and Takeshi Yamaguchi. 2006a. “The Inattentive
       Participant: Portfolio Trading Behavior in 401(k) Plans.” Pension Research Council Working
       Paper 2006-05. Philadelphia, PA.: Wharton School.

Mitchell, Olivia S., Gary R. Mottola, Stephen P. Utkus and Takeshi Yamaguchi. 2006b. “Winners and
       Losers: 401(k) Trading and Portfolio Performance.” Pension Research Council Working Paper
       2006-26. Philadelphia, PA.: Wharton School.

Nessmith, William E., Stephen P. Utkus, and Jean A. Young.     2007. "Measuring the Effectiveness of
       Automatic Enrollment."        Vanguard Center for Retirement Research, Malvern, PA.
       www.vanguard.com/retirementresearch.

O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. 1999. “Procrastination in Preparing for Retirement.” In Henry
       Aaron, ed., Behavioral Dimensions of Retirement Economics. Brookings Institution Press and
       Russell Sage Foundation.

O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. 2001. “Choice and Procrastination,” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics. Feb 2001. 121-160.

Thaler, Richard and Cass Sunstein. 2008. Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and
       Happiness. New Haven: Yale University Press.
                                                                                                                  22




Table 1. Characteristics of Lifecycle Funds Introduced


A. Portfolio Mix of Lifecycle Funds by Target Date
                                                                  Equity
                 US Equities Int'l Equities      US Bonds
                                                                  Share
                       %              %              %              %
2045 Fund              71             18             11            89
2035 Fund              71             18             11            89
2025 Fund              63             16             21            79
2015 Fund              50             13             37            63
2005 Fund              35              9             56            44
Income Fund            24              5             71            29




B. Introduction Patterns of Lifecycle (LC) Funds

                                        Plans             Participants       LC adopters
                                       N    %               N        %         N      %
1. De Novo Life Cycle (LC)            117   0.45          113,560 0.45        3,541 0.14
2. Added LC to SA                      83    0.32          99,201 0.39       12,509 0.51
3. Switch from SA to LC                58    0.22          40,219 0.16        8,562 0.35
Total                                 258                 252,980            24,612




Note: Panel A tabulates asset mix as of 9/07. Static allocation (SA) refer to prior risk-based funds; see text.
Source: Authors’ tabulations.
                                                                                                                       23




Table 2. Participant and Plan Characteristics

                                                                           Difference-in-Difference Sample
                                                                         All             Pure            Mixed
                                              Full Sample              Adopters        Adopters         Adopters
Variable                                             1                     2                3                4
Age (%)
Young (< 35)                                        25                     28               33              24
Middle (35-55)                                      59                     59               55              62
Old (> 55)                                          16                     13               12              13
Sex (%)
Male                                                45                     41               31              49
Female                                              26                     30               33              28
Missing                                             29                     28               36              22
Income (%)
Low (< $62.5K)                                      19                     23               25              21
Medium ($62.5-$87.5K)                               39                     39               44              36
High (> $87.5K)                                     41                     38               30              43
Tenure (%)
New Hire                                            18                    na               na               na
401(k) Balance ($ av.)                            64,065                50,032           34,289           62,240
Non-ret. Financial Wealth (%)
Poor (< $7.3K)                                      42                     41               44              39
Average ($7.3-$61K)                                 35                     37               36              38
Rich (> $61K)                                       23                     22               20              23
Plan Feature (% of participants)
Employer Stock Offered                              31                     26               na              na
Loan Offered                                        67                     62               na              na
N Funds Offered (mean)                             34.2                   33.0              na              na
Observations
N Plans                                                 258                   251              228              234
N Participant Accounts                              252,980                24,612           10,750           13,862

Notes:
1. Characteristics are as of 12/5 for the full sample and six months after lifecycle introduction for the difference-in-
difference sample.
2. The difference-in-difference sample includes participants choosing lifecycle funds who were continuously
employed during the sample period (i.e., new entrants are excluded).
Source: Authors’ tabulations.
                                                                                                                         24




Table 3. Multivariate Probit Analysis of the Probability of Being a Lifecycle (LC) Adopter
(Dependent variable = 1 if Lifecycle Adopter, 0 else; mean = 15.1%)

                                                                Marginal
                              Mean         Coefficient         Effects (%)
Lifecycle Treatment
Default (%)           11                        0.565    ***       10.9
New Entrant*Default                             0.189    ***        3.6
Mos Since LC          9.3                       0.011    ***        0.2
Mos**2 Since LC      120.7                      0.000    ***        0.0
Socioeconomic Factors (%)
Young                 23                        0.121    ***        2.3
Old                   16                       -0.103    ***       -2.0
Male                  45                       -0.067    ***       -1.3
Low_Income            20                       -0.029    ***       -0.5
High_Income           40                       -0.003              -0.1
Poor_Wealth           38                        0.035    ***        0.7
Rich_Wealth           26                       -0.092    ***       -1.8
Log Balance         $ 9.77                     -0.063    ***       -1.2
New Entrant           11                        0.342    ***        6.6
Plan Design (%)
SA_Before             61                       0.880 ***           16.9
Co. Stock Offered     26                      0.1011 ***            1.9
Loan Offered          59                     -0.0304               -0.6
N Funds              38.9                    -0.0112 ***           -0.2
Controls
Participant Clustering                       Yes
Time Fixed Effect                            Yes
Industry Fixed Effect                        Yes
Observations                               3,178,373
Number of Clusters                           252,980
-2LogL                                     2,692,640
Pseudo-R Squared                              11.62%

Notes: The model is a Probit regression of lifecycle adoption using the full sample of over 250,000 participants. It
controls for how lifecycle funds were introduced (“lifecycle treatment”), demographic control variables for
participants (“socioeconomic factors”), and elements of plan design that vary at the firm level (“plan design).
Reference categories include middle income; middle wealth; female (missing variables are dummied). Models
include participant clustering within plans, and time and industry fixed effects. ** Significant at the .05 level; ***
Significant at the .01 level.
 Source: Authors’ tabulations.
                                                                                                                   25




Table 4. Marginal Effects from Multinomial Logit Model of the Probability of Being a
Pure or Mixed Lifecycle (LC) Adopter
(Reference Group: Non adopter; Pure adopters = 8.6%, Mixed adopters 7.7%)


                                        Pure Adopter            Mixed Adopter
                            Mean      Marginal Effect (%)      Marginal Effect (%)
Lifecycle Treatment
Default (%)                 10        5.0            ***                1.6   ***
Default*New Entrant                   1.6            ***               -1.0   ***
Time Count                 8.6        0.4            ***               -0.1   ***
Time Count Squared       120.7        0.0            ***                0.0   ***
Socioeconomic Characteristics (%)
Young                       24        0.9            ***                0.5   ***
Old                         16       -0.5            ***               -0.7   ***
Male                        43       -0.9            ***               -0.2   ***
Low_Income                  20        0.2            **                -0.3   ***
High_Income                 39       -0.2                               0.0
Poor_Wealth                 38        0.5            ***                0.0
Rich_Wealth                 25       -0.8            ***               -0.4   ***
Log Balance            $ 9.80        -0.7            ***                0.0   **
New Entrant                 11        2.1            ***                1.5   ***
Plan Design (%)
SA_Before                   57        3.8            ***                5.0   ***
Co. Stock Offered           31       -1.6            ***                1.2   ***
Loan Offered                61       -1.2            ***                0.4   ***
N funds                   37.6       -0.1            ***                0.0   ***
Controls
Participant Clustering                Yes                              Yes
Time Fixed Effect                     Yes                              Yes
Industry Fixed Effext                 Yes                              Yes
Observations                   3,178,373                         3,178,373
Number of Clusters               252,980                           252,980
-2LogL                         3,354,106                         3,354,106
Pseudo-R Squared                  15.34%                           15.34%


Notes: The model is a multinomial Logit regression of lifecycle adoption using the full sample of over 250,000
participants. It compares mixed adopters (those holding lifecycle funds with other funds) and pure adopters (those
holding only one lifecycle fund) versus all other participants who do not adopt lifecycle funds (the reference group
for the dependent variable). See Table 3 for additional information on the independent variables. ** Significant at
the .05 level; *** Significant at the .01 level.
Source: Authors’ tabulations.
                                                                                                                           26




Table 5. Contribution Allocations and Portfolio Risk/Return Characteristics Pre/Post
Introduction of Lifecycle Funds
(Difference-in-Difference Sample)

A. Contribution Allocations (%)
                                         Cash
                                         (MMkt,               Balanced, U.S.           Int'l    Company
                                         GIC)   Bonds         Lifecycle Equities       Equities Stock
All Adopters             Pre                7.1       5.2        54.2         27.9        2.9           2.7
                         Post               3.7       3.6        66.1         21.7        2.7           2.3
                         Change            -3.4      -1.7       11.9          -6.2       -0.3          -0.4
Pure Adopters            Pre                4.9       2.9        79.4         11.3        0.9           0.5
                         Post               0.0       0.0       100.0          0.0        0.0           0.0
                         Change            -4.9      -2.9       20.6         -11.3       -0.9          -0.5
Mixed Adopters           Pre                8.7       7.0        34.7         40.8        4.5           4.3
                         Post               6.5       6.3        39.8         38.6        4.8           4.0
                         Change            -2.2      -0.7        5.1          -2.2       0.2           -0.3


B. Portfolio Risk/Return Characteristics (%)

                                                  Equity      Syste-
                                                  Alloca-      matic     NSR/TV*
                                                    tions    Returns
     All Adopters            Pre                   66.6         6.46          13.8
                             Post                  68.1         6.70          10.0
                             Change                 1.4         0.24          -3.8

     Pure Adopters           Pre                   61.4         6.38           6.0
                             Post                  62.4         6.63           0.9
                             Change                 1.0         0.25          -5.0

     Mixed Adopters Pre                            70.7         6.52          19.9
                    Post                           72.5         6.76          17.1
                    Change                          1.8         0.24          -2.8

Notes: * Nonsystematic risk as a percent of total variance (see text). Equity allocations are the percentage of
contributions invested in U.S. or international equities (including equity funds and the equity portfolio of balance,
lifecycle and other hybrid funds). Systematic returns refer to excess factor returns relative to the risk-free rate (see
text). Non-systematic risk is the idiosyncratic or non-market risk borne by investors (the portion due to deviating
from a market index portfolio).
Source: Authors’ tabulations.
                                                                                                                    27



Table 6. Marginal Effects from Multivariate Model of Portfolio Equity Allocations (%;
Difference-in-Difference Sample)
                                        Pure Adopters                         Mixed Adopters
                                   Model A      Model B                    Model A      Model B
Treatment
LC_treat                             -0.018 ***        -0.032   ***         -0.006            -0.013   **
LC_treat*Young                                          0.064   ***                            0.043   ***
LC_treat*Old                                           -0.040   ***                           -0.035   ***
LC_treat*Low_Income                                     0.000                                  0.004
LC_treat*High_Income                                   -0.004                                  0.000
LC_treat*Male                                          -0.016   ***                           -0.008   ***
LC_treat*Poor_Wealth                                    0.019   ***                            0.007
LC_treat*Rich_Wealth                                   -0.008                                  0.008
Socioeconomic Factors
Young                                 0.006   ***       0.022   ***          0.052   ***       0.031   ***
Old                                  -0.105   ***      -0.085   ***         -0.078   ***      -0.060   ***
Male                                  0.010   **        0.019   ***          0.019   ***       0.023   ***
Low_Income                            0.004             0.004               -0.015   ***      -0.017   ***
High_Income                           0.001             0.004                0.006             0.007
Poor_Wealth                           0.007            -0.005               -0.012   ***      -0.016   ***
Rich_Wealth                           0.010   **        0.013   **           0.005             0.001
Log Balance                           0.006   ***       0.005   ***          0.016   ***       0.016   ***
Plan Design
SA_Before                            -0.061 ***        -0.062 ***           0.005             0.004
Co.Stock Offered                     -0.006            -0.004               0.022 ***         0.022 ***
Loan Offered                          0.074 ***         0.074 ***           0.011             0.011
N Funds                               0.005 ***         0.005 ***           0.000             0.000
Controls
Participant-level clustering           Yes               Yes                  Yes               Yes
Time Fixed Effects                     Yes               Yes                  Yes               Yes
Industry Fixed Effects                 Yes               Yes                  Yes               Yes
Observations                        21,500            21,500               27,724            27,724
# of Participants                   10,750            10,750               13,862            13,862
R Squared                             0.19             0.20                  0.06              0.06
Dependent Means (%)
Pre-treat                               61.4                                   70.7
Post-treat                              62.4                                   72.5
Unadjusted difference                    1.0                                    1.8
Note: The model is an OLS regression based on the difference-in-difference sample of lifecycle investors. The
model regresses portfolio equity allocations on a variety of treatment, socioeconomic and plan-level characteristics.
Clustering and fixed effects are as described in Table 3.
Source: Authors’ tabulations.
                                                                                                                                                 28



Table 7. Marginal Effects of Multivariate Model of Lifecycle Treatment on Portfolio Characteristics
(%; Difference-in-Difference Sample)

                                                    Returns                                   Idiosyncratic Risk Share (NSR/TV)*
                                  Pure Adopters                Mixed Adopters                  Pure Adopters               Mixed Adopters
                                  A           B                 A          B                   A          B                 A          B
Treatment
LC_treat                     0.0021 ***     0.0019 ***      -0.0003       -0.0003         -0.051 ***      -0.039 ***     -0.083 *** -0.075 ***
LC_treat*Young                              -0.0006 ***                    0.0002                          0.010 ***                -0.002
LC_treat*Old                                 0.0006 **                    -0.0011 **                      -0.023 ***                -0.001
LC_treat*Low_Income                         -0.0002                       -0.0003                          0.008 ***                 0.005
LC_treat*High_Income                        0.0000                        -0.0005 **                       0.000                     0.001
LC_treat*Male                               0.0011 ***                     0.0000                         -0.039 ***                -0.013 ***
LC_treat*Poor_Wealth                        0.0005 ***                     0.0003                         -0.009 ***                -0.011 ***
LC_treat*Rich_Wealth                        -0.0007 ***                    0.0009 ***                     0.009 ***                  0.003
Socioeconomic Factors
Young                0.0005           ***    0.0008   ***    0.0016   *** 0.0014 ***       0.000          -0.005   ***    0.004      0.004
Old                 -0.0195           ***   -0.0023   ***   -0.0017   *** -0.0012 ***      0.007 ***       0.018   ***    0.005      0.006
Male                 0.0001                 -0.0004   **     0.0010   *** 0.0010 ***       0.001           0.021   ***    0.002      0.009 **
Low_Income           0.0001                  0.0002         -0.0003       -0.0001         -0.002          -0.006   **     0.010 *** 0.008
High_Income          0.0001                  0.0001          0.0000        0.0002         -0.003          -0.002          0.004      0.004
Poor_Wealth          0.0002                 -0.0001         -0.0006   *** -0.0007 ***     -0.002           0.003         -0.014 *** -0.009 **
Rich_Wealth          0.0002           **     0.0005   ***    0.0001       -0.0003          0.001          -0.003         -0.003     -0.005
Log Balance          0.0001           ***    0.0001   ***    0.0004   *** 0.0004 ***       0.003 ***       0.002   ***    0.005 *** 0.005 ***
Plan Design
SA_Before            0.0011           ***   0.0011 ***      -0.0009 *** -0.0009 ***       -0.074 ***     -0.075    ***   -0.055 *** -0.055 ***
CS_Offer             0.0001                 0.0001           0.0032 *** 0.0032 ***         0.035 ***      0.034    ***    0.068 *** 0.067 ***
Loan_Offer           0.0011           ***   0.0011 ***       0.0001      0.0001           -0.009 ***     -0.007    ***   -0.006     -0.006
Nfund                0.0001           ***   0.0001 ***       0.0000 **   0.0000            0.000          0.000    **     0.001 *** 0.001 **
Observations         21,500                 21,500           27,724      27,724           21,500         21,500          27,724     27,724
# of Participants            10,750          10,750         13,862         13,862         10,750         10,750          13,862     13,862
R Squared                     14.4%          14.8%           35.6%         35.6%          27.7%           29.2%          30.9%      31.0%
Dependent means
Pre-treat                     6.38%                          6.52%                          6.0%                         19.9%
Post-treat                    6.63%                          6.76%                          0.9%                         17.1%
Unadjusted difference         0.25%                          0.24%                         -5.0%                         -2.8%
Note: * refers to the ratio of nonsystematic portfolio variance to total variance; see text and Table 6 for details.
                                                                                       29




Figure 1. Change in Equity Proportion After Lifecycle Fund Introduction: Patterns by
Age for Pure and Mixed Adopters (Difference-in-Difference Sample)


                          Pure Adopters                 Mixed Adopters

     12%                              10%
                                                                          8%
      7%
                   3%                                 3%
      2%

      -3%                                                   -1%
                          -3%
                                                                    -5%
      -8%
                                -7%

    -13%

                 Young (< 35)   Middle age (35-55)   Older (> 55)   |Old - Young|




Source: Authors’ tabulations.
                                                                                30




Figure 2. Equity Allocations of Lifecycle Adopters: Before and After Adoption
Difference-in-Difference Sample




Note: No SA (static allocation funds) were offered prior to LC introduction.
Source: Authors’ tabulations.
                                                                                             31




Appendix. Cross-sectional Variation in Equity Exposure
(%; Difference-in-Difference Sample)


                                  Pure adopters      Mixed adopters        All adopters
                                Mean     St. Dev.   Mean     St. Dev.   Mean      St. Dev.
No SA before
    Before                      64.2       0.34     71.8       0.28     68.0        0.31
    After                       62.8       0.16     72.6       0.19     67.7        0.18
    % Change                     -2        -53       1         -32       -1         -42
SA before
    Before                      60.9       0.22     70.6       0.23     66.4        0.23
    After                       62.4       0.19     72.5       0.21     68.2        0.21
    % Change                     2         -14       3          -9       3           -9
All adopters
    Before                      61.4       0.24     70.7       0.24     66.6        0.24
    After                       62.4       0.18     72.5       0.20     68.1        0.20
    % Change                     2         -25       3         -17       2          -17




Source: Authors’ tabulations.
