                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        ANTI-LEMONS: SCHOOL REPUTATION AND EDUCATIONAL QUALITY

                                        W. Bentley MacLeod
                                         Miguel Urquiola

                                        Working Paper 15112
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15112


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2009




For discussions and comments, we thank Janet Currie, Dennis Epple, Caroline Hoxby, Larry Katz,
Maria Marta Ferreyra, Leigh Linden, Jonah Rockoff, and seminar participants at Carnegie-Mellon,
Columbia, and Harvard. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by W. Bentley MacLeod and Miguel Urquiola. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Anti-Lemons: School Reputation and Educational Quality
W. Bentley MacLeod and Miguel Urquiola
NBER Working Paper No. 15112
June 2009
JEL No. D02,I2,J3

                                              ABSTRACT

Friedman (1962) argued that a free market in which schools compete based upon their reputation would
lead to an efficient supply of educational services. This paper explores this issue by building a tractable
model in which rational individuals go to school and accumulate skill valued in a perfectly competitive
labor market. To this it adds one ingredient: school reputation in the spirit of Holmstrom (1982). The
first result is that if schools cannot select students based upon their ability, then a free market is indeed
efficient and encourages entry by high productivity schools. However, if schools are allowed to select
on ability, then competition leads to stratification by parental income, increased transmission of income
inequality, and reduced student effort---in some cases lowering the accumulation of skill. The model
accounts for several (sometimes puzzling) findings in the educational literature, and implies that national
standardized testing can play a key role in enhancing learning.


W. Bentley MacLeod
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, MC 3308
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
bentley.macleod@columbia.edu

Miguel Urquiola
Columbia University
SIPA and Economics Department
1022 IAB, MC 3308
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
msu2101@columbia.edu
          Please accept my resignation. I don’t want to belong to any club that will accept me as a
          member . —Groucho Marx

          By and large, I’m going to be picking from the law schools that basically are the hardest to
          get into. They admit the best and the brightest, and they may not teach very well, but you
          can’t make a sow’s ear out of a silk purse. If they come in the best and the brightest, they’re
          probably going to leave the best and the brightest, O.K.? —Antonin Scalia



                                              1. Introduction

    The ability of firms to acquire and maintain reputations for quality is a key ingredient for the
efficient provision of complex goods and services in a market economy. Friedman (1962) further
hypothesized that this ingredient is sufficient, namely, sellers’ concern for their reputation ensures
that an unfettered market efficiently supplies such goods.1 In this paper, we study the market for
educational services and show that this hypothesis is true only under the appropriate conditions.
Specifically, if schools cannot select students based upon their ability, then a free market is efficient
and encourages entry by high productivity schools. However, if schools use an entrance exam to
select students, then competition leads to stratification by parental income, increased transmission
of income inequality, and reduced student effort—in some cases lowering the accumulation of skill.
    These results follow from an “anti-lemons” effect that arises when firms can influence the quality
of their good by positively selecting their buyers. Specifically, Akerlof (1970) showed that if the
quality of goods is difficult to observe, then sellers with high quality goods exit the market, leaving
behind only low quality “lemons” for sale. In contrast, the perceived quality of a school depends
upon the quality of the buyers who purchase its services, resulting in a tendency for selective schools
to drive non-selective ones from the market. Analogous phenomena are observed in other markets
for service goods. For example, restaurants, social clubs, and law firms are perceived to be of high
quality when they serve exclusive clients. What makes education unique is that the industry’s
output (student achievement) depends upon both firm (school) productivity and buyer (student)
effort.
    This matters because Holmstrom (1999) has shown that the incentive effect of reputation depends
upon the existence of uncertainty regarding ability.2 When uncertainty is large, individuals have an
incentive to work hard to show to the market that they are able. In contrast, if individual ability is
1
  See MacLeod (2007) for a review of the literature on reputation and quality assurance.
2
  This model is widely used in labor economics. See for example Gibbons and Murphy (1992), Farber and Gibbons
(1996), and Altonji and Pierret (2001).
                                                        2
known, then effort cannot affect the market’s perception of one’s ability, reducing effort incentives.
We apply this insight to school reputation. Schools with good reputation are attractive to students
because admission to such a school signals high ability, thereby raising future income. In addition,
however, admission to a selective school reduces uncertainty regarding ability, resulting in lower
effort.
  Finally, the model illustrates that a school’s reputation is a function of both the quality of its
students and the school’s value added. This implies that parents may select a school with lower
value added if this is counterbalanced by a sufficiently high quality student population. Hence, a
concern for school reputation does not imply that parents will always choose schools with greater
value added.
  These anti-lemon effects reconcile two apparently contradictory empirical findings in the school
choice literature. First, there is evidence that parents value school choice and prefer higher-achieving
schools (Black (1999), Hsieh and Urquiola (2006), and Hastings and Weinstein (2008)). Second,
there is no consistent evidence that introducing choice substantially improves learning, or that pri-
vate schools have higher value added than public ones (McEwan et al. (2008) and Neal (2008)).
In the reputation model, these are in fact the expected results when there is competition between
selective schools. In contrast, if cream-skimming is limited, then choice can enhance performance,
consistent with recent evidence regarding charter schools (Hoxby and Murarka (2008) and Abdulka-
diroglu et al. (2009)). The model also predicts that European-style systems featuring national
testing and competition are likely to perform relatively well, consistent with the evidence discussed
in Neal (2008).
  Our agenda is as follows. In the next section we introduce a model that supposes that individuals
go to school and graduate with skills that depend additively on three factors: i) innate ability, ii)
effort devoted to studying as opposed to non-academic activities like sports and student government,
and iii) school value added. Upon graduation, each individual is employed at a wage that reflects the
market’s best estimate of her skill. This estimate is based upon two signals: an individual-specific
measure of skill in the form of a graduation test, and the reputation of the school she attended. A
school’s reputation is simply the expected skill of its graduates.
  On the supply side, schools produce two outputs: educational value added and amenities. Ed-
ucational value added enhances skill, while amenities are consumption goods that raise students’

                                                   3
welfare but not their skills. Schools are assumed to be of low or high productivity. The latter
produce value added at a lower marginal cost but are initially not sufficiently numerous to supply
the whole market.
  Next we study three scenarios. Section 3 considers a public school system in which the median
voter chooses taxes and school characteristics. Public schools are assumed to be non-selective in
that the distribution of innate ability is the same at all of them. This would result, for example,
if schools were assigned students in a randomized fashion. This benchmark scenario implies that
policies seeking to improve learning have to either increase the prevalence of high productivity
schools, or raise students’ academic effort.
  In Section 4 the base scenario is compared to one that features only for-profit schools, with the
caveat that these must also be non-selective. For simplicity, students differ only with respect to
income, which is assumed to be uncorrelated with ability. Compared to the public system, for-
profit provision has two advantages. First, it allows schools to respond to consumer heterogeneity
in terms of tastes for amenities; second, high productivity schools earn positive profits that provide
incentives for further entry. In addition, subsidizing for-profit schools via vouchers is shown to
be particularly beneficial to lower income students—not only does it increase their educational
investment via redistribution, it also raises the likelihood that high productivity schools enter the
market to serve them. In short, the second scenario shows that when there is no selectivity and school
reputation therefore reflects only value added, the model captures Friedman’s (1962) intuition:
private participation raises school productivity, and vouchers enhance the outcomes of low income
individuals.
  Finally, Section 5 introduces a third scenario with a system of non-selective public schools in
which selective for-profit schools are given the opportunity to enter and choose students based on
an admissions test that measures innate ability. If they enter, such schools’ reputation therefore
varies with their productivity and their student composition. To highlight the effect of selectivity,
this scenario makes three assumptions that would seem to foreclose for-profit entry: i) individuals
differ only with respect to innate ability (thereby eliminating private schools’ ability to cater to
heterogeneity in the demand for amenities), ii) all schools are equally productive, and iii) for-profit
schools must operate unsubsidized.



                                                   4
  For-profit entry turns out to be feasible, despite these assumptions, as long as private schools
can cream skim the highest ability students from the public system. These individuals are willing
to pay a premium for selective schools because employers are willing to pay higher salaries to these
schools’ graduates. The resulting equilibrium is characterized by a strict hierarchy of schools, with
the highest ability students going to the most selective for-profit schools, and the low ability ones
remaining in the non-selective public sector.
  Section 6 discusses the framework’s empirical and policy implications. There we note that the
model abstracts from peer effects for several reasons. First, Epple and Romano (1998) have shown
that peer effects lead to stratification in equilibrium. The present model also implies stratification,
and hence provides an alternative hypothesis for this effect. It also makes additional predictions
that can help disentangle peer effects from reputation effects. Second, peer composition can affect
learning through different channels, such as lowering disruption in class (Lazear (2001)), or allowing
material to be presented in an ability-appropriate manner (Duflo, Dupas, and Kremer (2008)).
Rather than make a choice regarding the form that peer effects take, this paper focuses upon the
implications of school reputation. Section 7 contains concluding comments.


                                                   2. Setup

  This section sets out four basic elements of the model: i) individual utility and skill, ii) school
characteristics, iii) the labor market and signals of skill, and iv) wages and student effort. The key
market imperfection is that student innate ability and student effort are not directly observable,
but can only be inferred from performance on tests that provide a noisy measure of individual skill.


2.1. Individual utility and skill. Consider a two period model in which individuals first go to
school, where they exert costly effort. In the second period they work, and their wages reflect the
skills acquired in the first period. Utility is given by:


(2.1)                     Uis = log(c0is ) + δi log(c1is ) + φi log(zis ) + Ψ(eis , ai ),


where i indexes individuals, and s stands for the school they attend. c0 and c1 denote consumption
in each period, and δ is the discount rate. φ stands for the taste for non-educational amenities,
which are labeled z and are assumed to raise student welfare directly, but to not produce skills
(manicured lawns or air conditioning might be examples).
                                                        5
   The last term in (2.1) reflects that individuals must choose to allocate their effort between: i)
academic effort, eis , which refers to activities like doing homework and paying attention in class
(more broadly, were one to consider parental actions, it could stand for time spent helping with
homework, or expenditure on after-school tutoring), and ii) non-academic activities like sports,
student government, watching television, or community service.3
   It is assumed that academic effort improves students’ skill, while non-academic activities do not
raise skill but provide a return, Ψ(eis , ai ) ≥ 0, that is increasing in the taste for these activities,
ai . Academic effort is costly and is rendered more so by increases in the taste for non-scholastic
                            ∂Ψ              ∂2Ψ                   ∂2Ψ
activities; specifically,   ∂eis   < 0,   ∂eis ∂eis   < 0, and   ∂eis ∂ai   < 0. Finally, for most of the analysis
heterogeneity in ai does not play a role, and accordingly we write Ψ(eis ) for simplicity.
   It is assumed that individuals cannot save, and hence consumption is given by:


                                                      c0is = Yi − ps ,


                                                        c1is = Wis ,

where Y is exogenous income (e.g., income students receive from their parents) and is divided
between the expenditure students must incur to attend school, p, and other first period consumption,
c0 . W is the individual’s market wage in the second period.
   An individual’s skill after attending school s is denoted by θis , and is determined by her innate
ability, her academic effort, and her school’s value added. Specifically, skill is given by:


                                                  θis = αi + eis + βs ,


where αi is innate ability and is independent of the school student i attends; eis is academic effort,
and βs is the value added school s provides to all the students it enrolls. Innate ability, αi , is
                                                                             1
distributed normally with zero mean and precision ρα =                      σα2 ,   the reciprocal of the variance σα2 .
Precision and variance are used interchangeably below, depending upon which one results in the
simpler formula.
   Two assumptions implicit in this formulation of skill deserve discussion upfront. First, academic
effort and school value added enter in a separable fashion. This assumption would seem hard

3 Although student effort has not been a focus of the literature, Bishop (2004) emphasizes its importance, and there is
a growing empirical research on interventions to elicit effort (see Angrist, Lang, and Oreopoulos (2006), and Kremer,
Miguel, and Thornton, forthcoming).
                                                             6
to test, as this might require exposing arguably comparable students to different levels of value
added, and then studying differences in their measured effort. In fact, recent randomizations in
developing countries, although not focused on the issue, achieve this to a large extent. Specifically,
Banerjee, Cole, Duflo, and Linden (2007) and He, Linden, and MacLeod (2008) evaluate a series of
interventions (e.g. targeted tutoring) and find them to significantly raise test scores. At the same
time, these interventions are not associated with changes in attendance, a key measure of student
effort in developing countries. Second, in contrast to seminal models in the literature (e.g., Epple
and Romano, 1998) the specification of skill features no peer effects. We make this assumption for
simplicity and return to a discussion of it later in the paper.




2.2. School characteristics. In providing instructional value added, βs , and non-academic ameni-
ties, zs , schools incur costs on a per-capita basis given by:


(2.2)                                       Cs (βs , zs ) = qs C(βs ) + zs


where C(·) is a twice differentiable cost function satisfying C ′ , C ′′ > 0, and C(0) = 0. School pro-
ductivity, parametrized by qs > 0, takes on two values corresponding to low and high productivity,
qL and qH respectively, where qL > qH . Given that the marginal cost of providing value added is
lower in the high productivity schools, these will generally supply greater value added.
   The size of the student population is normalized to 1, and n > 1 is the number of schools. It
is assumed that each school has one student.4This implies that not all schools will be utilized, and
hence there is real competition between schools. In addition, the initial fraction of schools that are
of high productivity is fixed at λ ∈ (0, 1), such that λn < 1 and high productivity schools cannot
serve the whole market. The question will be whether in equilibrium all high productivity schools
enter the market, and whether these earn positive profits that provide an incentive for further high
productivity entry. Per-student profit at school s is:


                                             Πs = ps − qs C(βs ) − zs .




4These assumptions are merely for simplicity. What is crucial is that the number of students is large, and that schools
have limited capacity.
                                                          7
Under perfect competition low productivity schools earn zero profit, while high productivity schools
earn positive profits, the magnitude of which depends on market structure.5 Finally, let Is denote
the resources schools devote to value added:


(2.3)                                     Is = ps − zs − Πs = qs C(βs ),


i.e., value added is tuition minus expenditures on amenities and profits, all in per-student terms.


2.3. The labor market and signals of skill. Individuals are employed in a perfectly competitive
labor market where they are paid a wage equal to the market’s best estimate of their skill. Following
Jovanovic (1979) and Harris and Holmström (1982), we suppose information regarding worker ability
is symmetric; workers and firms have the same beliefs regarding individual skill, and both efficiently
use the available information to estimate it.
   The market receives two signals of individual skill. First, it observes an individual-specific measure
of learning called a graduation test. Its existence can be motivated by reference to the standardized
high school graduation or university admissions exams in existence in countries including Germany,
Malaysia, Romania, South Korea, and Turkey.6 Performance in these tests strongly influences college
admissions and, eventually, job market success. Analogous motivation at a higher educational level
comes from the “job market papers” that Economics Ph.D. students distribute as they enter the
labor market. These provide an individual-specific signal of skill, and significantly influence students’
labor market outcomes.
   Formally, the graduation test reflects an individual’s innate ability, her academic effort, her
school’s value added, and an error term:


                                           tis = αi + eis + βs + ǫtis ,

                                                                            1
where ǫtis ∼ N (0, σt2 ), and hence the test has precision ρt =            σt2
                                                                               .   Precision intuitively corresponds
to test quality. When a test is uninformative, its precision is zero; greater precision implies a more
accurate measure of skill. Precision is assumed to be finite, such that the graduation test never
perfectly measures skill.

5 The expression for profit highlights one role for amenities. Specifically, in many jurisdictions schools operate under
a zero profit constraint, and one way for schools to dissipate rents is through expenditures on amenities like nice
grounds, field trips, and so forth.
6 In some cases like Germany, these exams are not national but jurisdiction-specific.
                                                           8
  The second signal the market observes is the identity and therefore the reputation of the school
each student attended.7 This is defined to be the expected skill of the school’s graduates:


(2.4)                           Rs = E{θi |i ∈ s} = E{αi |i ∈ s} + ês + βs .


Thus, a school’s reputation depends on its own value added, βs , on the average innate ability of
its students, E{αi |i ∈ s}, and on their average academic effort, ês . This effort is determined as
an equilibrium outcome that depends upon the structure of the school system, as discussed below.
Market participants are assumed to be able to anticipate the effect of the school system upon
incentives, and hence they have correct expectations regarding the average effort, ês , and value
added, βs at each school.
  Finally, suppose that each school has a large number of students, and hence any given individual’s
effort has a negligible impact upon her school’s reputation. For simplicity, this effect is set to zero,
∂Rs                                                                                           ∂tis
∂eis   = 0. In contrast, a student is able to raise her graduation test score; formally,      ∂eis   = 1.

2.4. Wages and student effort. Log wages in the second period, w, are equal to expected skill:


(2.5)                              wis = log(Wis ) = E{θis |tis , Rs },

(2.6)                                    = E{αi + eis + βis |tis , Rs }.


Given that the cost of academic effort is separable from consumption, utility maximizing students
who anticipate the effect of academic effort upon future wages choose effort to satisfy:

                                                         ∂E{wis |i ∈ s}
(2.7)                                   −Ψ′ (eis ) = δ                  .
                                                            ∂eis

where E{wis |i ∈ s} is the expected wage when admitted to school s.
  For later reference, it is useful to note the effort that would exist if skill were observable. In this
                                                                                                          ∂w
case, the market would simply set wages equal to skill: wis = θis = αi + eis + βs , such that             ∂e   = 1,
and (2.7) implies that efficient effort, denoted by e∗ , would satisfy:

                                                               ∂wis
                                           −Ψ′ (e∗ ) = δ            ,
                                                               ∂eis
(2.8)                                                    = δ.

7 We will assume that the identity of a student’s school of origin influences her compensation, as suggested by
Hoekstra (2009) and Saavedra (2008), though Dale and Krueger (2002) find mixed evidence in this regard.
                                                         9
In this case students’ academic effort is independent of the school they attend. In general, since
skill is imperfectly observed this level of effort will not be attainable. Rather, the incentive to study
will vary with the structure of the market for educational services.




                        3. A system of non-selective public schools

  The benchmark scenario is a public school system consisting of only non-selective schools. This
means that the distribution of student innate ability is the same at every school, which would
result, for instance, if students were randomly assigned to schools. It would also hold if students
attended the school closest to them, and there were no spatial segregation in student ability. Such
extreme non-selectivity is probably not observed in practice, but it provides an analytically useful
benchmark. Further, this assumption is consistent with the lack of explicit ability-based admissions
policies observed among public schools in many countries.
  The lack of competition in the market for public schools is assumed to imply that expected school
productivity is the mean productivity of all available schools: q = λqH + (1 − λ)qL . For simplicity,
suppose also that: i) all individuals have the same preferences and differ only by income (such that
ai = a, δi = δ, and φi = φ for all i), and ii) income, Yi , is independent of innate ability, αi . These
assumptions are not essential for the analysis of the public sector, but they simplify the comparison
with for-profit schools below. Next we consider individual behavior in this setting.




3.1. Individual effort. Recall that skill is given by θis = αi + eis + βs , and that innate ability,
α, is not observed. The market sets workers’ wages equal to their expected skill, and its beliefs
are determined by two signals. First, the market observes the reputation of the schools students
attend. Since in this scenario schools are not selective—all have an innate ability distribution
αi ∼ N (0, 1/ρα )—school reputation is only a function of average student academic effort and school
value added: Rs = E{θi |i ∈ s} = ês + βs . Second, the market observes students’ graduation test,
t = αi + eis + βs + ǫtis = Rs + αi + ǫtis , measured with precision ρt .
  In the perfectly competitive labor market considered, an individual’s wage is set equal to her
expected skill conditional upon these signals. From Bayes’ rule one has that the wage is a weighted
                                                    10
average of the two signals:8


(3.1)                                     wis = π (t)α tis + π (α)t Rs

(3.2)                                           = Rs + π (t)α (tis − Rs )

                   ρt                                                                                             ρα
where π (t)α =   ρα +ρt   ∈ [0, 1] is the weight assigned to the graduation test, and π (α)t =                  ρα +ρt   ∈ [0, 1]
is the weight attached to school reputation.9
   Expression (3.1) illustrates that an individual’s wage can be expressed as a convex combination
of the two signals of skill, where the weight assigned to each signal depends upon its relative
precision. Alternately, expression (3.2) shows that each individual’s wage is set equal to her school’s
reputation plus an adjustment, π (t)α (tis − Rs ). This adjustment reflects the information contained
in the graduation test score. If tis > Rs then the student has performed better than the average
student at school s, and the market adjusts her wage upwards; if a student does poorly on the
graduation test, the market adjusts its expectation downwards.
   These expressions make clear that the benchmark scenario does not provide first best incentives
                                                                                                    
                                                                                             ∂tis
for academic effort. The reason is that while a student’s effort can affect her test score, ∂e is
                                                                                                  = 1  ,
                                                            
                                                     ∂Rs
its effect on her school’s reputation is negligible ∂e is
                                                          = 0 . A rational individual anticipates this,
and the level of academic effort in a non-selective school system, eN S , therefore satisfies:

                                                            ∂wis    ∂wis ∂tis
(3.3)                                −Ψ′ (eN S , a) = δ          =δ
                                                            ∂eis    ∂tis ∂eis
(3.4)                                                 = δπ (t)α .


While academic effort is increasing in the precision of the graduation test, it is lower than the first
best (given by −Ψ′ (e∗ , a) = δ). The following proposition summarizes and expands these results.



Proposition 1. In a non-selective school system, students choose academic effort eN S satisfying
(3.4). This effort is lower than the first best, e∗ , given by (2.8). Academic effort is increasing in
the precision of the graduation test, and decreasing in a, the taste for alternative activities.



8 See DeGroot (1972), Theorem 1, Section 9.5.
9 This is a notation we will use henceforth, namely, the term π (x)yz =       ρx
                                                                          ρx +ρy +ρz
                                                                                       is the weight attached to signal x in
                                                                                                 ρx +ρy
a situation in which signals y, and z are also present. Similarly, we will denote π (xy)z =    ρx +ρy +ρz
                                                                                                            .
                                                           11
Proof. The first result follows from first order conditions, −Ψ′ (eN S , a) = δπ (t)α < δ = −Ψ′ (e∗ , a),
                                                                            d(Ψ′ (eN S ,a)+δπ (t)α )
and from the fact that Ψ is concave in effort. The second follows from                da             = 0, from
                deN S       Ψ
which we get     da     = − Ψea
                              ee
                                i
                                  < 0.
                                                                                                                 


  Proposition 1 highlights that while ultimately a school system may be judged by the performance
of its students, some of the factors that determine their outcomes are at least partially beyond
schools’ control. In particular, while schools can improve their value added, students’ performance
also depends upon how students allocate their time between academic and alternative activities.10
  This also suggests that the broader institutional settings in different jurisdictions can make a dif-
ference. If a neighborhood or country has in place institutions that reward non-academic endeavors
like sports, student government, or gang activity, this will detract from academic effort. Second, if
an educational system has poor measures of individual performance, then the market will set wages
using other observable characteristics, such as the identity of the school or the district a student
attended. In such cases, superior students from under-performing schools have no way to signal
their skill, and will therefore rationally divert effort toward non-academic activities.



3.2. Public school characteristics. Consider the characteristics that schools in a non-selective
public system would have if these were controlled by a median voter who selects the level of funding
per student, ps , and the level of amenities, zs , to be provided by school s. The focus is on these
two characteristics as the primary control variables because they are directly observable by parents.
Further, along with schools’ equilibrium profit levels, these choices determine value added, β, via
the expression Is = ps − zs − Πs = qs C(βs ).
  In choosing these parameters, voters know that school productivity is uncertain and has expected
value q = λs qH + (1 − λs )qL , where λs is the probability that school s is of high productivity. Their
formal problem is therefore:


(3.5)                                    max   ps ,zs   U (ps , zs , Πs , es |γi , λs )


10 This provides one explanation for why boarding schools are sometimes preferred by parents. These schools have
better control over activities both within and out of the classroom. If appropriately designed, this environment may
enhance performance relative to a day-school where outside activities are less strictly regulated.
                                                              12
where an individual’s utility, given characteristics γi = {Yi , φ, a, δ}, is defined by:


(3.6)      U (ps , zs , Πs , es |γi , λs ) = log(Yi − ps ) + δ[β(ps − zs − Πs , λs ) + es ] + φlog(zs ) + Ψ(es , a),


and school value added is given by:


                                  β(I, λs ) = λs βH (I) + (1 − λs )βL (I)
                                                                            
                                                   −1    I                −1   I
(3.7)                                       = λs C           + (1 − λs )C        .
                                                        qH                    qL

This problem can be simplified by noting two facts. First, in a public system like that in this
benchmark scenario, voters will always set profits equal to zero. Second, the level of academic effort
at school s, es , is chosen by students as a function of school selectivity and expected returns in the
labor market. Given than in the present scenario schools are non-selective, individuals will choose
effort eN S as defined in Proposition 1. These facts imply that problem (3.5) can be written as
max                             N S |γ , λ ).
        ps ,zs U (ps , zs , 0, e      i s

  To work out the expenditure on value added and amenities, it is useful to define the marginal
benefit from additional expenditure on value added:

                                                                    ∂β(Is , λs )
                                                M B(Is , λs ) = δ                .
                                                                       ∂I

This represents the marginal future income gain from investing in educational value added today.
It falls with increases in expenditure on value added ( ∂M B
                                                         ∂I < 0), and rises with increases in the

level of amenities, profits, and, importantly, productivity ( ∂M B
                                                               ∂z > 0,
                                                                                      ∂M B
                                                                                       ∂Π    > 0,   ∂M B
                                                                                                     ∂λ    > 0). With
this definition, the solution to the optimal school choice problem is summarized as follows:


Proposition 2. In a non-selective public school system, student effort is eN S , as defined by (3.4).
The per capita expenditure on value added, I(Y, φ, λs ), as a function of income, Y, the taste for
amenities, φ, and school productivity, λ, is the unique solution to:

                                                      1           Y − Is
(3.8)                                                           =
                                                  M B(Is , λs )   (1 + φ)
                                                                   ∂I
Moreover, the expenditure on value added is increasing in income ( ∂Y > 0) and school productivity,
  ∂I                                                    ∂I
( ∂λ > 0), but decreasing in the taste for amenities, ( ∂φ < 0).11 The first order conditions imply

11 See Appendix A for the proof.
                                                             13
that the optimal first period consumption, c0 , amenities, zs and tuition, ps satisfy:

                                                                  Y − I(Y, φ, λs )
(3.9)                                  c0s = G(Y, φ, λs ) =                        ,
                                                                     (1 + φ)


                                                                  φ[Y − I(Y, φ, λs )]
(3.10)                              zs = Z(Y, φ, λs ) =                               ,
                                                                      (1 + φ)


                                                                  φY + I(Y, φ, λs )
(3.11)                                ps = P (Y, φ, λs ) =                          ,
                                                                     (1 + φ)

where as stated I(Y, φ, λs ) denotes the equilibrium investment on value added. The other functions,
G(·), Z(·), and P (·) define the equilibrium level of consumption, amenities and tuition as a function
of the exogenous parameters. Importantly, an increase in school productivity, λs , results in greater
school expenditure, ps , less consumption, c0 , and a lower level of amenities, z.12



   In summary, the analysis of a non-selective public school system highlights two margins along
which school systems’ performance might be enhanced. The first is by increasing student academic
effort, which could be achieved, for example, by raising the precision of an individual-specific measure
of learning like the graduation test (or creating one, if it does not exist), or by reducing the benefits
of non-academic activities. Second, school productivity could be increased. In particular, as we
have set it up, in a purely public system not all high productivity schools are utilized, and without
profits there are no rewards to further entry by high productivity institutions.




12Additionally, an increase in the taste for amenities, φ, results in more amenities, z, greater school expenditure, p,
and less consumption. An increase in income results in more consumption and more expenditure on amenities. To
prove these, consider first the effect of productivity. If λ0s increases to λ1s , from Proposition 2 we have:
                               I1 − I0               1                         1
                                        =                           −                          > 0.
                                1+φ        M B(I(Y, φ, λ0s ), λ0s )   M B(I(Y, φ, λ1s ), λ1s )
From this we get:
                                                                 I 0 − I1
                                                 c1s1 − c1s0 =            < 0,
                                                                   1+φ
                                                          I1 − I0        φ
                                zs1 − zs0   =   I0 − I 1 +         =        (I0 − I1 ) < 0,
                                                           1+φ        1+φ
                                                             I1 − I 0
                                               ps1 − ps0 =            > 0.
                                                              1+φ
The effect of amenities is a straightforward substitution effect, while the effect of income follows from the fact that all
goods are normal.
                                                             14
           4. Introducing competition via non-selective, for-profit schools

  One widely discussed way of improving school system performance is by allowing competition
by for-profit schools. Our framework illustrates that to be effective, such a reform needs to raise
student academic effort and/or improve school productivity. To highlight the distinction between
these margins, this section considers a fully private market in which for-profit schools are also
required to be non-selective (selective schools are analyzed in the next section). The bottom line is
that in this case our framework is consistent with Friedman’s (1962) intuition: competition raises
average school productivity and improves learning. In short, a first result in this section reaffirms
that school productivity is one of the factors that can drive competition in educational markets,
with beneficial effects.
  On the other hand, a purely private system also tends to exacerbate inequality because wealthier
students purchase more education, and hence future income depends upon both students’ innate
ability and the income of their parents. To address this issue, Friedman recommended the intro-
duction of a voucher system that would ensure that all individuals purchase a minimum level of
educational services. A second result in this section is that aside from achieving greater equality, a
voucher system increases the incentive for high productivity schools to enter and serve students at
the lower end of the income distribution.
  To illustrate these points, this section continues to assume that students vary only with respect to
income, Y ∈ (0, Y max ), which is assumed to have a continuous distribution, F (·), with F (Y max ) =
1. Income is assumed to be independent of ability, such that even if there is sorting by income,
the distribution of innate ability is the same at all schools. Given that schools are non-selective,
combined with the separability of academic effort and skill, implies that the introduction of for-
profit suppliers provides no additional information regarding an individual’s innate ability. Hence,
the equilibrium effort will still be eN S as given by Proposition 1.



4.1. Unsubsidized for-profit schools. Consider a market consisting of n unsubsidized for-profit
schools, with nH < 1 high productivity schools, and hence n−nH low productivity schools. The fact
that high productivity institutions are in short supply implies they earn positive profits Π(nH ) ≥ 0,
while low productivity schools’ are (normalized to) zero. When Π(nH ) > 0 there is an incentive for
high productivity schools to enter the market; the level of profits provides a measure of its intensity.
                                                   15
  Since value added and amenities are normal goods, higher income individuals desire more of
these, and schools will therefore be segregated by income. Further, since high productivity schools
can provide more value added, higher income students will outbid lower income ones for these. This
implies that the scarce supply of high productivity schools will serve high income individuals first,
namely all individuals with income Y ≥ Ỹ , where:


(4.1)                                      nH = 1 − F (Ỹ ).


The low productivity schools serve students with income Y < Ỹ . For this to be an equilibrium,
it must be the case that the individual with income Ỹ (nH ), who is on the margin between a high
and a low productivity school, is indifferent between the two. The utility of this student at a low
productivity school (from expression 3.5) is given by:


                            UL (nH ) = maxp,z U (p, z, 0, eN S |Ỹ (nH ), 0).


Her utility at a high productivity school is:


(4.2)                     UH (nH , Π) = maxp,z U (p, z, Π, eN S |Ỹ (nH ), 1).


If profits were zero in both cases, utility would clearly be higher at the high productivity school
(UH (nH , 0) > UL (nL )). Since utility is monotonically decreasing with profit, there exists a unique
profit function, Π(nH ) ≥ 0, such that:


(4.3)                               UL (nH ) = UH (nH , Π(nH )) .


Furthermore, as nH increases, Π(nH ) falls until Π(1) = 0, and hence high productivity schools’
profits decrease with the entry of more high productivity schools, reaching zero when they cover the
market. The properties of this equilibrium are summarized in Proposition 3.


Proposition 3. Suppose individuals vary only with respect to income, and that income is
uncorrelated with ability. Then, there exists an equilibrium for privately supplied schooling where:


   (1) All students with income Ỹ (nH ) or greater attend the high productivity schools, where Ỹ (nH )
        is determined such that nH = 1 − F (Ỹ (nH )). The equilibrium profit of high productivity
        schools, Π(nH ), satisfies (4.3) and is strictly decreasing with nH , with Π(1) = 0 (the top
                                                   16
             Figure 4.1. Profit as a Function of Entry by High Productivity Schools


        segment in Figure 4.1 illustrates that profits are monotonically decreasing with the number
        of high productivity schools).
   (2) An individual with income Y chooses the school that charges price pY , offers amenities zY ,
        and supplies value added βY satisfying:


(4.4)                             zY     = Z(Y − πY , φ, λY ),

                                  pY     = P (Y − πY , φ, λY )

(4.5)                             βY     = β(I(Y − πY , φ, λY ), λY )


        where λY = 1 and πY = Π(nH ) if Y ≥ Ỹ (nH ), and both equal to zero if not.

  In contrast to the fully public system, therefore, the private system entails the efficient use of
all available high productivity schools. While the rents in this system take away resources from
amenities and value added, these would be dissipated with the entry of high productivity schools.
  In addition, as in Epple and Romano (1998), the market is stratified by income, with higher
income individuals consuming more amenities and value added. In the case of amenities, which are
pure consumption goods, this may not be a major concern. However, in the case of value added,
stratification by income implies that if two individuals have the same innate ability, then the one
with wealthier parents will consume more value added and have higher future income. Thus, a fully
                                                   17
private system tends to reinforce the inter-generational transmission of inequality. Friedman (1962)
recognized this problem, and recommended that all students be offered vouchers that could be used
only for the purchase of educational services.


4.2. Vouchers. To explore the consequences of this, consider a system in which each student is
given a voucher of value V that can only be used to buy school services from a private provider.
The system raises revenues via a constant marginal tax, v, distributing them equally such that the
voucher per student is (recall the student population is normalized to 1):
                                            Z   Y max
                                     V =                v × y × f (y)dy = vY ,
                                            0

where Y = E{Y } is mean income.13 In practice voucher systems sometimes require that schools
run only on the voucher subsidy, and sometimes they allow them to charge supplementary tuition.
We consider a case in which tuition payments are allowed; it will be clear how our results apply to
the case with no add-ons.
  In comparison to a fully private system, a voucher scheme thus has two effects. First, it constrains
some lower income individuals to consume more education than they would otherwise; second, it
redistributes income toward the less wealthy. Formally, the notional income of an individual as a
function of her exogenous income Y and the voucher amount is:
                                                               
                                        v                 V
                                      Y (Y, V ) = V + 1 −     Y
                                                          Y
                                                             
                                                            Y
                                                = Y +V 1−       .
                                                            Y

  To work out the effect of vouchers, consider first the case where there are only low productivity
schools. Figure 4.2 illustrates the relationship between income, notional income and tuition in this
case. The pre-voucher scheme income, Y , appears as the 45 degree line, with Y v (Y, V ) having an
intercept at V , the value of the voucher, and a flatter slope due to the redistribution of income
toward individuals with Y < Ȳ . Let P (Y v (Y, V ), φ, 0) be the willingness to pay under vouchers,
which Figure 4.2 illustrates is likewise flatter than P (Y, φ, 0), due to redistribution. Denote Y V L
the pre-redistribution income at which an individual would voluntarily pay a tuition equal to the

13 One could also consider voucher amounts that vary by student income rather than being uniform, both are observed
in practice. For a treatment of ability-contingent vouchers, see Epple and Romano (2002).
                                                           18
                Figure 4.2. Income versus Tuition: Private versus Voucher System


voucher at a low productivity school:


(4.6)                                 P (Y v (Y V L , V ), φ, 0) = V,


i.e., an individual with income Y V L would be willing to pay tuition equal to the voucher even without
voucher funding (though net of the redistribution). Hence, even though low income individuals
would choose more education than they would without redistribution (P (Y v (Y, V ), φ, 0) > P (Y, φ, 0)
for incomes below the mean), at the lowest income levels given by Y < Y V L , individuals would still
prefer to consume less education than V . Thus, to address inter-generational inequality, vouchers
necessarily constrain the choices of the lowest income individuals.
  The separability assumption also implies that individuals with incomes Y < Y V L consume the
same level of amenities and value added, given by:


                                 z V L = Z(Y v (Y V L , V ), φ, 0),

                                 β V L = β(I(Y v (Y V L , V ), φ, 0), 0).


In short, at low incomes parents consume more education under vouchers, partially due to redis-
tribution (the difference between P (Y, φ, 0) and P (Y v (Y, V ), φ, 0) in Figure 4.2), and partially due
to the minimum expenditure constraint. For incomes above Y V L , individuals are willing to pay
                                                    19
                   Figure 4.3. Tuition at High and Low Productivity Schools


additional tuition for higher levels of amenities and value added. For incomes above the mean, the
level of school expenditure is lower than would be observed in a purely private system.


4.3. Entry. Vouchers thus address one of the perceived shortcomings of a fully private system: low
educational consumption by low income students, an effect that is well understood. In addition,
the voucher system more effectively encourages entry by high productivity schools. To see this,
consider the effect of increasing the number of high productivity schools, nH . Our previous analysis
showed that in a purely private system, these schools earn a rent in equilibrium, and that this rent
is generated in part via higher tuition. Figure 4.3 plots the prices schools charge as a function of
income, and returns to considering both low and high productivity schools. The top, solid segments
refer to a fully private system in which high productivity schools serve individuals with incomes
greater than or equal to Ỹ = Ỹ (nH ) (Section 4.1), and charge a higher price than these students
would pay at low productivity institutions. As income falls tuition approaches zero, and hence the
premium that high productivity schools can command falls as well. The effect on their profits is
illustrated in Figure 4.1, which plots profits against the number of high productivity schools in
operation, nH (the top, solid segment of the figure refers to the fully private system).
  Moving on to the voucher system, the lower dotted lines in Figure 4.3 show that even when there
are only low productivity schools, individuals with incomes greater than Y V L choose to pay tuition
                                                 20
above the voucher—they choose the same level of educational expenditure as in the purely private
system save for the redistribution effect. This also implies, under the hypothesis that the voucher
is not set too high, that some parents are willing to pay tuition greater than the voucher even to
attend a low productivity school.
   Suppose that high productivity schools can enter, and consider a student on the margin between
a low and a high productivity school. At a low productivity school, her utility would be:


                           ULV (nH ) = maxp≥V,z U (p, z, 0, eN S |Y v (Ỹ (nH ), V ), 0).


At a high productivity school her utility would be:

                          V
(4.7)                    UH (nH , Π) = maxp≥V,z U (p, z, Π, eN S |Y v (Ỹ (nH ), V ), 1).


The equilibrium profit makes the marginal student indifferent between the two choices:

                                         V
                                           nH , ΠV (nH ) = ULV (nH ) .
                                                        
                                        UH


   When the number of high productivity schools is small, these will serve only the highest income
individuals. This implies that like a purely private system, a voucher system will be characterized
by stratification, with high income parents being served by the high productivity schools.
   However, with vouchers the relationship between profit and the number of high productivity
schools is different from that observed in a purely private scheme. To see this, note that with
vouchers high productivity entrants will eventually serve a student who would pay tuition equal
to the voucher at a low productivity school; this happens when their number reaches nVHL and the
associated marginal student has income Y V L = Ỹ (nVHL ). At this point, the marginal student is
indifferent between the two schools, but the productivity advantage of the high productivity school
implies that it will charge tuition at least slightly above the voucher, P (Y v (Y V L ), φ, 1) > V , and
that it will earn strictly positive profits.
   Figure 4.4 illustrates the intuition behind this. Point A is the level of value added and amenities
that would be chosen at a low productivity school. A high productivity school earns profits that
make the student indifferent between point A and the combination at a high productivity school,
point C (where the x-intercept illustrates that this school makes positive profits).14
14 Notice that at a high productivity school operating under a zero profit constraint, value added would be higher
while the level of amenities would be lower, as illustrated by point B.
                                                          21
                           Figure 4.4. Productivity-Amenities Trade-off


  Further entry will continue to drive down tuition until it reaches the voucher level, which happens
                 ′
at income Y V L in Figure 4.3. At this point the associated number of high productivity schools is
    ′                ′        ′
                           V L )). After this, tuition cannot fall any further, and hence the profits of
nVHL (that is Y V L = Ỹ (nH
high productivity schools do not decline more until all students are served. This point is illustrated
in the lower, dotted segment of Figure 4.1. In short, while profits in the purely private system
decline strictly monotonically, in the voucher system they are constant for a range. The implication
is that a voucher scheme provides enhanced incentives for high productivity schools to enter and
serve low income individuals. The intuition is that as long as students’ outside option is a low
productivity school, and as long as they are forced to spend at least the voucher on tuition, the
high productivity schools will be strictly preferred and able to earn a positive rent (Figure 4.4).
  To summarize, the results in this section confirm and bolster Friedman’s (1962) intuition that a
for-profit system combined with voucher subsidies would enhance skill accumulation. However, the
assumption that schools are non-selective turns out to be crucial to this result, as explored in the
next section.


                5. Selective for-profit schools and the Anti-Lemons Effect

  This section relaxes the assumption that for-profit schools must be non-selective, and shows that
this substantially qualifies the conclusions regarding the positive effects of competition (discussed
                                                   22
in Section 4). Specifically, consider a non-selective public system in which school characteristics
are chosen by a median voter, and suppose that private schools can enter and select their student
population based upon an entrance exam that measures innate ability. Would these schools find it
profitable to enter such an environment?
  To focus on some of the key aspects selectivity raises, this section makes a series of assumptions
that would seem to essentially foreclose such entry. First, suppose that all students have the same
characteristics γ = {Y, φ, a, δ}, and hence differ only with respect to innate ability.15 This eliminates
for-profit schools’ ability to cater to heterogeneity in tastes for amenities. Second, assume all schools
are of the same productivity, so that for-profit entrants cannot offer consumers an advantage in this
dimension. Third, suppose that for-profit schools must operate unsubsidized, such that individuals
using them have to pay tuition in addition to the taxes that give them access to public schools.
  Despite all this, private entry is profitable, which reflects two aspects. First, when a school is
selective, its reputation derives not just from its value added, but also from the composition of its
student body; all else equal, schools that are able to select students of high innate ability will enjoy
good reputations. Second, employers will rationally offer higher salaries to graduates from more
selective schools, and hence higher ability students will be willing to pay for-profit schools’ tuition
as long as these are sufficiently selective. In general, equilibrium will therefore be characterized
by the coexistence of a stratified for-profit selective sector that contains the highest innate ability
students, and a non-selective public sector containing those whose ability was too low to secure
admission into a selective school.
  Finally, this section illustrates that while such sorting is not inefficient per se (recall we assume no
peer effects), it does have two negative consequences. First, it lowers academic effort in both sectors.
This reflects that selectivity allows the school system to transmit a clearer signal of students’ skill in
the form of school reputation. This lowers students’ incentive to exert academic effort to manipulate
the other signal, the graduation test score. Second, as a result, lower innate ability students receive
lower incomes than they would if the school system were entirely non-selective.

5.1. Selectivity and private entry. Suppose for-profit schools can select students using an ad-
missions test that measures innate ability with error:


(5.1)                                              τi = αi + ǫτi
15 We also assume that before they have been tested, all students have the same belief regarding this attribute.
                                                        23
                                                                                                   1
where the error term is normally distributed with precision ρτ ; ǫτi ∼ N 0, στ2 and στ2 =
                                                                               
                                                                                                  ρτ .   As with
the graduation test, suppose that the precision of the admission test is bounded above. Additionally,
assume that the market is sufficiently thick so that competition among selective schools leads each
one to specialize in admitting students with a test score exactly equal to τs .
  Suppose also that students’ performance on the admissions test is observed only by schools, and
is not available to employers. Although this assumption is stark, the motivation is that schools
might have an advantage in certifying innate ability. For example, while an outside agency might
try to administer admissions exams and disseminate their results, it might find it hard to replicate
the admissions process at selective schools.
  The key impact of introducing selective admissions is that schools’ reputations then partially
depend on their student composition. To see this, recall that when all schools are non-selective,
the market expects that students, regardless of their school of origin, have expected innate ability
equal to the mean, E{αi } = 0. When school s admits only students with an entrance score of τs ,
however, the expected innate ability among its graduates is:



(5.2)                            E{αi |s} = π (α)τ E{αi } + π (τ )α τs = π (τ )α τs

                    ρτ
where π (τ )α =   ρα +ρτ   is an increasing function of the precision of the admissions test.16
  When a school is selective, its reputation (always given by the market’s correct expectation of its
graduates’ skill) is therefore:


(5.3)                        Rs = E{αi |i ∈ s} + ês + βs = π (τ )α τs + ês + βs .


In short, in the educational industry the perceived quality of a firm can vary with the quality of
its buyers. Education is not the only sector with this feature; private clubs, New York apartment
coops, and consulting firms are all partially judged by the characteristics of their clients.
  One key consequence of this is that knowledge that a student attended a selective school lowers
the variance of her estimated skill. Specifically, given the assumption of a linear learning model
(θis = αi + eis + βs ), the posterior distribution of skill among the graduates from school s is



16 As defined above, π (α)τ =     ρα
                                ρα +ρτ
                                         .
                                                         24
normally distributed and given by: θ ∼ N (Rs , 1/(ρα + ρτ )) (DeGroot, 1972). The implications are
summarized in the following proposition:

Proposition 4. Upon admission to a school s that takes only students with admission test score τs ,
a student has expected log wage:


(5.4)                                         ws = π (τ )α τs + ês + βs .


Conditional on obtaining a graduation test score, ti , this individual’s wage is:


(5.5)                                     wis (Rs, tis ) = π (t)τ α ti + π (τ α)t Rs .


     The first result (5.4) reflects that upon acceptance to a selective school, a student’s expected log
wage is equal to the sum of the average effort of the students at the school, the school’s value added,
                                                                                                          ∂ws
and a term that is strictly increasing in school selectivity. In particular, note that                    ∂τs   = π (τ )α > 0,
i.e., future wages increase without limit as a function of selectivity.17 This implies that if a for-
profit school is sufficiently selective, some parents will be willing to pay its tuition even if the school
otherwise has no productivity advantage, and even if they can use a non-selective public school at
no cost. The implication is that it will be feasible for a very selective school to enter the market.18
This implies that if it is profitable for a school with selectivity τs to enter, then it is profitable for
all schools with higher selectivity to enter.
     Consider a related question: if a selective school entered the market “at the top,” say by admitting
only students of the highest ability, would it seek to grow by accepting students of lower ability?
Expression (5.4) implies that expected wages rise with school selectivity, and hence once a student
has been admitted to a selective school it is not in her interest that the school admit students of
lower ability, although she would always welcome higher ability peers.
     Putting these facts together yields that if for-profit selective entry is allowed, the market will be
characterized by some cutoff point, τ̄ , such that there are selective schools for all levels of admissions
test performance greater than or equal to τ̄ , which we explicitly derive below.19 The assumption of
17 Increases in the precision of the entrance exam also raise the returns to enrolling in a more selective school.
18
    For another illustration, let U (e∗ (τs , ρτ )|τs , ρτ ) be the equilibrium utility of a student accepted at a school s with
selectivity τs and admission test precision ρτ . From (5.4) and the envelope theorem, ∂τ         ∂U
                                                                                                   s
                                                                                                     = δπ (τ )α > 0.
19
 Note that the fact that income grows without bound as τs rises implies that τ̄ < ∞. Further, the assumption here is
that all students take the same admissions test with with the same precision. If schools could set their own precision,
they would set it as high as possible, since the envelope theorem implies that a small change in the precision has
                                                              25
thick markets implies that each school will specialize in students with admissions scores exactly equal
to τs , since students with higher scores choose more selective schools, while incumbents experience
a loss in utility if students with low innate ability are admitted. Thus, we may conclude:


Proposition 5. With free entry of private selective schools with a common admission exam and the
same productivity, the equilibrium is characterized by an admissions test score τ̄ and precision ρτ
such that all students with a score τi ≥ τ̄ attend a selective school, while the rest attend non-selective
public schools.


5.2. Selectivity and student effort. Now consider the consequences of selectivity on effort. The
second result in Proposition 4 illustrates the effect of the graduation test upon wages in this context:

                                         ∂ws                 ρt
(5.6)                                        = π (t)τ α = t          > 0.
                                         ∂ti             ρ + ρτ + ρα

As before, an increase in the precision of the graduation test, ρt , increases the sensitivity of wages to
students’ performance on this test. In contrast, an increase in the precision of the admissions test,
ρτ , reduces the sensitivity of wages to performance on the graduation test. This in turn reduces the
incentives for effort experienced by students in selective schools. More specifically:


Proposition 6. A student attending a selective school chooses academic effort to satisfy:


(5.7)                                        −Ψ′ (es , a) = δπ (t)τ α < δπ (t)α ,

                       ρt             ρt
where π (t)ατ =    ρα +ρτ +ρt   <   ρα +ρt   = π (t)α . Given the concavity of Ψ, it follows that an increase in
the precision of the admissions test, or a decrease in the precision of the graduation test, results in
lower academic effort.20


                                                                                             “         t
                                                                                                         ”
no effect upon effort, but it does have a first order effect upon utility: ∂ρ∂U        δ
                                                                               τ = (ρτ +ρα )  1 − ρτ ρ+ρα τs . Note further
that the sign of this expression depends upon the sign of τs ; if τs > 0, then the school is more selective than the
population average, and students would prefer admission with a more precise admissions test. The opposite occurs
if the school has standards below the population average. This implies that a necessary condition for the entry of a
for-profit selective school is that it selects students whose innate ability is above the population average.

20 Holmstrom (1999) was the first to make the point that a better reputation may reduce performance incentives.
Gibbons and Murphy (1992) find evidence consistent with this for CEO compensation. Namely, more senior CEOs
with better reputations should be less concerned about their careers, and hence firms should rationally provide them
with more performance pay; this is consistent with the data that Gibbons and Murphy analyze.
                                                             26
  Again, the intuition reflects that selectivity allows the school system to transmit a clearer signal
of students’ skill in the form of school reputation. This lowers students’ incentive to exert academic
effort to manipulate the other signal (the only one they can affect): the graduation test score.
  To summarize, thus far this section illustrates that if schools can select students, then free entry
and competition can entail negative effects (Section 4 illustrated they can have positive effects as
well). In the extreme, for-profit entry is feasible even if private schools are not more productive, and
this entry will result in lower academic effort among students attending selective schools. This is
the essence of the anti-lemons effect—entry by selective schools that derive their reputation for high
quality from selectivity. In the next two subsections, we work out the equilibrium of the market
with selection. A necessary preliminary to pinning down τ̄ is determining the effort of students who
do not gain entry into a selective school.




5.3. Academic effort in non-selective schools when they co-exist with selective ones.
Proposition 6 shows that students at selective schools will exert lower academic effort than they
would in a non-selective school system. In this subsection, we characterize the consequences that
entry by selective for-profit schools has on the academic effort of students “left behind” in the non-
selective public sector. This requires some technical detail because these students, by failing to
secure admission into a selective school, are revealed to come from an adversely selected pool of
individuals. The bottom line is that these students will also display lower effort than they would in
a non-selective system.
  To see this, let τ̄ denote the cutoff score such that all students with admission test performance
below this level remain in the non-selective sector. Let s̄ denote any school in the non-selective
sector, and let ês be the equilibrium academic effort level observed among them. The expected log
wage of individuals who cannot make it into a selective school is therefore:



                               wis̄ (tis ) = E{αi |τs̄ < τ , tis } + ês̄ + βs̄


where in a manner analogous to that seen above, the first term on the right hand side reflects that
the market will use the sector of origin to estimate students’ innate ability.
                                                     27
  This expression can be explicitly computed because it is the expected value of a normally dis-
tributed variable given that another normally distributed variable with which it is correlated is
truncated. The details of this computation are in Appendix B. There we show the following.

Proposition 7. The expected log wage of an individual entering a non-selective school is:

                                               σα2
                                                       
                                                     τ
                                     w (τ ) = − Γ −       + ês̄ + βs̄ ,
                                               στ    στ
                f (x)
where Γ(x) =   1−F (x)   is the hazard function and f and F are density and cumulative distribution
functions for the normal distribution.

  This illustrates that an expansion of the selective sector (a decrease in τ ) lowers the expected
wage of students in the non-selective sector. This implies that “cream-skimming” can hurt those
left in the non-selective public sector, even without peer effects.
  One can bound the hazard function, from which it is possible to show that for τ̄ ≤ 0:

                                                                             1
                         π (τ )α τ + ês̄ + βs̄ ≥ w (τ ) ≥ π (τ )α τ +             + ês̄ + βs̄ .
                                                                         π (τ )α τ

As τ falls, w(τ ) approaches a linear function of τ , with slope π (τ )α < 1. As before, to determine
the effect on the incentives for effort, one needs to compute the contribution of the graduation test
to wages. It is not possible to obtain a simple closed form solution, so consider an approximation
(also detailed in the appendix). Specifically, the marginal impact of academic effort on wages for
students in the non-selective schools is:
                                                                                2
                                                                                              
                                                                        π (t)α σα Γ − τ       + τ
                                  ∂w (τ )                                      στ        στ
(5.8)      −Ψ′ (ês̄ (τ ), a) = δ         ≃ δπ (t)α 1 − π (τ )αt Γ′ −                            .
                                   ∂e                                              στ |t

The hazard rate grows without limit, and hence as τ̄ falls, the expected log wage falls without limit.
The marginal hazard rate satisfies Γ′ ∈ [0, 1], and therefore we have:

                                                      ∂w (τ )
                                           π (t)α ≥           ≥ π (t)ατ .
                                                       ∂e

  This result has two key implications. First, as long as a selective sector exists, the incentives for
academic effort in the non-selective sector will never exceed those that would prevail in the complete
absence of selection. Second, when the selective sector is small (τ̄ is high), the marginal incentive
for academic effort in the non-selective sector is higher than in selective schools. As the selective
                                                         28
sector grows, however, it falls to that observed among selective schools. Again, given the existence
of a selective sector, increasing its size reduces performance incentives in the non-selective sector,
adversely impacting the most disadvantaged students.

5.4. Equilibrium. We now compute the equilibrium admission cutoff, τ̄ , where students with
scores above this level attend selective private schools, while the rest remain in the non-selective
public sector. Let pm be the cost of a public school in the latter, where the utility of a student who
uses it is given by:

                                                                        σα2
                                                                                
          P ub                                    m                           τ
(5.9) U          (τ ) = argmaxz,β,pm   log(Y − p ) + δ[βs̄ + ês̄ (τ ) − Γ −       ] + φlog(z) + Ψ(ês̄ (τ ), a),
                                                                        στ    στ

where, ês̄ (τ̄ ) solves (5.8). The total cost of operating the public schools is given by pm (τ̄ ) =
(z m + q̄C(β m ))F (τ̄ ), which is the per-student amount (q̄ is the average quality of these schools)
multiplied by F (τ̄ ), the fraction of the population that attends public school. Suppose that τ̄ > 0
so that the median voter actually attends public school.
   Let zs̄ , βs , and pm
                       s̄ denote the solution to this problem, and observe that their optimal values are

independent of τ̄ . Note also that only effort and the final term in (5.9) vary with τ̄ , and hence the
utility of individuals who enter the non-selective public sector can be rewritten as:

                                                                       σα2
                                                                                 
                                                                               τ̄
                                  U P ub (τ̄ ) = ūP ub + E(τ̄ ) − δ       Γ −      ,
                                                                       στ      στ

where E(τ̄ ) = δes̄ (τ̄ )+Ψ(es̄ (τ̄ ), a), and ūP ub collects the remaining constant terms.21 Notice that the
payoff in the non-selective sector is strictly increasing with τ , and converges to the utility students
would experience if there were only non-selective public schools (Section 3).
   At an equilibrium, it must be the case that an individual with admission exam score τ̄ is indifferent
between the public and private sector. Because a student attending a private school must nonetheless
pay the taxes that entitle him to use the public sector, the utility from attending a private school
with entrance requirement τ̄ is:


                                       U P rv (τ ) = ūP rv + E P rv + δπ (τ )α τ ,


where:
                       uP rv = argmaxz,β log[Y − z − q̄C(β) − pm (τ̄ )] + φlog(z) + δβ,
21 More precisely, ūP ub = log(Y − pm ) + φlog(z ) + δβ .
                                     s̄          s̄     s̄
                                                             29
                                        E P rv = δes + Ψ(es , a),

and es is the unique solution to (5.7). Notice that ūP rv + E P rv < ūP ub + E(τ ), such that without
selection, the public school would always be preferred due to the higher cost of private school.
However, as stated the payoff to the private school increases without bound as τ increases, and
hence if a school is sufficiently selective it will always be preferred to a public school.

5.5. Vouchers. Finally, consider the impact of giving all students vouchers equal to pm
                                                                                      s̄ , and of

allowing them to choose any school they wish. With this, the cost of a selective school would be
the same as that of a non-selective school. All students with high test scores strictly prefer selective
to non-selective schools if they come at the same price. By construction, the average ability of an
individual in the non-selective sector is less than τ̄ , and now there is no additional cost associated
with the selective sector. One therefore has an extreme form of the anti-lemons effect: the non-
selective schools are driven from the market, leaving only selective schools. Given that this reduces
the incentives for effort, this outcome is strictly worse than a pure, non-selective public system.
Therefore, in the absence of heterogeneity in school productivity, the anti-lemons effect leads to a
highly stratified school system with strictly worse outcome in terms of student performance.
  Finally, note that introducing income heterogeneity would significantly complicate the analysis
while adding little insight. If the market were sufficiently thick then in the absence of vouchers high
income individuals would leave the public system, regardless of ability. For this group, there would
be stratification by both ability and income. The introduction of vouchers would simply allow the
stratification by ability to extend to individuals with lower incomes.

                                            6. Discussion

  The reputation model explores that educational systems not only produce skills but also serve as
settings for the transmission of information on individual ability. As this section discusses, taking
this into account has numerous policy implications and helps to account for puzzles in the literature.

6.1. The impact of competition. There is clear evidence that parents value school choice and
schools with higher achievement. For instance, in 1981 Chile essentially implemented Friedman’s
(1962) voucher proposal, and the private sector’s market share subsequently increased by about 45
percentage points (McEwan, Urquiola, and Vegas (2008)). In the U.S., Black (1999) and Figlio and
Lucas (2004) find that parents are willing to pay more for residences tied to schools with higher
                                                   30
test scores, and Hastings and Weinstein (2008) present evidence that parents’ school choices react
to information on achievement.
     In the reputation model, however, a parental preference for higher performing schools does not
necessarily imply that competition will improve outcomes—Section 5, for example, illustrates that
extensive private entry can be associated with no gains in average school productivity. Such a
disappointing outcome is consistent with stylized evidence surrounding the first example cited,
Chile’s introduction of vouchers. Specifically, at the start of the 1980’s Chile’s school system in
many ways resembled the scenario of Section 5: it had a large, generally non-selective public sector,
and a smaller selective private one; on average private schools enjoyed much better reputations than
their public counterparts. In 1981 the government introduced an unrestricted voucher scheme by
which any student could in principle attend any subsidized school, public or private, religious or
secular. Importantly, private voucher schools were allowed to implement a wide range of admissions
policies.
     The reputation model predicts that these measures would result in substantial entry, with the
private sector cream-skimming the best students from the public sector, and private schools them-
selves becoming stratified. The evidence is consistent with this. First, mainly for-profit private
schools presently account for most enrollments, up from about a ten percent share at the time of
the reform. Second, Hsieh and Urquiola (2006) suggest that this growth was associated with the
“middle class” largely following upper income households into the private sector, with the lowest
income students remaining in public schools. Third, at present one observes clear hierarchies of
schools by income.22
     There is no consistent evidence that this reform had a substantial net effect on test scores,
despite the large reallocation of students to the private sector. While some studies find positive
effects (for example Gallego (2006)), Hsieh and Urquiola (2006) find private entry had little if any
impact on average test scores or years of schooling. Consistent with this, Chile’s international
testing performance has not displayed major changes since the 1970s, and disappointment with the
evolution of learning outcomes is widespread.23


22 For instance, Mizala, Romaguera, and Urquiola (2007) suggest that a full set of school dummies accounts for about
80 percent of the variation in student income in Chile.
23
   McEwan, Urquiola, and Vegas (2008) revisit the disappointing impact of this reform on testing results, and in a
comment on the piece, Gallego (2008) points out that a lack of improved learning is indeed one of the “stylized facts”
of Chile’s experience with vouchers.
                                                         31
  Further, the reputation model predicts that the growth of the private sector would have very
different consequences on those transferring into it and on those left behind. On the one hand,
students attending selective private voucher schools might experience an increase in wages, as Bravo,
Mukhopadhyay, and Todd (2008) suggest in fact happened. On the other hand, the growth of the
selective sector would generally lower the welfare of individuals remaining in the public sector.
Consistent with this, over the past few years Chilean public high school students, despite having
access to schools that have improved substantially at least in terms of amenities, have taken to at
times violently demanding changes in the laws that govern the school sector. In short, the reputation
model suggests that the Chilean voucher system was perhaps structured in a way that led schools
to compete on selectivity (or amenities) rather than productivity in the generation of skill.
  For some contrast, consider the case of Sweden. In the early 1990s, Sweden allowed independent
schools to begin receiving per-student subsidies equal to about 80 percent of those given to public
schools. Independent schools can have explicit religious affiliations, and can be operated for-profit.
In relevant dimensions, therefore, the Swedish system is quite similar to Chile’s. However, Swedish
private schools must be operated on a “first-come, first-served” basis, and cannot select students
based on ability, income, or ethnicity. Although in practice the allocation of students to schools is
probably never random, the reputation model suggests that this design would produce less strati-
fication and greater effects on learning. The literature is broadly consistent with Swedish private
schools on average not being that different from public schools in terms of socioeconomic compo-
sition (Sandstrom and Bergstrom (2005)), in stark contrast with the outcome in Chile. In terms
of impacts on learning, the evidence is mixed (see Sandstrom and Bergstrom (2005) and Bohlmark
and Lindahl (2008)).
  Additionally, Sweden has experienced less private entry than Chile—at present the private en-
rollment rate is about 15 percent in Sweden relative to about 55 percent in Chile. This could reflect
a variety of factors, including that Sweden’s reform is more recent. Nonetheless, it is also consistent
with the possibility that without selection, private entrants have to build competitive strategies
that rely on catering to heterogeneity in parental tastes for value added or amenities, as opposed
to strategies than emphasize cream skimming.
  For a final case, note that competition in the U.S. also takes forms that the reputation model
predicts would have heterogeneous effects on learning. As Hoxby (2000) points out, “Tiebout”

                                                  32
choice between independent districts is probably the most important form of school choice in the
U.S. One might expect this mechanism to be associated with stratification, since admission into a
“good” district depends exclusively on households’ ability to buy or rent a house within its confines.
In terms of stratification, Clotfelter (1999) and Urquiola (2005) suggest that increased district
availability leads to sorting; there is mixed evidence on its impact on performance (see Hoxby
(2000) and Rothstein (2006)).
     In contrast, consider competition induced by charter schools, which generally have significantly
less latitude in selecting students than private schools. The reputation model would suggest these
would have a more positive impact, as Hoxby and Murarka (2008) and Abdulkadiroglu, Angrist,
Cohodes, Dynarski, Fullerton, Kane, and Phatak (2009) recently find using randomized designs.
     The bottom line is that competition may lead to enhanced learning, but the specifics of market
design may matter. If so, then it is not surprising, for example, that the literature on whether private
schools are more effective has produced mixed findings.24 More broadly, the private advantage itself
may be endogenous, and more likely to reflect greater value added in settings in which market design
gives private schools greater incentives to differentiate along dimensions related to value added.

6.2. Resource policies. The reputation model is also consistent with disappointment surrounding
another major set of educational policies: those focused on providing schools with more inputs. This
reflects that while such initiatives can enable schools to provide greater value added, they do not
fundamentally affect the incentives faced by students or schools.
     In fact, the claim that resource-oriented policies can disappoint is almost non-controversial.
Specifically, while recent research shows that certain inputs raise learning, the broader picture
is one in which most countries have seen their educational expenditures climb substantially over
recent decades, often with scant testing gains to show for it. This has led Pritchett (2003) to argue
that there has been a generalized decline in school productivity across the OECD; while Hoxby
(2002) suggests that U.S. school productivity has declined by 50 percent since the 1970s.

6.3. Testing policies. The reputation model highlights three determinants of individual educa-
tional performance: innate ability, effort, and school value added. The interventions discussed thus
far in this section—competition and resources—are generally aimed at improving value added, and
24
   To illustrate, Angrist, Bettinger, Bloom, King, and Kremer (2002) present experimental evidence of a private
school advantage in Colombia, while the evidence in the U.S. has been more mixed (e.g. Howell and Peterson (2002),
and Krueger and Zhu (2004)).
                                                       33
have only indirect effects on the other two. Of these, innate ability is often considered to be outside
the domain of education (but is affected by public health policies, e.g., Currie (2009)). The third
determinant, student effort, has not been the object of much analysis, although there are exceptions;
for example, Bishop (2004) has long highlighted its importance. The point here is that competition,
if accompanied with stratification, can reduce the incentives for effort.
     The model makes this point starkly because, for simplicity, it assumes that upon entry to a
selective school there is no further selection. In practice, this is not the case for at least some
students. For example, the best students from selective high schools cannot all go to the best
universities, and they compete with each other to obtain entry to these institutions. Similarly,
students at top graduate programs are sometimes ranked. One might therefore expect the incentive
effects of selection to be mitigated for such groups, a prediction that is consistent with casual
observation that motivating the best students is rarely a challenge.
     The reputation model also suggests that national testing can be useful in motivating the rest—
the claim is that educational systems that provide individual-specific measures of learning tied to
outcomes parents care about will tend to develop school systems geared toward higher achievement.
Consistent with this, Woessmann (2007) suggests that countries with standardized graduation or
college admissions exams perform better than expected in international tests. In anecdotal evidence,
few observers disagree that such high stakes national examinations result in high levels of student
and parental effort.25 For instance, Romania and South Korea display extensive private tutoring
industries that parents use to supplement their children’s learning at school.26
     At the opposite extreme, consider cases in which the labor market observes no independent signal
of individual attainment, a scenario that is particularly relevant in the U.S. In terms of the model, in
such a setting the assumption of perfect selection means that all individuals who attend a selective
school s will have admissions scores, τi , equal to τs , and wages wis = π (τ )α τs + ês + βs . This implies
that the wages of individuals who attend selective schools will vary with their admissions score:
25
   The New York Times (2008) reports that some South Korean children react to failure in college-entry exams by
enrolling in “boot camp”-type institutions that heavily restrict all activities but preparing for the next annual round
of examinations. Analogous effort is also observed in the U.S., but in more isolated settings. For instance, admissions
into the top public high schools in New York City are test-based, and as a result children planning to apply for them
often devote much energy to preparation.
26
   These observations further suggest that while No Child Left Behind might have moved the U.S. in the right direction
by increasing the availability and use of educational performance data, the initiative’s impact might be enhanced if
it made greater use of individual-specific information and incentives. For example, at present its testing results have
few consequences on individuals as opposed to schools. Similarly, the main national testing effort in the U.S., the
NAEP (National Assessment of Educational Progress), does not even generate scores at the student level.
                                                          34
∂ws
∂τi   = π (τ )α > 0. In contrast, students in the non-selective school have a starting wage wis̄ = w (τ̄ ),
                         ∂wis̄
and hence for them        ∂τi    = 0.
   In short, if the market observes no signal analogous to a graduation test score, then the correlation
of workers’ innate ability and their initial wages will be very different depending on the sector they
attended—if they went to a selective school, the correlation will be positive; if they did not, it will
be zero. Over time, employers will learn about individuals’ true skill (e.g. Farber and Gibbons
(1996) and Lange (2007)), and hence the wages of individuals from non-selective schools will also
come to reflect τi later in their careers, but this will not be the case initially.
   Arcidiacono, Bayer, and Hizmo (2008) present evidence that is quite consistent with these pre-
dictions. They analyze individuals’ scores in the AFQT, which is basically an aptitude test used
by the armed forces, the results of which are generally not available to employers; hence, in the
context of our model, this is a reasonable proxy for τi . Given that most high school graduates who
enter the labor force upon graduation attended lower quality public schools, one can suppose that
these students come from a non-selective sector. In contrast, college graduates can be considered to
originate in a selective sector. This reflects that college admissions in the U.S. are very competitive
and at least partially rely on academic ability (e.g., they consider SAT scores). Further, it is easy
for employers to observe graduates’ colleges of origin. To summarize, the implication is that the
starting wages of college graduates should be significantly correlated with AFQT scores; wages for
high school graduates who entered the labor market immediately should initially not be correlated
with AFQT scores, but become so over time. This is exactly what Arcidiacono, Bayer, and Hizmo
(2008) find.27
   This differential effect implies that the return to skill for high school graduates is delayed relative
to college graduates. If individuals with lower cognitive skills indeed prefer more immediate rewards,
then ideally high school graduates should face higher rather than lower immediate rewards for
performance.28 Yet, the U.S. educational system may be doing largely the opposite: high schoolers
27 More specifically, Arcidiacono, Bayer, and Hizmo (2008) emphasize that analyses of employer learning should
perhaps not pool data from all education levels, since employers learn slowly about the ability of high school graduates,
while the ability of college graduates is “directly revealed.” Our model suggests that this direct revelation may largely
reflect that colleges are on average more selective than high schools (particularly than those high schools whose
students typically enter the labor market immediately upon graduation). If this is the case, our model further
suggests that actually controlling for the precise college of origin would reduce the observed correlation between
AFQT and wages. Whether or not this effect would go to zero (as in the extreme our model would predict) is an
empirical question.
28
   See Shamosh and Gray (2008) for a meta-analysis of studies on the relationship between cognitive skill and delayed
gratification.
                                                           35
of higher innate ability are rewarded with entry into elite colleges and then high paying jobs; in
contrast, the more skilled individuals in the group of high school graduates (who do not go on to
college) face delayed rewards.
  Finally, the model highlights the fact that raising test scores, say by strengthening national
testing, entails some trade-offs. If students spend more time preparing for a national test, then
they necessarily spend less time at other activities such as debating clubs and sports. This may
explain why many observers in countries that perform well on international tests express concern
that children spend too much time studying, while the U.S., despite its poor performance in tests
like PISA, produces high school graduates that go on to be part of one of the most successful higher
educational systems.


6.4. Pro-social behavior. In the reputation model, academic effort is assumed to describe activi-
ties that enhance an individual’s labor market outcome. The model explicitly allows for variation in
the return to non-academic activities via the preference term Ψ(e, a). There is a recent economics
literature that explicitly considers some of the factors that affect the parameter a.
  Benabou and Tirole (2006) observe that people’s reputation depends not only on their ability,
but also upon the extent to which they can be trusted. Hence, if it is important for individuals
to signal such characteristics then they will allocate some of their time to pro-social activities. We
do not explicitly model this effect here, but their point implies that schools have an incentive to
also acquire a reputation for producing pro-social individuals. The anecdotal evidence is consistent
with this in that private schools often have programs promoting pro-social behavior. At Andover,
an elite private school in the U.S., the admissions process explicitly considers whether applicants
are “nice.”
  Akerlof and Kranton (2002) make the point that individuals create distinctive group identities
within a school. These groups in turn can affect the extent to which individuals invest into study
versus activities rewarded by the group (such as delinquent behavior). Fryer (2005) extends these
ideas to explore the economic implications for identity with a particular racial group. If “acting
white” is associated with study, then individuals who believe there is a higher return from group
membership would reduce study time, and hence overall labor marker performance.
  This literature illustrates that schools have the potential to shape the perceived trade-off between
study and other activities. In the model, these would be reflected in the β term. The main result
                                                  36
still applies—namely if schools are non-selective then it is easier for the market to measure the
extent to which they are able to create an environment that produces high value. On the flip side,
if pro-social behavior is valued by the market, then schools can also increase their reputations by
selecting students that exhibit more pro-social behavior (Andover’s solution), which in turn will
make it more difficult for other schools to teach such skills.


6.5. Peer effects. Models that emphasize peer effects, such as Manski (1992), Epple and Romano
(1998), and Ferreyra (2007), also predict stratification in equilibrium. From the perspective of
parents, peer effects and reputation may be viewed as two good reasons for choosing a selective
school—at such a school children benefit from high quality peers and can expect good future job
opportunities because of the school’s reputation. In practice, therefore, peer effect and reputation
concerns may reinforce each other, making it hard to distinguish between them.
  There is nonetheless evidence suggesting that the reputation model should be considered seriously.
First, it is consistent with the observation that parents care a great deal about peer composition,
yet the literature often fails to find clear evidence of peer effects (e.g. Oreopoulos (2003), and
Katz, Kling, and Liebman (2006)). Second, if peer effects have some of the commonly considered
functional forms, then one might expect countries that display significant stratification to have high
average levels of learning, or at least very good test scores “at the top.” Specifically, if students
benefit from not interacting with low-ability peers (e.g., Epple and Romano (1998)), then one would
expect good outcomes for the students at the best schools. On the other hand, if peer-related gains
come mainly from homogeneity (e.g. Duflo, Dupas, and Kremer (2008)), then one might expect
countries with extensive sorting to perform well across the distribution.
  To our knowledge, there is no standardized measure of educational stratification that would allow
for cross-country comparisons in this spirit. Nevertheless, and on a speculative note, one might
expect countries with extensive school choice, like the U.S. or Chile, to be relatively stratified. The
evidence is that both of these countries do not perform well for their income levels. For instance,
Murfin (2007) considers PISA 2003 performance among 20 high income countries including the
U.S. In terms of average 8th grade Math performance, the U.S. places last. When the comparison
considers only students at the 95th percentile in each of these 20 countries, the U.S. places second
to last. The latter result is particularly surprising given that upper income households in the U.S.
have access to substantial school choice.
                                                  37
6.6. The impact of information. Policy makers increasingly appreciate that in order to measure
school quality one must take selection into account. As a result, several jurisdictions (e.g., New
York City) are carrying out efforts to publicize information that approximates school value added.
These efforts complement much more widespread initiatives that simply disseminate information on
schools’ absolute testing performance.
  What is possibly less well appreciated is that public and private objectives may be different;
namely, while policy makers might wish households used information to choose schools with higher
value added (β), parents may be more concerned with reputation (Rs = π (τ )α τs + ês + βs ), of which
value added is only one component. If so, then parents may prefer a given school to another that
has higher value added but is less selective. Consistent with this, recent research suggests that while
parents react to information on absolute achievement (e.g. Hastings and Weinstein (2008)) they are
less sensitive to data that might approximate value added (e.g. Rothstein (2006) and Mizala and
Urquiola (2008)).
  We do not wish to suggest that one should not attempt to measure or disseminate data on absolute
achievement or value added, but that the impact of such initiatives on overall school productivity
might be less clear or pronounced than policy makers hope. In the extreme, these policies might
supply another example of the list described by Steve Kerr (1975) in his classic article On the folly
of rewarding A while hoping for B.
  As an alternative to improving schools via information provision, policy makers might use data on
value added to introduce remedial interventions or financial penalties for poorly performing schools
(as New York City is currently doing). Alternatively, they might insist that schools be non-selective,
in which case a school’s reputation would provide a “clean” signal of performance. The latter scheme
would face multiple obstacles, among them that it is difficult to truly allow parental choice while
constraining schools to be non-selective.



6.7. A summary of empirical implications. This section closes by summarizing the empirical
implications it covered. Specifically, if the reputation model holds for a school market:

     • Parents will have a clear preference for schools with higher absolute achievement—this will
       not necessarily translate into a preference for schools with greater value added.
     • If schools can select students based upon ability then:
                                                  38
           – School choice will result in stratification, with the highest ability/income children going
             to the most desirable and productive schools.
           – School choice will result in lower student effort, and in lower incomes for students who
             do not gain admission to selective schools. (Note that if peer effects exist, then changes
             in the distribution of students will have additional effects on the level and distribution
             of achievement.)
     • If schools cannot select on ability, the introduction of school choice will unambiguously raise
        school performance and student outcomes.
     • All else equal, educational attainment will be higher in school systems that make use of
        individual-specific measures of learning observed by the labor market.
     • Selective school systems will reveal individual ability more effectively than non-selective
        systems. In terms of labor market outcomes, this implies that innate ability will be immedi-
        ately correlated with wages even when the market observes no individual-specific measures
        of learning. In contrast, in non-selective systems without individual-specific measures of
        learning, this correlation will only emerge over time.


                                            7. Conclusion

  In this paper, we study the characteristics of a competitive market for education in which schools
are able to acquire a reputation for quality, as measured by the achievements of their graduates.
When schools are able to select students based upon innate ability there is an “anti-lemons” effect:
namely entry by relatively small schools that serve students within a specific ability range. This
leads to stratification, where the most able students attend the schools with the best reputations
and subsequently earn the highest incomes, while the least able remain in the worst schools. In
general, this is not an efficient solution for two reasons. First, all students face weaker incentives for
academic effort than they would in a non-selective setting. Second, reputation effects dilute schools’
incentive to enhance productivity, since a low value added school can always enhance its reputation
by being more selective. In contrast, if schools are non-selective, competition leads to an efficient
outcome.
  Contrary to Friedman’s (1962) claim, these results illustrate that reputation effects are not suf-
ficient to ensure that free markets ensure the efficient provision of complex goods. Analogous
phenomena have been observed in other markets. For example, Dranove, Kessler, McClellan, and
                                                    39
Satterthwaite (2003) show that health report cards can result in cream skimming of patients by
physicians, leading to under provision of services to the most needy individuals. Similarly, the re-
cent financial meltdown made clear that reputation effects are not sufficient to ensure that financial
firms behave in a prudent fashion. Thus, as Posner (2009) argues in his discussion of the financial
crisis, some form of regulation or market design must supplement reputation effects to ensure the
success of the market system.
  Our results also illustrate the challenges one faces when attempting to enhance school perfor-
mance. For instance, it is well appreciated that schools’ average test scores are not a good measure
of their value added. As a consequence, jurisdictions such as New York City are publicizing esti-
mates of value added. However, our model predicts that parents care not only about schools’ value
added, but also about schools’ student composition. Hence, their reactions to these informational
initiatives may be weaker than policymakers hope.
  The reputation model also has implications regarding the political economy of school reform. For
example, once stratification takes hold, parents with children at schools with good reputations will
rationally resist efforts to make schools less selective. This may make it difficult to enhance school
performance by reducing selectivity. However, the model also predicts that the introduction of
more rigorous national testing provides an alternate way to enhance performance. This prediction
is consistent with Bishop (1997), who has long advocated the importance of enhancing individual
incentives.
  Finally, our model may help explain why it is so difficult to enhance school performance in urban
areas where competition for admission into selective schools leaves many students behind in schools
with adversely selected populations. The model predicts that these students should expect a lower
return from academic study, and hence will rationally allocate their time to non-academic activities
such as sports, part time jobs, crime, and parenthood. Understanding the link between school
selectivity and academic performance among those in the lowest ranked schools is an important
topic for future research.




                                                  40
                     Appendix B. Derivation of the Selection Effect

  The effect of selection upon expected ability can be computed using results on conditional ex-
pectations of normal random variates with truncation. From Birnbaum (1950) we have:


                                          E{X|Z ≥ z} = µΓ(z),
where X and Z are standard normal random variables with zero mean and unit variance; µ =
                     f (z)
E{XZ}, Γ(z) = 1−F        (z) is the inverse mills ratio or hazard rate, and f, F are the p.d.f. and
c.d.f. for the standard normal distribution, respectively. If X and Z have normal distributions with
variances σX 2 and σ 2 , respectively, then:
                     Z
                                                                            
                                                    cov {X, Z}     E {Z} − z
(B.1)                    E {X|Z ≤ z} = E {X} −                 Γ               .
                                                        σZ            σZ
  The expected future wage of a person who is admitted to the non-selective sector is given by:


                                  ws (τ ) = E{α|τ ≤ τ̄ } + ês + βs .


We have that E {α} = E {τ } = 0 and cov {α, τ } = σα2 . Applying (B.1) implies:

Proposition. The expected innate ability and wage, w (τ̄ ), of a student entering a non-selective
school where τ ≤ τ̄ is:
                                                      σα2
                                                                 
                                                               τ
                                     E {α|τ ≤ τ } = − Γ −
                                                      στ      στ
                                               σ2
                                                         
                                                        τ
                                  w (τ̄ ) = − α Γ −         + es̄ + βs̄ ,
                                               στ      στ
where es̄ and βs̄ are the equilibrium effort and value added in this sector.

   Moreover, we also have from Birnbaum (1950) that x+ x1 ≥ Γ (x) ≥ x for x ≥ 0, and limx→−∞ Γ(x) =
0. Thus we have:

Proposition. For τ̄ ≤ 0:
                                                                          1
                       π (τ )α τ + es̄ + βs̄ ≥ w (τ ) ≥ π (τ )α τ +             + es̄ + βs̄ .
                                                                      π (τ )α τ

   Notice that as τ falls, then so does the expected wage. Hence, as the selective sector increases in
size, the expected income of individuals in the non-selective sector falls.
  The equilibrium effort in the non-selective sector depends upon how effort is rewarded when its
students enter the labor market. An individual’s choice does not affect the average effort in the
                                                                                                ∂tis̄
sector, only her test score, tis̄ , upon leaving school. By construction we know that           ∂eis̄   = 1, so the
next step is to work out the effect of test scores on future wages. Let w(t, τ̄ ) be the expected wage
of an individual from the non-selective sector who enters the labor market with a test score of t.
                                                      42
Under the assumption that all individuals have the same taste for non-academic activities, a, the
level of effort, ês̄ (τ̄ ), in this sector is the solution to:
                                                                                              
                                                         ∂w (τ )                  ∂w (t, τ )
                                −Ψ′ (ês̄ (τ ), a) = δ           ≡ δE                              .
                                                          ∂e                        ∂t

We begin by finding w(t, τ̄ ). It is the solution to:


                                    w(t, τ̄ ) = E {α|t, τ ≤ τ̄ } + ês̄ (τ ) + βs̄ .


Given that the last two terms do not depend upon t we need only work out the expected ability:


                      E {α|t, τ ≤ τ̄ } = E {E {α|t, τ } |t, τ ≤ τ̄ }
                                           n                                                 o
                                       = E π (t)ατ (t − βs̄ − ês̄ ) + π (τ )αt τ |t, τ ≤ τ̄

                                         = π (t)ατ (t − βs̄ − ês̄ ) + π (τ )αt E {τ |t, τ ≤ τ̄ }


   To compute the final expectation notice that we can view τ as a random variable conditional
upon the test score t, such that:


                                       E {τ |t} = E{α|t, s} + E{ǫτ |t}

                                                   = π (t)α (t − βs − ês ),


where π (t)α is the optimal weight when only the test score is known. Note also that the variance of
τ is equal to the conditional variance given t plus the variance of the error term:


                                     var {τ |t} = var {α|t} + var {ǫτ }
                                                                  1
                                                   =                   + στ2
                                                           ρα     + ρt
                                                   ≡ στ2|t .


   We can now use formula (B.1) with X = Z = τ, to compute:
                                                                                               !
                                                         (t)α                 π (t)α t − τ
                                E{τ |t, τ < τ } = π             t − στ |t Γ                        .
                                                                                  στ |t

Using this result we have that the expected skill of an individual who obtains a test score t and who
went to school in a non-selective sector with cutoff score τ is:

                                                                43
                                                                                                 !
                                                                     π (t)α (t − βs̄ − ē) − τ
(B.2) w (t, τ̄ ) = E{θs̄ |t, τ < τ } = π (t)α t − π (τ )αt στ |t Γ                                   + (1 − π (t)α )(βs̄ + es̄ )
                                                                                στ |t
   We can compute a simple formula that captures the main effects on effort incentives by supposing
that Γ′ is approximately linear locally, and observing that E {t − es̄ − βs̄ |τ ≤ τ } = E {α|τ ≤ τ } =
     2
             
− σσατ Γ − σττ . From this we get.


Proposition 9. The marginal incentive for effort that students face in such schools is approximately:
                                                                            2
                                                                                          
                                                                   −π (t)α σα Γ − τ      − τ
          ∂w (τ )
                             ¯
                       ∂w(t, τ )
                                 
                                                                           στ       στ
                  =E               ≃ π (t)α − π (τ )αt π (t)α Γ′                            .
            ∂e            ∂t                                                  στ |t




                                                             44
                                         References
Abdulkadiroglu, A., J. Angrist, S. Cohodes, S. Dynarski, J. Fullerton, T. Kane, and
  P. Phatak (2009): “Informing the debate: Comparing Boston’s charter, pilot, and traditional
  schools,” Discussion paper, Boston Foundation.
Akerlof, G., and R. Kranton (2002): “Identity and schooling: Some lessons for the economics
  of education,” Journal of Economic Literature, XL, 1167–1201.
Akerlof, G. A. (1970): “The Market for ’Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mecha-
  nism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3), 488–500.
Altonji, J. G., and C. R. Pierret (2001): “Employer Learning and Statistical Discrimination,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(1), 313–50.
Angrist, J., E. Bettinger, E. Bloom, E. King, and M. Kremer (2002): “Vouchers for private
  schooling in Colombia: Evidence from a randomized natural experiment,” America Economic
  Review, 92(5), 1535–1558.
Angrist, J., D. Lang, and P. Oreopoulos (2006): “Incentives and Services for College Achieve-
  ment: Evidence from a Randomized Trial,” Working paper no. 12790, National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research.
Arcidiacono, P., P. Bayer, and A. Hizmo (2008): “Beyond Signaling and Human Capital:
  Education and the Revelation of Ability,” Discussion Paper 13951, National Bureau for Economic
  Research, Cambridge, MA.
Banerjee, A., S. Cole, E. Duflo, and L. Linden (2007): “Remedying Education: Evidence
  from Two Randomized Experiments in India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3), 1235–
  1264.
Benabou, R., and J. Tirole (2006): “Incentives and prosocial behavior,” American Economic
  Review, 96(5), 1652–1678.
Birnbaum, Z. W. (1950): “Effect of Linear Truncation on a Multinormal Population,” The Annals
  of Mathematical Statistics, 21(2), 272–279.
Bishop, J. H. (1997): “The Effect of National Standards and Curriculum-Based Exams on Achieve-
  ment,” The American Economic Review, 87(2), 260–264.
         (2004): “Drinking from the fountain of knowledge: Student Incentive to Study and Learn–
  Externalities, Information Problems, and Peer Pressure,” Working paper, Center for Advanced
  Human Resource Studies.
Black, S. (1999): “Do better schools matter? Parental valuation of elementary education,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(2), 577–599.
Bohlmark, A., and M. Lindahl (2008): “Does school privatization improve educational achieve-
  ment? Evidence from Sweden’s voucher reform,” Discussion Paper 3691, IZA.
Bravo, D., S. Mukhopadhyay, and P. Todd (2008): “Effects of a universal school voucher sys-
  tem on educational and labor market outcomes,” Discussion paper, University of Pennsylvannia.
Clotfelter, C. (1999): “Public school segregation in metropolitan areas,” Land Economics, 75(4),
  487–504.
Currie, J. (2009): “Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: Socioeconomic Status, Poor Health in Childhood,
  and Human Capital Development,” Forthcoming Journal of Economic Literature.
Dale, S. B., and A. B. Krueger (2002): “Estimating the Payoff to Attending A More Selective
  College: An Application of Selection on Observables and Unobservables*,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 117(4), 1491–1527.
DeGroot, M. H. (1972): Optimal Statistical Decisions. McGraw-Hill Book C., New York, NY.
Dranove, D., D. Kessler, M. McClellan, and M. A. Satterthwaite (2003): “Is More In-
  formation Better? The Effects of "Report Cards" on Health Care Providers,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 111(3), 555–587.

                                               45
Duflo, E., P. Dupas, and M. Kremer (2008): “Peer Effects and the Impact of Tracking: Evi-
  dence from a Randomized Evaluation in Kenya,” Mimeo, Dartmouth College.
Epple, D., and R. E. Romano (1998): “Competition between Private and Public Schools, Vouch-
  ers, and Peer-Group Effects,” American Economic Review, 88(1), 33–62, TY - JOUR Accession
  Number: 0455952 . Geographic Descriptors: U.S.. Publication Type: Journal Article. Update
  Code: 199806.
          (2002): “Educational vouchers and cream skimming,” Working paper no. 9354, NBER.
Farber, H. S., and R. Gibbons (1996): “Learning and Wage Dynamics,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 111(4), 1007–47.
Ferreyra, M. M. (2007): “Estimating the Effects of Private School Vouchers in Multi-District
  Economies,” American Economic Review, 97, 789–817.
Figlio, D. N., and M. E. Lucas (2004): “What’s in a Grade? School Report Cards and the
  Housing Market,” American Economic Review, 94(3), 591–604.
Friedman, M. (1962): Capitalism and Freedom. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, With the
  assistance of Rose D. Friedman. 23 cm.
Fryer, R. (2005): “An Economic Analysis of ’Acting White’,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  120(2), 551–583.
Gallego, F. (2006): “Voucher School Competition, Incentives, and Outcomes: Evidence from
  Chile,” Mimeo, MIT.
         (2008): “Comment on: School choice, stratification, and information on school performance:
  Lessons from Chile,” Economia, 8(2), 32–37.
Gibbons, R., and K. J. Murphy (1992): “Optimal Incentive Contracts in the Presence of Career
  Concerns,” Journal of Political Economy, 100, 30–52.
Harris, M., and B. Holmström (1982): “A Theory of Wage Dynamics,” Review of Economic
  Studies, 49(3), 315–333.
Hastings, J., and J. Weinstein (2008): “Information, School Choice, and Academic Achieve-
  ment: Evidence from Two Experiments,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4), 1373–1414.
He, F., L. Linden, and M. MacLeod (2008): “How to teach english in India: Testing the
  relative productivity of instruction methods within the Pratham English language program,”
  Mimeo, Columbia University.
Hoekstra, M. (2009): “The effect of attending the flagship state university on earning: A discon-
  tinuity approach,” Review of Economics and Statistics.
Holmstrom, B. (1999): “Managerial incentive problems: A dynamic perspective,” Review Of
  Economic Studies, 66(1), 169–182.
Howell, W., and P. Peterson (2002): The Education Gap: Vouchers and Urban Schools.
  Brookings Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
Hoxby, C. (2000): “Does Competition among Public Schools Benefit Students and Taxpayers?,”
  American Economic Review, 90(5), 1209–1238.
          (2002): “School choice and school productivity (or could school choice be a tide that lifts
  all boats)?,” Discussion Paper 8873, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Hoxby, C., and S. Murarka (2008): “New York City Charter Schools: Who Attends Them and
  How Well Are They Teaching Their Students?,” EducationNext, 8(3).
Hsieh, C.-T., and M. Urquiola (2006): “The Effects of Generalized School Choice on Achieve-
  ment and Stratification: Evidence from Chile’s School Voucher Program,” Journal of Public
  Economics, 90, 1477–1503.
Jovanovic, B. (1979): “Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover,” Journal of Political Economy,
  87, 972–90.
Katz, L., J. Kling, and J. Liebman (2006): “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects,”
  Econometrica, 75(1), 83–119.
                                                 46
Kerr, S. (1975): “On the Folly of Rewarding A, While Hoping for B,” Academy of Management
  Journal, 18(4), 769–783.
Kremer, M., E. Miguel, and R. Thornton (Forthcoming): “Incentives to Learn,” Review of
  Economics and Statistics.
Krueger, A., and P. Zhu (2004): “Another Look at the New York City School Voucher Experi-
  ment,” American Behavioral Scientist, 47(5), 658–98.
Lange, F. (2007): “The Speed of Employer Learning,” Journal of Labor Economics, 25(1-35),
  497–532.
Lazear, E. (2001): “Educational production,” Quarterly Journal Of Economics, 116(3), 777–803.
MacLeod, W. B. (2007): “Reputations, Relationships and Contract Enforcement,” Journal of
  Economics Literature, XLV, 597–630.
Manski, C. (1992): “School choice (vouchers) and social mobility,” Economics of Education Review,
  11(4), 351–369.
McEwan, P., M. Urquiola, and E. Vegas (2008): “School choice, stratification, and information
  on school performance: Lessons from Chile,” Economia, 8(2), 1–27.
Mizala, A., P. Romaguera, and M. Urquiola (2007): “Socioeconomic status or noise? Trade-
  offs in the generation of school quality information,” Journal of Development Economics, 84,
  61–75.
Mizala, A., and M. Urquiola (2008): “School markets: The impact of information approximat-
  ing schools’ effectiveness,” Mimeo, Columbia University.
Murfin, W. (2007): “United States performance on international tests,” Discussion paper.
Neal, D. (2008): “The role of private schools in education markets,” Mimeo, University of Chicago.
Oreopoulos, P. (2003): “The Long-run Consequences of Living in a Poor Neighborhood,” Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 118(4), 1533–1575.
Posner, R. A. (2009): A Failure of Capitalism. Harvard University Press.
Pritchett, L. (2003): “Educational Quality and Costs:A Big Puzzle and Five Possible Pieces,”
  Mimeo, Harvard University.
Rothstein, J. (2006): “Good Principals or Good Peers: Parental Valuation of School Charac-
  teristics, Tiebout Equilibrium, and the Incentive Effects of Competition Among Jurisdictions,”
  American Economic Review, 96(4), 1333–1350.
Saavedra, J. (2008): “The returns to college quality: A regression discontinuity analysis,” Mimeo,
  Harvard University.
Sandstrom, M., and F. Bergstrom (2005): “School vouchers in practice: Competition won’t
  hurt you,” Journal of Public Economics, 89, 351–380.
Shamosh, N. A., and J. R. Gray (2008): “Delay discounting and intelligence: A meta-analysis,”
  Intelligence, 36(4), 289 – 305.
Urquiola, M. (2005): “Does School Choice Lead to Sorting? Evidence from Tiebout Variation,”
  American Economic Review, 95(4), 1310–1326.
Woessmann, L. (2007): “International Evidence on School Competition, Autonomy, and Account-
  ability: A Review,” Peabody Journal of Education, 82(2-3), 473–497.




                                                47
