NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LIFE CYCLE ANNUITY VALUATION

B. Douglas Bernheini

Working Paper No. 1511

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 198)4

Financial support from the Center for Economic Policy Research is
gratefully acknowledged. I am indebted to Kyle Bagwell for able
research assistance, and to Debbie Olson and Lucia Alviano for
technical preparation of this manuscript. I would also like to
thank Michael Boskin, Michael Hurd, Joel Slearod and Lawrence
Summers for helpful comments and discussions. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research programs in Taxation
and Pensions and project in Government Budget. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1511
December 1984

Life Cycle Annuity Valuation

AB STRACT

In this paper, we argue that actuarial valuation of annuity benefit
streams is theoretically inconsistent with the assumption of pure life

cycle motives. Instead, we show that the simple discounted value of
future benefits (ignoring the possibility of death) is often a good

approximation to the relevant concept of value. This observation motivates a re—examination of existing empirical evidence concerning the
effects of Social Security on personal savings, retirement, and the
distribution of wealth, as well as the proper computation of age—wealth

profiles. The conceptual points raised here are also relevant for evaluating the relative merits of wage and consumption taxes. In each case,
we argue that the use of simple, rather than actuarial discounting of
survival—contingent income streams dramatically alters the conclusions
of previous studies.

B. Douglas Bernheim
Department of Economics
Stanford University
404 Encina Hall
Stanford, CA. 94305

I.

Introduction

Most empirical analyses of the behavioral and distribution consequences of public retirement annuity provision (e.g. Social Security)
are based upon simple life cycle models where, in particular, individ-

uals have no bequest motives, and lifespans are certain. In moving from
tractable theoretical models to empirical implementation, such studies
typically accomodate uncertain lifespans by employing actuarial discounting to compute the 'values' of annuity benefit streams (see, for
example, Feldstein's [191)4] analysis of personal savings). In this
paper, we argue that the practice of employing actuarial valuation cannot be reconciled with models encompassing pure life cycle motives, and
that this practice systematically biases results in predictable direc-

tions. Instead, we show that under very general conditions (discussed
below), the simple discounted value of benefits (ignoring the possibility of death) is ordinarily a good approximation to the relevant
concept of value.

The intuition for these results is straightforward. Actuarial
valuation is appropriate only if annuity markets are perfect, in which
case positive holdings of bequeathable assets are inconsistent with pure

life cycle motives (see Yaari [1965]). To rescue the life cycle hypothesis, it is necessary to assume a partial or complete failure of

annuity markets. In particular, one can explain the presence of
bequeathable wealth in either of two ways.

First, one might assume that groups of individuals (typically
friends or family, who share private information concerning survival
probabilities) contrive imperfect substitutes for annuity markets by

—2—

pooling risks. The 'value' of an annuity will then exceed its actuarial
value

by a risk premium, but the magnitude of this premium will be

related to the size of the group (in the limit, as

infinitely

the

group becomes

large, the premium shrinks to zero). Kotlikoff and Spivak

[19811 have shown that even relatively small groups manage to appro-

priate a large fraction of the potential surplus available from risk
sharing.

It may, however, be difficult to enforce non—contractual agreements between family members, other than spouses.--' Furthermore, there
is reason to believe that the advantages of risk pooling between spouses
may be overstated.--'1 In the absence of compelling empirical evidence

establishing the prevalence of such arrangements, it is therefore
important to consider the case in which imperfect substitutes for
annuity markets are unavailable; indeed, most theoretical and empirical
work in this area proceeds on this basis.

When 'homemade' risk pooling arrangements are unavailable, positive holdings of bequeathable wealth can be reconciled with life cycle
motives only if annuity markets fail completely (Yaari [19651), or if
insurance market equilibrium involves quantity constraints, so that

annuities are unavailable on the margin. Under these circumstances, the
value of an annuity is suggested by the following hypothetical exercise:
how much bequeathable wealth would one have to give a life cycle saver

to compensate him for the loss of an annuity which pays $1 per year? A

bequeathable asset which pays $1 per year costs $1/r (where r is the
rate of interest). Of course, it generates income even if the individ—

—3—

ual dies, while the annuity does not. However, this difference is
irrelevant to the pure life cycle saver: both assets generate the same
survival—contingent income stream, and the absence of annuity markets
precludes the consumer from selling the death—contingent stream associated with his beq.ueathable asset. So far as he is concerned, the only
relevant difference between these two assets is that he cannot consume
the principal of the annuity (he cannot sell the rights to future

benefits). But if the date at which he plans to drive his bequeathable
wealth to zero is sufficiently distant, the benefits associated with
being able to consume the principal of the marginal asset are negli-

gible. In such cases, simple discounting of annuity benefits (computed
as if the consumer will live forever) is therefore a good approximation
to value.

This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we formalize
the preceeding argument within the context of a simple life cycle model

with an uncertain horizon. Annuity values are calculated for a range of
hypothetical parameter values. In Section 3, we discuss the implications of employing simple, rather than actuarial, valuation for several
empirical problem areas, including the effects of Social Security on
personal savings, retirement, and the distribution of wealth, as well as

the proper computation of age—wealth profiles. Our central results also
form the basis for some remarks concerning the comparison of wage and

consumption taxes. In each case, we argue that the use of simple,
rather than actuarial valuation of survival—contingent income streams

dramatically alters the conclusions of previous studies. The paper
closes with a brief conclusion.

—It—

2. Annuity Valuation
%hen annuity markets fail and consumers are risk averse, the true

value of an annuity exceeds its actuarial value by a risk premium. In
this section, we calculate the magnitude of this premium within the
context of a simple life cycle model.

We will assume that lifetime utility is intertemporally separable
and hornothetic, and that each consumer has a constant pure rate of time

preference p, and a constant instantaneous survival probability 1 —

.

Under these assumptions, the only utility functions consistent with
Yaari's [l965J formulation of the consumer's optimal control program

have the form

(1)

where X =

i_f

a0
p +

ii. At

e)tCdt
t

time 0, the individual is endowed with some level

of bequeathable wealth, W0, which earns a rate of return r..!L' Beginning

in period L (representing retirement), he receives income from an

exogenous annuity. Anuity benefits At thereafter grow at the rate g;
thus,

t<L

0
(2)

At=

t > L

g(t—L)
The choice of a particular consumption profile determines the evolution
of bequeathable wealth, as follows:

=

rWt

+

At

—

Ct

—5—

The consumer is constrained in two ways. First, his resources
must be sufficient to finance planned consumption in all states of
nature; thus,

dt

j (C — At)e_rt

Further, the absence of annuity markets implies that he is unable to
finance

current consumption by selling (borrowing on) future annuity

benefits,J

so

t

W

()

= ertW

—

0

(C
0

—
T

A )et_T) d1 >— 0

t

By considering perturbations of the planned consumption profile,
we see that as long as beq.ueathable wealth is positive at t and T,

the

optimal program must satisfy

(5)

where

Ct =

y

straints

(r —

x)/(i

— ct) <

r.-'

e1(tT)C
Ignoring the non—negativity con-

it is easy to see that the optimal program is given by

(6)

C(r_y)(W+V)

where wealth evolves according to

(7)

and where we define

(W +

V)

=

(w0

+

V0)eTt

—6—

A

t

r-g
(8)

Vt=

t>L
=
t < L

VLer(t_L)

Of course, there is no guarantee that the program described by
(6), (1), and (8) is feasible, given (14). To proceed, it is necessary

to classify the various ways in which (1) may bind. First, it is clear

from (2) and (8) that if y >

t >

'r,

(wt +

g, there exists some t such

that if

W (as given in equation (7)) would necessarily exceed 0

Vt

grows at the rate y, while V., after L, grows at the rate

g). Conversely, if y <

g, W (as given by (7)) would at some point

necessarily fall below, and remain below 0. We refer to these as case

I (y > g)

and case II (y <

g).

We divide these two cases into subcategories, according to whether,

along the optimal plan, W > 0

binds (cases lb and lib) or does not

bind (cases Ia and ha) at L (given the form of the utility function,

it will never bind before L, since at C = 0

the individual has

infinite marginal utility of consumption). These four cases are

exhaustive. We consider each in turn.

Case Ia; y >

g,

WL >

0.

In this case, the program described in

(6), (7), and (8) never violates (14), so it is optimal. The evolution

of C, A, and W is depicted in panel Ia of Figure 1 (note: AL need
not exceed CL). Observe that the annuity wealth term, A/(r —

g),

equal to the simple discounted value of future benefits (ignoring death).
Swapping a bequeathable asset worth $1 for an annuity which pays $r per

year until death will not alter the optimal program, or affect utility.
Intuitively, unless an individual plans to consume his principal at some
point in the future, he will be indifferent between these two assets
(both generate the same survival contingent income stream).

An interesting feature of this regime is that the value of

insurance is independent of the consumer's risk aversion parameter, .

Whether or not we are in this regime is, as well, often independent of
c .11

Case Ib: y >

g,

WL =

0.

The consumer completely exhausts W0

over [0,L1, with C- obeying (5). At L, consumption rises discontinuously, but CL < AL, so that bequeathable assets begin to accumulate
once again. Thereafter, C. obeys (5). This pattern is depicted in
panel

lb of Figure I.
Shifting resources from bequeathable wealth to annuities neces-

sarily alters the

optimal program, depressing consumption prior to L

and raising it thereafter. In this case, simple discounting is only
approximately appropriate, and the accuracy of the approximation depends

upon the magnitude of the discontinuity at L. In particular,
l—ci

dW0

CL

dV0 u* CL+
(CL_ and CL+ are defined, respectively, as the left and right hand

limits of C as t approaches L). Thus, when CL = CL+, simple
discounting is exactly appropriate.

—8—

Within

this regime, higher risk aversion may either increase or

decrease the marginal value of insurance. One effect is obvious: since

CL < CL+, the consumer is overinsured," and more risk averse individuals will have a stronger desire to smooth the discontinuity (further

annuitization accentuates the discontinuity). However, there is a
second effect: the degree of risk aversion affects the magnitude of

CL/CL+. Higher risk aversion rotates the consumption profiles both

before and after L to flatter positions. If y >

0,

this increases

the discontinuity——since this works in the same direction as the
previous effect, risk averse individuals will place a lower value on

insurance. If y < 0, this rotation works in the opposite direction,
and the net effect of risk aversion on annuity valuation is ambiguous.

Case ha: y < g, WL > 0.

This is the most interesting case,

since it applies to an individual who reaches retirement with positive

resources, whose real annuity profile is relatively flat (g

who dissaves after retirment (y <

0).

0), and

There is strong empirical evi-

dence indicating that these features characterize most consumers (see

Bernheim [198a], King and Dicks—Mireaux [19821, or Diamond and Hausman
[19801). It is also the most difficult case, and so warrants careful
attention.

The qualitative pattern is depicted in panel ha of Figure 1.
Along the optimal program, consumption will obey the first order condition (5) as long as wealth is positive; however, once (1) binds, we will

simply have C =

At.

Let T denote the age at which ()

Then the first order conditions imply that

first

binds.

—9—

It

e C0

t<T

At

t>T

()

From the resource constraint, we have

f(c — At)

(io)

e_rtdt

Finally, it is easy to see that despite the binding constraint, consumption must be continuous in time, so that
1T

-

g(T-L)

Unfortunately, the solution is highly non—linear, so the appropriate
"value" of an annuity cannot be inferred directly from an equation such

as (7). Instead, we calculate the compensating variation associated

with annuitization. This is done by changing AL (with associated
changes in zi+), and allowing wealth to adjust endogenously so that
utility is held constant:

(12)

- I eXCadt
t

=

a0

U

where U* is fixed at the level associated with the initial program.
Given TJ* and AL, equations (2), (9), (10), (ii) and (12) determine

C0, and T (we use (2) and (9) to substitute out for At and
leaving 3 equations in 3 unknowns).

This system of equations can be differentiated implicitly to

yield, after some tedious manipulations,i

—10—

dC
=

(13)

- (r -

(g—r)(T—L)

-

e(Y_T

and

=

(14)

0

-1

+

(1- )e_T_ -1 +

U*

where

r-g

(15)

A — c*g

Since y < g <

r,

it is easy to show that A — cg >

r

—

g

>

0, from

which we can immediately conclude that

and

dW
_i<
<o
'_'o u*

Intuitively,

since (4) may bind at some point, the annuity is worth less

than an asset which yields the same yearly income. As T goes to
infinity (or y to g), this event becomes more remote, so naturally the
value of annuitization approaches A0/(r —

g).

Eciuations (14) and (15) tell us that when y <

g,

the marginal

value of an annuity is equal to the simple discounted value of future
benefits (calculated as if the individual will live forever), minus a

proportional adjustment factor. How large is the adjustment? It is
impossible to say without substituting numerical values.

—11.-

The results of calculations based on alternative hypothetical

parameter values are presented in Table 1. We consider real interest

rates (r) of 1%, 3% and 5%, felicity discount rates (A) of 5% and
1%, and relative risk aversion coefficients ()

All

eighteen

of

0, -.1, and —2.

permutations of these values are included; throughout, we

set the growth rate of annuity benefits (g) equal to zero (more on
this below), the length of an individual's preretirement economic life

(L) equal to

and the ratio of annuity wealth to bequeathable wealth

at retirement (VL/WL) equal to 2. This last value is roughly consistent with empirical evidence on retirees (see Bernheini [l98ltaI); if' any-

thing, the large assumed relative magnitude of annuity wealth will tend

to generate small values of T, thereby overstating the difference
between simple discounted value and compensating variation.

For each set of parameter values, we report y, P —

L,

the ratio

of the compensating variation associated with the marginal annuity to
its simple discounted value (M1T/SDV = 1 —

), and

the approximate ratio

of the value of all annuities held by this consumer to their simple

discounted value (AV/sDV). The last of these calculations is based on
numerical integration——the true relationship is highly non—linear, and
analytic integration is impossible.

Calculated values of y lie between —.06 and 0. Evidence on
dissaving among retirees leads us to believe that y typically lies

between .011 and 0 (see Bernheim [1981a1)——the plausibility of
particular parametric values should be judged accordingly. Note that
even when rates of dissaving are relatively high, the associated uncon-

strained interval (T) is quite long.

—12—

For r = 0.03

and 0.05,

simple

discounting approximates annuity

values extremely well. Only for very low risk aversion (a = 0)
high felicity discounting (x =

.oi)

and

does the value of the marginal

annuity fall below 80% of its simple discounted value, and the value of

all annuities below 90%. In contrast, actuarial discounting is much

less accurate. Assuming a single year survival probability of .95
(this is approximately appropriate for an individual of retirement age),

actuarial values at retirement are only 37.5%, and 50% of simple
discounted values (depending on whether r =

0.03 or 0.05). In all

cases, simple discounting is far superior.

For r = 0.01, simple dicounting performs less well. However,
this conclusion should be tempered by two comments. First, in this

case, actuarial values at retirement are only 16.7% of simple discounted values, which implies that, even in the most favorable case,
actuarial discounting understates total annuity valuation by a factor of

almost three. Second, the 'poor' performance of simple discounting is

directly attributable to the difference between r and g (this can be
seen from equation (lu): since g —

r

= —.01, the adjustment factor is

discounted very little even though T is large). If one believes that
inflation erodes private pension values so that g is, say, —0.02, then
once again the accuracy of simple discounting will be evident.
Equations (1)4) and (is) also allow us to draw some qualitative

conclusions concerning the role of risk aversion in determining the

value of insurance provided by annuities. If g = 0

(annuities pay a

constant real streat), the coefficient of relative risk aversion (a)

—13—

appears only

through its effect on T. As ci

falls

(the individual

becomes more risk averse), yj falls. Since this flattens the consumption profile, T rises. From (9), the marginal value of an annuity

rises as well, as we would expect. As a a goes to -, T approaches
infinity, and the value of an annuity rises to A/r (intuitively, it is

less likely that the constraint well ever bind). As a approaches 1
(risk neutrality), -

goes to

and T to 0——before we reach this

limit, we move into regime lib. However, if L = 0

so that we remain

in ha, the limiting value of the annuity is AIX (intuitively, future
consumption is discounted at the rate .

> r).

Note that this is the

actuarial value of the benefit stream only if we discount by the
individual's pure rate of time preference, rather than by the market

rate of interest. In a strict sense, not even risk neutrality justifies
actuarial valuation, as typically defined !5L1

Case lib: y <
exhausts

g,

WL =

0.

As in Ib, the consumer completely

over [0,LJ, with C. obeying (5). At L, consumption

rises discontinuously, but since the desired consumption profile falls
more rapidly than his annuity profile, he is immediately constrained to

—

consume exactly his annuity benefit. This pattern is depicted in panel
hib of Figure 1.

As before, additional annuitization raises consumption after L,
and depresses it before. However, in this case,_9i

—
dO0

i;-

c
0L—

i—a

—l4—

Again we see that simple discounting approximates true value, but in

this case there are two adjustment factors. First, as in Ib, additional

annuitization magnifies the discontinuity at L. Second, as in ha,
additional annuitization forces the individual to choose a consumption

profile with the wrong slope (this is captured by •).

The effect of risk aversion on annuity valuation is ambiguous
here, and the analysis parallels that for regime lb. We leave the
details to the readers.

The model considered here is, of course, quite restrictive. We
have employed specific functional forms (e.g. survival probabilities are
constant; utility is intertemporally separable and has constant elast—
icity), and have ignored the problems which arise when the relevant
decision unit

is

a family or household. While these considerations

undoubtably effect our hypothetical calculations, we believe that our

basic qualitative results are quite robust. In particular, regardless
of functional forms, if the individual has no desire to borrow on future
annuity benefits, simple discounting is exactly correct; if this desire
arises only in the distant future (when bequeathable wealth reaches

zero), simple discounting yields a good approximation to value. By the
same reasoning, for households consisting of more than one member,
simple discounting will be (approximately) appropriate for the assumable

portion of annuity benefits. A large fraction of Social Security
benefits are assumable by a surviving spouse, and many private pensions
are fully

assumable.

—15—

3.

Implications

In this section, we apply the preceding analysis to several

important empirical questions concerning behavior and distribution. It
is, of course, far from clear that one ought to use compensating varia—
tion as a measure of value in a behavioral context, so it is necessary

to supplement the analysis of Section 2. In each case, we find that the
use of simple discounting would dramatically alter the conclusions of

earlier authors, who employed actuarial valuation. Our central results
also form the basis of some remarks concerning consumption and wage
taxation.

A.

Personal Saving and Asset Substitution
The question of whether (and to what extent) Social Security

displaces personal wealth accumulation is, by now, a familiar one. In
his seminal work, Feldstein [19711 employed a simple life cycle model
with certain lifespans to show that, abstracting from the effects of
induced retirement, Social Security would displace private savings

"dollar for dollar". In moving to his empirical implementation,
Feldstein used actuarial values to accoinodate uncertain horizons. While
more recent studies have modified his estimation procedure in a variety
of ways (producing a range of estimates), the practice of employing

actuarial values has been nearly universal.-' Yet, as we have argued,
actuarial valuation is inconsistent with life cycle assumptions.!V
One might defend this practice by arguing that the life cycle
model outlined by Feldstein is merely suggestive——the notion that Social
Security displaces personal savings is, perhaps, not intrinsically tied

—16—

to this particular formulation of consumer behavior. Specifically, if
we assume that consumers have bequest motives, it is entirely consistent
to posit efficient annuity markets, in which case actuarial valuation is
appropriate.

Unfortunately, this argument runs afoul of a severe conceptual

difficulty. In the world outlined above each consumer will have an
optimal degree of annuitization. When the government imposes compulsory
saving for retirement annuities, consumers will alter their investment
strategies to offset not only the additional savings, but also the addi-

tional annuitization. That is, in such a world, Social Security should
displace private pensions dollar for dollar, leaving bequeathable wealth

unaffected. Yet microeconomic estimates of this relationship (such as
Feldstein and Pellechio [19791, Kotlikoff [1979] and King and Dicks—
Mireaux [1983]) employ bequeathable wealth as the dependent variable.
By finding that the coefficient of Social Security is significantly
different from zero, these studies effectively reject the hypotheses
upon which the use of actuarial valuation is based!

In geneal, unless insurance markets fail completely, Social
Security will, at least in some regimes, alter insurance holdings rather

than bequeathable wealth. When discretionary annuity holdings are
positive, Social Security simply displaces annuities; when term life
insurance is positive, consumers neutralize increases in Social Security
by purchasing additional insurance (in both cases, these conclusions
apply to a Social Security system which is "fair" using survival probabilities implicit in market prices of insurance; "unfair" Social

—"1—

Security would, in addition, generate an income effect). Unless
estimation procedures make use of information identifying appropriate
regimes (i.e., whether annuities or term life insurance holdings are
positive), the use of bequeathable wealth as a dependent variable may

involve

severe econometric mispecification. In Bernheim [198Lb1, we

elaborate on these issues, and discuss consistent estimation of asset—
annuity substitution in the presence of imperfect insurance markets.
When insurance market failure is severe or complete, the investigator can safely confine his attention to the relationship between

compulsory annuities and bequeathable assets. In the presence of nontrivial bequest motives, appropriate valuation of Social Security wealth
is problematic, and there is, of course, no reason to believe that the

rate of displacement should be dollar—for—dollar. On the other hand,
for pure life cycle assumptions, the analysis of Section 2 creates a
presumption in favor of simple discounting.

Is the simple discounted value of benefit streams the appropriate

variable for behavioral relationships concerning life cycle savings? To
answer this question, we must return to the theoretical model of Section

2. We will confine attention to the two cases in which WL > 0

(Ia and

ha).
Consider first case Ia. Suppose we consider a change in Vt

(increasing the level of benefits while preserving g and L) for
which total initial resources,

—18—

are held constant. What effect will this have on Wt? It is straightforward to calculate that

dWt

dWt

t
Within

R

1

dvt u

this regime, a regression of bequeathable wealth on Social

Security wealth (calculated with simple discounting), controlling for
total resources, would confirm the tldollar_for_dollarfl substitution

bypothesis. Furthermore, the regression coefficient would measure a
"pure" substitution effect, as in simple life cycle models with certain
horizons.

In Case ha, the pure substitution effect may be substantially
less than dollar for dollar, due to the presence of binding constraints.
Analyses of asset—annuity substitution based on simple discounting will

yield only an approximation of this effect. In what follows, we show

that the accuracy of this approximation is determined by , as defined
in Section 2. Thus, simple discounting is appropriate for behavioral
savings equations precisely when it yields a satisfactory approximation
to compensating variation!

First, we calculate the pure substitution effect by differenti-

ating the optimal program implicitly, as in Section 2. We find:

-1 +

e_T{(t)

+

(1 -

(t))(i -

t

< L

-l

e_Tt){(t)

+

(1 -

(t))(i - )}

t

>

dW
(16)

=
+

L

—19—

where
(y—r)t
4'(t)

For t = 0,

=

As t rises, 4'

0,

=1

so our result is consistent with that of Section 2.

rises,

and the rate of substitution falls smoothly to

0. This does not, however, imply that annuitization is worthless:
since the policy is fully anticipated, endogenous readjustments in the
wealth profile simple minimize changes in wealth near the date at which

liquidity constraints bind. If T is large relative to t, substitution will be nearly dollar—for—dollar.

Now suppose that we attempt to measure this pure substitution
effect as before by estimating a regression of bequeathable wealth on
Social Security wealth and total resources, where simple discounting is

used to value annuity streams. We this yield an accurate approximation
of pure behavioral substitution? Rather than fixing utility as above,

we fix R0 and differentiate:

(ri)

tR0

—l +

(_r)(T_L)4'()

-l +

(_r)(T_t)4'()

Using the facts that r > y

t <

L

t > L

and r > g, it is easy to see that

>—

dWt
0> dWt
_dVt u*dVt

>—l
R0

—20—

That is, the use of simple discounting overstates the rate of substitu-

tion, but the estimated rate should lie between 0 and —1. How accurate is the approximation? By comparing (16) and (ii), we see that

t<L
dW

dW

dvt u*t R

( -

t L

where F is the adjustment factor discussed in Section 2. In both
cases, the multiplicative term associated with

lies between 0 and

1. Thus, the error induced by using simple valuation is bounded by c——

the

use of simple discounting in behavioral savings relations is justi-

fied whenever it yields a good approximation to compensating variation.
If liquidity constraints eventually bind for most consumers, we
would not expect to find evidence of dollar—for—dollar substitution.
What rates of displacement are plausible, and how well will estimates

based on simple discounting approximate true values? In Table 2, we
present sample calculations for the cases labelled 1 and 3 in Table 1
(note that Case 3 is the least favorable to simple discounting when
r =

0.03

or 0.05). We present both the pure substitution effect and

our approximation for two ages—--t = 20

represents an individual (or

sample of individuals) in the middle of his working life, while t = 1O
represents an individual at retirement. Values of the pure substitution
effect range between 564 and 784 on the dollar; approximations based on
simple discounting are generally quite accurate.

—21—

Suppose instead that, as in most empirical work, we employed

actuarial valuation of annuity benefit streams. How would we interpret
an estimated "rate of displacement"? We will focus entirely on Case Ia
(the "easy" case), since it allows us to illustrate the important

principles. Paralleling our previous analysis, we will denote actuarial
valuations as follows:

A

t

a

t>L
=

r+lt—g

Vt
e

(Tr+r)(t—L) a

V

t<L

and

First, it is easy to see the basis for Hubbard's 1198)4j result,

that an actuarially fair Social Security system will displace bequeath—

able wealth accumulation by more than the taxes paid. We can think of
such a system as a combination of one which is fair in the sense of

simple discounting, with one which entails benefits, but no taxes. The
first portion would displace savings dollar—for—dollar. The subsidy
late in life generates an income effect, which increases consumption in
every period, thereby depressing savings prior to retirement even

further. Note, however, that this result is quite sensitive to the

assumption that we are in regime Ia. In other regimes, the first
portion of the system generates less than dollar—for—dollar substitution, and the net result is ambiguous.

—22--

Most empirical studies of these issues, however, measure the rate

of displacement as dWt/dVR, rather than dWt/dTIR (where T, here,
refers to taxes). As we will see, the choice of denominator makes an
enormous difference.

We begin by calculating the pure rate of substitution between

bequeathable wealth and actuarially valued annuities in regime Ia. It
is easy to see that
dW
=

(18)

—

r

+ it — g
<

r-g

—1

That is, income effects aside, we would expect to observe more than
dollar—for—dollar substitution, because the use of actuarial valuation

has changed the units of measurement. We refer to this as the "scale
effect •"

In

addition, we will have an income effect as before. However,

given our current choice of denominator, the income effect works in the

opposite direction. This may seem counterintuitive, but is simply a

matter of what one chooses to hold constant. By employing

as the

denominator, we must perform our decomposition by holding the change in

benefits, rather than the change in taxes constant. That is, we decompose an actuarially fair system into a system which is fair in the sense
of simple discounting (and which has the same benefits), plus a t,ax

rebate. The first portion will displace resources at the rate indicated

in Equation (18). Since the marginal propensity to consume the tax

—23—

rebate is less than one, the second component will increase wealth accu—
niulation, depressing the rate of displacement. The net result is
ambiguous.

Formally, a regression of bequeathable wealth on Social Security
wealth and total resources (employing actuarial discounting) would estimate the rate of displacement to be
— re ir(L—t)r + if —

r—g

dW

(19) —
dV

g(

— e (y—r)t\

e

—iTt

e

(i—r)t1

t <

=

R

—

+

—

e__t)

+

_mL(g_r)(i_g)tj

These expressions are quite complex, but one can reach certain qualita-

tive conclusions. The derivative can, in both cases be either greater

or less than —1 (we will see examples below). For t < L, is always
negative; however, it may be

for t > L

(this is true even

when taxes are used as the denominator——by moving sufficiently far into
retirement, one puts the income effect into the past, reversing its
impact).

This analysis suggests that the use of actuarial valuation confounds efforts to measure behavioral substitution between compulsory
annuities and bequeathable assets, in part because of a scale effect,
and in part because the introduction of an actuarially fair Social
Security system generates a blend of income and substitution effects.
The problem is sufficiently severe that theory yields essentially no
prediction as to the magnitude of the relevant regression coefficient,

or (if the sample includes retirees) even its sign! While such
estimates may be valid for assessing the "reduced form" impact of Social

t L

Security on capital accumulation, (although, see below) they do not
allow us to evaluate theories of behavior.

Nevertheless, we may evaluate estimates based on actuarial
valuation by comparing them with the predictions of our model for

particular, reasonable parameter values. Sample calculations are
presented in Table 3. Since our analysis of actuarial valuation has
focused on regime Ia, we cannot employ the parameter values used in

Tables 1 and 2 (which correspond to ha). Instead, we take r =
L = 10, g = 0

and —0.03, and y = 0

= 0.03,

and 0.02. Note that the rate of

displacement tends to rise, then fall with age. Further, for the most

reasonable case (y, g near zero) it substantially exceeds unity (the

scale effect dominates). By increasing the gap between y and g, one
can drive the rate of displacement below unity, even changing its sign
in extreme cases.

These calculations shed rather a different light on existing

estimates of asset—annuity substitution. Since it is commonly presumed
that pure theory predicts dollar—for—dollar displacement, estimates of
504 to 154 on the dollar have been interpreted as roughly consistent

with life cycle behavior. However, the coefficient actually predicted
by theory (assuming reasonable parameter values) may be twice as large.
This suggests that existing estimates are consistent with much more
limited asset—annuity substitution than was previously believed.

However, the analysis points to at least one more problem with
existing estimates of displacement, even when they are interpreted as
reduced forms for the aggregate effect (income and substitution) of an

—25—

actuarially fair Social Security system on savings. Specifically, for
the age group which dominates most microeconoinic cross—sections (J-o to

60, and over), the rate of displacement falls with age. Thus,
specifications should include an interaction term between age and Social

Security wealth. A moment's reflection suggests that, implicitly,
common specifications do include such an interaction. To step outside
our formal model, survival probabilities decline with age, which makes
actuarial values fall, or equivalently, makes the "scale effect" rise.
Thus, these specifications constrain the rate of displacement to rise

with age, exactly contrary to the predicted pattern. The effect of this
mispecification may be to weaken the link between measured Social
Security wealth and behaviorally relevant variables, and might account
for the magnitude of existing estimates.

It is worth noting that Diamond and Hausman [19801 did not employ
actuarial valuation in their study, but instead simply included the

yearly benefit as an explanatory variable. Within the context of our
model, it is natural to think of the estimated coefficient as measuring
l/(r —

g)

times the pure rate of subsitution. Yet for reasonable

values of r and g, their estimates suggest a rate of displacement far
below any of those calculated earlier for reasonable parameter values.
This is consistent with our evaluation of the evidence based on actu-

arial discounting. It is not clear, however, that their procedure
controls for lifetime resources in a way which includes the insurance

value of annuities. Since their estimated coefficient therefore
subsumes an income effect, it may significantly understate the true rate
of substitution.

—26—

B.

Age—Wealth Profiles

Until recently, most evidence on age—wealth profiles among the
elderly has suggested that consumers do not significantly deplete accu—
inulated resources after retirement, contrary to the predictions of

simple life cycle models (see, for example, Lydall 119551, Projector and

Weiss [19661, Projector [19681, and Mirer [19821). Studies by Diamond
and Hausman [19801, King and Dicks—Mireaux [1982] and Bernheini [l984a]

have criticized the empirical methodology underlying these earlier
estimates, and have found to the contrary that bequeathable wealth
declines significantly after retirement.

Yet there is an additional problem with using this evidence to

test life cycle predictions: a very large fraction of the total
resources available to many retired individuals is locked into non—

bequeathable annuities. It has frequently been argued that the
inclusion of annuities would vindicate the hump—shaped age—wealth
profile, since the actuarial value of survival contingent claims falls

with age (single year survival probabilities decline). Thus, Mirer
[19191 concedes that, "to some extent, perhaps a great one for many

people, pension and Social Secruity programs tend to institutionalize

the tenets of the life cycle theory." Likewise, King and Dicks—Mireaux
[1983] find evidence of "a clear life—cycle pattern" when the actuarial

value of annuity claims are included in measures of net worth.
Yet if one wishes to infer an age—wealth profile in order to judge
the plausibility of life cycle motives, the analysis of Section 2 sug-

gests that actuarial valuation is inappropriate. Instead, we would
expect simple discounting to better approximate the relevant notion of

—21--

value. Since this measure changes very little with age, proper computation of age—wealth profiles will reverse the conclusion of King and

Dicks—Mireaux: the inclusion of annuities will reinforce earlier findings that resources decline only slightly, if at all, after retirement.
In Bernheim [198la], we employ simple discounting of annuity benefits in calculations of age—wealth profiles, and find little evidence of
rapid resource depletion even though bequeathable assets appear to

decline rapidly after retirement. It may, of course, be inappropriate
to use the compensating variation as a measure of annuity valuation when

calculating wealth trajectories. For ths reason, we also examine the
accuracy of the approximation entailed by the use of simple

discounting. In particular, we show that, for y <

g,

the behavioral

rate of depletion (y) is bounded between the depletion rate for

bequeathable resources, y', and the depletion rate for total
resources, 1r, where total resources are defined to include the simple
discounted value of annuity benefits:

w

r

1 <1<1.
For a range of hypothetical parameter values, the upper bound (1')

in fact a much better approximation of y. When y >

g,

is

it is easy to

see (ecjuation (1)) that simple discounting is exactly appropriate (1r =

C.

Retirement

In recent years, a large number of authors have examined the
effect of Social Security on work incentives (see, for example, Boskin
and Hurd [19181, Blinder, Gordon, and Weiss [19801, Burkhauser [1980]

—28—

Hurd and Boskin [19811, and Burtless and Moffitt [19831). Kotlikoff and
Wise 1198-1 have also considered the relationship between the structure

of private pension plans and labor force incentives. In most studies of
pensions and retirement, the effect of continued labor force participation on the actuarial value of pension benefits plays a prominent role.
Yet in a life cycle world, any

inducement

to retirement built into pen-

sion plans cannot arise from mortality rates. Calculations based on
actuarial values will therefore tend to overstate the incentive effects

of pensions.-'
We must qualify this conclusion in two ways. First, estimation of
pension induced work disincentives is not intrinsically tied to pure
life cycle assumptions (unlike the prtctiction of dollar—for—dollar

asset-annuity substitution, or the computation of meaningful age—wealth

profiles). Under the maintained hypotheses that individuals have
bequest motives and annuity markets are perfect, the use of actuarial

values is sensible. Second, we have not explicitly shown that simple
discounting is, under life cycle assumptions, approximately appropriate

within this particular behavioral contexts Unfortunately, our model is
not sufficiently rich to permit consideration of endogenous retirement.

Yet the fundamental insights still seem applicable: if non—negativity
constraints on bequeathable wealth will never bind, simple discounting
yields the proper behavioral variable; if these constraints bind only in
the distant future, than this measure will be approximately appropriate.

—29—

D.

Distribution

The public provision of Social Security has important distri-

butional implications. In considering these issues, Hurd and Shoven
[1983], Kotlikoff [19831, Pellechio [l983], and others have typically

employed actuarial valuation of annuity benefits. While the analysis of
distribution is not intrinsically tied to life cycle assumptions, it is
noteworthy that the use of simple discounting (associated with the
assumption of pure life cycle motives) would dramatically alter many of
the conclusions which appear in this literature.

In particular, many results based on actuarial valuation are
driven by the observation that annuity wealth rises with survival

probabilities. Thus, while consumers make the same contributions to
Social Security irrespective of race and sex, whites receive in return

more than blacks; women more than men. Yet if one assumes life cycle
behavior with missing annuity markets and uses compensating variation to

measure value, equal yearly benefits generate equal return. From this
point of view, the current Social Security system seems entirely equitable.

Once again, simple discounting is, of course, not exactly appro-

priate even in a pure life cycle world. Furthermore, individuals with
high survival probabilities will tend to have large T's, so that there
will be some vestigial correlation between survival probabilities and

value. However, the calculations of Section 2 appear to suggest that
actuarial valuation will significantly overstate these differences.

—30—

E.

Wage Taxes vs. Consumption Taxes
"Textbook't wisdom holds that proportional wage taxes and consump-

tion taxes are equivalent, from the point of view both of the individual,

and of the government. In recent years, this belief has been modified
by the recognition that there are important transitional distinctions
between these two taxes (see, for example, Auerbach, Kotlikoff, and

Skinner [19811). The current analysis raises a second potentially
important set of distinctions, which arise when lifetimes are uncertin.

If annuity markets are perfect, then, as in the textbook case, a
wage tax and a consumption tax which raise the same expected revenue

will be equivalent from the individual's point of view. When annuity
markets are either imperfect or fail completely, this equivalence
dissolves.

Consider a pure life cycle saver who has no access to private
annuity markets, and suppose his lifetime consumption plan places him in

regime Ia (for simplicity, no constraints bind). He will be indifferent
between proportional wage and consumption taxes as long as the simple
discounted value (ignoring death) of tax payments is the same for each.
However, since the government taxes many individuals, it is concerned

with expected revenue. Since wage taxes raise revenue sooner, the wage

tax raises more expected revenue. Equivalently, if the government
wishes to raise a certain amount of revenue, consumers would prefer to

have the tax applied to wages, rather than to consumption. The potential importance of this observation is clear when one considers the
nature of transitional distinctions between wage and consumption
taxation——the wage tax raises less revenue in the short run, because the

—31—

consumption tax falls heavily on retirees. Considerations based on
uncertin lifetimes work in the opposite direction, offsetting this
effect.

Of course, this result is driven by the assumption that market
imperfections make it more efficient for government, rather than

individuals, to save. This property holds for some, but not all, models
of adverse selection (see King [198111,

and

Eckstein, Eichenbaum, and

Peled [19831).

4.

Concluding

Remarks

When annuity markets are perfect and individuals have bequest

motives, actuarial valuation of benefits is clearly appropriate. In
this paper, we have shown that, when annuity markets are missing and
individuals have no bequest motives, simple discounting of benefits
yields a good approximation to the appropriate concept of value.
Between these two polar, "easy" cases, there is a range of possibilities
for which the valuation of annuities is significantly more difficult.
Calculation of realistic annuity values must recognize not only the
existence of potentially significant bequest motives, but also the
potential imperfections in annuity markets, including idiosynchratic
intrafamily arrangements designed to improve upon imperfect markets
(see, for example, Kotlikoff and Spivak [19811, and Bernheini, Shleifer

and Summers [19841). These important intermediate cases are left for
future work.

—32—

Figure 1

Case Ia: y > g

,

WL

0

w

C,A

t

L

Case

T

L

Ib: -y>g , WL=O

C,A

w
1"

t

L

Case ha: y

t

L

WL > 0

< g

C,A

w

T

R

Case lib:

t

t

T

R

WL=O

C,A

w

C,A

A

I

R

t

N

R

t

—33—

Table 1

Annuity Valuation for Hypothetical Parameter Values

Case #

Exogenous Parameters

Calculated Values
MV

-

AV*

r

.

c

1

.03

.05

0

—.020

1.9

0.886

0.936

2

.03

.05

—1

—.010

6i.i

0.947

0.9Th

3

.03

.05

—2

—.007

89.7

0.973

0.990

4

.03

.07

0

—.040

26.6

0.7143

0.822

5

.03

.07

—1

—.020

Ii1.9

0.831

0.908

6

.03

.07

—2

—.013

54.9

0.890

0.947'

.05

0

0.0

1.000

1.000

8

.05
.05

.05

—1

0.0

1.000

1.000

9

.05

.05

—2

0.0

1.000

1.000

10

.05

.07

0

—.020

35.14

0.951

0.978

11

.05

.07

—1

—.010

58.2

0.984

0.995

12

.05

.07

—2

—.007

79.4

0.995

0.995

13

.01

.05

0

—.040

39.2

0.459

0.547'

14

.01

.05

—1

—.020

61.5

0.567

o.64

15

.01

.05

—2

—.013

79.9

0.640

0.751

16

.01

.07

0

—.060

30.0

0.365

0.448

17

.01

.07

—1

—.030

147.3

0.469

0.570

18

.01

.07

—2

—.020

61.5

0.536

0.650

7

T

y

co

*These calculations are based on trapazoidal approximations of the appropriate

integrals. Since the marginal valuation function is monotonic, it is possible to
obtain bounds on the true integral by employing rectangular approximations. Such
calculations suggest that every entry in this column is within 0.01 of its true
value (most bounds are, in fact, much tighter).

—36—

Footnotes

!i

have considered the problem of
Bernheifll, Shleifer and Summers [l9841context.
enforceabilitY in a non_cooperative

/ Kotlikoff and Spivak's calculations ignore

the fact that the deaths

of elderly spouses tend to be highly correlated.

1'

conditional survival probabilities
Note that we assume single year
value of an

are constant over time. In such a world, the actuarial
In what
annuity with constant benefits does not change with age.
do.not depend
follows, it should be clear that our central results
which
establishes
argument
upon this assumption. In particular, theappropriate
depends only
that simple discounting is approximately
interval before the nonnegativity
upon there being a relatively longbinds.
To take an extreme alterconstraint on beueathable wealth
If an
native, suppose death will occur at date T, with certainty.
benefits past this date, those
annuity contract promises to pay
value of an annuity
benefits are irrelevant. The appropriate
individual can borrow on benefits paid
(assuming either that the
terminal benefits are not too large) is then

prior to T or that

value of benefits, U to age T. In this
just the simple discounted
actuarial valuation is exactly appropriate, and
very special case,
benefits promised after T) is clearly
our technique (which includes
must
in error. However, we have added the c1ualificatiofl that there
before the constraint on beq.ueathable
be a relatively long interval
method

wealth binds. Here, it binds as T, so if T is large, our

In general, however, if there
is, again, approximately appropriate.
measure by
is some maximum age, one could always improve our
excluding benefits promised after the maximum age.

inherited endowment and as human
One may think of this both as an
of substance would change if a pre—
capital. In fact, nothing
retirement income stream were substituted for w0, to incorporate
earned income explicitly.
constraint only strenthenS our
./ Partially or completely relaxing this
conclusion that simple discounting is appropriate.
The transverSalitY condition guarantees this inequality.

11

For example, if r > X and g < —0, -y
independent of

./

> g, and whether (14) binds is
—

ct.

availThroughout, details of all calculations are ommitted, but are
able from the author upon request.

—31—

21 This result can be understood as follows. Since . > r, the
individual wishes to consume all resources immediately. He cannot
borrow on annuities, so annuitization forces him to defer consumption to the future. Thus, annuitization generates at net loss given
actuarially fair financing.
This formula matches our previous result (Equation (i4)) in the
L and CL_ =
borderline case where T

CL+.

See, for example, Feldstein and Pellechio [19791, Kotlikoff [19791
and King and Dicks—Mireaux [19821,. A notable exception is Diamond
and Hausman [19801,.
The inconsistency would disappear if each individual belonged to a
sufficiently large risk—pooling family, as discussed in the introduction.
I would like to thank Michael Hurd for pointing this effect out to
me.

—38—

References

Auerbach, A., L. Kotlikoff and J. Skinner [19811, "The Efficiency Gains
from Dynamic Tax Reform," Harvard Institute for Economic Research
Discussion Paper No. 870.

Bernheim, B.D. [1983a1, "Dissaving After Retirement: Testing the Pure
Life Cycle Hypothesis," in Z. Bodie, J. Shoven, and D. Wise (eds.),
Pensions and Retirement in the United States, NBER Conference
volume, forthcoming.
Bernheim, B.D. [1981th], "Annuities, Pensions, and Private Wealth,"
rnimeo, Stanford.

Bernheim, B.D., A. Shleifer and L. Summers [19811, "Bequests as a Means
of Payment," NBER Working Paper No. 1303.
Blinder, A., R. Gordon and D. Wise [1980], "Social Security, Bequests,
and the Life Cycle Theory of Saving: Cross—Sectional Tests," NBER
Working Paper No. 619.
Boskin, M. and M. Hurd [19781, "The Effects of Social Security on Early
Retirement," Journal of Public Economics vol. 10.

Burkhauser, R. [19801, "The Early Acceptance of Social Security: An
Asset Maximization Approach," Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
Vol. 33.
Burtless, G. and R. Moffitt [19831, "The Effect of Social Security on
Labor Supply of the Aged: The Joint Choice of Retirement Date and
Post—retirement Hours of Work," (mimeo).
Diamond, P. and J. Hausman [1980], "Individual Savings Behavior," MIT
(mimeo).
Eckstein, Z., M. Eichenbaum and D. Peled [1983], "Uncertain Lifetimes
and the Welfare Enchancing Properties of Annuity Markets and Social
Security," mimeo, GSIA, Carnegie—Mellon.
Feldstein, M. [1971t], "Social Security, Induced Retirement, and
Aggregate Capital Accumulation," JPE, vol. 82, pp. 905—926.

Feldstein,

M. and A. Pellechio [1919], "Social Security and Household
Wealth Accumulation: New Microeconomic Evidence," Review of
Economics and Statistics, vol. 61.

Hubbard, R. Glenn [198'i.l, "Undertain Lifetimes, Pensions, and Individual
Savings," NBER Working Paper No. 1363.

—39—

Hurd, M. and M. Boskin [19811, "The Effect of Social Security on
Retirement in the Early 1970's," NBER Working Paper No. 659.
Hurd, M. and J. Shoven [19831, "The Distributional Impact of Social
Security," Stanford (mimeo).
King, M. [198)41, "Tax Policy and the Business Cycle," mimeo, MIT.

King, N. and Dicks—Mireaux, L. [19821, "Asset Holding and the Life
Cycle," Economic Journal, vol. 92, pp. 2)47—67.
King, M. and Dicks—Mireaux, L. [19831, "Pension Wealth and Household
Savings: Tests of Robustness," Journal of Public Economics,

Kotlikoff, L. [19791, "Testing the Theory of Social Security and Life
Cycle Accumulation," The American Economic Review, vol. 69, pp. 396—
)4io.

Kotlikoff, L. [19831, "The Distributional Impact of Social Security,"
presented at the CEPR Conference on Social Security at Stanford
University.
Kotlikoff, L. and A. Spivak [19811, "The Family as an Incomplete
Annuities Market," JPE, vol. 89, pp. 372—91.
Kotlikoff, L. and D. Wise [198)41, "The Structure of Private Pension
Plans and Labor Force Incentives," in Z. Bodie, J. Shoven, and M.
Hurd (eds.), Pensions and Retirement in the United States, NEER
Conference volume, forthcoming.

Lydall, H. [19551, "The Life Cycle in Income, Saving and Asset
Ownership," Econoxuetrica vol. )46, pp. 985—1012.
Mirer, T. [19791, "The Wealth—Age Relationship Among the Aged," American
Economic Review, vol. 69, pp. )435—)43.

Pellechio, A. [19831, "Individual Gains and Losses from Social Security
and an Agenda for Reform," mimeo.
Projector, D. [19681, Survey of Changes in Family Finances, Federal
Reserve Board of Governors.
Projector, D. and G. Weiss [19661, Survey of Financial Characteristics
of Consumers, Federal Reserve Board of Governors.
Yaari, M. [19651, "Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and The Theory of
the Consumer," Review of Economic Studies, vol. 32, pp. 137—50.

