                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  PUBLIC POLICY, HEALTH INSURANCE AND THE TRANSITION TO ADULTHOOD

                                           Phillip B. Levine
                                           Robin McKnight
                                            Samantha Heep

                                         Working Paper 15114
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15114


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2009




We thank Akila Weerapana and seminar participants at Harvard University, the Harvard/MIT/BU
Health seminar, and the NBER Health Economics program meeting for very helpful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Phillip B. Levine, Robin McKnight, and Samantha Heep. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Public Policy, Health Insurance and the Transition to Adulthood
Phillip B. Levine, Robin McKnight, and Samantha Heep
NBER Working Paper No. 15114
June 2009
JEL No. I18

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper assesses the impact of two recent policies designed to increase insurance coverage for older
teens and young adults. The introduction of SCHIP in 1997 enabled low and moderate income teens
up to age 19 to gain access to public health insurance. More recent policies adopted by a number of
states have enabled young adults between the ages of 19 and (typically) 24 to remain covered under
their parents’ health insurance. We take advantage of the discrete break in coverage at age 19 to evaluate
the impact of SCHIP. We also use quasi-experimental variation across states and years along with
the targeted nature of eligibility to evaluate the impact of these “extended parental coverage” laws.
Our results suggest that both types of policies were effective at increasing health insurance coverage,
especially among their respective target populations. Overall, SCHIP increases insurance coverage
by 3 percentage points; those with incomes under 150 percent of poverty are found to experience a
7 percentage point increase. We find little evidence of crowd-out associated with the introduction
of SCHIP. Extended parental coverage laws have minimal aggregate effects on coverage, but they
increase coverage by up to 5 percentage points for select groups. These laws may generate reverse
crowd-out, as individuals leave public insurance coverage to take advantage of the private coverage
now available to them.


Phillip B. Levine                                   Samantha Heep
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
Wellesley College                                   Wellesley College
106 Central Street                                  106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481                                 Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER                                            samantha.heep@gmail.com
plevine@wellesley.edu

Robin McKnight
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
rmcknigh@wellesley.edu
I. INTRODUCTION

        For the past 25 years, public policy regarding health insurance has focused on increasing

the rate of coverage among children and youth in the United States. As shown in Figure 1, these

efforts have been quite successful, with insurance coverage rates among children under the age

of 19 rising by roughly 15 percentage points between 1982 and 2007. In contrast, coverage rates

among young adults (aged 19 to 29) remain as low as, and in some cases much lower than, they

were 25 years ago.        Less than two-thirds of 23-year-olds are currently covered by health

insurance. Because of these relatively low rates of insurance coverage, young adults comprise a

large fraction of all those without health insurance. Indeed, one-third of all the uninsured in the

U.S. fall into this young adult age group.

        As a result, public policy has increasingly focused on raising insurance coverage among

young adults. One option is to expand existing public insurance programs that are targeted at

children and teens, such as Medicaid and the State Children’s Health Insurance Program

(SCHIP), by increasing the maximum age to qualify for coverage. Children generally lose their

Medicaid or SCHIP coverage on their 19th birthday, but recent proposals have sought to increase

this age limit to as high as 25 years old.1 A second option is to expand private insurance

coverage among young adults by increasing the age of dependency for the purposes of health

insurance coverage. Due to incentives of the tax code, children generally lose access to private

insurance coverage through their parents at age 19 (or age 24 if they are full-time students).

However, in recent years, several states have expanded eligibility to young adults through

(typically) age 24 in certain population subgroups to be covered under their parents’ employer-

provided plan.


1
 See, for example, the Children’s Health First Act (H.R.1535 and S.895), introduced in March 2007 by Rep. John
Dingell and Sen. Hillary Clinton.

                                                      2
       This paper provides evidence on the efficacy of these two policy options to increase

health insurance coverage among young adults. While the existing literature has examined the

take-up and crowd-out rates associated with SCHIP, it is unclear that these estimates are

applicable to young adults. We provide new estimates of take-up and crowd-out, which are more

relevant to the young adult population, by taking advantage of the discontinuity in SCHIP

eligibility upon turning age 19 that was generated when the program was instituted in the late

1990s. “Extended parental coverage” laws are recent enough that no past research of which we

are aware has examined their effect on take-up and crowd-out. We take advantage of variation

across states and years in the introduction of these laws, along with other provisions that target

certain population subgroups, to identify the effects of these extended parental coverage laws.

       Our estimates suggest that both policies have been successful in increasing insurance

coverage for older teens and young adults, although the aggregate impact is larger for SCHIP.

We find that SCHIP increased insurance coverage by three percentage points for older teens as a

whole. Those under 150 and 300 percent of the poverty line experienced a seven and four

percentage point increase, respectively. We also find weaker evidence of crowd-out than in the

existing SCHIP literature.

       We also find that extended parental coverage laws are effective at increasing rates of

insurance coverage for those groups targeted by the policy. These groups include those whose

parents have group health insurance coverage and who work in firms that are unlikely to be

exempt from state insurance regulation due to ERISA. For young adults in this subpopulation,

coverage rates are found to rise by five percentage points, which corresponds to a 25 percent

decline in uninsurance rates for this subpopulation.      In addition, we find that effects are

concentrated among non-students, which is consistent with the fact that many students are

eligible for parental coverage even in the absence of these state laws. These laws are also found

                                                3
to have their largest effects in the income distribution on those between 150 and 300 percent of

the poverty line. These young adults experience a 2.7 percentage point increase in coverage in

response to extended parental coverage laws. Because the targeted groups are a subset of the full

population of young adults, we are unable to find an impact of extended parental coverage laws

on aggregate rates of insurance coverage. Our results also provide evidence of reverse crowd

out; increases in private insurance coverage may be at least partially offset by reductions in

public insurance coverage.



II. BACKGROUND

A. Legislative Background

       While Medicaid policy in the 1980s and early 1990s dramatically expanded coverage for

pregnant women, infants, and young children, coverage expanded relatively little for teenagers

during this time. Teenagers who received Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC)

were always covered by Medicaid, but the income eligibility limits for AFDC – and therefore

Medicaid – coverage were extremely low in most states. For example, income eligibility limits

for 18-year-olds were 15 percent of the federal poverty line in Alabama, 28 percent in Florida, 41

percent in New Jersey, 33 percent in Ohio, and 17 percent in Texas (Rosenbach, et al., 2003).

       The only substantial Medicaid expansion that affected teenagers was the provision of

OBRA 1990 requiring that that all states provide Medicaid to children with incomes below the

federal poverty line and birth dates after September 30, 1983 (U.S. Congress, 1994). This

change led to a gradual expansion of Medicaid eligibility to older children and teenagers. For

older teenagers, however, Medicaid eligibility remained extremely restrictive through 1997,

when those born after September 30th, 1983 were no more than age 14.




                                                4
       This changed in 1997 upon the introduction of SCHIP, which was created by the

Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (BBA 97) and enacted in August of that year. This legislation

provided federal matching funds for states to expand coverage up to age 19 and to children in

families with income beyond previous Medicaid eligibility levels. States could either expand

their existing Medicaid programs or create new programs.            States launched their SCHIP

programs at different times, but all did so within a fairly narrow window. Most began enrolling

children in 1998 and by the end of 1999 all SCHIP programs were up and running (Wooldridge,

et al., 2003). States were allowed to cover children in families up to 200 percent of the poverty

line, but they could extend those income limits even further, depending upon the income

thresholds in their existing Medicaid programs. This provision generates some variability in

income eligibility limits across states, although the range is very narrow for most states.

       Table 1 details the variation in the implementation and provisions of Medicaid

expansions, including SCHIP programs, across states around the time that SCHIP was

introduced. In most states, children lost coverage at age 14 in 1997 and at age 19 in 1999. There

is some variation in the income eligibility limits for SCHIP across states, with limits ranging

from 100 to 300 percent of the federal poverty line; however, the majority of states ultimately

used an eligibility limit of 200 percent of the poverty line.

       BBA 97 intentionally allowed states to incorporate features intended to minimize crowd-

out into their SCHIP programs. For example, states are permitted to impose waiting periods

before enrollment in SCHIP and most states have chosen to do so (cf. Gruber and Simon, 2008).

In addition, states are permitted to charge premiums and copayments for services, so long as total

out-of-pocket costs (including premium) do not exceed 5 percent of family income. These

features may be expected to reduce both take-up and crowd-out relative to rates that were

observed in prior Medicaid expansions.

                                                  5
       Like Medicaid coverage, private coverage through a parent’s policy has traditionally

ended on a child 19th birthday (or, for full-time students, the child’s 24th birthday). Indeed,

Anderson and Dobkin (2009) document a substantial discontinuity in private insurance coverage

at exact age 19. These age limits for parent insurance coverage reflect the tax code, which

specifies that the tax exclusion for health insurance includes coverage of a dependent child until

the 19th (or 24th) birthday (Internal Revenue Service, 2008). While, in principle, an employer

could have extended coverage to older children, the potentially complicated tax implications

would have provided a very strong disincentive.         Extended parental coverage laws have

mandated that, in spite of the tax implications, certain firms must extend coverage to young adult

children.

       Virtually all extended parental coverage laws have been implemented by individual states

over the past five years. While there have been proposals to extend parental coverage at the

federal level, all of the laws to date have been implemented by states. The first such law was

implemented in Utah in 1994 where young Mormon adults were losing health insurance while

carrying out their traditional two years of missionary work (Associated Press, 2007). Members

of the Church of Latter-Day Saints applied pressure to the state legislature and a policy allowing

parents to cover these young adults was implemented. Kriss, et al. (2008) provides an extensive

description of the laws introduced through 2007, most of which were implemented in the few

years preceding that date.

       Table 2 summarizes these extended parental coverage laws. The table includes the years

when extended parental coverage laws were implemented, the limiting age of dependency status

(coverage expires at that birthday), as well as whether the young adult must be a student, must be

unmarried, or cannot have their own dependents. The limiting age of dependency status, or age

up to which young adults are covered, is 25 in the majority of states that passed such laws, with a

                                                6
few states opting for age 24, 26 or 30. Nearly all states require young adults to be unmarried to

qualify. While most states allow non-students to qualify under extended parental coverage laws,

a minority require the young adult to be enrolled in school.2 A few states require the young adult

not to have any dependents of their own. As of the end of 2008, 25 states havd implemented

laws.3

           Eligibility for extended parental coverage depends not only on the characteristics of the

adult child, but also on the characteristics of the parents’ insurance coverage. Naturally, parents

who do not have private insurance coverage for themselves will not be able to extend coverage to

their adult children. In addition, roughly 55 percent of those parents who have employer-

provided health insurance are covered by firms that self-insure (Pierron and Fronstin, 2008).

Under the Employee Retirement Income Security Acts of 1974 (ERISA), self-insured firms are

exempt from state-level health insurance regulation. The implication for extended parental

coverage laws is that a substantial fraction of parents who have employer-provided health

insurance do not have the option to extend it to their adult children under existing laws. We use

this variation in some of our empirical specifications below.

B. Prior Literature

           Although the decision to remain uninsured may be rational if young adults are risk

neutral, there are reasons to believe that some form of market failure may also be at play here.

Levy (2007) analyzes several reasons underlying the low and declining insurance rates among

young adults. First, increasingly unstable employment patterns in this population, including

2
  Providing health insurance to students up until their 24th birthday is a nontaxable benefit even without these laws,
but employers do not need to offer it. States that require school enrollment for extended parental coverall are
expanding coverage by mandating the provision of this benefit as well as extending the age at which it is offered. In
all of our empirical results presented below, we include these states as having an extended parental coverage law
despite its potentially limited effect. We have also experimented with dropping these states and our results were
virtually unchanged.
3
    See the notes to Table 2 for sources.

                                                          7
frequent job changes and employment in part-time and temporary positions, diminish the

likelihood of employer-sponsored health insurance coverage. Levy (2007) reports empirical

evidence that suggests that employment patterns among young adults contribute substantially to

their low and declining insurance rates. Second, adverse selection, which has been widely

documented in health insurance markets (cf. Cutler & Reber, 1998), implies actuarially unfair

premiums for young adults in both group and non-group insurance markets and therefore lower

insurance rates. Increasing health care costs have likely exacerbated this actuarial unfairness for

healthy, young adults. Both of these potential explanations for falling insurance rates imply a

potential role for the government. Even if the decision were rational for individual young adults,

one could still argue that the government should intervene in this market if young adults’ failure

to purchase insurance generates negative externalities on others. For instance, Gross (2008)

finds that young adults overuse expensive emergency room care because they lack health

insurance and those costs may be transferred to others.

       Prior public interventions into insurance markets through Medicaid expansions have been

studied extensively. However, that literature provides many conflicting estimates of take-up and

crowd-out. For example, Cutler and Gruber (1996) identify the effects of Medicaid expansions,

using a measure of “simulated eligibility” that quantifies the legislative variation across states

and years. They find crowd-out rates of 30 to 50 percent. Ham and Shore-Sheppard (2005),

however, suggest that these results are sensitive to specification and choice of data set. Other

papers, using longitudinal data sets, have found lower, but non-zero, crowd-out rates (Yazici and

Kaestner, 2000; Thorpe and Florence, 1999; Blumberg Dubay, and Norton, 2000). Moreover,

Card and Shore-Sheppard (2004) use a regression discontinuity design to analyze expansions of

Medicaid that affects those under 100 percent and 133 percent of the poverty line and find that




                                                8
the coverage effect is low because take-up is low rather than because of large crowd out. On

balance, the evidence on crowd-out in Medicaid expansions is quite mixed.

        The more recent literature on SCHIP has also relied primarily on variation in program

generosity across states and years to identify the effect on insurance coverage. Using this

variation, LoSasso and Buchmueller (2004), for example, conclude that 9 percent of eligible

children gained public insurance coverage, but that crowd-out was nearly 50 percent. Similarly,

Gruber & Simon (2008) use the SIPP and find take-up rates ranging from 5 to 15 percent

depending on the specification; their central crowd-out estimate is 60 percent, although the

estimates that are most closely related to the results presented in the current paper are in the 20 to

40 percent range.

        Our contribution, relative to this body of previous literature, is an entirely new

identification strategy, which relies on the discontinuity in eligibility at age 19, to identify the

impact of public insurance on coverage rates and crowd out.4 Because our identification strategy

is so simple, we are able to show the basis for many of our results in graphs. In addition, our

evidence focuses on the marginal older teenager (aged 16-18) who is induced to participate in

public insurance due to the introduction of SCHIP rather than the marginal child (aged 0-18)

who is induced to participate, as in the prior literature. Therefore, our findings are more relevant

for thinking about the likely effects of expanding SCHIP coverage to older ages.

        The literature on parental extended coverage laws is much less developed because the

laws have been introduced so recently. To our knowledge, this paper is the first to address the

impact of these laws on the level of insurance coverage.




4
  Gross (2008) and Anderson and Dobkin (2009) also use the discontinuity of SCHIP eligibility at exact age 19 to
identify the impact of insurance coverage on the use of emergency rooms, outpatient and inpatient services.

                                                       9
III. DATA

           For our analysis, we use several years of data from the March Current Population Survey

(CPS). The CPS is a monthly survey of about 50,000 households (although the sample size

varies somewhat over time) conducted by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Each month,

information about employment status and demographic characteristics is obtained from

individuals aged 16 and older. The March supplement to the CPS asks additional questions

including whether individuals had private health insurance, public health insurance, or were

uninsured (in more recent years) in the preceding calendar year.

           Our analysis of SCHIP uses these data between the years 1992 and 2008, whereas our

analysis of extended parental coverage laws uses the data between 2000 and 2008. These

datasets provide reports of insurance coverage in 1991 to 2007 and 1999 to 2007, respectively.

We use different sample windows for these exercises to focus more closely on the periods in

which the laws changed.

           Several potential concerns must be addressed when using the CPS health insurance

variables. First, the CPS was re-designed in 1995, which led to some changes in the reporting of

health insurance. This change should not contaminate our analysis, however, as long as the

reporting changes did not vary discretely with age, which seems unlikely.5 Second, there is a

long-standing concern that CPS respondents may actually provide their current insurance status

when asked about their insurance status in the prior year; thus, health insurance variables are

potentially measured with error (Swartz, 1986). The quasi-experimental nature of our

identification strategy, however, is unlikely to be seriously affected by this problem. All pre-

and post-policy change years are grouped together so these errors are likely to generate only a

relatively small number of miscodings. In addition, the recent literature on SCHIP has raised the

5
    We have verified that the results of our analysis are not sensitive to excluding the data collected prior to 1995.

                                                             10
concern that, as states outsource their public insurance plans to HMOs, some individuals who are

actually on state Medicaid and SCHIP programs may incorrectly report that they are on non-

group private health insurance. Such incorrect reporting could bias downwards estimates of both

take-up and crowd-out. Indeed, Lo Sasso and Buchmueller (2004) find that their results are

sensitive to the treatment of reported non-group private insurance coverage. We will also

examine the sensitivity of our results to this issue.

       Finally, the literature on Medicaid and SCHIP has raised questions about how to code

individuals who report both public and private health insurance coverage in the prior year. If

these individuals were on private health insurance at the beginning of the year and dropped it in

order to take up public insurance, then coding them as being on both types of insurance coverage

would bias downwards estimates of crowd-out. Gruber and Simon (2008) explored this issue

using panel data in the SIPP and found that 40 percent of the children who reported both public

and private insurance in the middle wave also reported overlapping public and private coverage

before and after the middle wave. This finding suggests that it is, in many cases, appropriate to

code these individuals as holding both private and public insurance. Nonetheless, we explore the

sensitivity of our estimates to this concern below.

       To capture the nature of the data available to us, we present Figure 2, which displays the

age pattern of health insurance status over the 2000 to 2007 period. This figure is comparable to

figures reported by Levy (2007). It shows that the majority of teens are covered by a parent’s

health insurance plan through age 18 and then parental coverage drops off sharply through the

early 20s. Coverage from a public plan through age 18 captures a substantial share of those

without parental coverage, but that drops off as well soon after that. Own private coverage,

which includes spousal coverage, makes up a lot of the lost coverage through the late teens and

early 20s, but not enough to prevent a sizeable drop-off in insurance coverage. Rates of coverage

                                                  11
by any insurance rebound in the middle 20s, but even by age 35 do not reach the level of

childhood coverage. Insurance coverage status measures for each individual in the relevant CPS

surveys provide the dependent variable in our subsequent econometric analyses.



IV. THE IMPACT OF SCHIP

A. Identification Strategy

       Our empirical strategy for identifying the effect of SCHIP on older teenagers relies on the

age discontinuity in eligibility. As discussed earlier and shown in Table 1, the introduction of

SCHIP created a discrete discontinuity in eligibility at age 19 that did not exist prior to BBA 97.

There are, of course, other sources of variation in eligibility for SCHIP that have been exploited

by other authors, such as differences in income eligibility limits by state and differences in the

timing of SCHIP implementation by state. However, the variation across states was relatively

small, with the vast majority of states choosing income eligibility cut-offs that were precisely, or

very close to, 200 percent of the poverty line and most states implementing their SCHIP

programs by the end of 1998. In comparison, the variation in SCHIP eligibility across different

young adult age groups was quite dramatic. Therefore, our analysis asks whether there is any

discontinuous change in insurance coverage for individuals under the age of 19 after BBA 97.

B. Descriptive Analysis

       An advantage of this identification strategy is that any effects should be apparent in a

simple, graphical analysis.    Indeed, Figure 3A provides suggestive evidence that an age

discontinuity in insurance coverage emerged after BBA 97. The figure shows the age pattern of

insurance coverage in three different time periods: 1990-1995 (before SCHIP), 1999-2003

(immediately after SCHIP), and 2004-2007 (several years after SCHIP). At most ages, the profile

of insurance coverage falls relatively uniformly over time. The exception to this pattern is an

                                                12
increase in insurance coverage for individuals under 19 years of age in the post-SCHIP periods

relative to the pre-SCHIP time period. This suggests that the introduction of SCHIP generated a

substantive increase in insurance coverage for older teenagers.

        Public insurance coverage displays a similar pattern, as shown in Figure 3B. The age

profile of coverage shows that the percentage of individuals covered by public insurance fell

over time at most ages with the notable exception of 16-18-year-olds, who experience a relative

increase in public insurance coverage in the post-SCHIP periods. Figure 3C provides the same

graphical analysis for private insurance coverage. If crowd-out were a substantial issue for this

age group, we would expect to see a relative decline in private insurance coverage for 16-18-

year-olds after SCHIP was introduced. Interestingly, this figure suggests that there was, if

anything, an increase in private insurance coverage. This figure provides suggestive evidence

that the magnitude of crowd-out in this age group is unlikely to be large.

C. Econometric Specification

        Our regression analysis formalizes this graphical analysis, using the following

framework:

(1)      Insuranceiast = α + β Below19 a ⋅ Post1998t + δ a + τ t + π s + ρUnempst + Xiastθ + ε iast

where Insuranceiast is a measure of insurance status for individual i in age group a, state s and

year t. Our independent variable of interest is an indicator for being under the age of 19 after

1998. 6 The regression includes a full set of age, year, and state fixed effects. In addition, we

control for differences in economic conditions across states, using the state- and year-specific




6
  In our analysis, we assume that the age reported in the March CPS corresponds to the individual’s age in the prior
year, the year for which health insurance variables are reported. However, we have confirmed that our results are
not sensitive to excluding 19-year-olds—who might plausibly have been below 19 and therefore in the treatment
group, rather than the control group, during the prior year.

                                                        13
unemployment rate.7 We also control for individual-level covariates, including gender, marital

status, student status, household income as a share of the poverty line, and the square of

household income as a share of the poverty line. We use OLS to estimate the regressions and

cluster our standard errors at the state level. We limit the sample to ages 16 to 22, so we are

including only three years above and below the age cut-off. The implicit identifying assumption

of our regression is that, in the absence of SCHIP, there would not have been differential trends

in insurance coverage at ages around the age 19 eligibility limit.

D. Results

           Table 3 shows our main results for SCHIP.                     Column 1 in this table displays the

percentage of individuals in the relevant population subgroup that is covered by any form of

insurance. This is a useful metric for gauging the magnitude of the estimated effects reported in

the remainder of the Table. Each cell in Columns 2 through 4 reports the results from a different

regression; the reported coefficient reflects the estimated value of β from equation (1), which is

the coefficient on an indicator for being under the age of 19 after 1998. Each column shows

coefficients and standard errors for a different dependent variable, and the rows show results for

different subsamples.

           The first row of Table 3 shows results for the full sample of 16 to 22 year olds. Our

results suggest a statistically significant 3.0 percentage point increase in insurance coverage for

older teenagers associated with the introduction of SCHIP (Column 2). The third column shows

a larger, statistically significant 4.2 percentage point increase in public insurance and the fourth

column shows a statistically insignificant 0.4 percentage point decrease in private insurance




7
    Results are similar when we also include state-specific linear trends in our econometric specification.

                                                            14
coverage.8 The implied level of crowd-out is 10 percent (.004/.042), although this estimate is not

significantly different from zero.

        The lower rows of Table 3 explore heterogeneity in the effect of SCHIP by income

category.     Because we prefer a measure of household income that does not reflect the

temporarily low incomes for otherwise middle- and high-income young adults who are

transitioning into the labor market, we restrict this analysis to young adults who live with their

parents. Therefore, the second row replicates our main results for the full sample of 16 to 22

year olds who live with their parents; the increase in insurance coverage is somewhat smaller

than the results in the full sample, but the difference is small and not statistically significant.

        For the lowest income group, with household incomes below 150 percent of the poverty

line, we see a substantial, 6.7 percentage point increase in insurance coverage. Prior to SCHIP,

64 percent of this group was covered by insurance, so 36 percent remained uninsured. This

estimated impact of SCHIP suggests that it reduced uninsurance rates by 19 percent. Estimates

of crowd-out in this lowest income category are small. The 8.5 percentage point increase in

public insurance is accompanied by a statistically insignificant 0.5 percentage point decline in

private insurance coverage, suggesting a 6 percent crowd-out rate.

        For the middle income group, with household incomes between 150 percent and 300

percent of the poverty line, take-up rates are lower, which is not surprising, and the overall

increase in insurance coverage is smaller (a 4.2 percentage point increase, relative to a pre-policy

uninsurance rate of 19 percent).             Crowd-out for this income group is wrong-signed and

statistically insignificant. For the highest income group, with household incomes above 300


8
  The coefficients from the public and private insurance models would sum to that for the any insurance model, if
the two forms of insurance were mutually exclusive. The nature of the questions asked in the CPS, however, makes
it possible for a respondent to report both types of coverage in the past year. We discuss this issue in more detail
below.


                                                        15
percent of the poverty line, we expect little impact of the introduction of SCHIP, because very

few states extended eligibility to teenagers in this part of the income distribution. Indeed, there

are no statistically significant changes in insurance coverage in this income group, and all

coefficients are very small.

       In Table 4, we examine the time pattern of the change in insurance coverage patterns for

individuals under the age of 19, to ensure that it corresponds to the timing of SCHIP

implementation. For this section of the analysis, we use six separate independent variables of

interest, which interact the dummy variable for being under the age of 19 with dummies for

different time periods. The omitted time period is 1997, the year before changes in insurance

coverage should have begun, so all coefficients are measured relative to 1997. Each column of

the table reports the six key coefficients from a different regression.

       The coefficients in the first two rows show that the difference in insurance coverage for

those under the age of 19, compared to those over the age of 19, were not statistically different in

the years leading up to the SCHIP legislation than it was in 1997; these coefficients provide

evidence that our estimates are unlikely to be merely capturing pre-existing differential trends in

insurance coverage for those under the age of 19. The third coefficient shows the change in

insurance coverage for those under the age of 19 during the transition years, 1998 and 1999,

when most SCHIP plans were being implemented.               During this time period, we see no

statistically significant difference in overall insurance coverage, although the second column

does provide evidence of a small, statistically significant increase in public insurance coverage.

Beginning in 2000, the regression shows a substantial and statistically significant increase in

both public insurance coverage and overall insurance coverage. This rise in insurance coverage

increases somewhat over time, which is consistent with overall SCHIP enrollment patterns,

which nearly doubled between 2000 and 2007 (Smith et al., 2008). Our estimates for private

                                                 16
insurance coverage, reported in the third column, provide only statistically insignificant evidence

of crowd-out, with point estimates that never exceed a 15 percent crowd-out rate.

E. Alternative Measures of Crowd-Out

       The prior literature on crowd-out suggests two alternative ways to measures insurance

status, which could potentially increase our estimate of crowd-out. One alternative is to consider

any increase in non-group private insurance to be an increase in public insurance coverage. This

alternative measure of public insurance addresses the concern that CPS respondents who are on

SCHIP programs might erroneously report that they had private insurance coverage. Crowd-out,

in this case, should be measured as the reduction in group insurance coverage, as a percentage of

the increase in public and non-group insurance coverage. When we follow this approach, our

estimates of crowd-out rise. Specifically, we find a 5.3 percentage point increase in public plus

non-group insurance, and an insignificant 1.5 percentage point decline in group insurance

coverage, for an overall crowd-out rate of 28 percent. However, crowd-out among the lowest

income group – those with household incomes below 150 percent of the poverty line – remain

low at only 10 percent.

       Another alternative approach is to measure crowd-out as the reduction in reporting only

private insurance coverage, as a percentage of the increase in public insurance coverage. This

approach addresses the concern that individuals who are in the process of switching from private

to public health insurance coverage may report both types of coverage. This approach is the

most conservative possible solution to this problem, because it assumes that all individuals who

report overlapping public and private coverage are being crowded out. As mentioned above,

Gruber & Simon’s (2008) investigation of this issue in the SIPP suggests that this approach is

likely too conservative, since roughly half of the individuals who report having both public and

private insurance continue to do so in later interviews. Nonetheless, we used this approach and

                                                17
found a statistically significant decline in private insurance coverage, resulting in an overall

crowd-out rate of 29 percent. Among the lowest income groups, the crowd-out rate is 21 percent

and remains statistically insignificant. We consider these estimates to be upper bounds on

crowd-out among older teenagers due to SCHIP expansions.

       While our estimates of crowd-out are lower than those in the prior literature, we do not

believe that they are necessarily inconsistent with the prior literature. Our identification strategy

relies on a marginal SCHIP participant who is a 16- to 18-year-old who was made eligible for

public insurance by SCHIP’s expansion of the age eligibility limit. In contrast, the identification

strategy in Gruber and Simon (2008) and Lo Sasso and Buchmueller (2004) relies on differences

in SCHIP eligibility across all age groups and states. Their strategy, therefore, relies on a

marginal SCHIP participant who is likely to be much younger and with higher income. For

example, prior to the introduction of SCHIP, the minimum income eligibility limit for 1-5-year-

olds was 133 percent of the federal poverty line, whereas the typical 18-year-old had to meet the

dramatically lower AFDC eligibility rules. So, if higher income individuals have lower take-up

rates and higher crowd-out rates, it may not be surprising that our analysis estimates lower

crowd-out.    However, for the purposes of predicting crowd-out rates for further expansions of

public insurance to older age groups – including recent proposals to expand SCHIP eligibility to

adults in their early 20s – our lower estimates of crowd-out in SCHIP are likely more relevant

than estimates from the prior literature.



V. THE IMPACT OF EXTENDED PARENTAL COVERAGE LAWS

A. Identification Strategy and Econometric Specification

       The second portion of our analysis focuses on the impact of extended parental coverage

laws. As shown in Table 2, there is substantial variation across states in the implementation of

                                                 18
these laws. Our basic identification relies on standard quasi-experimental variation comparing

changes in outcomes in states that adopt laws before and after their implementation relative to

changes in outcomes over time in states that did not introduce these laws. In addition, since the

provisions of these laws in states that adopted them made certain population subgroups eligible

and others ineligible, we also adopt triple-difference estimation strategies that provide even

stronger methods of drawing causal conclusions.

        Our basic regression framework is as follows:

(2)            Insuranceiast = α + β Laws ⋅ Postt + δ a + τ t + π s + ρUnempst + Xiastθ + ε iast

where Insuranceiast is a measure of insurance status for individual i in age group a, state s and

year t. Our independent variable of interest is an indicator for living in a state that has adopted

an extended parental coverage law in a year after the law was implemented. As in the SCHIP

analysis, the regressions include a full set of age, year, and state fixed effects. We again control

for differences in state-specific economic shocks using the state- and year-specific

unemployment rate, and we control for individual-level covariates, including gender, marital

status, student status, household income as a share of the poverty line, and the square of

household income as a share of the poverty line. We continue to use OLS to estimate the

regressions and cluster our standard errors at the state level.

        To begin our analysis, we use a sample of all young adults between the ages of 19 and 24,

the age group that would be affected by laws, to estimate the aggregate impact of the law using

standard difference-in-difference methods.9            We then separate that sample into population

subgroups that we would expect to be more and less affected by its introduction. Initially, we

restrict the sample to include just those who meet the eligibility criteria in their state. For states


9
 We exclude all data from Massachusetts in this analysis, because of the broader health insurance reform that was
implemented at the same time as the extended parental coverage law.

                                                       19
that have not passed extended parental coverage laws and therefore have not established

eligibility criteria, we assume that the only eligibility criterion is that the young adult must be

unmarried. As an additional test, we run a triple-difference specification that uses the ineligible

young adults in the states as the third difference. This approach uses the ineligibles within the

states as an additional control group that can adjust for other within-state differences that may be

affecting levels of health insurance coverage in the state. We continue our analysis by further

separating the sample into narrower population subgroups, who we might expect to be more and

less likely to be affected by extended parental coverage laws.

B. Results

       Tables 5 and 6 present the results of our analysis. As in Table 3, the first column of these

tables displays the percentage of individuals in the relevant population subgroups who are

covered by any form of insurance. In Columns 2 through 4 of both tables, every cell represents

the results from a different regression. Different dependent variables are shown in different

columns, and different samples and specifications are shown in different rows.

       The first row of Table 5 shows the difference-in-difference results for the full sample.

We do not find that extended parental coverage laws are associated with a statistically significant

increase in insurance coverage overall or private insurance coverage in this model. In the second

row, we focus more narrowly on those young adults who would be eligible for this form of

coverage. Perhaps not surprisingly, we see larger effects for this group; private insurance

coverage is estimated to increase by a statistically significant 1.9 percentage points.         The

magnitude of the effect on private insurance coverage is larger in the triple-difference

specification in the third row, at 3.8 percentage points.

       Interestingly, the net effect on overall insurance coverage in both specifications is muted

by an offsetting decline in public insurance coverage, which is statistically significant in the

                                                 20
difference-in-difference specification. This finding suggests the possibility of “reverse crowd-

out” resulting from extended parental coverage laws. When young adults are able to move onto

their parents’ private insurance plans, some of them appear to drop public insurance to do so.

This reverse crowd-out might be expected to occur if the private insurance plan provides more

generous coverage or better access to providers.10

         In the second panel of Table 5, we restrict our analysis to individuals who are not

students.    Since the tax incentive for employer-provided health insurance has traditionally

extended to students up to the age of 24, the impact of extended parental coverage laws should

be much smaller for students than for non-students. In the bottom of Table 5 we show results for

non-students who should be more strongly affected.11 These results show that, indeed, increases

in private insurance coverage associated with extended parental coverage laws are concentrated

among non-students. The triple difference estimate for the sample of non-students indicates that

these laws increased private insurance coverage by 5.6 percent, compared to 3.8 percent for the

full sample. However, Panel B also shows that the decreases in public insurance coverage are

not statistically significant.        Although the additional evidence that is presented below is

uniformly consistent with reverse crowd-out, the findings in Panel B of Table 5 lead us to

consider our overall evidence for reverse crowd-out to be suggestive, rather than conclusive.

         Table 6 reports the results of additional difference-in-difference models by more

narrowly defined population subgroups. To identify these subgroups, we need identifying

information in the data that is only available on the parents’ record, so we are required to restrict


10
    We conducted one additional test to validate the notion of reverse crowd-out. Among those in their early 20s,
public insurance coverage largely results from welfare receipt and most welfare recipients are female. As an
additional test, we estimate these models separately by gender. The results indicate that reverse crowd-out is largely
attributable to women, as we might suspect.
11
  We do not show results for students, because there are so very few ineligible students that our triple-difference
empirical strategy is far less compelling for this subsample

                                                         21
the population to those respondents living with their parents. Because the main reason a young

adult would be ineligible for extended parental coverage is marriage and few married young

adults live with their parents, the triple-difference estimating strategy does not make sense in this

context. In this part of the analysis, we restrict our attention to difference-in-difference models

relying just on those eligible for extended parental coverage, as described earlier. The first row

of this table reports the results of estimates comparable to the second row of Table 5 (eligible

sample) except that it focuses on just those young adults living with their parents. As described

earlier, we impose this sample restriction so that we can observe relevant household

characteristics that enable us to better identify who may be affected by these laws. The results

from this specification are similar to those in Table 5.

       The next rows of the table show effects by income category. These laws clearly affect a

different income group than SCHIP introduction does.           Increases in private insurance are

statistically insignificant for young adults in households with incomes below 150 percent of the

poverty line. This finding is not surprising, since the parents in these households are unlikely to

have private health insurance to extend to their adult children. The impact of the extended

parental coverage – in terms of an increase in private insurance coverage and a decrease in public

insurance coverage – is concentrated almost entirely among the group with incomes between 150

and 300 percent of the poverty line. For this group, extended parental coverage laws are

associated with a 6.4 percentage point increase in private insurance coverage, a 2.4 percentage

point decrease in public insurance coverage, and a 2.7 percentage point increase in overall

insurance coverage. This 2.7 percentage point increase in insurance coverage is relative to a pre-

policy uninsurance rate of 33 percent, so it represents an 8 percent decline in the prevalence of

uninsurance in this income group. Interestingly, there is not a statistically significant increase in

insurance coverage for those with incomes over 300 percent of the poverty line. In the pre-

                                                 22
policy period, though, 85 percent of these young adults had private insurance, so there was less

scope for expanding insurance coverage in this income group than in the lower income groups.

        In the bottom rows of Table 6, we examine heterogeneity in the effects by parents’

insurance coverage. We expect the impact of extended parental coverage laws to be strongly

concentrated among the children of parents who are covered by group health insurance plans.

Although some states included non-group insurance policies in their extended parental coverage

laws, most focused on group health insurance policies. Moreover, since group health insurance

policies are typically much less expensive than non-group health insurance policies, young adults

who become eligible for extended parental coverage have a much stronger incentive to take

advantage of it if their parents have group insurance. In fact, we see that the effects of the

extended parental coverage laws – including increases in private insurance and decreases in

public insurance – are concentrated among those whose parents have group insurance coverage.

        In addition, among children whose parents have group health insurance, we expect the

effects of extended parental coverage laws to be strongest for those whose parents work for

relatively small firms. This prediction arises from the ERISA legislation of 1974, which exempts

the insurance policies of self-insured firms from state regulation. As a result, roughly half of

those who have employer-provided health insurance have insurance policies that are not affected

by these legal changes.12 In the absence of ERISA’s effects, this prediction would likely be

reversed, since small employers face higher expected premiums and therefore are less likely to

offer health insurance (cf. Ellis and Ma, 2009). While we cannot observe in the CPS which

parents work in self-insured firms, we do know that the probability of self-insurance increases

dramatically with firm size:       In firms with less than 200 employees, only 12 percent of



12
  According to the 2008 Kaiser/Health Research and Education Trust (HRET) Employer Heath Benefits Survey,
55% of workers who receive health insurance through their employer are in self-funded insurance plans.

                                                   23
employees were in self-funded plans; in contrast, 89 percent of employees of firms that have

5,000 or more employees are in self-funded plans (Henry J. Kaiser Foundation and HRET,

2008).

         We take advantage of this fact and use firm size as a proxy for self-insurance status. We

create two further sub-samples among the children of parents with group insurance coverage:

those whose parents work for firms with less than 100 employees and those whose parents work

for firms with more than 100 employees.13 We expect to find larger effects in the smaller firms,

because these smaller firms are substantially more likely to be required to follow the state

insurance law.

         Indeed, we find our largest increase in private insurance coverage in the group of children

whose parents have group insurance coverage through a firm with fewer than 100 employees.

For this group, we find that private insurance coverage increases by a statistically significant 6.7

percentage points, compared to a 1.5 percentage point increase in private insurance coverage

among those whose parents work for larger firms.14 The 4.9 percentage point increase in overall

insurance coverage for this group is substantial, particularly when compared to the pre-policy

uninsurance rate of 19.5 percent for this particular population. We also continue to find evidence

of reverse crowd-out. The decline in public insurance coverage is considerably larger for

children of parents who work in small firms, as we would expect if it was caused by the extended

parental coverage laws.

         This set of findings has two important implications: First, it provides some validation of

our empirical strategy, by showing that the overall effects that we estimate are driven by the sub-

13
   We also experimented with alternative firm size cut-offs (like 500 employees) and obtained qualitatively similar
results.
14
   We also find that, for those whose parents are included in a group plan, there is a decrease in nongroup coverage
and an increase in group coverage. Individuals who used to pay for their own individual plans appear to drop them
and join their parents’ plan. This transition likely saves money for these individuals and potentially provides them
with superior insurance.

                                                        24
sample that should be most strongly affected by extended parental coverage laws. Second, it

provides some explanation for the relatively small overall effects of extended parental coverage

laws. Even if a young adult is legally eligible for a state-level extended parental coverage law,

he or she can only take advantage of that eligibility if his or her parent has group insurance

coverage through a firm that does not self-insure. Among those who are both legally eligible and

have parents who are able to extend coverage, the take-up rates – and the corresponding

reductions in uninsurance – are quite high.


VI. DISCUSSION

       The results of our analysis suggest that both the introduction of SCHIP and extended

parental coverage laws were effective in increasing rates of insurance coverage for older teens

and young adults, at least for certain population subgroups. SCHIP was particularly effective at

increasing insurance coverage for older teens who were under 150 percent of the poverty line

without evidence of substantial crowd-out. Extended parental coverage laws had a sizeable

impact on the insurance coverage of non-students, young adults between 150 and 300 percent of

the poverty line and those whose parents worked for relatively small firms that had group

insurance plans. We also found suggestive evidence that the increase in insurance coverage that

this policy generated may have been accompanied by a reduction in public insurance coverage

(reverse crowd-out). The magnitude of the coverage effects is somewhat larger in response to

the introduction of SCHIP than the introduction of extended parental coverage laws, but both led

to meaningful increases in coverage for their target populations.

       Determining whether policymakers should endorse extending either or both of these

programs requires a weighing of their advantages and disadvantages as implemented in the past

and as they would be extended going forward. In the case of SCHIP, for instance, our policy



                                                25
experiment addressed the discontinuity of coverage at age 19 created when SCHIP was

introduced. An expansion of this policy could increase the maximum age of coverage to, say 22

or 25. It is not clear whether or not the impact of such an extension would be the same as that of

the earlier policy.

        One issue to consider would be differences in crowd-out. If anything, our prior would be

that crowd-out would be smaller for this group than it is for younger children and, in fact, our

estimates of crowd-out based on the introduction of SCHIP were smaller than those from earlier

Medicaid expansions. We hypothesize that the reason for this is that the marginal “child”

gaining coverage in SCHIP is a teen who is lower in the income distribution than the younger

children who gained coverage in earlier Medicaid expansions. Uninsured young adults would

similarly be more likely to be drawn from the lower parts of the income distribution and, if our

hypothesis is correct, crowd-out may be less important for this group.

        Another factor that may suggest even larger effects for young adults is that they have

fewer options for coverage. Young children have the ability to be included in their parents’ plan

if their parents are covered; parental coverage is quite high for younger children as shown in

Figure 2. Young adults would have to rely on their own private coverage as their alternative to a

public plan, yet private coverage rates are relatively low for young adults (also shown in Figure

2).

        To provide a ballpark estimate of the number of additional young adults who may be

covered if SCHIP was extended to cover individuals up to their 22nd or 25th birthday, we ignore

these caveats for the moment. We assume that the impact on the incremental groups covered is

the same as we have estimated for those at age 19 with the same extent of crowdout. Based on

our results in Table 3, we apply the aggregate estimate that insurance coverage of any type

would rise by 3 percentage points to simulate this statistic.      We combine this value with

                                               26
population estimates from the 2005-2007 American Community Surveys indicating that there are

about 13.3 million individuals between the ages of 19 and 21 and another 12.2 million between

22 and 24. If 3 percentage points more members of these groups received health insurance in

response to an SCHIP expansion, this would increase coverage by 399,000 and 366,000

individuals, respectively.

        We also hypothesize that extended parental coverage laws would have larger effects than

those we have estimated if they are implemented at the federal level. A key constraint on the

effectiveness of these laws as currently enacted at the state level is that ERISA significantly

restricts the target population. As discussed earlier, 55 percent of those parents who have

employer-provided health insurance are covered by firms that self-insure and ERISA excludes

those plans from state regulation. If implemented at a national level, that restriction would not

exist. Moreover, state level plans require children to be residing in the same state as the parents

and that would not need to be true if the policy were implemented at the federal level.

        To simulate the effect of a national extended parental coverage law for those ages 19 to

24, we apply the estimate obtained from parents receiving group insurance from the smaller

firms that do not self-insure to approximate the impact of a law that was not constrained by

ERISA. For that sample, insurance rates rose 5 percentage points. Without the constraint of

ERISA, we assume this impact would extend to all of those whose parents held group coverage,

although this group is only around three-quarters of the population. Therefore, we apply the 5

percentage point estimate along with the three-quarters group coverage estimate to the 25.5

million individuals between the ages of 19 and 24 to get a simulated coverage increase of

956,000 young adults. This would include those who have already received coverage as a result

of the state laws.




                                                27
       The question of who pays for the insurance coverage is also a relevant issue. We find

some support for the notion that extended parental coverage laws generate reverse crowd out in

that some individuals may drop public insurance coverage for what may be superior private

insurance coverage. This shifts the cost of the coverage from the taxpayer to the individual’s

family and the insurance company. To the extent that the family pays, such an outcome may be

optimal. To the extent that insurance companies are unable to sufficiently assess and spread risk

in the presence of adverse selection, it may be suboptimal.

       In the end, policymakers will be required to weigh these trade-offs in determining

whether to introduce either or both of these policies. Nevertheless, our analysis has provided

evidence indicating that both types of policies as implemented have increased insurance

coverage among the targeted groups.




                                                28
                                      REFERENCES


Anderson, Michael and Carlos Dobkin (2009). “The Effect of Health Insurance Coverage on the
Use of Medical Services,” unpublished manuscript.

Associated Press (1997). “New Law Would Let Parents Insure Kids Til Mid-20s.” April 1, 2007.
Available at http://www.wvdlc.com/news_detail/1526.htm.

Blumberg, Linda J., Lisa Dubay, and Stephen A.Norton (2000). “Did the Medicaid Expansions
for Children Displace Private Insurance? An Analysis Using the SIPP.” Journal of Health
Economics 19(1):33-60.

Card, David and Lara D. Shore-Sheppard (2004). “Using Discontinuous Eligibility Rules to
Identify the Effects of the Federal Medicaid Expansions on Low-Income Children,” The Review
of Economics and Statistics 86(3): 752-766.

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (2004). “State 1998 SCHIP Evaluations and State
SCHIP Summaries.” http://www.cms.hhs.gov/schip/researchers/default.asp.

Cutler, David and Jonathan Gruber (1996). “Does Public Insurance Crowd Out Private
Insurance.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 111 (2): 391-430.

Cutler, David M. and Sarah J. Reber (1998). “Paying for Health Insurance: The Tradeoff
between Competition and Adverse Selection.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (2): 433-
66.

Ellis, Randall P. and Ching-to Albert Ma (2009). “Health Insurance, Cost Expectations, and
Adverse Job Turnover.” Unpublished manuscript.

Gross, Tal (2008). “The High Cost of Partial Insurance: Moral Hazard and the Health Care
Consumption of the Nominally Insured,” unpublished manuscript.

Gruber, Jonathan, and Kosali Simon (2008). “Crowd-Out Ten Years Later: Have Recent Public
Insurance Expansions Crowded Out Private Health Insurance?” Journal of Health Economics 27
(2): 201–217.

Ham, John C. and Lara Shore-Sheppard (2005). “The Effect of Medicaid Expansions for Low-
Income Children on Medicaid Participation and Private Insurance Coverage: Evidence from the
SIPP.” Journal of Public Economics. 89(1): 57-83.

Henry J. Kaiser Foundation and Health Research and Educational Trust (2008). Employer
Health Benefits: 2008 Annual Survey. http://www.kff.org/insurance/7790/index.cfm.

Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury (2008). “Medical and Dental Expenses,”
Publication No. 502. Downloaded from http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p502.pdf.



                                            29
Kriss, Jennifer L., Sara R. Collins, Bisundev Mahato, Elise Gould, and Cathy Schoen (2008).
Rite of Passage? Why Young Adults Become Uninsured and How New Policies Can Help, 2008
Update. New York: The Commonwealth Fund.

Kronstadt, Jessica, Safiya Mojerie, and Sonya Schwartz (2007). “State Efforts to Extend
Dependent Coverage for Young Adults.” State Health Policy Monitor 1(5). Publication No.
2007-111.
Levy, Helen (2007). “Health Insurance and the Transition to Adulthood,” in Sheldon Danziger
and Cecilia Rouse (eds.), The Price of Independence: The Economics of Early Adulthood. New
York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Lo Sasso, Anthony and Thomas C. Buchmueller (2004). “The Effect of the State Children’s
Health Insurance Program on Health Insurance Coverage,” Journal of Health Economics 23(5):
1059-1082.

National Conference of State Legislatures (2008). “Covering Young Adults through Their
Parent’s or Guardian’s Health Policy.” Accessed May 5th, 2009 at
http://www.ncsl.org/programs/health/dependentstatus.htm

National Governors Association (various years). Maternal and Child Health (MCH) Update.
Washington, DC: NGA Center for Best Practices, Health Policy Studies Division.

Pierron, William and Paul Fronstin (2008). “ERISA Pre-Emption: Implications for Health
Reform and Coverage,” Employee Benefit Research Institute Issue Brief No. 314.

Rosenbach, Margo, Marilyn Ellwood et al. (2003). “Implementation of the State Children’s
Health Insurance Program: Synthesis of State Evaluations,” Mathematic Policy Research
Reference Number 8644-100.

Shore-Sheppard, Lara (2003). “Expanding Public Health Insurance for Children,” in Changing
Welfare, Rachel Gordon and Herbert Walberg, eds. New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum
Publishers.

Smith, Vernon, David Rousseau, Caryn Marks and Robin Rudowitz (2008). “SCHIP Enrollment
in June 2007: An Update on Current Enrollment and SCHIP Policy Directions,” downloaded
from the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, http://www.kff.org/medicaid/upload/7642_02.pdf.

Swartz, Katherine (1986). “Interpreting the Estimates from Four National Surveys of the Number
of People without Health Insurance.” Journal of Economic and Social Measurement 14(3):233-
42.

Thorpe, Kenneth and Curtis Florence (1998)."Health Insurance Coverage among Children: The
Role of Expanded Medicaid Coverage". Inquiry (35) 4: 369–379.




                                             30
U.S. Congress, Committee on Ways and Means (1994). Overview of Entitlement Programs:
Bacground Material and Data on Programs Within the Jurisdiction of the Committee on Ways
and Means. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Wooldridge, Judith, Ian Hill, Mary Harrington, Genevieve Kenney, Corinna Hawkes, and
Jennifer Haley (2003). Interim Evaluation Report: Congressionally Mandated Evaluation of the
State Children’s Health Insurance Program. Princeton, NJ: Mathematica Policy Research.

Yazici, Ezel and Robert Kaestner (2000). “Medicaid Expansions and the Crowding Out of
Private Health Insurance among Children.” Inquiry 37(1): 23-32.




                                            31
                                                     Figure 1: Rate of Health Insurance Coverage by Age, 1982 and 2007
                                          0.95



                                          0.90



                                          0.85
   Fraction Covered by Health Insurance




                                          0.80



                                          0.75



                                          0.70



                                          0.65



                                          0.60



                                          0.55



                                          0.50
                                                 0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20   21   22   23   24   25   26   27   28   29

                                                                                                              Age

                                                                                                    1982            2007

Source: Authors’ calculations from the Current Population Survey.
                                                  Figure 2: Health Insurance Coverage Status: 2000‐2007, by Age
                                100%



                                90%

                                                                                                        Uninsured
                                80%


                                                                                                                         Covered Through Public Plan
                                70%
Cumulative Percentage Covered




                                60%



                                50%



                                40%

                                                                                            Covered Through Own Plan
                                30%



                                20%


                                            Covered Through Parent's Plan
                                10%



                                 0%
                                       16    17    18     19     20     21   22   23   24    25         26    27    28   29    30     31     32        33   34   35

                                                                                                  Age
                                             Figure 3A: Percent Covered by Insurance
                  100%


                  95%


                  90%


                  85%


                  80%
Percent Covered




                  75%


                  70%


                  65%


                  60%


                  55%


                  50%
                         16   17   18   19    20   21     22    23   24      25         26   27   28      29   30   31   32   33   34   35

                                                                                  Age

                                                        1990‐1995         1999‐2003           2004‐2007
                                  Figure 3B: Percent Covered by Public Health Insurance
                  40%



                  35%



                  30%



                  25%
Percent Covered




                  20%



                  15%



                  10%



                  5%



                  0%
                        16   17   18   19   20   21     22    23   24      25         26   27   28      29   30   31   32   33   34   35

                                                                                Age

                                                      1990‐1995         1999‐2003           2004‐2007
                                  Figure 3C: Percent Covered by Private Health Insurance
                  80%



                  75%



                  70%



                  65%
Percent Covered




                  60%



                  55%



                  50%



                  45%



                  40%
                        16   17   18   19   20   21     22    23   24      25         26   27   28      29   30   31   32   33   34   35

                                                                                Age

                                                      1990‐1995         1999‐2003           2004‐2007
            Table 1: Changes in Income and Age Eligibility Limits Associated with
                     Medicaid Expansions and the Introduction of SCHIP

                          Percent of Federal Poverty Line          Upper Age Limit
State                  1995       1997       1999      2001    1995     1997      1999
Alabama                 100        133        200       200     12       14        19
Alaska                  100        100        200       200     12       14        19
Arizona                 100        100        150       200     16       18        19
Arkansas                100        100        200       200     12       14        19
California              100        100        200       250     12       14        19
Colorado                100        100        185       185     12       14        19
Connecticut             185        185        300       300     12       14        19
Delaware                100        100        200       200     19       19        19
District of Columbia    100        100        200       200     12       14        19
Florida                 100        100       200        200     12       19        19
Georgia                 100        100        200       200     19       19        19
Hawaii                  300        300        300       200     19       19        19
Idaho                  100        100        150        150     12       14        19
Illinois                100        100        185       185     12       14        19
Indiana                 100       100        150        200     12       19        19
Iowa                   100        100        185        200     12       14        19
Kansas                 100        100        200        200     12       16        19
Kentucky                100        100        100       200     12       19        19
Louisiana               100        100        133       200     12       14        19
Maine                   125        125       185        200     19       19        19
Maryland                185        185        200       200     12       14        19
Massachusetts          200        100        200        200     12       14        19
Michigan                150        150        200       200     16       18        19
Minnesota               275        275        275       275     18       18        19
Mississippi             100        100        100       200     12       14        19
Missouri                100        100        300       300     18       18        19
Montana                100        100        100        150     12       14        18
Nebraska                100        100        185       185     12       14        19
Nevada                  100        100        200       200     12       14        19
New Hampshire          185        185        300        300     19       19        19
New Jersey              100        100        200       350     12       14        19
New Mexico              100        185        235       235     12       19        19
New York                160        100        230       250     15       14        19
North Carolina          100        100        200       200     18       18        19
North Dakota            100        100        100       140     12       18        19
Ohio                   100        100        150        200     12       14        19
Oklahoma                100        100        185       185     12       14        18
Oregon                  100        100        170       170     12       19        19
Pennsylvania            185        185        235       235     12       14        19
Rhode Island            100        250        250       250     12       19        19
South Carolina          100        100        150       150     12       14        19
South Dakota            100        100       140        200     12       19        19
Tennessee              100        400         200       200     12       18        19
Texas                         100         100          100          200              12          14           19
Utah                          100         100          200          200              18          18           19
Vermont                       225         225          300          300              18          18           18
Virginia                      100         100          185          200              19          19           19
Washington                    200         200          200          250              19          19           19
West Virginia                 150         150          150          200              19          19           19
Wisconsin                     100         100          100          185              12          14           19
Wyoming                       100         100          100          133              12          14           19
Sources: Shore-Sheppard (2003), Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (2004), and National Governors Association
(various years).
                                 Table 2: Extended Parental Coverage Law Details
                             Year Law was          Limiting Age of          Must be a         Must be         Cannot have
  State Name                 Implemented             Dependency              student         unmarried        dependents
  Colorado                       2006                     25                                    X
  Delaware                       2007                    24                                     X                    X
  Florida                        2007                    25                                     X
  Idaho                          2007                    25                     X               X
  Indiana                        2007                     24
  Maine                          2007                    25                                       X                  X
  Massachusetts                  2006                     25
  New Hampshire                  2007                    26                                       X
  New Jersey                     2006                     30                                      X                  X
  New Mexico                     2005                     25                                      X
  Rhode Island                   2007                     25                    X                 X
  South Dakota                   2005                     24                    X
  Texas                          2003                     25                                      X
  Utah                           1994                     26                                      X
  Virginia                       2007                     25                    X
  Washington                     2007                     25                                      X
  West Virginia                  2007                     25                                      X
Notes: Entries in table show whether law was in effect as of December of that year. Age of dependency is birthday at which
dependency expires.
Sources: Kronstadt, et al. (2007), Kriss, et al. (2008) National Conference of State Legislatures (2008), and our own reading of
state laws.
                             Table 3: The Effect of SCHIP on Insurance Coverage

                                              Percent             Estimation Results for Dependent Variable:
                                              Covered                Any            Public         Private
                                              by Any              Insurance      Insurance        Insurance
                                             Insurance            Coverage       Coverage         Coverage
                                                 (1)                  (2)            (3)              (4)
 Full Sample                                    76.1               0.030**        0.042**           -0.004
 N=270,636                                                         (0.004)         (0.005)         (0.004)

 Sample Living with Parents                      81.8              0.026**              0.037**                 -0.003
 N=202,783                                                         (0.005)              (0.005)                 (0.004)

 By Income:
 <150% of poverty line                           63.9              0.067**              0.085**                 -0.005
 N=38,066                                                          (0.010)              (0.014)                 (0.010)

 150-300% of poverty line                        80.6              0.042**              0.054**                  0.004
 N=71,818                                                          (0.008)              (0.006)                 (0.007)

 >300% of poverty line                           91.9               0.001                0.005*                 -0.003
 N=92,899                                                          (0.004)               (0.003)                (0.004)

Notes: Each cell in Columns 2-4 presents the results from separate difference-in-difference regressions models. Control variables
include state, year, and age fixed effects, the state- and year-specific unemployment rate, and individual-level covariates.
Standard errors are clustered on state. The sample includes all observations between the ages of 16 and 22, using the 1992-2008
CPS.
** denotes statistical significance at the 5% level.
* denotes statistical significance at the 10% level.
                             Table 4: The Effect of SCHIP on Insurance Coverage
                                           Dynamic Specification

                                                        Estimation Results for Dependent Variable:
                                                           Any           Public          Private
                                                        Insurance      Insurance       Insurance
                                                        Coverage       Coverage         Coverage
                                                           (1)             (2)             (3)
           Under Age 19
           * Years 1991-1993                              -0.004                -0.002                 -0.002
                                                          (0.009)               (0.007)                (0.010)

           * Years 1994-1996                              -0.006                -0.006                 -0.001
                                                          (0.007)               (0.006)                (0.008)

           * Years 1998-1999                               0.007               0.013**                 -0.002
                                                          (0.009)              (0.006)                 (0.008)

           * Years 2000-2002                             0.019**               0.033**                 -0.005
                                                         (0.008)               (0.007)                 (0.009)

           * Years 2003-2005                             0.032**               0.045**                 -0.004
                                                         (0.009)               (0.008)                 (0.009)

           * Years 2006-2007                             0.037**               0.053**                 -0.005
                                                         (0.009)               (0.008)                 (0.010)
Notes: Each column presents the results from separate difference-in-difference regressions models. The omitted period is 1997.
Control variables include state, year, and age fixed effects, the state- and year-specific unemployment rate, and individual-level
covariates. Standard errors are clustered on state. The sample includes all observations between the ages of 16 and 22, using the
1992-2008 CPS. N=270,636.
** denotes statistical significance at the 5% level.
* denotes statistical significance at the 10% level.
          Table 5: The Effect of Extended Parental Coverage Laws on Insurance Coverage

                                               Percent            Estimation Results for Dependent Variable:
                                               Covered               Any           Public          Private
                                               by Any             Insurance      Insurance       Insurance
                                              Insurance           Coverage       Coverage        Coverage
                                                 (1)                 (2)             (3)             (4)
  Panel A: Full Sample
  Difference-in-Difference                        69.0              -0.004               -0.012*                 0.008
  Full Sample                                                       (0.008)              (0.007)                (0.010)
  N=112,625

  Eligible Sample                                 69.2               0.002              -0.016**               0.019**
  N=88,514                                                          (0.008)              (0.007)               (0.009)

  Triple Difference
  Full Sample                                     69.0               0.015               -0.010                0.038**
  N=112,625                                                         (0.019)              (0.015)               (0.015)

  Panel B: Non-students
  Difference-in-Difference
  Full Sample                                     62.2              -0.003               -0.010                  0.008
  N=69,288                                                          (0.010)              (0.011)                (0.013)

  Eligible Sample                                 59.9               0.013               -0.013                0.031**
  N=48,225                                                          (0.010)              (0.010)               (0.015)

  Triple Difference
  Full Sample                                     62.2               0.037               -0.004                0.056**
  N=69,288                                                          (0.023)              (0.011)               (0.021)
Notes: Each cell in Columns 2-4 presents the results from separate difference-in-difference regressions models. Control
variables include state, year, and age fixed effects, the state- and year-specific unemployment rate, and individual-level
covariates. Standard errors are clustered on state. The sample includes all observations between the ages of 19 and 24, using the
2000-2008 CPS.
** denotes statistical significance at the 5% level.
* denotes statistical significance at the 10% level.
          Table 6: The Effect of Extended Parental Coverage Laws on Insurance Coverage
                                    among Targeted Populations

                                                Percent            Estimation Results for Dependent Variable:
                                                Covered               Any           Public          Private
                                                by Any             Insurance      Insurance       Insurance
                                               Insurance           Coverage       Coverage        Coverage
                                                   (1)                (2)             (3)             (4)
  All Living with Parents                         74.7               0.011        -0.015**         0.029**
  N=53,292                                                          (0.009)        (0.007)          (0.008)

  By Income:
  <150% of poverty line                           53.3              -0.006                -0.029                  0.006
  N=7,480                                                           (0.031)               (0.026)                (0.030)

  150-300% of poverty line                        66.9              0.027*                -0.024*               0.064**
  N=17,359                                                          (0.014)               (0.012)               (0.016)

  >300% of poverty line                           85.1               0.003                -0.006                  0.009
  N=28,453                                                          (0.011)               (0.006)                (0.013)

  By Parents’ Insurance

  Group Coverage                                  84.1               0.009               -0.020**               0.028**
  N=39,073                                                          (0.008)               (0.006)               (0.008)

     And firm size<100                            80.5              0.049**              -0.038**               0.067**
     N=9,064                                                        (0.020)               (0.011)               (0.018)

     And firm size>100                            85.1              -0.003               -0.014**                0.015*
     N=30,009                                                       (0.009)               (0.006)                (0.009)

  No Group Coverage                               49.0               0.006                -0.003                  0.021
  N=15,582                                                          (0.022)               (0.017)                (0.015)
Notes: Each cell in Columns 2-4 presents the results from separate difference-in-difference regressions models. Control
variables include state, year, and age fixed effects, the state- and year-specific unemployment rate, and individual-level
covariates. Standard errors are clustered on state. The sample includes observations on all targeted groups between the ages of 19
and 24, using the 2000-2008 CPS. All targeted groups are restricted to those who live with their parents and are eligible for
coverage in treatment states and are unmarried in control states.
** denotes statistical significance at the 5% level.
* denotes statistical significance at the 10% level.
