                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     SIN TAXES: DO HETEROGENEOUS RESPONSES UNDERCUT THEIR VALUE?

                                          Padmaja Ayyagari
                                              Partha Deb
                                            Jason Fletcher
                                          William T. Gallo
                                           Jody L. Sindelar

                                         Working Paper 15124
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15124


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2009




This work was supported by Grant Number RL1AA017542 from the National Institute on Alcohol
Abuse and Alcoholism to Yale University and Grant Number R01AG027045 from the National Institute
on Aging to Yale University. We gratefully acknowledge the alcohol price data that Michael French
assembled and shared with us. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Padmaja Ayyagari, Partha Deb, Jason Fletcher, William T. Gallo, and Jody L. Sindelar.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Sin Taxes: Do Heterogeneous Responses Undercut Their Value?
Padmaja Ayyagari, Partha Deb, Jason Fletcher, William T. Gallo, and Jody L. Sindelar
NBER Working Paper No. 15124
July 2009
JEL No. I1

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper estimates the price elasticity of demand for alcohol using Health and Retirement Survey
data. To account for unobserved heterogeneity in price responsiveness, we use finite mixture models.
We recover two latent groups, one is significantly responsive to price but the other is unresponsive.
Differences between these two groups can be explained in part by the behavioral factors of risk aversion,
financial planning horizon, forward looking and locus of control. These results have policy implications.
Only a subgroup responds significantly to price. Importantly, the unresponsive group drinks more
heavily, suggesting that a higher price could fail to curb drinking by those most likely to cause negative
externalities. In contrast, those least likely to impose costs on others are more responsive, thus suffering
greater deadweight loss yet with less prevention of negative externalities.


Padmaja Ayyagari                                     William T. Gallo
Yale University                                      Yale University
Epidemiology & Public Health                         Epidemiology & Public Health
P.O. Box 208034, 60 College St.                      P.O. Box 208034, 60 College St.
New Haven, CT 06520-8034                             New Haven, CT 06520-8034
padmaja.ayyagari@yale.edu                            william.gallo@yale.edu

Partha Deb                                           Jody L. Sindelar
Hunter College                                       Yale School of Public Health
Department of Economics                              Yale University School of Medicine
695 Park Avenue                                      60 College Street, P.O. Box 208034
Room 1524 West                                       New Haven, CT 06520-8034
New York, NY 10021                                   and NBER
and NBER                                             jody.sindelar@yale.edu
partha.deb@hunter.cuny.edu

Jason Fletcher
Yale University
School of Public Health
60 College Street, #303
New Haven, CT 06510
jason.fletcher@yale.edu
Introduction

        Federal excise taxes on alcohol have not risen since 1991 and the real tax rate has been

declining. However, many states are now actively considering raising taxes on alcohol to meet

revenue shortfalls. The rising attention to increasing alcohol taxes may be due to the success of

state and federal taxes on tobacco in boosting revenue. However, the case for a ‘sin’ tax to

address externalities is not as strong for alcohol as it is for tobacco because most people drink

responsibly, without hurting themselves or others. Another reason for taxing potentially

‘tempting’ goods has emerged relatively recently from the behavioral economics literature. Some

individuals, especially in some situations, have trouble resisting temptations such as cigarettes or

cannot resist drinking more than they had planned; this occurs even when the harms associated

with succumbing ultimately outweigh the benefits of reducing the short term craving. These

individuals lack the self-control to adhere to their long run preferences over tempting goods. The

‘sophisticated’ realize that succumbing to temptation does not maximize their long run utility,

but in the short run, consumption is irresistible (Gruber and Koszegi, 2000). Taxation may serve

as a pre-commitment device which helps to achieve the consumption level desired according to

their longer view. (See Gruber and Mullainathan, 2002 and Hersh, 2005 for applications to

tobacco.)

        The price elasticity of demand for alcohol is a significant determinant of the potential

welfare effects of increasing alcohol taxes1. Desired welfare effects may include raising revenue,

reducing externalities, and acting as a precommitment device to self-control problems. If the goal

is simply to raise revenue without concern for externalities, then a tax on a good with inelastic


1
  Our empirical measure is price. There is evidence that alcohol taxes are at least fully passed through to the
consumer (Kenkel, 2005; Young and Bielinska-Kwapsisz, 2002). Thus a tax increase results in an almost one to one
price increase.


                                                                                                               3
demand would minimize deadweight loss, ceteris paribus. However, if the goal is to address

potential negative externalities, a tax on consumption imposing external harm is good policy

only if demand is responsive to the tax. If the goal is to bolster self-control2, the criteria are less

precise, but at least those who desire a precommitment device should bear the tax and should be

responsive to the tax. An optimal tax might have the greatest impact on those who impose the

highest externalities (or who most want help with self-control) while having no impact on the

majority of the drinkers who do not impose negative externalities (or do not seek self-control

devices)3. This would reflect heterogeneity of demand across subpopulations.


         While much of the economics literature on alcohol is aimed at youth drinking, we focus

on older individuals and the potential impact of price on this population. Perhaps owing to the

fact that many people drink less as they age, there is less research on older drinkers. However,

older drinkers are an important set of drinkers in part due to critical interactions between alcohol

and medication and also due to specific diseases being more common in older populations

(Williams, 1984; Abrams and Alexopoulos, 1977). Further, although older individuals drink less

than younger ones, they attain higher blood alcohol content for a given amount of alcohol

consumed and, for any given level of blood alcohol, there is an intensified sensitivity to ethanol

(Vestal et. al., 1977; Vogel-Sprott and Barrett, 1984). Further, balance, gait and cognition can be

disturbed by alcohol consumption, and these issues are of greater concern as one ages (Williams,

1984).




2
  Behavioral economics literature on ‘asymmetric paternalism’ (Cameron et al, 2003) ‘opitimal paternalism’
(O’Donaghue and Rabin (2003) and others (Bernheim et al 2005) have opened the way for economists to consider
self-control issues in discussions of optimal tax policy.
3
  We ignore the issue of regressivity.


                                                                                                               4
        In this paper, we estimate the price elasticity of demand for alcohol explicitly allowing

for differences by complex sub-groups of individuals. We use a finite mixture model (FMM)

methodology to allow the price elasticity to vary by latent groups. Specifically, FMM permits

estimation of price elasticity to vary across complex, latent sub-groups that could not be

identified by using simple groups such as by age, race, gender or consumption level4. Further,

FMM allows prior and posterior characterization of the component groups. Our results suggest

that important differences in price elasticity are revealed by our FMM approach and that these

differences are masked in a single equation method that assumes homogeneity in response. By

characterizing these two groups of individuals, we further find that some of the difference

between these two latent groups can be explained by differences in risk aversion, locus of control

and financial planning horizon; the differences are not only due to addiction to alcohol. These

findings have critical policy applications that we discuss below.


        We add to the literature in multiple dimensions. First, the topic of alcohol taxes is of

current policy concern given the latest wave of proposed state level tax hikes on alcohol5.

Second, our use of FMM allows heterogeneity across latent groups, identifying differences

which would otherwise be masked by pooling unlikes. The heterogeneity that we find across

4
  Methods such as quantile regression allow for heterogeneity in the price elasticity, however they do not
distinguish between whether the behavior of the individual at the xth percentile has changed or the
individual at the xth percentile has changed.


5
  At least 24 states are considering proposals to raise alcohol taxes. In addition, states are considering
easing restrictions on alcohol sales to boost tax revenues. Examples of policies under consideration
include: in Utah, lawmakers are considering ending a 40-year-old law requiring consumers to get a
license before drinking in a bar; Georgia, Connecticut, Indiana, Texas, Alabama, and Minnesota may end
Sunday-sales bans and Alabama may allow sale of beer with 13.9% percent, instead of the current 6%
volume. Accessed 6-23-09 http://www.jointogether.org/news/headlines/inthenews/2009/state-
loosening-alcohol-laws.html




                                                                                                             5
latent groups is relevant to policy goals. Third, we examine factors such as locus of control,

financial planning horizon and risk aversion, thus contributing to the more modern behavioral

economic literature on optimal taxation of addictive goods.


Background on price elasticity.


           There is considerable range in estimates of the price elasticity of demand for alcohol with

variation likely attributable to data type (aggregated or individual) and source (national, cross-

sectional), age groups (often youths), measure of consumption, price (beer, wine or spirits,

separately or an average), use of tax rate versus price, econometric methods and other factors.

Wagenaar et al. (2009) conduct a formal meta-analysis and review of 1003 estimates of the price

and tax elasticities of demand for alcohol from 112 studies. See also Leung and Phelps (1993)

Ornstein (1980), Ornstein and Levy (1983) for earlier reviews. Grossman et al. (1998) review the

evidence for youths specifically. Wagenaar et al. conclude that alcohol prices and tax rates

significantly reduce consumption of alcohol. Using the simple mean effect across all of the

studies, they find price elasticities for beer, wine, and spirits to be respectively: -.46, -.69, and -

.806. Using more-sophisticated meta-analysis techniques, including weighting the study

outcomes by the precision of the estimates, they find smaller estimates of the elasticities.

Specifically they find the elasticities for beer, wine and spirits to be respectively: -.17, -.30 and -

.29. They estimate the overall price elasticity for alcohol to be -.44 based on studies using

aggregate level data and -.03 for studies using individual level data. For heavy drinkers, the

elasticity is estimated to be -.28. While these meta-estimates are extremely useful benchmarks,

there is potential heterogeneity by age, race and tax versus price of alcohol that are masked. For

example using data from the 1993 NHIS and self-reported number of days with five or more
6
    Estimates for price and tax elasticity were not separately delineated.


                                                                                                     6
drinks, Kenkel (1996) finds the elasticity of -.5 for men and more than double this for women (-

1.3). For youths, while most studies find that the initiation of use of alcohol, the amount

consumed conditional on drinking and the overall drinking rate are sensitive to price, statistically

significant effects are not always found (Chaloupka and Wechsler, 1996). As discussed below,

Dave and Saffer (2007) find differences by age.


        Two extant studies are more closely related to our current study. Using the National

Health Interview Survey, Manning et al. (1995) examine whether the price elasticity of demand

for alcohol varies by consumption levels. Heavy drinkers are hypothesized to be less responsive

to price than light or moderate drinkers. They use a two-part model to separate the decision to

drink from the quantity consumed conditional on being a drinker finding an overall price

elasticity of -.807. However, the price elasticity for drinks, conditional on being a drinker is

insignificantly different from zero while price significantly affects the decision to drink

(elasticity of -.55). Quantile regression is used to address the question of heterogeneity of

elasticity across drinkers based on their level of consumption, finding that the most price

responsive drinkers are the moderate drinkers. The median drinker has a price elasticity of -1.19.

The lowest quantile drinker has a price elasticity of 0.55 while the heaviest two quantiles have

elasticities of -0.49 and 0.12 respectively; all but the latter are significant. The gradients on both

sides of the peak elasticity decline rather abruptly and the upper and lower tails are significantly

different from the elasticity of the median. Manning et al. conclude that there is heterogeneity in

the price elasticities and that failure to differentiate these groups could conceal important policy

relevant information.


7
  Their price measure is a weighted national average across beer, wine, and spirits of the price (including
taxes) per ounce of pure ethanol. They use ACCRA price data and use CPI adjustments. They use the
national share of each beverage in overall alcohol consumption as weights.


                                                                                                         7
       The Dave and Saffer (2007) paper relates to our study along several dimensions.

Specifically, they use both the PSID and the HRS to examine whether the beer tax elasticity of

demand for alcohol varies by risk preference. They find that a higher risk aversion reduces

alcohol consumption but that the tax elasticity of demand does not vary by a binary risk

preference class. Further they find that older individuals are more tax responsive (using beer tax

measures) than younger individuals (comparing age groups within the PSID). Participation

elasticity is estimated to be between -.05 and -.04 for younger individuals in the PSID, and -.22

to -.11 for HRS participants over age 55. Tax elasticities, conditional on being a drinker using

the average number of drinks per day as the dependent variable, are estimated to be between -.08

to -.27 depending on the specification. Chronic drinkers have a tax elasticity on this intensive

margin of -.27 indicating that even heavy drinkers are at least as, if not more, price sensitive than

other drinkers. This contrasts to the findings of Manning et al. above in which the moderate

drinkers were found to be the most price sensitive. Both the Manning et al (1995) and

Dave/Saffer (2007) studies suggest that there may be some heterogeneity in the demand for

alcohol. We address this directly using the Finite Mixture Model (FMM) approach to allow

heterogeneity in response across latent groups. The FMM has not been used to estimate price

elasticities but offers multiple advantages as indicated above.


Data

       We used data from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), which is a nationally

representative longitudinal survey of individuals over 50 years and their spouses. At baseline in

1992, HRS participants included 12,652 individuals from 7,702 households. Data were originally

collected through face-to-face interviews, but later interviews were completed by telephone or

mail. The HRS initially sampled persons in birth cohorts 1931 through 1941 in 1992 and then



                                                                                                   8
conducted follow up interviews biennially. In 1998, persons from the 1924 to 1930 cohort and

the 1942 to 1947 cohort were added to the original sample. In 2004, persons from the 1948 to

1953 cohort were added to the survey. Our study takes data from both the original HRS and

Version H of the data prepared by RAND.8 The RAND HRS data is a subset of the HRS data

containing cleaned versions of several variables. It was created by the RAND Center for the

Study of Aging with the goal of making the data more accessible to researchers. More detail on

the HRS is available elsewhere (Juster and Suzman 1995).

       Our sample includes all individuals who were surveyed in 1996 through 2004. We

exclude observations for which data were missing on any of the following variables: drinks per

day, state and census region of residence, alcohol price for the corresponding state-year, age,

race, gender, height and years of education. Our final sample consists of 71,802 observations.

       Dependent Variable. The HRS asked respondents whether they ever drink any alcoholic

beverages such as wine, beer or liquor. Approximately 46% of the sample answered yes to this

question. If they answered yes, then they were asked how many drinks they have per day on the

days that they drink. This question was not asked in the first two waves of the HRS; instead

respondents were asked for a range of drinks per day in general. Because the questions are not

consistent, we used data only from the third (conducted in 1996) through seventh wave

(conducted in 2004) of the survey. For the 71,802 observations in our maximum sample, the

average number of drinks is 0.62.

       Independent Variables. We controlled for age, race, gender, height in meters, income and

marital status, and years of education. To allow for nonlinear effects of age, we created the

following age categories: 46 to 55, 56 to 65, 66 to 75, 76 to 85 and 86 plus. The reference

8
 The RAND HRS Data file is a longitudinal data that includes the most frequently used HRS variables. It
was developed at RAND with funding from the National Institute on Aging and the Social Security
Administration.


                                                                                                      9
category was 45 or less. We also included binary indicators for the individual’s census region of

residence and also wave (year). The reference group for census region was Pacific and for year

was 1996. Summary statistics are shown in table 1.

        Alcohol Price. We merged the HRS data with state level data on prices on wine, beer and

spirits. The prices were standardized per ounce of ethanol using standard drink size for each

wine, beer and spirits and the concomitant ounces of ethanol per drink. Adjustments were made

for state variation in cost of living and prices were adjusted for inflation over time.9 In our

primary results, the three prices were equally weighted to develop an average price rate measure.

We take the log of this average price to obtain the variable, log average price.10 In robustness

checks, price on each beer, wine and spirits were entered separately.

        Risk Aversion. To measure risk preferences the HRS asked respondents to choose among

four different gambles. The first gamble was presented as follows: “Suppose you are the only

income earner in the family, and you have a good job … You are given the opportunity to take a

new and equally good job, with a 50-50 chance that it will double your income and a 50-50

chance that it will reduce your income by a third. Would you take the new job?” If the answer

was “no,” the respondent was presented with the second gamble: “Suppose the chances were a

50-50 chance that it would double your income and a 50-50 chance that it would cut your income

by 20 percent. Would you still take the new job?” If the answer to the first question was “yes”,


9
   We are grateful to Michael French and his colleagues at University of Miami for sharing their data on
prices. The alcohol price data have been adjusted by the cost of living; alcohol is measured as per ounce
of ethanol. ACCRA is the original source of data. State level data were calculated by averaging the
figures from one or more cities within each state. The data are also available online from the National
Tax foundation. We adjusted for inflation over the years.
10
   The prices have been handled in a variety of different ways in the literature. For example, Manning et
al. (1995) weighted their price index using national data on the relative consumption of each beer, wine
and spirits. However, these national averages are not necessarily representative of consumption patters for
those over 50.



                                                                                                        10
the interviewer asked: “Suppose the chances were a 50-50 chance that it would double your

income and a 50-50 chance that it would cut your income by half. Would you still take the new

job?” See Barsky et al. 1997 for more information on this variable and its validity.

          Based on their choices, we created a risk aversion variable that took the value 1 if the

individual chose the most risky gamble (50-50 chances of doubling their income or reducing it

by half); 2 if they chose the job with even chances of doubling their income or reducing it by a

third; 3 if they chose the job with even chances of doubling their income or reducing it by a fifth;

and 4 if they chose to stay with their current job.

          These questions were not asked in the 1994 and 1996 waves of the HRS and were also

not asked if the interview was by proxy. Note that when we include measures of risk aversion

our sample size is smaller. From 1998 onwards, only some respondents were selected to answer

these questions based on their cohort, age and/or random selection11. We treated risk aversion as

a time-invariant trait and used an approach that replaces the missing information with data from

the previous wave for each individual. For persons who answered these questions in more than

one wave, we took the mean of their answers.

          Financial Planning Horizon. To measure planning behavior, the HRS asked respondents:

“In deciding how much of your (family) income to spend or save, people are likely to think about

different financial planning periods. In planning your (family’s) savings and spending, which of

the     time    periods   listed   in   the   booklet    is   most   important   to   you   [and   your

(husband/wife/partner)]?” We created a variable that took the value 1 if they answered “next few

months”; 2 if they answered “next year”; 3 if they answered “next few years”; 4 if they answered

“next 5-10 years”; and 5 if they answered “longer than 10 years”.



11
     For details see: http://www.rand.org/labor/aging/dataprod/randhrsh.pdf


                                                                                                    11
        The sample of those who are asked the financial planning question is a subset of the full

sample. These questions were not asked in the 1994 and 1996 waves of the HRS and they were

not asked if the interview was by proxy. In 1998 and 2000, respondents were selected to answer

this question based on a combination of their cohort and random selection. In 2002, individuals

who were 65 years and older were not asked this question. We treated planning horizon as a time

invariant trait and applied the same approach used for risk attitudes.

       Locus of Control. Locus of control is a concept developed in psychology and refers to the

extent to which individuals believe that they can, through their own efforts, affect events and

outcomes in their lives. Individuals with a high internal locus of control believe that events result

primarily from their own behavior and actions. In 2004, HRS asked about locus of control in a

self-administered questionnaire that was left behind with some respondents upon completion of a

core in-person interview. The questionnaire was administered to a random sample of non-

institutionalized respondents and collected information on various psychosocial variables. One

question asked individuals how often they feel that what happens to them is out of their control.

Answers were coded on a 4-point scale with 1 representing “often”, 2 representing “sometimes”,

3 representing “not often” and 4 representing “never”. Individuals were also asked how much

they agreed or disagreed with the statements: “at home, I feel I have control over what happens

in most situations” and “I feel that what happens in life is often determined by factors beyond

control”. Answers were coded on a 6-point scale, with 1 representing ”strongly agree” and 6

representing “strongly disagree”.

       We used principle component analysis to reduce these three variables to a single factor

that was increasing in the level of internal control. The factor loaded positively on the first and

third variables and negatively on the second variable. Since these variables were asked only in




                                                                                                  12
2004, we treated the factor as a time invariant variable and attributed the same value to all

previous waves for each person. This is consistent with the view in psychology that locus of

control is a personality trait.

         Forward Looking. The 2004 leave-behind questionnaire also asked individuals how much

they agreed or disagreed with the following statements: “I live life one day at a time and don’t

really think about the future”, “I enjoy making plans for the future and working to make them a

reality” and “some people wander aimlessly through life, but I am not one of them”. Answers

were coded on a 6-point scale with 1 representing “strongly agree” and 6 representing “strongly

disagree”. We recoded the latter two variables so that 1 represented “strongly disagree” and 6

represented “strongly agree”. Next, we used principle component analysis to create a single

factor that loaded positively on all three variables. A higher value of this factor represents a more

future oriented attitude12. For this factor too, we attributed the same value to previous waves for

each individual.

         CESD Score. The RAND-HRS data included an abridged version of the Center for

Epidemiologic Studies-Depression (CESD) Scale (Radloff 1977). This validated score is based

on eight questions that asked the respondent if during the past week they: felt depressed, felt that

everything did was an effort, experienced restless sleep, could not get going, felt lonely, felt sad

much of the time, enjoyed life and was happy. The variable is a count of the number of

symptoms of depression.

         Binge Drinking. The HRS asked respondents the number of days that they had four or

more drinks on one occasion, in the last three months.


Econometric Methods

12
  The factor loadings for locus of control and forward looking attitudes are not presented here but are available
upon request.


                                                                                                                    13
        We estimate the basic econometric model for number of drinks per day (DRINKS), an

integer valued variable, using the following approach:

        E ( DRINKS i | PRICEi , X i ) = exp(α PRICEi + X′i β )                      (1)

        Where, PRICEi is the logarithm of the average alcohol price corresponding to

observation i. Socioeconomic characteristics are denoted by X. Equation (1) is first estimated by

Poisson regression. In the Poisson model, the coefficient α is the price elasticity of alcohol

consumption. However, if DRINKS is drawn from distinct subpopulations, the Poisson estimate

of α is the average of the effects across subpopulations and may hide substantive differences in α

across the subpopulations. Thus, we also estimate equation (1) using a finite mixture model with

Poisson-distributed subpopulations.

        In the finite mixture model, the random variable y is postulated as a draw from a

population which is an additive mixture of C distinct classes or subpopulations in proportions π j,

such that

                               C                                  C
         g ( yi | θ, π) = ∑ π j f j ( yi | θ j ), 0 ≤ π j ≤ 1,   ∑π      j   = 1.         (2)
                               j =1                               j =1




Where, the j th density is f j ( yi | θ j ), j = 1,..., C and θj is the associated set of parameters. Equation

(2) assumes that the proportions π j are constant across observations.


The mixture density in the Poisson mixture for DRINKS is given by:

                              λ jiy exp(−λ ji )
                                   i

         f j ( yi | θ j ) =                                 (3)
                                       yi !

        Where, λ ji = exp(α j PRICEi + X ′i β j ) . Other applications of mixture models include

Morduch and Stern (1997) and Conway and Deb (2002) who used a mixture of normal densities,



                                                                                                           14
while an early application of finite mixture of Poisson densities is Wang, Cockburn and

Puterman (1998).

       The likelihood function corresponding to the constant probability model is:



        L ( θ , π ) = ∏ ∑ π j f j ( yi | θ ) = ∏ g ( yi | θ , π )     (4)
                       i    j                      i




        The finite mixture models are estimated using maximum likelihood and cluster-corrected

robust standard errors are used throughout for inference purposes. These are implemented using

the Stata package fmm. Starting from the initial estimates of component proportions π j, we re-

estimate the finite mixture model assuming a (prior) component probability of the form:

                                                  C
       π j (Zi | δ ) = Z′iδ , 0 ≤ π j ≤ 1,       ∑π
                                                  j =1
                                                           j   = 1.          (5)


       The prior component probability now depends on observables Z and so varies across

observations. This model assumes that individuals with varying observable characteristics might

have different probabilities of belonging to either component. The likelihood function

corresponding to the variant probability model is:

        L ( θ , δ ) = ∏ ∑ π j ( Z i | δ ) f j ( yi | θ )                    (6)
                       i    j




       The finite mixture model provides a natural and intuitively attractive representation of

heterogeneity in a finite, usually small, number of finite mixtures latent classes, each of which

may be regarded as a ‘type’, or a ‘group’. The results of two studies (Heckman and Singer 1984;

Laird 1978) suggest that estimates of such finite mixture models may provide good numerical

approximations even if the underlying mixing distribution is continuous. In addition, the finite


                                                                                              15
mixture approach is semiparametric—it does not require any distributional assumptions for the

mixing variable—and under suitable regularity conditions is the semiparametric maximum

likelihood estimator of the unknown density (Lindsay 1995). Econometric applications of finite

mixture models include the seminal work of Heckman and Singer (1984) to labor economics,

Wedel, et al. (1993) to marketing data, El-Gamal and Grether (1995) to data from experiments in

decision making under uncertainty, and Deb and Trivedi (1997) to the economics of healthcare.

Finite mixture models have received increasing attention in the statistics literature as well (see

McLachlan and Peel, 2000, and Lindsay, 1995, for numerous applications).

        A finite mixture characterization is especially attractive if the mixture components have a

natural interpretation. However, this is not essential. A finite mixture may be simply a way of

flexibly and parsimoniously modeling the data, with each mixture component providing a local

approximation to some part of the true distribution. A caveat to the foregoing discussion is that

the finite mixture model may fit the data better simply because outliers, influential observations

or contaminated observations are present in the data. The finite mixture model will capture this

phenomenon through additional mixture components. Hence it is desirable that such models be

supported both by a priori reasoning and by meaningful a posteriori differences in the behavior

of the latent classes.

        We use our finite mixture parameter estimates to calculate the posterior probability of

being in each of the latent classes. We use Bayes’ Theorem to calculate the posterior probability

of membership in each class, conditional on all observed covariates and outcome, as

                                              f k ( yi | θ k )
        Pr( yi ∈ k | θ, yi ) =   C
                                                                           , ∀k = 1, 2,..., C .   (7)
                                 ∑π
                                 j =1
                                        j   ( Z i | δ ) f j ( yi | θ j )




                                                                                                        16
Thus the posterior probability varies across observations. We use the estimated posterior

probabilities to explore the determinants of class membership.

       Two potentially attractive alternative econometric strategies are worth discussing, the use

of quantile regression methods, and dealing with the large fraction of zeros using two part

models. Quantile regressions have been used in similar contexts to study heterogeneous

responses to treatments but they have two limitations vis-à-vis finite mixture models. First,

quantile regressions are not well behaved in the context of count data. Second, although quantile

regression methods may detect heterogeneous responses, they provide no way to characterize the

source of the heterogeneity.

       Two part models are ubiquitous in the health economics literature to deal with potential

heterogeneity between users and non-users when the distribution of the outcome includes a

substantial fraction of zeros. Although our data do include a substantial fraction of zeros, the

two-part model is less attractive than the finite mixture for two reasons. First, the two-part model

may be thought of as a special case of the finite mixture model in which one of the components

has a degenerate distribution at zero. Second, to the extent that some individuals are occasional

drinkers who go back and forth between no drinks and light drinking, the distinction between use

and non-use may be less attractive than the distinction between low and high use, which is the

distinction that the finite mixture model makes.




Results

       Using our full sample to estimate a single Poisson regression, we find that price has a

significant (p<0.001) impact on the number of drinks consumed with a coefficient of -0.286




                                                                                                 17
(Table 2, column 1). This estimate falls within the range of estimates from Wagenaar et al. When

we estimate the FMM allowing for two latent components, we find that for the first and largest

group (75.4% of the sample), price also has a significant impact on the number of drinks

consumed (p <0.001) with a coefficient of -1.600 (Table 2, column 2). In contrast, for the

second, smaller group (24.6% of the sample), price is not significant and the coefficient is -0.035

(Table 2, column 3). The differences between these two groups in both the significance and

magnitude of impact are striking. This evidence suggests that the single component model is

composed of two unlike groups. The larger group (Component 1) consumes 0.129 drinks per day

on average, while the smaller group (Component 2) has an average consumption of 1.879 drinks

per day. This heterogeneity is masked in the single equation estimation approach. The prior

probability equation (Table 2, column 4) indicates that individuals who are younger, more

educated, male and white are more likely to belong to the latent Component 2.

       Other Independent Variables. Education is significant in all regressions in Table 2

(p<0.001) and increases the number of drinks in the single Poisson equation and in the sub-

population, Component 1. Further, those with higher education are less likely to be in

Component 1, suggesting that education may be positively correlated with the number of drinks.

However, the impact of education is, perhaps surprisingly, negative for those in Component 2.

These results suggest that education is associated with more drinks in general and for those in the

group with the lower level of drinking, and education is associated with an increased likelihood

of being in the heavy drinking group. However, for those in this higher drinking group, the

impact of education is to reduce the number of drinks. The FMM results generally support

previous studies suggesting that for adults, education increases drinking on average, but these

results suggest a more complicated picture. More educated individuals may be more likely to




                                                                                                18
drink, but less likely to drink to overindulge.

       Each of the set of the age dummies is negative and significant in the single equation

Poisson estimate, with the impact increasing with higher ages (the youngest age category is

omitted). Similarly, for those in Component 2, as one ages, the number of drinks declines. Also,

the probability of being in Component 1 increases with age. For those in Component 1, however,

age is insignificant. Thus the FMM results indicate a more complicated role for age as compared

to the single equation results that suggest simply that the number of drinks decline with age.

       These results also indicate an interesting role for gender in affecting the number of

drinks. As would be expected, males are found to be significantly more likely to drink in the

single equation regression and this same relationship is found for those in Component 2. Also,

males are significantly less likely to be in Component 1. However, gender is insignificant for

those in Component 1, as seen in column 2. Blacks and other races are found to drink fewer

drinks in the single equation regression as well as in Components 1 and 2 and more likely to be

in Component 1.

       Posterior Probability. In the prior probability equation of Table 2, we use a basic set of

socio-economic variables (e.g. age, race and gender) to classify observations into the latent

subgroups. Using the established groups, we then use a richer set of variables to characterize the

two latent components. Our descriptive analysis of posterior probabilities (shown in Table 3)

aims to identify factors that are correlated with group membership. Some of the variables that are

of interest to us due to behavioral economic concepts (e.g. locus of control) are available only in

much smaller subsets of the HRS.

       Drawing on some of the literature in behavioral economics, we hypothesized that locus of

control, risk-aversion, length of planning horizon and forward looking attitudes would affect the




                                                                                                 19
likelihood of individuals’ sorting into each component. We find that higher risk aversion is

significantly and positively associated with an increased likelihood of being in Component 1 as

expected. Intuitively, those who are more risk averse tend to avoid the risky behavior of heavy

drinking and associated harmful behaviors and outcomes (e.g. drunk driving resulting in traffic

crashes and impaired balance resulting in falls). Longer financial planning horizons are

significantly associated with a reduced probability of being in Component 1. Those with a long-

term perspective are less affected by current price variations; their decisions are apparently based

on a longer time horizon. Similarly, those with forward looking attitudes are less likely to be in

Component 1. Rather surprising to us, locus of control is associated with a decreased likelihood

of being in Component 2. Locus of control is a measure of ‘internal’ control; it could be that

people naively believe that they can control their drinking but then do not, or could be that they

are in control. Locus of control is not a good measure of self-control per se, but such a measure

is not available in the data.

        We find that depression increases the likelihood of being in Component 1. This finding is

consistent with less social interaction due to depression and in turn a lower drinking rate. This

finding is also consistent with the finding in Saffer and Dave, 2005, indicating that individuals

with mental disorders are more sensitive to tax. We include a measure of binge drinking (the

number of days in the last three months that the individual had four or more drinks on one

occasion) to determine whether the components are synonymous with binge drinking. While

binge drinkers are significantly less likely to reside in Component 1, the inclusion of this

indicator has little impact on the significance and sign of the other independent variables. Note

that the sample size in the posterior specification varies due to limits in the number of

observations available for each of these less standard variables.




                                                                                                 20
       Robustness Checks. We conduct several different types of robustness checks. We find

qualitatively similar results across the alternative specifications. In Table 4, we compare across

specifications using alternative sets of covariates. In the first three columns, we display the

results of the two component FMM estimates including risk aversion and financial planning

horizon directly in the component price elasticity regressions rather than only in the posterior

probability. Note that the sample size when these variables are included is substantially reduced

(32,989 instead of the larger 71,802), as these questions were not asked of the full population.

Locus of control and forward looking attitudes are not included in the FMM regressions of

drinks due to the much smaller sample size.

       When planning horizon and risk aversion are entered directly into the DRINKS equation,

the qualitative results still hold. Price elasticity is significant and fairly large (-1.464) in

Component 1, while it is insignificant (and small) in the second. The price elasticity of

Component 1 is similar to our previous estimates, but we would not expect it to be exactly the

same due to the smaller sample. Risk aversion is negative and significant in Component 1,

indicating that those who are most risk-averse drink fewer drinks, cet. par. This mirrors the

qualitative result in Dave and Saffer (2007). Risk aversion is insignificant in Component 2.

Financial planning horizon is significant in both components; however, it is positive in

Component 1 but negative in Component 2. These qualitative results of opposing impacts are

similar to those found for education, in that a longer financial planning horizon makes one less

likely to be in Component 1 (from Table 3), but more likely to drink more conditional on being

in this component and less likely to drink more for those in Component 2.

       The second set of FMM results in Table 4 includes state level drunk driving laws. We




                                                                                               21
include these laws to test for the impact of state sentiment.13 Inclusion of these laws helps to

address the possibility that differences in tax rates and levels of alcohol consumption are

determined by differences across state in sentiment toward alcohol consumption, which could

bias the results. Because zero tolerance laws affect only those under age 18, this may be the

purest control, as it could not have a direct impact on alcohol consumption by older individuals.

Estimates of the price elasticity are changed very little by inclusion of these proxies for state

sentiment.

        The next set of checks examines the number of components. We initially investigated a

FMM specification with two heterogeneous groups. Then we tested to determine whether one,

two or three components would better represent the underlying relationships. The test criteria for

each model are reported in Table 5 while the resulting price elasticities can be seen in Table 6.

We use several criteria in selecting the best model: AIC/BIC and appropriate mechanism of the

estimation approach. The AIC/BIC reveal that the one component Poisson regression is inferior

to a specification with multiple components. This is consistent with our finding that there are two

groups with importantly different price elasticities. As a comparison, we allow three groups in

the FMM specification. The three component model did not converge.

        In an alternative two-component approach, rather than using only latent groups we

deleted all the individuals who reported no drinking over the full set of waves in which they were

in the data14. Then we estimated a two-component FMM model. We deleted those who do not

drink over all waves on the grounds that they were dedicated non-drinkers and including them in

13
   Kenkel (1996) also uses state laws related to alcohol availability and drunk driving countermeasures as
explanatory variables for alcohol demand.
14
   The HRS asked respondents whether they ever drink alcoholic beverages. Unfortunately, it is not clear whether
this question refers to consumption over the individual’s lifetime or current consumption. Further, it is well known
that individuals tend to under-report alcohol consumption in such surveys. Thus, we defined non-drinkers as those
who answered no in every survey interview.



                                                                                                                 22
the regressions would mask the true price elasticity for light drinkers. Otherwise, light drinkers

and non-drinkers would likely be included together in the two-component model. In the preferred

two-component FMM specification found in Table 2, rather than deleting the ‘dedicated non-

drinkers’ we allowed the estimation approach to determine the composition of the latent classes.

Non-drinkers are considered to be at risk of becoming drinkers.

       The price elasticities associated with the different model specifications are displayed in

Table 6. The qualitative conclusions that we draw from all specifications of the FMM models are

similar. We consistently find that, 1) price is significant for Component 1; 2) the price elasticity

is larger in this component as compared to the single equation Poisson estimate and 3) price is

insignificant in the other component(s). Further, the first component is the largest group, and it

comprises about 75% of the population except when we delete the nondrinkers. Thus the

qualitative results from our preferred model are robust to alternative specifications. Estimated

price elasticities range from -0.926 to -1.600 for the full sample. Even the lowest elasticity is

more than double that of the Poisson regression (-.268).

       Also displayed in Table 6 are FMM results with alternative price measures. Instead of

using the average price per ounce of ethanol, we enter price on each beer, wine and spirits in

separate regressions. We find that the qualitative results remain the same. That is, the alcohol

price is significant and negative only in Component 1. Also, for this group the elasticity is either

greater than one (for beer and wine) or very close to one (for liquor). Specifically, the elasticities

for Component 1 are -1.128, -1.515 and -.926 for beer, wine and liquor respectively.

       Limitations. The results of this study are subject to several limitations. First, the number

of drinks per day is the dependent variable. This measure does not capture all aspects of

consumption (i.e. it does not capture days drinking). However, drinks per day may be a good




                                                                                                   23
proxy for the most problematic drinking as it is the number of drinks per occasion that engenders

risky behavior. Some studies have also used drinks per day as their key measure of alcohol

consumption (Kenkel 1996), while others have used this measure in a two-part model. Second,

we are unable to differentiate between consumption of beer, wine, and spirits. Third, alcohol

prices may be measured with some error and may be endogenous in the sense that higher demand

may result in higher market prices15 (Manning, et al. 1995). Fourth, for some of the behavioral

economics variables, there were too few observations for our results to conclusively demonstrate

the variables’ effects. However, our preliminary results may prompt further interest in behavioral

economics variables. In addition, the findings of this analysis are limited to older individuals

while related research has typically focused on youths. Policymakers must consider the impact

on the entire population.



Discussion

        We find that there is important heterogeneity in the impact of alcohol price on alcohol

consumption. For the majority of individuals, price is a significant determinant of demand for

alcohol and these individuals are highly sensitive to price. For the other, smaller group, which

consumes more alcohol, prices do not significantly affect consumption rates. Females, those with

lower education, non-whites, and older individuals are more likely to be in the larger, high

elasticity, low consumption group (Component 1). We also find that members of Component 1

are more likely to be risk averse, and have a shorter financial planning horizon.

        Our results are in contrast to most of the earlier studies in this area, specifically because

we identify a very price elastic group as well as find a group that does not respond significantly


15
  While endogeneity and measurement error may bias the results, this would apply to both components of the
FMM.


                                                                                                             24
to prices. As indicated above, Wagenaar et al. (2009) find the average alcohol price/tax elasticity

to be -.03 across a large number of studies using individual level data16. Dave and Saffer (2007),

find that chronic drinkers have a significant tax elasticity on the intensive margin of -.27.

Manning et al. (1995) conclude that moderate drinkers are the most price sensitive, more so than

heavier or lighter drinkers. Our estimate of a price elasticity of -1.6 is somewhat similar to the

Manning et al. price estimate of -1.19 for the median drinker in quantile regressions; however,

our estimate is based on Component 1 only.

           Our finding that, among older adults, heavier drinkers are those who have inelastic

demands for alcohol has important welfare implications for alcohol tax policy. The standard

welfare approach would suggest (considering only efficiency conditions and ignoring

distributional issues) that for most goods, higher taxes should be levied, ceteris paribus, on goods

that have an inelastic demand. However, in the case of potentially harmful goods, sin taxes are

levied in part to reduce the potential harms, external and internal, of consumption. For these

drinkers, under several behavioral economic theories of addiction, taxes could increase welfare

by serving as a precommitment device that serves to bolster weak self-control. However, our

results suggest that the heavier drinkers are least likely to respond to the higher taxes, thus

neither the externality nor ‘internality’17 justification for higher alcohol taxes is supported by our

results. Note that those in Component 2 are heavier drinkers, but heavy drinking is only one

factor in the complex set.

           This paper adds to the literature in several dimensions. We apply the FMM estimation

approach to estimating the price elasticity of demand. FMM allows us to unmask important,

policy relevant heterogeneity in elasticity of demand for alcohol among older individuals. In


16
     The estimate is -.44 for studies using aggregate data.
17
     See for example Gruber, 2002, on the concept of internalities, intrapersonal impacts


                                                                                                   25
addition, the FMM enable us to explore the impact of behavioral factors on the posterior odds of

belonging to these heterogeneous latent classes. That is, we do not have to delineate only one,

race, gender, or quantity of alcohol consumed, but rather can examine the multifaceted

relationships underlying the latent classes. Figure 1 demonstrates graphically that the

determination of the two components is not based on drinking status alone; many members of

Component 2, for instance, consume 0 or 1 drink per day. By examining the posterior probability

of being in each group, we can examine the impact of behavioral factors on classification into

components.

       While there is growing support for increased alcohol taxes at the political level, we are

cautious about the welfare gains to increasing the tax on alcohol with regard to this older group

of individuals. Prior to making a broad policy statement, we would want to apply our estimation

approach to the full age spectrum. Nonetheless, we believe that this paper makes an important

and provocative point and suggests a new approach to identifying heterogeneity in the price

elasticity of demand for alcohol.




                                                                                              26
References


Abrams R, Alexopoulos G. (1977). Substance Abuse in the Elderly: Alcohol and Prescription
      Drugs. Hospital and Community Psychiatry 38(12):1285-1287.

Barsky RB, Juster FT, Kimball MS, Shapiro MD. (1997). Parameters and Behavioral
      Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health and Retirement Study Quarterly
      Journal of Economics 112 (2): 537–579.
Bernheim, B. Douglas; Rangel, Antonio (2005). From Neuroscience to public policy:
      A New economic view of Addiction. Swedish Economic Policy Review of
       Addition.

Camerer, C., Issacharoff, S., Loewenstein, G., O’Donoghue, T., Rabin, M. (2003).
       Regulation for Conservatives: Behavioral Economics and the Case for “Aymmetric
Paternalism”. University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 151/3:1211-154.

Chaloupka FJ and Weschler H (1996). Binge drinking in college: the impact of price,
      availability, and alcohol control policies. Contemporary Economic Policy 14(4): 112–
      124.

Conway K, Deb P. (2005). Is Prenatal Care Really Ineffective? Or, is the ‘Devil’ in the
     Distribution? Journal of Health Economics 24, 489-513.

Dave D and Saffer H (2007) Risk Tolerance and Alcohol Demand among Adults and Older
      Adults. NBER Working Paper No. 13482

Deb P, Trivedi PK. (1997). Demand for Medical Care by the Elderly: A Finite Mixture
      Approach. Journal of Applied Econometrics 12, 313-336.

El-Gamal M, Grether D. (1995). Are People Bayesian? Uncovering Behaviorial Strategies.
      Journal of the American Statistical Association 90, 1137-1145.

French MT, Maclean JC (2006). Underage Alcohol Use, Delinquency, and Criminal Activity.
       Health Economics 15:1261-1281.

Gomberg E. (1982). Alcohol use and Problems among the Elderly. In: National Institute on
     Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, Special Population Issues: Alcohol and Health
     Monograph 4, DHHS Pub. No. (ADM) 82-1193. Washington, DC: Supt. of Docs., U.S.
     Govt. Print Off., pp. 263-290.

Grossman M, Chaloupka, FJ and Sirtalan, I. An empirical analysis of alcohol addiction: Results
      from the Monitoring the Future panels. Economic Inquiry 36(1):39–48, 1998.

Gruber J. (2002) Smoking's 'Internalities'. Regulation 25/4: 25-57.




                                                                                           27
Gruber J, Mullainathan S. (2002). Do Cigarette Taxes Make Smokers Happier? NBER Working
       Paper No. W887.

Gruber J, Koszegi B. (2000). Is Addiction ‘Rational’? Theory and Evidence. Quarterly Journal
       of Economics 116(4): 1261-1303.

Hersch J. (2005) Smoking Restrictions as a Self-Control Mechanism. Journal of Risk and
      Uncertainty 31/1: 5-21

Heckman JJ, Singer B. (1984). A Method of Minimizing the Distributional Impact in
     Econometric Models for Duration Data. Econometrica 52:271-320.

Hurt R, Finlayson R, Morse R, Davis, L. (1988). Alcoholism in Elderly Persons: Medical
      Aspects and Prognosis of 216 Inpatients. Mayor Clinic Proceedings 64:753-760.

Juster FT, Suzman R. (1995). An Overview of the Health and Retirement Study. Journal of
       Human Resources 30:S7-56.

Kenkel DS. (1996). New Estimates of the Optimal Tax on Alcohol. Economic Inquiry 34: 296-
      319.

Kenkel DS. (2005) Are alcohol tax hikes fully passed through to prices: Evidence from Alaska.
      AER, 5(2):273-277.

Laird N. (1978). Non-parametric Maximum Likelihood Estimation of a Mixing Distribution.
       Journal of the American Statistical Association 73:805-811.

Leung SF, Phelps CE. (1993). My kingdom for a drink . . .? A review of estimates of the price
      sensitivity of demand for alcoholic beverages. In: Hilton, M.E. and Bloss, G., eds.
      Economics and the Prevention of Alcohol-Related Problems. NIAAA Research
      Monograph No. 25, NIH Pub. No. 93–3513. Bethesda, MD: National Institute on Alcohol
      Abuse and Alcoholism, pp. 1–32.

Lindsay BJ. (1995). Mixture Models: Theory, Geometry, and Applications, NSF-CBMS
       Regional Conference Series in Probability and Statistics, Vol. 5, IMS-ASA.

McLachlan GJ, Peel D. (2000) Finite Mixture Models. New York: John Wiley.

Manning WG, Blumberg L and Moulton, LH. (1995) The demand for alcohol: The differential
      response to price. Journal of Health Economics 14(2):123–148.

Manning, WG, Keeler EB, Newhouse JP, Sloss EM, Wasserman J. (1989). The Taxes of Sin: Do
      Smokers & Drinkers Pay Their Way. Journal of the American Medical Association
      261(11):1604-1609.




                                                                                          28
Morduch J, Stern HS. (1997) Using Mixture Models to Detect Sex Bias in Health Outcomes in
      Bangladesh. Journal of Econometrics 77, 259-276.

O’Donoghue, T. Rabin, M. (2003). Studying Optimal Paternalism, Illustrated with a
     Model of Sin Taxes. AER Papers and Proceedings, 93/2: 191.

Ornstein, S.I. (1980) Control of alcohol consumption through price increases. Journal of Studies
       on Alcohol 41: 807–818

Ornstein, S.I. & Levy, D. (1983) Price and income elasticities and the demand for alcoholic
       beverages. In Galanter, M. (ed.): Recent developments in alcoholism, pp. 303–345. New
       York: Plenum.

Radloff LS. (1977) The CES-D Scale: A Self-report Depression Scale for Research in the
       General Population, Applied Psychological Measurement 1(3): 385–401.

Saffer H, Dave D. (2005) Mental Illness and the Demand for Alcohol, Cocaine, and Cigarettes,
       Economic Inquiry, Oxford University Press 43(2): 229-246.

Sloan FA, Reilly BA, Schenzler C. (1994). Effects of Prices, Civil and Criminal Sanctions, and
       Law Enforcement on Alcohol-related Mortality. Journal of Studies on Alcohol 55:454–
       465.

Vestal R, McGuire E, Tobin J, Andres R, Norris M, Mesey, E. Aging and Alcohol Metabolism.
       Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics 21(3):343-354, 1977.

Vogel-Sprott V, Barrett P. (1984). Age, Drinking Habits and the Effects of Alcohol. Journal of
      Studies on Alcohol 48(6):517-521.

Wagenaar AC, Salois MJ, Komro KA. (2009). Effects of Beverage Alcohol Price and Tax
     Levels on Drinking: A Meta-Analysis of 1003 Estimates from 112 Studies. Addiction
     104: 179-190.

Wang P, Cockburn IM, Puterman ML. (1998) Analysis of Patent Data - A Mixed Poisson
     Regression Model Approach. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 16, 27-36.

Wedel M, Desarbo WS, Bult JR, Ramaswamy V. (1993). A Latent Class Poisson Regression
      Model for Heterogeneous Count Data. Journal of Applied Econometrics 8, 397-411.

Williams, M. (1984). Alcohol and the Elderly: An Overview. Alcohol Health & Research World
       8(3): 3-9, 52.

Young, DJ and Bielinska-Kwapsisz A (2002) Alcohol Taxes and beverage prices. National Tax
      Journal. LV(1): 57-74.




                                                                                             29
Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                               Mean           Std. Dev.
    Drinks per day                             0.616          1.346
    Average price per ounce of ethanol         8.308          1.063
    Age 0 – 45                                 0.014
    Age 46 – 55                                0.147
    Age 56 – 65                                0.377
    Age 66 – 75                                0.256
    Age 76 – 85                                0.155
    Age 86+                                    0.051
    Black                                      0.151
    Other race                                 0.031
    Male                                       0.419
    Height                                     1.688          0.101
    Married or partnered                       0.675
    Household income (in 10,000 1992 USD)      4.463          7.143
    Years of education                         12.073         3.253
    Binge drinking                             1.325          8.242
    CESD score                                 1.512          1.941
    Risk aversion (imputed)                    3.301          0.989
    Financial planning horizon (imputed)       2.970          1.131
    Observations                               71,802
Note that the number of observations is not the same for all variables




                                                                          30
Figure 1: Predicted Densities of the 2 Components




                       Predicted Densities at Mean(X)
   1
   .8
   .6
   .4
   .2
   0




            0         1         2         3         4          5      6
                            Component 1                 Component 2




                                                                          31
Table 2. Price Elasticity of the Number of Drinks
                                 Poisson        FMM           FMM        FMM
                                                Component1    Component2 Prior Probability
                                                                         of Component 1
       Log average price      -0.286***       -1.600***       0.0351
                              (0.0918)        (0.345)         (0.134)
       Age 46-55              -0.559***       0.0696          -0.405***  0.274*
                              (0.0632)        (0.367)         (0.112)    (0.162)
       Age 56-65              -0.771***       0.183           -0.532***  0.487***
                              (0.0619)        (0.368)         (0.112)    (0.161)
       Age 66-75              -1.061***       0.356           -0.721***  0.757***
                              (0.0628)        (0.369)         (0.112)    (0.164)
       Age 76-85              -1.446***       0.158           -1.084***  0.846***
                              (0.0648)        (0.368)         (0.117)    (0.175)
       Age 86+                -2.040***       -0.549          -1.573***  0.943***
                              (0.0824)        (0.426)         (0.187)    (0.277)
       Height                 0.231**         1.021*          0.0533     -0.140
                              (0.117)         (0.538)         (0.213)    (0.363)
       Years of education     0.0334***       0.248***        -0.0580*** -0.115***
                              (0.00281)       (0.0200)        (0.00490)  (0.0111)
       Black                  -0.332***       -2.636***       -0.122***  0.150**
                              (0.0280)        (0.680)         (0.0443)   (0.0754)
       Other race             -0.180***       -1.980***       0.0913     0.346**
                              (0.0665)        (0.760)         (0.124)    (0.149)
       Male                   0.898***        -0.0980         0.460***   -0.897***
                              (0.0229)        (0.114)         (0.0426)   (0.0756)
       Constant               -0.189          -3.171***       1.447***   2.488***
                              (0.281)         (1.172)         (0.466)    (0.599)
       Observations           71,802          71,802          71,802     71,802
       Mean Predicted y                       0.129           1.879
       % in Component 1                       75.4            24.6
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Regressions also include census region of residence and year dummies




                                                                                             32
Table 3. Determinants of the Posterior Probability of Component 1
                                   (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)
       Age 46-55                   0.0502***     0.0509***    0.0411       0.0498***    0.0478***
                                   (0.0133)      (0.0134)     (0.0390)     (0.0142)     (0.0153)
       Age 56-65                   0.0918***     0.0910***    0.104***     0.0883***    0.110***
                                   (0.0131)      (0.0131)     (0.0380)     (0.0140)     (0.0150)
       Age 66-75                   0.141***      0.139***     0.142***     0.139***     0.166***
                                   (0.0131)      (0.0131)     (0.0383)     (0.0143)     (0.0150)
       Age 76-85                   0.153***      0.151***     0.134***     0.146***     0.175***
                                   (0.0131)      (0.0133)     (0.0390)     (0.0155)     (0.0151)
       Age 86+                     0.159***      0.157***     0.188***     0.152***     0.182***
                                   (0.0134)      (0.0136)     (0.0407)     (0.0287)     (0.0156)
       Height                      -0.0383**     -0.0305*     -0.120**     -0.0102      -0.0341
                                   (0.0179)      (0.0179)     (0.0581)     (0.0289)     (0.0210)
       Years of education           -0.0191***   -0.0177***   -0.0185***   -0.0174***   -0.0210***
                                   (0.000374)    (0.000392)   (0.00125)    (0.000678)   (0.000455)
       Black                       0.0258***     0.0230***    -0.0225      0.0116**     0.0186***
                                   (0.00366)     (0.00371)    (0.0150)     (0.00588)    (0.00435)
       Other race                  0.0494***     0.0454***    0.0571**     0.0328***    0.0509***
                                   (0.00739)     (0.00744)    (0.0261)     (0.0112)     (0.00869)
       Male                        -0.169***     -0.169***    -0.146***    -0.180***    -0.172***
                                   (0.00366)     (0.00373)    (0.0112)     (0.00601)    (0.00431)
       Married                                   0.00865***
                                                 (0.00290)
       Log income                                -0.0108***
                                                 (0.000970)
       Locus of control                                       -0.0247***
                                                              (0.00328)
       Forward looking                                        -0.00646*
                                                              (0.00354)
       Risk aversion                                                       0.0102***
                                                                           (0.00198)
       Financialplanning horizon                                           -0.0126***
                                                                           (0.00188)
       Binge drinking                                                                   -0.0113***
                                                                                        (0.000215)
       CESD score                                                                       0.00865***
                                                                                        (0.000724)
       Constant                   0.970***       1.046***     1.133***     0.903***     0.934***
                                  (0.0325)       (0.0334)     (0.101)      (0.0508)     (0.0380)
      Observations                71,802         71,713       8,542        32,989       53,227
      R-squared                   0.121          0.123        0.108        0.104        0.214
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                     33
     Table 4: FMM Models
                Component1        Component2      Prior          Component1   Component2   Prior
                                                  Probability of                           Probability of
                                                  Component 1                              Component 1
Log average price -1.464***       0.131                          -1.522***    0.0388
                   (0.442)        (0.187)                        (0.344)      (0.136)
Risk aversion       -0.113***     0.00190
                   (0.0426)       (0.0153)
Financial planning0.248***        -0.0614***
horizon            (0.0436)       (0.0196)
Blood       alcohol                                               0.0715      0.0123
count law                                                         (0.0783)    (0.0276)
License revocation                                                0.0558      -0.0452
law                                                               (0.125)     (0.0448)
Zero tolerance law                                                -0.224*     -0.0698*
                                                                  (0.132)     (0.0395)
Age 46-55          0.159            -0.416***       0.261         0.0725      -0.406***    0.274*
                   (0.380)          (0.123)         (0.165)       (0.361)     (0.112)      (0.161)
Age 56-65          0.338            -0.539***       0.482***      0.186       -0.533***    0.487***
                   (0.385)          (0.125)         (0.167)       (0.362)     (0.111)      (0.160)
Age 66-75          0.507            -0.752***       0.795***      0.363       -0.721***    0.761***
                   (0.403)          (0.130)         (0.190)       (0.363)     (0.112)      (0.163)
Age 76-85          0.491            -1.122***       0.760***      0.167       -1.084***    0.851***
                   (0.422)          (0.150)         (0.255)       (0.363)     (0.117)      (0.175)
Age 86+            0.610            0.732***        3.845***      -0.547      -1.575***    0.941***
                   (0.559)          (0.139)         (0.961)       (0.424)     (0.186)      (0.277)
Height             0.421            0.106           0.0458        1.031*      0.0520       -0.137
                   (0.730)          (0.266)         (0.499)       (0.537)     (0.213)      (0.363)
Years of education 0.255***         -0.0591***      -0.0815***    0.247***    -0.0579***   -0.114***
                   (0.0263)         (0.00673)       (0.0149)      (0.0200)    (0.00491)    (0.0111)
Black              -3.162*          -0.156***       -0.0398       -2.653***   -0.121***    0.148**
                   (1.684)          (0.0576)        (0.103)       (0.691)     (0.0445)     (0.0756)
Other race         -1.929*          0.0707          0.141         -1.980***   0.0922       0.346**
                   (1.068)          (0.180)         (0.206)       (0.753)     (0.123)      (0.149)
Male               -0.0765          0.455***        -0.920***     -0.104      0.459***     -0.901***
                   (0.154)          (0.0536)        (0.105)       (0.115)     (0.0426)     (0.0758)
Constant           -3.098*          1.449**         1.835**       -3.300***   1.508***     2.484***
                   (1.656)          (0.661)         (0.818)       (1.175)     (0.472)      (0.599)
Observations       32,989           32,989          32,989        71,802      71,802       71,802
Mean predicted y 0.159              2.084                         0.129       1.879
% in component 1 0.723              0.277                         0.754       0.246
      *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
      Robust standard errors in parentheses
      Regressions also include census region of residence and year dummies




                                                                                                 34
Table 5: Selection Criteria for Various Models
                                     Log-likelihood   d.o.f   AIC        BIC
 Poisson                             -82363.43        24      164774.9   164995.2

 2 component, constant probability   -70321.87        49      140741.7   141191.6


 3 component, constant probability   Not converging


 2 component, variable probability   -69550.2         59      139218.4   139760.1


 Risk/Planning Model                 -35478.15        63      71082.29   71611.74


 Laws Model                          -69543.24        65      139216.5   139813.3

 Only   drinkers     sample     (2
                                   -58492.72          59      117103.4   117615
 component, variable probability)




                                                                                    35
         Table 6: Comparison of Price Elasticity Estimates across Models
                                    Overall          Component 1     Component 2     Component 3   N
                                    -0.286***                                                      71,802
Poisson
                                    (0.0918)
                                                     -0.997***       -0.023                        71,802
2 component, constant probability                    (0.245)         (0.142)
                                                     [0.754]         [0.246]
3 component, constant probability   Not converging
                                                     -1.600***       0.0351                        71,802
2 component, variable probability                    (0.345)         (0.134)
                                                     [0.754]         [0.246]
                                                     -1.128***       0.0282                        71,802
Beer                                                 (0.285)         (0.107)
                                                     [0.754]         [0.246]
                                                     -1.515***       0.0816                        71,802
Wine                                                 (0.270)         (0.117)
                                                     [0.755]         [0.245]
                                                     -0.926***       0.00649                       71,802
Liquor                                               (0.228)         (0.133)
                                                     [0.754]         [0.246]
                                                     -0.630***       0.152                         43,098
Only   drinkers     sample     (2
                                                     (0.224)         (0.149)
component, variable probability)
                                                     [0.604]         [0.396]
         Robust standard errors in parentheses, proportion in component in square brackets
         *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                   36
