NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FOREIGN-OWNED LAND

Jonathan Eaton

Working Paper No. 1512

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MP 02138
December 1984

I gratefully acknowledge support from the National Science
Foundation under grant no. SES 82OT6'3. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in International Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1512
December 1984

Foreign—Owned Land

ABSTRACT

Land and capital serve not only as factors of production but as assets

which households use as stores of value. Standard trade models typically

rcuyri i z un 1..
I)' .L_
LIW i rs L ruie.
—

—

iii I LS ruie s ni Se i.

i dEIU iUULtS i..nte

amount of national savings available for capital investment.
Foreign investment affects the national economy through both asset

markets and factor markets. When the share of labor in the land—using sector
is large relative to the labor share in the capital—using sector, factor—

market effects are likely to dominate. In this case a drop in the price of
the agricultural good or a rise in the land—labor ratio attracts foreign
investment, while a drop in the world interest rate raises the welfare of a

capital—importing country. If the share of labor in the land—using sector is
smaller, however, asset—market effects dominate. These results are then
likely to be reversed. Even when trade in claims on land equalizes the
domestic and world interest rates, a tax on land raises steady—state welfare.

Jonathan Eaton
Department of Economics
Rouss Hall
University of Virginia

Charlottesville, VA 22901
(804) 924-7580

The issue of foreign investment in land has been the subject of some

political concern.' Nevertheless, there is not much economic analysis of the
causes and consequences of international trade in claims on land. This paper
analyzes the determinants of foreign ownership of land, and its implications
for national welfare.

These issues are explored in a dynamic model in which labor, land and

capital are used to produce output. In addition, land and capital serve as
stores of value. Each period the economy is identical to the specific factors
model described, for example, by Ronald Jones (1971): A manufactured good is
produced with capital and labor and an agricultural good with land and labor.

The specific—factors model has become popular in analyzing movements of

capital. Richard Brecher and Ronald Findlay (1983) and T.N. Srinivasan (1983)
provide examples. Unlike the two—factor Heckscher—Ohlin model, the specific—
factors model does not imply that trade in commodities, unless it leads to

complete specialization, removes any incentive for foreign investment. The
formulation determines interior production and investment patterns
simultaneously.

A limitation of the static specific-factors model as a vehicle to analyze
foreign ownership of land, and foreign investment more generally, is its
treatment of nationally—owned assets as exogenous in supply.
the

In particular,

national supply of capital does not derive from national savings

behavior. The role of land as a store of value that competes with capital is
consequently ignored.

In the model developed in this paper individual savings determines the
national

capital supply. Savings behavior is the outcome of a simple life-

cycle optimization like that in Paul Samuelson's (1958) overlapping
generations (0L1) model.

2

Incorporating land and capital together in a dynamic model introduces a
role for land not only as a factor of production, as in the static specific—

factors model, but as an asset. An important aspect of foreign investment in
land is its effect on the value of this asset and the quantity available to

national investors. These magnitudes in turn have implications for the amount
of capital supplied nationally.

The analysis addresses three issues. The first is the effect of an
exogenous increase in the amount of land owned by foreigners on the domestic

economy. The effects on the price of land, on factor prices and on welfare
are considered. There is, in fact, no presumption that the price of land
rises in response to more foreign investment. The effect depends upon the
relative labor shares in the two sectors. Increased foreign ownership does
cause the real wage to rise and the interest rate and rent on land to fall,

but the effect on welfare in steady state is ambiguous, depending upon the
initial interest rate, relative labor shares, and the initial amount of
foreign investment.2

A second concern of this paper is the behavior of the economy under free

trade in claims on land. The paper considers the effects of changes in the
terms of trade, the world interest rate, nd the relative amounts of domestic
factors in fixed supply on foreign investment and welfare.3 One result is
that an increase in the relative price of the agricultural good may raise or
lower the amount of land that foreigners own, but regardless of its effect on
land ownership or trade patterns, an increase in the price of this good always

lowers steady—state welfare. The effects of changes in the world interest
rate and in relative factor supplies on welfare and land ownership are
ambiguous, depending upon factor shares in the two sectors and the initial

foreign investment position. In particular, a country with a low population

3

density does not necessarily end up with more of its land foreign-owned, and a
drop in the world interest rate may reduce foreigners' land holdings.4
The third issue that the paper addresses is the effect of a land tax on

foreign ownership and on national welfare. This analysis extends to an open
economy work by Martin Feldstein (1977), Guillermo Calvo, Lawrence Kotlikoff
and

Carlos Rodriguez (1979) and Christophe Chamley and Brian Wright (1983) who

show, in a closed economy, that taxing land raises steady—state welfare. The

reason is that such a tax diverts savings into capital accumulation. The

interest

rate consequently

production

fails. Since land serves both as

a

factor of

and as a non-depreciating asset, the rate of return in the economy

necessarily exceeds the growth rate. A permanent reduction in the interest
rate consequently raises steady—state welfare, since the economy is brought

closer to the Golden Rule steady state. With free trade in claims on land,
factor prices are unchanged as a consequence of a land tax. Nevertheless, a
tax on land raises steady—state welfare as long as the value of land remains
positive.5

The outline of the paper is as follows: Section I presents the basic
assumptions of the analysis. The effect of an exogenous increase in foreign—
owned land is examined in Section II. Section III analyzes the economy under
free trade in claims on land, while the issue of the land tax is addressed in

Section IV. Section V provides some concluding remarks.

I. The Model

In each period t the economy is identical to the three—factor, two-

commodity model of Jones (1971). The manufactured good employs capital and

4

labor in its production. Its output, given factor inputs K of capital and L
of labor is F(K,L). The agricultural good is produced by land and labor.
Amounts T of land and L of labor produce an output G(T,L). The functions F
and G are continuous, twice—differentiable and linear homogeneous.

At each period t the economy is endowed with supplies of each factor in

amounts Kt, Lt and Tt. The stock of land is fixed at 1 and the labor force at

L each period. Labor is mobile between sectors, and earns the same wage w in
either activity. Competition in factor markets determines the wage rate, the
interest rate rt, the land rent

and an allocation of LMt units of labor to

the manufacturing sector. In the absence of a corner solution, equilibrium is
thus described by the equations

(1)

w = FL(Kt,LMt)

(2)

w = ptGL(L

(3)

rt =

(4)

=

—

LMt)

FK(Kt,LMt)

ptG(l_

—

LMt)

which determine Wt, rt,

—

wt(L

—

LMt)

and LMt as functions of the factor supplies and the

relative price of the agricultural good in period t,

The manufactured

good serves as numeraire.

New investment in capital takes the form of currently produced units of

the manufactured good that are not consumed. National savings is determined

5

by a simple life—cycle optimization. Individuals live two periods. In the
first perod of life they provide a unit of labor services to earn a wage w.
An amount cY is spent on current consumption with the remainder invested in

land and capital. In the second period the individual consumes the value of
his assets and the income that they have earned. This amount is denoted C0.
Lifetime utility as a function of cY, c0, and the relative prices of the
agricultural good each period, p'" and p°. is given by V'(c,pY) + V°(c°,p°j.
The price of land is denoted

Denoting the individual 's investment in

capital as kt and in land as 1t budget constraints imply that

(5\
,

c

(6)

c÷1 =

—

w

-'

- k

(1 +

1

rt+i)kt+i

+

(1 +

With perfect foresight, for both land and capital to be held in positive
amounts requires that

t+1

(7)

t+1q

=

1

+ r+i

which implies, with (6), that

(8)

c÷1 =

(1 +

r+i)(w -

c)

In the working period the individual 's problem is to choose c to
maximize utility, given wt,rt+l, Pt and

The utility—maximizing level is

6

denoted by the function cY(wt, rt+l, t' Pt+i)•
Equilibrium in the markets for land and capital implies that

(9)

Kt+i =

Lkt+i

(10)

1

=

Llt+i

+

+ T

where K+i and T41 denote net foreign investment in capital and land,
respectively, Negative values of these variables imply net ownership of these
assets abroad by nationals.

The supply of nationally—owned capital K and the price of land

evolve

according to the two dynamic equations

=

(11)

L[Wt

-

c'(wt,rt+i,pt,pt+i)]

—

ir

-

where

+q
________

the share of land owned by nationals.

Since q does not appear in equations (1) through (4), Wt, rt,

and LMt

can be expressed as functions of Kt and Pt alone. As Jones (1971), for
example, has demonstrated WK > 0, rK <
> 0, LMp < 0, where XK

= x/oKt

and

< 0, LMK > 0, w > 0, r < 0,

x = ôx/ôp

for x

w, r, it,

In the subsequent analysis foreign investment in capital, K, is assumed
to equal zero. Trade in claims on land constitutes the only form of

international in"stment.

7

II. Foreign Investment in Land

This section treats the amount of land owned by foreigners as exogenous,

and considers the effect of changes in this amount on the capital stock, the
price of land and national welfare, both on steady-state configurations and in
the transition from the initial situation to the new steady state.

The economy is in steady state when the relative price of the

agricultural comodity is constant over time, at a level denoted , and the
capital stock and price of land are constant values, K and ,
that satisfy

(13)

K =

(14)

=

x(K,)

-

Xq

where

L[ -

and

w(K,)

F

r(K,)
.

respectively,

8

(K,) is the total savings of workers in steady state.6
An increase in foreign ownership of domestic land is indicated by an

increase in 1—X. The effects, in steady state, on K and

are given by

dK
d(1-X)

(15)

d

(16)

K L

d(1-X)

where

(17)

(18)

1_L(1_c)wK+crK+XVK
-

rK

As shown in the appendix, as long as 1 +

crK

> 0, the condition

> 0 is

necessary and sufficient for the existence of a unique, stable, non—

oscillating convergence path to steady state. This condition states that in
the neighborhood of steady state an increase in the capital stock by a

particular amount raises investment in capital by a lesser amount. If this
stability condition is imposed Proposition 1 follows from equation (15):

Proposition 1: An increase in the amount of domestic land owned by
foreigners raises the steady—state capital stock, thereby raising the real
wage and lowering the interest rate and rent on land in steady state.
When more land is owned by foreigners, less is available to national

investors as a store of value. More savings is diverted into capital

9

formation. The capital stock rises with the consequent implications for
factor rewards.

Imposing the stability condition on equation (16) implies that an
increase in the amount of land owned by foreigners raises or lowers the price
of land depending upon whether VK is positive or negative.
The term VK indicates the effect of an increase in the steady-state

capital stock on the price of land. Its sign is ambiguous since an increase
in the capital stock has two conflicting effects. One is to raise the real

wage, which reduces the profit earned by land, t. This acts to lower the land
price. The other is to 'lower the interest rate which, given t, raises the

price of land. The first, negative effect dominates if labor's share in
agriculture is larger than its share in manufacturing, and conversely.7 From
this relationship follows:

Proposition 2: An increase in foreign ownership of domestic land raises
or lowers the price of land depending upon whether the manufacturing sector
has a larger or smaller labor share than the agricultural sector.

Thus there is no presumption that a permanent increase in the amount of
land owned by foreigners raises the price of land.

If agriculture is labor-

intensive relative to manufacturing, the price falls.

Consider now the effect of a permanent increase in foreign ownership of
land on the level of welfare that is attained in steady state.

Differentiating utility, U, evaluated at steady state, with respect to (1—X),
gives, using the first—order condition for utility maximization,

19

dU
-d(1-X)

v°c (-pG"F)q
+
TpG"

FLL)

(1+F)K
-

LM

K +

L

10

The term outside the square brackets is positive. In the steady state of an
economy in which land serves both as a productive factor and as a store of

value, the interest rate is positive. Therefore expression (19) is
nonnegative as long as

(20)

K>

K

+

17

X—

r

Expression (.19) consequently implies the following sufficient condition for

welfare to rise when foreign land ownership rises:

Proposition 3: A permanent increase in the amount of land owned by
foreigners necessarily raises steady-state welfare if the share of capital in

national wealth exceeds the fraction of the labor force engaged by the
manufacturing sector.

An increase in foreign investment raises the wage and lowers the interest

rate. The positive effect of the first on welfare is greater when the
capital—labor ratio in manufacturing is high. The negative effect of the
second is greater the greater steady—state wealth per worker.
Expression (19) indicates another sufficient condition for increased
foreign investment in land to raise welfare:

Proposition 4: A permanent increase in the amount of land owned by
foreigners necessarily raises steady—state welfare if the labor share in
agriculture is larger than the labor share in manufacturing and net foreign
land holdings are initially nonnegative.

Propositions 2 and 4 together imply a third sufficient condition for

increased foreign ownership of land to raise steady—state welfare: that

11

initial foreign land holdings are nonnegative and that the price of land not
rise when foreign investment in land rises.

Increased foreign ownership of land can reduce steady—state welfare if
agriculture is highly land—intensive relative to the capital intensity of

manufacturing. Two extreme cases in which an increase in foreign investment
lowers welfare are those in which agriculture employs no labor, and in which

manufacturing employs no capital. The second case lowers the steady—state
interest rate without raising the wage.

The discussion so far has compared the effect of different levels of

foreign investment in land across steady states. The dynamics of a transition
from one steady state to another can be analyzed by manipulation of equations

(A3) and (A4) in the appendix. Once the change in foreign investment has
occurred, the capital stock and price of land, and consequently factor prices,
begin to move monotonically toward their new steady—state values.

If the change is anticipated, the land price begins to move toward its

new steady—state value prior to the actual increase in foreign ownership. If
the steady—state price of land falls, then the capital stock begins to rise

before the increased foreign investment occurs. As the price begins to fall
in anticipation, more national savings is diverted toward capital

investment. If the steady—state land price rises, however, there is a period

of capital decumulatjon before the increase in foreign-ownership. Once the
investment takes place, this process is reversed as the capital stock moves to
exceed its initial steady-state level.
The older generation at the time that the increase in foreign investment
is first anticipated experiences a capital gain or loss on its land holdings
depending upon whether the ultimate effect of the foreign investment is to

raise or lower the steady—state land price. An implication of Proposition 4

12

is consequently that an increase in the amount of land that is foreign—owned

is never Pareto-worsening. Either steady—state welfare rises or the older
generation at the time that the increase is initially anticipated experiences

a capital gain, with no other change in income. An increase in foreign
investment can bring about a Pareto—improvement, however, if the price of land

rises and condition (20) is nevertheless satisfied. This can occur when the
interest rate is large or when the amount of land owned nationally is already
smal 1.

III. Free Trade in Land

The previous section considered the effect of an increase in the amount

of 'and owned by foreigners, treating this amount as exogenous. This section
extends the model to endogenize foreign investment in land when claims on
domestic land are freely traded internationally.
Foreign investors are assumed to have available to them investments

elsewhere in the world that earn a constant real rate of return r*. The
country considered here is small in the sense that it does ot affect this

rate. Free trade in claims on land will insure that the rate of return on
domestic land equals r*, or that

t+1 +
(21)

q1

= 1

+

r*

If nationals continue to invest in domestic land, then condition (7) must

continue to apply as well. Together, equations (7) and (21) imply

13

r*

=

(22)

from which follows:

Proposition 5: Free trade in land will yield a domestic interest rate
equal to the world interest rate unless all land is foreign—owned. The
domestic interest rate will then exceed the world rate.

Even though, by assumption, foreigners do not invest directly in capital,
investment in land has the same effect on the capital stock as if they did.
In the rest of this section it is assumed that some domestic land remains

nationally-owned, so that the domestic and world interest rates are in fact
equal

8

The five equations (1) through (4) and (22) determine perfect foresight
equilibrium values of Wt, rt,

LMt and Kt as functions of the domestic

supplies of labor and land, the relative price of the agricultural good, and
the world interest rate.

If these amounts are constant, then factor returns,

the allocation of labor and the supply of domestic capital will be constant as

well. Denoting these magnitudes as ,

, , LM

and K, the land price is then

also a constant, given by

It

(23)

From the savings relationship (11), with K = K, the share of land that is
nationally—owned is:

K (24)

L[wt - 1

-

c'(wt q

14

In steady state, wt_1 =

. The

amount of land owned by foreigners in steady

state, X, is thus given by expression (24) with wt_1 =
The remainder of this section considers the effects of permanent changes

in the relative commodity price, ,

the

world interest rate, r*, and domestic

supplies of fixed factors on foreign investment in land and on national
welfare.1°

A. An Increase in the Relative Price of the Agricultural Good

1. Steady-State Foreign Investment
As long as land ownership remains diversified a change in the relative
price of the agricultural commodity has no effect on the steady—state rate of

interest or wage. These are tied to r* by equations (1) through (4) and
(22). Foreign investment is affected through the effect of
of land, which rises when
which falls when

(1) on the value

rises, (ii) on the equilibrium capital stock,

rises, and (iii) on worker's consumption, which can either

rise or fall. The first acts to attract foreign investment by diverting more
national savings toward investment in land rather than capital. The second
has the opposite effect.

The total effect on the amount of foreign-owned land of a rise in the
price of the agricultural commodity is, from equation (24), given by

c3'L(25)

where

d1 —X' =

d

G' [_X7t
r*G" (L_CM)

r*K]

15

+

the effect of a permanent change in p on a worker's consumption,11 and

a

—

GG"(L_LM)
itG

the

elasticity of substitution between land and labor in the agricultural

sector.

If tastes are homothetic and identical across periods then c = 0.

More

generally there is no presumption as to its sign. The sign of the remaining
term of expression (25) depends upon the sign of the term in square brackets,
from which follows:

Proposition 6: A permanent increase in the price of the agricultural
good is more likely to raise foreign investment in land when (1) the labor
share in agriculture is smaller than its share in manufacturing, (ii) the
elasticity of substitution between land and labor in agriculture is large, and
(iii) the initial amount of foreign—owned land is small.
If either a = 0 or .
necessarily falls when

0, and c < 0, foreign ownership of land

rises. A high elasticity of substitution in

agriculture and a high labor share in agriculture relative to manufacturing
imply that the capital stock that equates the domestic to the world interest
rate does not fall very far when
rise in

rises.'2 Consequently the main effect of a

is to raise the value of a given amount of land, diverting national

savings away from capital. To obtain the required investment in capital more

foreign investment in land must be attracted. If little land is held by

16

nationals initially, however, an increase in the price of land, given X,
affects investment in capital very little.
Since the price of land rises when

rises, the value of foreign

investment in land may rise even when the amount of land that is foreign—owned

falls. The effect of a permanent increase in

on the value of foreign—owned

land is given by

'26'
'

d[(1-X)] —— Cy

—

wG

U ry

— r*K

There is still no presumption that an increase in

rakes the value of

foreign investment. It is more likely to do so when the labor share in
manufacturing is larger than in agriculture and when the elasticity of
substitution between land and labor in agriculture is large.

2. Steady-State Welfare
Since the steady-state wage and interest rate in terms of the

manufactured good are unaffected by a change in , an increase in the relative
price of the agricultural good unambiguously lowers welfare in steady state.

It does so by reducinq the purchasi power of the wage and of interest
income. This result emerges regardle'- of the trade pattern or the pattern of
land ownership.

3. Transitional Effects
If the increase in

is unanticipated, the retirees at the time the

change occurs will experience an unanticipated capital gain on their land but
earn a lower than expected return on capital.

The net effect is ambiguous.

17

If the increase in

is anticipated, the price of land will begin to rise

before the commodity price increase. During this period more national savings
will be diverted toward land unless X falls. To maintain the domestic
interest rate at the world level thus requires more foreign investment between

the announcement of the change and the change itself. When the rise in
actually occurs, foreign investment will fall, possibly to below its initial
steady-state

level.

When the increase in

is anticipated the retired generation at the time

1-k, aiiiuuiieu t.l!aIIJe
..k
•..II U
•. UI
I II va
U! LIIC
AI)tF I 1IL au UllOilti) I UUU WCI QI a I It,• TI.

their

land rises above its previous steady—state level, but the rate of return

on their capital is unaffected. The welfare of generations between the
announcement and the change itself is unaffected, but when

does actually

rise current and all subsequent generations experience a reduction in welfare.

B. An Increase in the Labor Force

As long as nationals continue to own land, a permanent change in the size

of the labor force has no effect on the wage and the interest rate. The
profit on land, and consequently the value of land, are also unaffected. What
does change is the amount of national savings, which rises in proportion to
the labor force, and the capital stock required to employ the larger labor

force at the world interest rate and implied wage. The first acts to reduce
foreign investment and the second to attract it.

Differentiating 1— with respect to L gives

(27)

d(1-X) =

K

XM L

+

dL

LM

K

K+X

18

which implies

Proposition 7: A permanent increase in the total labor force will lead
to a rise or fall in the amount of land that is foreign-owned depending upon
whether the proportion of the labor force engaged in manufacturing is larger
or smaller than the proportion of national wealth that consists of capital.
Since factor prices are unaffected by a change in the size of the labor

force, welfare is also unaffected. Since there is no change in the price of
land, the amount and the value of foreign investment in land change in the
same proportion.

C. An Increase in the World Interest Rate

The world interest rate affects all domestic factor prices, the price of

land and the equilibrium domestic capital stock. A rise in r* causes the wage
and the capital stock to fall and the return on land to rise.

The effect on

the price of land is given by:

(29)

.sL

dr*

=

w(L_LM)
(r*)2

(IK wLM

it

—)

w(L_LM)

which is positive or negative as the labor share in agriculture is larger or
smaller than in manufacturing.

1. Foreign—Owned Land
Both the amount and the value of foreign investment in land may rise or

fall as a consequence of an increase in the world interest rate. Unless the
interest elasticity of savings is highly positive, national savings falls when

r* rises. This acts to raise foreign investment. The decline in the

19

equilibrium capital stock acts to reduce foreign investment, however.
Finally, the wealth effect associated with the change in

acts to attract

foreign investment if the land price rises but to repel it if it falls. No
simple condition summarizes the net impact of these three effects on foreign
land ownership, but foreign investment does not necessarily fall as a

consequence of a higher world interest rate. The opposite result will emerge,
for example, if agriculture is very labor—intensive relative to manufacturing.

7 W1fr
To determine the effect of an increase in the interest rate on welfare in
steady—state is more straightforward. Differentiating the utility function
with respect to r* given

(29)

=

- (1+r)K

This expression is opposite in sign to the expression that indicates the

effect of an exogenous increase in foreign investment on welfare: A rise in
the world interest rate with free trade in land affects steady—state welfare
in the same way as a fall in foreign investment when foreign—owned land is

exogenous. Welfare is more likely to rise when the interest rate is initially
low and manufacturing labor—intensive relative to agriculture. There is thus
no presumption that a net recipient of foreign investment experiences a
reduction in its steady—state welfare when the world interest rate rises.'3

20

IV. The Consequence of a Tax on Land with International Capital Mobility

In contrast to what is implied by a static model of tax incidence, that a

tax on land is neutral in its effects on resource allocation, in a closed
economy, overlapping-generations context such a tax increases the steady-state
supply of capital, thereby reducing the interest rate and raising the real

wage. As long as the initial interest rate exceeds the population growth
rate, which it will when land serves both as an asset and as a factor of
production, steady-state welfare rises.14 A land tax raises the capital stock

by reducing the price of land. More savings is then available for capital
investment.15

With capital mobility, in the form of either foreign borrowing or direct
foreign investment in land, a tax on land has no effect on factor prices and

the domestic stock of capital. These are governed by the world interest

rate. Nevertheless, the tax does have real effects. It lowers the value of
foreign investment and, as in the closed economy case, it raises steady-state
wel fare.

16

A. The Land Tax and Foreign Investment

Consider a lump—sum tax in amount w

that

is collected on all domestic

land each period. If nationals continue to invest in land, free trade in
claims on land continues to equate the domestic interest rate to the world

rate. Equation (22), along with equations (1) through (4), imply a particular

value for the capital stock. Since the tax affects none of these four
relationships, it has no effect on the stock of domestic capital, factor

21

rewards, or the allocation of labor, with rEt

defined now as the pre-tax return

on land.

The tax does affect the price of land, however. To incorporate its
effect equation (7) must be changed to

+

ltt+1 -

(30)

If the tax revenue is distributed to the working generation, an individual

worker's wage income is augmented by r/L. The relevant savings relation
becomes

K1 =

(31)

If,

L[Wt

+ -r/L -

c)'(wt+.v/L,rt+i,pt,pt÷i)]

-

instead, the government gives the tax revenue to the retired generation,

the relevant equation is

(31')

Kt+i =

L[wt

-

cY(wt+

-

L(1+rt+l)rt+1PtPt+1fl

X1q

In steady state these become:

(32)

K =

L[ +

t/L

-

c

+

/L,r*,p,p)]

and

(32')

K

respectively.17

-

c'(

-

Differentiating equation (32) with respect to -r

gives:

22

d_1_cW+XIr
-

( 33 )

dt

which is positive as long as future consumption is non—inferior. Taxing land
raises the amount of domestic land owned nationally, if the tax revenue is

distributed to the working generation. It does so for two reasons. First, by
increasing working period income, the tax revenue raises savings. Second, by
lowering the price of land it increases the amount of savings available for

investment. Since the capital stock cannot rise, the amount of land owned by
nationals rises.

The equivalent derivative for equation (32') is

d

(333)

If

_c)'/(l+r*) +
W

X/r*

is close to one, this expression is positive: as before, the land tax

raises the amount of land owned by nationals. If

is very small, however,

the expression is negative. The reason is that, in this case, the net effect
of the tax is to raise retirement income. Savings in the form of land
acquisitions is consequently lower. These results may be summarized as
follows:

Proposition 8: Taxing land reduces the amount of foreign—owned land in
steady state unless (i) the tax revenue is distributed to the retired
generation and (ii) foreigners already own most land.

Regardless of how the tax revenue is distributed or the pattern of land
ownership, unless first-period consumption is highly inferior the land tax
reduces the steady—state value of foreign investment in land.
is distributed to workers then, using expression (32),

If tax revenue

23

(34/

d(1.-

d

=

yw -

1+r
r*

which is negative as long as c < 1.

If the tax revenue is distributed to

retirees, the expression is

(34'\

d(14)

=

1

—

1+r*

c' — ____
'

w

r*

which has th same sign as (35S) but is smaller in absolute magnitude.18

B. The Effect of a Land Tax on Welfare

However the tax revenue is distributed, the land tax does not affect the
steady—state wage rate or rate of return on savings.

If tax revenue is

distributed to workers then each worker receives, in addition to his wage

income, an amount t/L in redistributed tax proceeds. If the revenue is
distributed to retirees then each retiree receives an additional r/L, which is

equivalent to a wage supplement of 1/L(1+r*). In either case the tax provides
a net addition to income, leaving the steady-state return on savings

unaffected. Proposition 9 immediately follows:
Proposition 9: A tax on land raises steady—state welfare regardless of
how the revenue is distributed between generations.
Steady—state welfare rises as t

rises.

The potential welfare gain is

not, of course, unlimited. If land can remain unowned then when 'v >
is owned and no tax is collected;

,19

no land

consequently imposes an upper bound on

24

While Feldstein (1977) and Chamley and Wright (1983) demonstrate that a
land tax raises steady—state welfare in a closed economy, they also show that

such a tax does not constitute a Pareto improvement. This is likely to be the

case when land is traded, as well. If the tax is announced in advance of its
imposition, or if the tax revenue is distributed to workers at the time the

tax is announced, retirees owning land experience a capital loss for which

they receive no compensation. Their welfare drops because of the tax. If,
however, the tax is imposed immediately upon its announcement and retirees are
given the tax revenue, the potential for a Pareto—improving land tax, from a
national perspective, emerges.

The tax creates an immediate capital loss for retirees in total amount

where

is the initial amount of land owned nationally. If

> r*, of course, this magnitude exceeds tax revenue, t.

Even if retired

land owners are given the tax revenue, it does not compensate them for their

capital loss. They are net losers. If

< r*, however, tax receipts exceed

the capital loss to nationals, and retirees are net beneficiaries of a land

tax. Since steady-state welfare rises as a consequence of the tax, and the
new steady state is achieved in one period, the tax yields, from a national

perspective, a Pareto improvement. The capital loss on the part of foreign
land—owners is, of course, the source of the gain to the initial retirees.
In summary, while a land tax raises steady state welfare, it typically

harms the retired generation at the time it is announced. For a national
Pareto improvement to emerge requires that (i) the tax is not anticipated,
(ii) tax revenue is distributed to retirees, and (iii) the share of
nationally—owned domestic land is less than the world interest rate.

25

V. Conclusion

Capital and land serve both as factors of production and as stores of

value. The primary distinction between capital and land is that the supply of
the first is determined by household saving and foreign investment. Nature
determines the supply of land. Models of international trade and investment
have typically incorporated land and capital only in their roles as factors of

production, not as competing assets in household portfolios. Once a role for
land as an asset is recognized, standard results on the implications of

international investment can change significantly. This paper has examined
the effects of international investment when land is both a factor of

production and an asset in fixed supply. International investment raises the

wage, but lowers the return on land and capital. The first effect is more
pronounced when the share of labor in agriculture, the land—using sector, is

large relative to the labor share in manufacturing, which uses capital. When
this effect dominates foreign investment is more likely to raise welfare, and
increases in the labor force and the price of the land—using commodity are

more likely to reduce the amount of foreign investment. At the same time
foreign investment in land is more likely to reduce the steady—state price of

land when agriculture has a larger labor share than manufacturing. Taxing
land raises steady—state welfare and is likely to reduce foreign investment.

REFERENCES

Bhagwati, Jagdish N. and Brecher, Richard A., uNational Welfare in an Open
Economy in the Presence of Foreign—Owned Factors of Production," Journal
of International Economics, February 1980, 10, 103—115.
"Foreign Ownership and the Theory of Trade and Welfare," Journal
of Political Economy, 1981, 89, 497—511.

Bhagwati, Jagdish N. and Tironi, Ernesto, "Tariff Change, Foreign Capital and
Immiserization: A Theoretical Analysis," Journal of Development
Economics, March 1980, 7, 71—83.
Brecher, Richard A. and Findlay, Ronald, "Tariffs, Foreign Capital and
National Welfare with Sector—Specific Factors," Journal of International
Economics, May 1983, 14, 277—288.
Buiter, Willern H., "Time Preference and International Lending and Borrowing in
an Overlapping—Generations Model," Journal of Political Economy, August
1981, 89, 769-797.

Business Week, "U.S. Realty Continues to Tempt Foreigners," October 1, 1979,

260, 51.
"Can Oklahoma Block Alien Land Holdings? Proceeding Against
Canada's Hillcrest Investment Limited," December 31, 1979, 33.
"Big Money is Sneaking into U.S. Properties," July 12, 1982,
2747, 36-37.

Calvo, Guillermo A., Kotlikoff, Lawrence, and Rodriguez, Carlos Alfredo, "The
Incidence of a Tax on Pure Rent: A New (?) Reason for an Old Answer,"
Journal of Political Economy, August 1979, 87, 869-874.
Chamley, Christophe and Wright, Brian fl., "Fiscal Incidence in a Dynamic Life
Cycle with Land," mimeo, Yale University, 1983.

Dutton, John, "The Optimal Taxation of International Investment Income: A
Comment," Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1982, 373—380.
Optimal Taxes on Foreign Investment in an Overlapping
Generations Model," mimeo, North Carolina State University, 1984.
Eaton, Jonathan, "A Dynamic Specific—Factors Model of International Trade,"
National Bureau of Economic Research Discussion Paper No. 1479, October
1984.

Feldstein, Martin, "The Surprising Incidence of a Tax on Pure Rent: A New
4nswer to an Old Question," Journal of Political Economy, April 1977, 85,
349-360.

Jones, Ronald W., "A Three-Factor Model in Theory, Trade and History," in
Jagdish N. Bhagwati, Trade Balance of Payments and Growth, Amsterdam:
North—Holland, 1971, 3—21.

Kareken, John and Wallace, Neil, "Portfolio Autarky: A Welfare Analysis,"
Journal of International Economics, February 1977, 7, 19—43.
Srinivasan, T.N., "International Factor Movements, Commodity Trades and
Commercial Policy in a Specific Factor Model," Journal of International
Economics, May 1983, 14, 289—312.
Tobin, James, "Money and Economic Growth," Econometrica, October 1965, 33,
67 1-684.

APPENDIX

Equations (11) and (12) in the text may be linearized around K and

as

follows:

(Al)

x4 = L(l

(A2)

y =

where

x Kt -

-

c)wKxt

-

K

-

LcrKxt+l

rK]x+l

xyt

+

- q.

E

and

—

These equations constitute a second-order system of linear homogeneous

difference equations. Their solution has the form:

(A3)

Pi —

(A4)

+

x = A1(p1)t

A2(p2)t

11

' A,(p1)

yt =

4-

+

P,'

—

r 12

A2(p2)

where p1 and p2 are the roots of the equation.

p2 -

(r11

+

r22)p

where

L(1_c)wK

r

1+Lc'r
rK
12

1 +

Lc'rK

+

r11(l÷r)

= 0

-

r)Fii

F21

F22

1 +

r

+

r12r21/r11

and with p1 and p2 defined so that p1 < p2. The scalars A1 and A2 are
determined by boundary conditions.

At any period t the capital stock Kt, and hence x, are predetermined.
The price of land

and hence t' are determined by assetmarket equilibrium

each period. At period t = 0 A1 must therefore satisfy the condition

A1 =xo -A.
2
A necessary and sufficient condition for the existence of a unique stable
non—oscillating convergence path to steady state is that 0 < p1 < 1 < p2.

If p1 < 0 the system oscillates. The condition

> 0 is necessary and

sufficient to preclude oscillation. This condition in turn is guaranteed by
the two conditions

(A5)

1c

which states that the marginal propensity to save is nonnegative, and

(A6)

1+crK>O

which requires that an increase in the interest rate not have a highly
negative effect on savings.
If p1 > 0 and p2 < 1 then for

value of A2 equations (A3) and (A4)

converge to steady state while if p1 > 1 no path converges unless A2 = 0.

A

0.

unique convergence path therefore requires that 0 < p1 < 1 < p2 and A2

If (A5) and (A6) are satisfied a necessary and sufficient condition for a

unique stable non—oscillating convergence path is that t > 0 where t is
defined in equation (17).
To

verify that A > 0

-

A(p)

Since

is necessary and sufficient define the function

(r11 + r22)p

+

r11(1+r)

A(p) =0 defines p1 and p2, for p e (p1,p2), A(p)

< 0. If p1 < 1 < p2

then A(1) < 0. Since
A

A(1) =
-(1

+ Lc'rK)

Along with (A6), A > 0 implies and is implied by A(1) < 0.

FOOTNOTES

1. The amount of land in the United States that is owned by foreigners
apparently grew substantially during the 1970s. Concern over increased
ownership of U.S. land by foreigners has led to closer monitoring of land-

ownership patterns by the U.S. Department of Commerce. Legislation
restricting the sale of agricultural land to foreigners has been considered in

California. The state of Oklahoma has tried to enforce a clause in its state
constitution prohibiting non—resident foreigners from owning land in that

state. A number of countries currently restrict foreign ownership of land,
particularly land used in agriculture. See articles in Business Week (1979a,

1979b, 1982) for a discussion.

2. Foreign investment has been analyzed in two—factor, one—asset OLG models
by John Kareken and Neil Wallace (1977) and by Willem Buiter (1981). Kareken
and Wallace ignore capital, so that changes in the price of land and the
amount that is owned by foreigners have no effect on factor supplies.

Buiter's model, in contrast, has no land. Again, there is no asset
substitution effect of foreign investment on asset supplies. The effect of
foreign

investment on steady—state welfare that these authors find is

consequently quite different.
3.

Elsewhere I have explored the implications of changes in the terms of

trade and in factor supplies in a dynamic specific—factors framework with

portfolio autarky: i.e., in the absence of trade in claims on land or capital
flows (Eaton, 1984).

4.

In a series of articles Jagdish Bhagwati and Ernesto Tironi (1980) and

Bhagwati and Richard Brecher (1980, 1981) investigate the implications of
foreign-owned factors of production for trade and welfare.

Their analysis is

static, and treats the amount of foreign investment as exogenous. The results
are consequently quite different.

5. John Dutton (1982, 1984) derives optimal tax policies toward foreign and
domestic capital income in a two-factor OLG model.

6. Conditions for the existence of a K and

that satisfy (13) and (14) are

derived elsewhere (Eaton, 1984). A condition for the stability of the steady
state is provided in the Appendix.

=

7. Since

K

.wK(LLM)

and rKK +

wKLM

icw

wL

w(L-L)

wr

rK

it

0,

M]

which is positive or negative as

wLM > w(L — LM)
rK

8.

<

It

If the amount of land bought by foreigners were less than the amount that

equated interest rates, then the domestic capital stock would be lower, since
more national savings would be channeled into purchases of domestic land.

The

domestic interest rate would consequently be higher. Equation (7) would then

imply a net rate of return on domestic land above r*. An incentive for more

foreign investment would emerge. By the same argument, if foreigners bought
more than the appropriate amount, the rate of return on land would be less

than r*. Foreign investment would fall.

9. Note that factor prices and the domestic capital stock, and consequently
the price of land, assume their new steady—state values immediately upon any

anticipated change in exogenous variables. From equation (24) the amount of
land owned by foreigners therefore achieves its new steady—state value after
nne%nt%_
II fl1l
IJU. %JIIC

10.

The analysis considers the effect of changes in exogenous variables on

both the amount of land owned by foreigners and the value of their

investment. When the price of land itself changes these two magnitudes can
respond in different directions. Free trade in land, when it does not lead to
a total divestiture of land holdings by nationals, leads to domestic factor
prices that are the same as those that would emerge if capital, rather than

land, were internationally mobile. The value of land owned by foreigners then
equals the amount of foreign borrowing that would occur if capital were
mobile.

11. The sign of c is the same as that of

•

ôc0

+ (—)R

ôc c

-

(-)R°
C°

where x1 is the consumption of the agricultural commodity in the th period of
life, i =

y,o,

and

vi ci

= — CC

= y,o

vi

C

the elasticity of the marginal utility of consumption expenditure in period i.

dK

12. Differentiating, —

=-

rKG(L -

dp

L

LM)

M

13. If the increase in the world interest rate is not anticipated, the
retired generation at the time the change occurs benefits if the steady—state

land price rises, but the effect on their welfare is ambiguous otherwise. If
the increase is anticipated the retired generation when the change occurs
necessarily benefits while the retired generation in the period in which the
change

is first anticipated gains or loses depending upon whether land prices

rise or fall.
14. These qualitative effects emerge independently of how the proceeds
tax

of the

are distributed. Feldstein (1977) incorrectly asserted that the

traditional
generation.

results reemerge if

the tax revenue is given to the retired

Calvo, et al. (1979) correct this error.

15. The effect is similar to the so—called Tohin effect" of inflation on the
capital stock: higher anticipated inflation channels savings out of cash
balances into capital investment (James Tobin, 1965). Chamley and Wright
(1983) emphasize the quantitatively trivial potential for inflation to affect
the capital stock in contrast with the potential effect of a land tax.

16. The effect of the tax on the steady—state value of foreign investment and
welfare is the same regardless of whether capital mobility takes the form of
borrowing or direct foreign investment in land, barring a corner solution in
which all domestic land is foreign—owned.

17. These expressions apply only if X < 1, so that there is net foreign
investment in domestic land. If A > 1 the last term in these equations should
become -

— (X_1)q* where q* is the price of foreign land. This change

does not affect the qualitative conclusions stated here, as the interested
reader can readily verify.

18. The reason is that when tax revenue is distributed to retirees its effect
on savings is muted; the delay reduces the present value of the payment.

19.

If land—owners must sell their land then a negative price of land must be

admitted. The upper bound on -

in

this case is determined by the wealth of

land—owners at the period in which the tax is initially imposed.

