                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      HE WHO COUNTS ELECTS:
  DETERMINANTS OF FRAUD IN THE 1922 COLOMBIAN PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION

                                          Isaías N. Chaves
                                         Leopoldo Fergusson
                                         James A. Robinson

                                         Working Paper 15127
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15127


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2009




We are particularly grateful to Eduardo Posada-Carbó for telling us about the data on the 1922 election
in the National Archive in Bogotá. We also thank Daron Acemoglu, James Alt, Jeffry Frieden, and
Daniel Ziblatt for their comments and María Angélica Bautista, Camilo García, María Alejandra Palacio,
and Olga Lucía Romero for their invaluable help with the data. All translations from Spanish texts
are our own. We thank the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research for their financial support. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Isaías N. Chaves, Leopoldo Fergusson, and James A. Robinson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
He Who Counts Elects: Determinants of Fraud in the 1922 Colombian Presidential Election
Isaías N. Chaves, Leopoldo Fergusson, and James A. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 15127
July 2009, Revised December 2012
JEL No. H0

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper constructs measures of the extent of ballot stuffing (fraudulent votes) and electoral coercion
at the municipal level using data from Colombia's 1922 Presidential elections. Our main findings are
that the presence of the state reduced the extent of ballot stuffing, but that of the clergy, which was
closely imbricated in partisan politics, increased coercion. We also show that landed elites to some
extent substituted for the absence of the state and managed to reduce the extent of fraud where they
were strong. At the same time, in places which were completely out of the sphere of the state, and
thus partisan politics, both ballot stuffing and coercion were relatively low. Thus the relationship between
state presence and fraud is not monotonic.


Isaías N. Chaves                                     James A. Robinson
Stanford University                                  Harvard University
Department of Political Science                      Department of Government
Encina Hall West                                     N309, 1737 Cambridge Street
616 Serra St.                                        Cambridge, MA 02138
Stanford, CA 94305                                   and NBER
isa.chaves.v@gmail.com                               jrobinson@gov.harvard.edu

Leopoldo Fergusson
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-371
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
leopoldo@mit.edu
            “What the conservatives won with arms cannot be taken away by a few slips
        of paper.”1


1       Introduction
The preponderance of the literature on democracy in political science has focused on the
origins and timing of the introduction of universal suffrage (e.g., Rueschemeyer, Stephens
and Stephens, 1992, Collier, 1999, Acemoglu and Robinson, 2006). While this approach is
surely justified in many cases, it also leaves aside many puzzles. For instance, Argentina had
universal male suffrage after the promulgation of the 1853 constitution, as did Mexico after
its 1857 constitution, but neither country is typically counted as a democracy in the 19th
century. In fact, the typical date for the introduction of democracy in Argentina is the passing
of the Saenz Peña Law in 1914 whose main aim was to eliminate electoral corruption and
fraud, things which had previously negated the effects of universal male suffrage. This law
had profound consequences, destabilizing the political status quo and allowing the Radical
Party to assume power, a process ultimately leading to the coup of 1930 (Smith, 1978). This
example, and others like it, such as the introduction of the secret ballot in Chile in 1957
(Baland and Robinson, 2008, 2012), suggest that the consequences of variation in electoral
fraud are possibly as large as that of the variation in the formal institutions of democracy.
    In this paper we develop a theoretical model of one type of electoral fraud, ballot stuffing,
or creating fake votes. We study the trade-off between using fraud and offering standard
policy concessions, specifically providing public goods and we study the determinants of
fraud and public good provision. In the model two political parties compete for votes in
a national election. Both offer a policy vector, but the incumbent party also has local
political agents that can stuff ballots to inflate the national incumbent’s vote totals relative
to the opposition. We assume that ballot stuffing is costly and destroys income, but that
the stronger is the state the more it can penalize such illegal activities. The incumbent
rewards the local politicians with transfers in exchange for stuffed ballots. In the model we
distinguish between economic elites, who own assets such as land, and political elites who
run the local parties, but we also parameterize the extent to which these groups coincide,
or ‘overlap’. This creates a conflict of interest between these different sorts of elites since
    1
   In Spanish: “lo que los conservadores han ganado con las armas no se puede perder con papelitos.” El
Espectador, February 10, 1922, quoted on Blanco et al. (1922) p. 306.




                                                  1
economic elites suffer from the consequences of fraud, but do not necessarily benefit from it,
except to the extent that they overlap with the political elite. We therefore allow such elites
to lobby (influence) the local politicians to reduce fraud.
    The model generates three main testable results for the incidence of fraud. First, the
extent of ballot stuffing should be negatively correlated with the strength of the state. This
is because greater state strength makes stuffing more costly, reducing the extent of it in
equilibrium. Second, higher land inequality should be correlated with less ballot stuffing.
This is because when inequality is higher, local economic elites suffer greater losses from the
chaos that goes along with fraudulent elections and they oppose it more. Third, the greater
is the extent of overlap, the more ballot stuffing there is, other things equal. Greater overlap
means that local economic and political elites coincide more, implying that economic elites
put more weight on the rents generated by supplying votes to national politicians and they
therefore prefer more of it. These results have intuitive corollaries for the provision of public
goods. Public good provision is higher, the greater is the strength of the state, the higher is
land inequality, and the lower is overlap.
    To test the implications of the model we construct a unique, though necessarily imperfect,
measure of the extent of fraudulent voting or ‘ballot stuffing’ at the municipal level in the
1922 Colombian presidential election. We do this by combining data collected on the vote
totals reported by municipal electoral boards (Jurados Electorales) to the central government
with estimates of the maximum potential franchise from the 1918 population census. This
gives us at least a lower bound on the extent of ballot stuffing. For 508 out of the total
755 municipalities of Colombia for which we have data we find the reported vote totals to
be larger than the maximum number of people who could possibly have voted. In such
municipalities there was obvious ballot stuffing and this was consequential. The ratio of
stuffed ballots to total votes is very large, reaching over 35% on average. Indeed, according
to this methodology the total number of stuffed ballots was 230,007 which was larger than the
winning margin of 188,502 by which the Conservative candidate Pedro Nel Ospina defeated
the Liberal loser Benjamı́n Herrera.
    Table 1 shows some of the basic data from this exercise by Colombian department. One
can see here that there is a lot of variation in our estimated number of stuffed ballots. For
instance in Antioquia, traditionally a bastion of the Conservative party, the total number of
votes cast was 76,420 of which we calculate close to 11,000 were fraudulent. On the other
hand, in the Liberal stronghold of Santander of the 55,492 votes ‘cast’ almost 24,000 were
fake, a far greater proportion. Generally, ballot stuffing is larger in the eastern Andean


                                               2
region (Boyacá, Cundinamarca and the Santanderes) as well as in the Coast (Bolivar and
Magdalena).
    Though we have data on ballot stuffing for most departments, to test the predictions of
the model we focus solely on the department of Cundinamarca. The reason for this is that we
have detailed historical information of land inequality from Acemoglu, Bautista, Querubı́n
and Robinson (2008) who also collected the names of the mayors in each municipality over the
period 1875 to 1895. By matching these data on the names of landowners we can construct a
measure of the extent to which politicians were large landowners, our measure of overlap. We
measure the extent of state capacity by the number of state officials and soldiers who were
present in a municipality from the 1918 Colombian Census which also gives us data on one
type of public good, the vaccination rate. We also use richer data on public goods available
from the next reliable Colombian census (1937) as a check on the basic results. Finally, we
also use various sources of information, particularly the proceedings of a conference held in
the Colombian city of Ibagué after the election, to code a variable measuring incidents of
electoral violence or coercion (Blanco, Solano and Rodrı́guez, 1922). This conference, held
by the Liberal party in the wake of the 1922 election contains numerous accounts of both
ballot stuffing, fraud and coercion. This data suffers from being constructed from probably
biased reports, so is much less objective than our data on ballot stuffing.
    Our empirical work finds robust evidence which is consistent with all the predictions
made by our model. Nevertheless, we are cautious in giving the correlations we uncover a
causal interpretation since we use ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions and we proceed
by assuming that our main explanatory variables, land inequality, overlap and the strength
of the state, are all econometrically exogenous.
    Our theoretical results and empirical findings in Cundinamarca, Colombia, contrast with
and complement the existing literature on electoral fraud. Most related is the seminal re-
search of Lehoucq and Molina (2002) who studied the intensity and spatial distribution of
over a thousand legal accusations of ballot rigging in Costa Rica between 1901 and 1946.
They find that fraud accusations were more prevalent in the three poorest and least popu-
lated provinces of the country where social differentiation was more pronounced and it was
harder to protect civil liberties. Ziblatt (2009) using data on complaints of electoral mis-
conduct from pre-1914 Germany finds that electoral fraud was greater in areas with high
land concentration. His interpretation of this is that strong local elites captured local state
institutions and used these to commit fraud and sustain their power. Finally, Baland and
Robinson (2008, 2012) find that traditional landed elites in Chile coerced workers into voting


                                              3
for conservative parties prior to 1958.2
    We make several contributions to this literature. First, our model suggests that a key
determinant of the extent of ballot stuffing and coercion is the strength (here measured by
the presence) of the central state, which appears not to have been directly tested before.
Second, unlike Ziblatt or Baland and Robinson, we allow for political elites and economic
elites to be different actors. Though it is often assumed in the study of Latin America that
they are always the same, there is a lot of variation in this.3 Our model allows us to vary
land inequality and the political participation of the landed elite (overlap) independently,
while Ziblatt and Baland and Robinson interpret an increase in inequality to imply both
higher inequality and greater landed power. Though their assumption is probably a good
one for late 19th century Germany or 1950s Chile, it is not a good one for Colombia where
a large historical literature emphasizes that political elites were distinct from landed elites.4
Our unique dataset allows us to actually measure the extent to which this is true. Quite
tellingly, in our data our measure of overlap between political and economic elites on the
one hand, and land inequality on the other, are not significantly correlated (they exhibit a
correlation coefficient of -7.26% with associated p-value of 0.5).
    We find that holding constant landed political power, higher land inequality is correlated
with less electoral fraud, at least in the sense of ballot stuffing. We believe that the reason
for this is that local economic elites in Colombia were not closely associated with political
parties. Therefore, they were not in a position to ‘capture’ local institutions in the way
Ziblatt (2009) describes. Moreover, the central state was much weaker. Unlike Prussian
Junkers or the Hacendados of Chile’s Central Valley, Colombian landowners could not rely
on basic things such as social order and they had little interest in encouraging the anarchy
that went along with electoral fraud.5 Third, unlike Lehoucq and Molina, but similar to
Ziblatt (2009), we do not find a lot of evidence that ‘modernization’ reduced fraud.6
   2
     Other related work is that of Cox and Kousser (1981) and there is also a rich case study literature on
electoral fraud in the United States, see Bensel (2004). See also Posada-Carbó (2000) on Latin America and
Lehoucq (2003) for a conceptual overview.
   3
     Historians of Latin America have rebelled against the simplistic assumption that landed elites necessarily
dominated politics (see Brading, 1973, Safford, 1985, Schwartz, 1996, Hora, 2001). Nevertheless, it was true
in some cases, see Bauer (1975) and Ratcliff and Zeitlin (1988) on Chile.
   4
     See the seminal work of Safford (1972, 1974) and Delpar (1981) and Uribe-Uran (2000), the latter book
emphasizing that Colombia politics after independence was dominated by lawyers not landowners.
   5
     Hirst (2006), in his study of the origins of the secret ballot in the Australian state of Victoria, argues
that it was economic elites who suffered from the anarchy created by fraud and coercion in elections who
pushed for the introduction of effective secret ballots.
   6
     Unfortunately it is not possible to investigate in Colombia several of the issues which the literature
raises. For instance, it is impossible to collect meaningful data on either turnout or political competition


                                                      4
    Our approach also has the advantage that for our measure of ballot stuffing we have
actual data on the extent of fraud as opposed to complaints about fraud. Since accusations
of fraud may be used strategically, it is useful to have a relatively objective source (though
our data on coercion does come from such accusations).
    There are clearly many ways to undermine the true outcome of elections. In a more
general model one could choose whether or not to use coercion to keep voters from the polls
or instead to force them to turn out and vote in a particular way. In addition instead of
using sticks, political parties can use carrots, buying votes or rewarding people for turning
out (see Stokes, 2005, Baland and Robinson, 2008, 2012, Dekel, Jackson and Wolinsky, 2008,
Dunning and Stokes, 2008, Nichter, 2008, Gans-Morse, Mazzuca, and Nichter, 2011, Diaz-
Cayeros, Estévez and Magaloni, 2012, for models of some of these strategies). Which strategy
is optimal will depend on the institutional details. For example, ballot stuffing, if it can be
used, is obviously a cheaper strategy than buying votes or turnout. In situations where the
rule of law is very weak, as in the case of Colombia in 1922, the focus of our empirical study,
or many other Latin American countries, vote or turnout buying will therefore be dominated
by other strategies. Moreover, if there is a reasonably secret ballot, it may be difficult to
check how a coerced person votes, in which case it may be more reliable to keep people away,
which is observable, and stuff ballots. Coercing people at a voting table may also be more
likely to cause a riot. The ability to coerce people to vote in a particular way depends on the
extent of political competition and socioeconomic control over voters. For example, Baland
and Robinson (2008) shows that economic elites brought their workers to the polls and told
them how to vote. In comparison to Colombia, these Chilean elites had much greater control
over their workers and also did not face opposition from other parties locally. Our focus on
ballot-stuffing is partially because the historical and case study literature suggests it was of
salient importance historically in Colombia and partially for the practical reason that we
were able to construct a unique measure of the extent of ballot stuffing and we are also able
to measure public good provision. It is no doubt true that coercion also took place but
rather than model the extent of coercion endogenously we use this variable as a covariate in
the empirical analysis.
    Finally, our paper builds on the work of the political economy of Colombia by Acemoglu,
during this period since elections were either very fraudulent, or were uncontested. Wilkinson (2004) for
instance, finds that electoral violence is more likely in close elections in India and Ziblatt (2009) also finds
more fraud in more competitive elections. Since we have no way to know if an election is close, we cannot
investigate this claim with our data. Moreover, since we are examining data for a national election, it is not
clear if these ideas are relevant in our setting.



                                                       5
Bautista, Querubı́n and Robinson (2008). We borrow heavily from their data construction
for Cundinamarca and several of our findings are very consistent with theirs.
    The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section we develop our model of ballot stuffing
and coercion whose comparative statics capture the key hypotheses we test. Section 3 gives
some historical background to the 1922 presidential election, describes the institutional set-
up and contemporary accounts of fraud. Section 4 discussed the data construction and some
descriptive statistics. Section 5 presents our econometric results and section 6 concludes.


2     The Model
2.1    Setup
We consider a simple probabilistic voting model (Lindbeck and Weibull, 1987) of political
competition between two parties, the incumbent (I) and his opponent (O). While real
ballots will be cast, the incumbent can also stuff ballots. More specifically, we assume the
incumbent party has two types of politicians, local and national. If he wins the elections,
the national incumbent politician gives a transfer t to the local politician. In exchange, the
local politician provides the ballot stuffing (S) that will favor the incumbent party during
national elections.
    National politicians must also offer a policy platform to voters. For simplicity, we will
assume that the tax rate on income is fixed at τ, and thus the policy platform is simply a
level of public goods G from which voters derive some utility. National politicians get some
exogenous rents (R) from power, and they choose policy to maximize their probability of
winning and obtain these rents. The local incumbent politicians, on the other hand, want
to maximize the rents t they obtain from national politicians.
    Turning to voters, we introduce inequality and assume that y, the average income, is the
weighted sum of the income y r of a mass of λ rich individuals and y p of a mass (1 − λ) of
poor individuals. To capture inequality in the simplest possible way, we assume that the rich
hold a share θ of total income, that is λy r = θy. We assume that, θ > λ so that y r > y p and
define θ̃ = (θ/λ) to be the ratio of the rich’s share of income to its share in total population,
which is our measure of inequality.
    The utility that each voter i in group j ∈ {p, r} derives from policy is given by

                                 uj (G) = (1 − τ ) y j + u (G) ,                             (1)


                                               6
where u (G) is the utility from the public good which is increasing and strictly concave with
derivatives denoted u0 > 0 and u00 < 0. Aside from the utility from policy, we introduce
a parameter (σ i ) to capture the underlying “ideological” bias of individual i towards the
opponent party, as well as a “popularity” shock (δ) for the opponent party. We assume that
each σ i is independent and uniformly distributed with density 1 and centered at 0; δ is also
uniformly distributed with density 1 and centered at 0.
   We also assume that ballot stuffing comes at a cost. In particular, it generates disruption
                                                                      2
and disorder which reduces income. When stuffing is S, a fraction γ S2 of income is destroyed,
such that net income is:
                                               S2
                                                 
                                          1−γ       y.
                                               2
In the theoretical analysis below we think of the parameter γ, the marginal cost of stuffing,
as a reduced form way of measuring the strength of the state. The stronger is the state, the
higher is γ and the more costly it is to stuff ballots.
    We think of the rich individuals in this setup as the local economic elite. They are in-
fluential in local politics to the extent that they can act collectively and lobby the local
politician to stop coercion and ballot stuffing. The rationale for this lobbying is that local
economic elites suffer from the disruption caused by ballot stuffing, while local politicians
only care about rents. We follow the approach of Grossman and Helpman (2001) and in their
setup the lobby, here the economic elite, offers a transfer of income to the local politicians
in exchange for a reduction in the extent of ballot stuffing. Grossman and Helpman’s as-
sumptions imply in our context that the local politician’s objective function ends up being a
weighted function of his utility and that of the economic elite in society. Moreover, to allow
for some “overlap” between the local politician and the local elite, we posit that a fraction µ
of the rents from the national politician are obtained directly by the local elites, with (1 − µ)
going to the local politician. With these assumptions in place, the local incumbent politician
maximizes,
                               ulocal = (1 − µ) t + α [ur (G) + µt]                           (2)

where ur (G) is the utility of a representative member of the rich elite as given by (1) and
α > 17 . Following this lobbying game between the local politicians and elite, the following
   7
       More specifically, to derive (2) suppose that the local politician has a utility of the following form

                                          ulocal = C np + C elite + a · uelite
where C np = t is the contribution that he gets from the national politician. C elite , on the other hand, is the
contribution that the elite can make as a ”lobby” to the local politician. Finally, a captures to what extent


                                                           7
electoral game is played.

   1. The incumbent politician promises rents t to the local politician if he wins.

   2. The opponent and incumbent national politicians promise GO and GI , respectively, to
      voters.

   3. The local politician chooses ballot stuffing S.

   4. Shocks are realized and elections take place.

   5. Politicians fulfill their promises.


2.2     Probability of winning
A citizen i in group p will vote for I only if

                      (1 − τ ) y p + up GI > (1 − τ ) y p + up GO + σ i + δ.
                                                                


This defines a critical value of σ i , σ̃ p , such that all poor voters with σ i < σ̃ p vote for the
                                                                            
incumbent party. This critical level is defined by σ̃ p = u GI − u GO − δ. In the case of
the rich, recall that they obtain a fraction µ of the transfers from the national incumbent
politician. Assuming that such transfer is distributed evenly among rich individuals, the
corresponding critical value for the rich is σ̃ r = u GI − u GO + µ λt − δ. Using these
                                                                       

critical values and the distribution of σ i , we can find the share of real votes in each group
for party I, bjI , as:

                                      1
                              bpI =     + u GI − u GO − δ,
                                                    
                                      2
                                      and
                                      1           t
                              brI       + u GI + µ − u GO − δ.
                                                          
                                    =
                                      2           λ

Let vI and vO be the number of votes for the incumbent and his opponent. These totals
are made up of ballots cast (bP = λbrP + (1 − λ) bpP for P ∈ {I, O}), but also in the case of
the local politician cares directly about the elite’s utility.
  As in Grossman and Helpman (2001) it can be shown that the resulting policy can be found as the solution
to the following welfare function,
                                              C np + (1 + a) uelite .
Therefore, in (2) α = 1 + a. Thus our assumption that α > 1 can be restated as saying that the local
politician is not completely indifferent about the elite’s utility.


                                                    8
the incumbent of ballots stuffed. Hence, vI = bI + S. The probability that party I wins,
π = Pr [vI − vO ≥ 0] , is then computed using the distribution of δ as

                                  1+S
                                      + u GI − u GO + µt
                                                  
                             π=                                                                   (3)
                                   2

2.3    The local incumbent politician
Recall that the local politician wants to maxS ulocal = maxS (1 − µ) t + α (ur (G) + µt) .
Substituting the utility of a representative member of the rich elite, recognizing that the
transfers are only obtained when the incumbent wins, and rearranging, we have:

                                                    S2
                                                                                           
                                                                  I                   O
                                                                                         
      max [1 + µ (α − 1)] πt + α (1 − τ ) θ̃y 1 − γ          + πu G       + (1 − π) u G
       S                                            2

where π is given by (3). The first order condition of this problem gives the following solution
for stuffing as a function of t, GI , and GO :
                                                            
                          1 [1 + µ (α − 1)] t − α u GO − u GI
                      S=                                                                          (4)
                         2γ θ̃             α (1 − τ ) y
                                                       
Note that ballot stuffing is decreasing in inequality θ̃ and increasing in national politician
transfers (t). However, this is for a fixed level of public good platforms, GO and GI , which
also depend on parameters and will be determined below. Also notice that when µ = 1, the
full overlap case, α as expected plays no role in the solution, as we can think of the local
elite and local politician as the same player. Also notice that since α > 1, more overlap
as captured by an increase in µ increases the saliency of transfers t and therefore increases
ballot stuffing. In addition a higher marginal cost of the instrument of fraud, captured by
γ, reduces the use of such an instrument. Finally, ballot stuffing is smaller the larger is the
gap between the level of public good offered by the opponent and the incumbent.


2.4    The national politicians
To find the equilibrium of the game, we now continue by backwards induction and examine
the national politicians’ problems. The opponent has a trivial problem, as it maximizes
(1 − π) R subject to τ y = GO . Since his election probability (1 − π) is increasing in GO , he
chooses
                                          GO = τ y.

                                              9
The national incumbent politician, in turn, will solve

                                                              max πR
                                                              GI ,t
                                                              subject to
                                                τ y = GI + t

The first-order conditions for an interior optimum are, using the expressions for S and π,
and with λg the Lagrange multiplier for the government budget constraint,
                                                      
                                    1      1      1
                                                    + 1 u0 GI R = λg
                                                             
                                   4θ̃ (1 − τ ) y γ
                                                            
                                      1 [1 + µ (α − 1)] 1
                                                          + µ R = λg
                                     4θ̃ α (1 − τ ) y γ

Combining, and summarizing, we find that in the interior solution the equilibrium vector of
                              
promised policies is GI , t , GO that satisfies:
                                                                                                 
                  0    I
                                            1                1 + µ (α − 1) 1
                 u G           =   1
                                                                              + 4µθ̃ (1 − τ ) y              (5)
                                   γ
                                       + 4θ̃ (1 − τ ) y             α       γ
                           t = τ y − GI                                                                      (6)
                      GO = τ y                                                                               (7)

    Note from this solution that the incumbent promises less public goods than the oppo-
nent, because the opponent is not passing on transfers in exchange for ballot stuffing and
coercion. Moreover, it can be shown that the incumbent’s public good offer is increasing
in the parameter that captures the marginal cost of ballot stuffing, γ . More interesting,
GI is also increasing in inequality θ̃8 . Of course, the transfers to the local politician have
the opposite comparative statics in these parameters, namely they are decreasing in γ and
θ̃. Regarding overlap, (5) shows that an increase in overlap µ reduces the provision of the
public good and thus increases transfers.
                                                                                                      
                                                                                       1+µ(α−1)
     To see these results, let x = γ1 , z = 4θ̃ (1 − τ ) y, then (5) is: u0 GI = x+z
                                                                                  1
   8
                                                                              
                                                                                          α     x + µz   . Taking
the derivative of the right hand side with respect to x, and simplifying, one can show that the condition for
it to be positive (and thus for GI to fall when γ increases) is just z (1 − µ) > 0, which is clearly satisfied
since µ ∈ (0, 1). Similarly, taking the derivative of the right hand side with respect to z, the condition for it
to be negative (and thus for GI to increase when θ̃ rises) is found to be x (1 − µ) > 0, which is also trivially
satisfied.



                                                          10
    As for stuffing, it will be given by (4) evaluated at the equilibrium values (5)-(7). With
some algebra, it can be shown that the indirect effects that the equilibrium values of t and
GI as given by (5)-(7) have on such expression do not change our conclusions on the effects
of inequality, overlap, and marginal costs derived before. We can therefore summarize our
results in the following Proposition.

Proposition 1 Consider the electoral game described before between the incumbent national
politician, his opponent, the local incumbent politician and the local economic elite. Then,
                                                                                        
the unique subgame perfect equilibrium of the game features a set of policies GI , t , GO
given by (5)-(7), and ballot stuffing S given by (4). Moreover, these equilibrium quantities
satisfy:

                            ∂GI         ∂GI           ∂GI
                                   > 0,      > 0, and     < 0;
                             ∂ θ̃        ∂γ            ∂µ
                              ∂t        ∂t           ∂t
                                   < 0,     < 0, and    > 0;
                              ∂ θ̃      ∂γ           ∂µ
                             ∂S         ∂S            ∂S
                                   < 0,     < 0, and     > 0.
                             ∂ θ̃       ∂γ            ∂µ


Proof. In the text and Appendix A
    Proposition 1 captures the main results of interest. Consider first inequality. It says that
higher inequality is associated with more public good provision and less electoral fraud. The
intuition for this is that since more inequality implies a richer economic elite, they care more
about the costs of disruption and put a check on the local politician’s stuffing and coercion,
who now puts less effort into committing electoral fraud. In addition, the national politician
observes this and is less willing to give transfers to the local politician, focusing instead on
increasing public goods to increase its election probability. This strategic effect also reduces
the local politicians incentive to commit fraud in search of rents.
    The increase in the marginal cost of fraud, which we associate with state strength, has
a similar effect on public good provision, transfers, and electoral fraud. Intuitively, buying
votes from local politicians becomes more expensive when the marginal cost of ballot stuffing
increases. This reduces the transfers that national politicians send to local politicians in
exchange for fraud, reducing the equilibrium level of fraud, and enticing politicians to focus
on public good provision instead to attract votes.
    Finally, greater overlap means that local economic and political elites coincide more,

                                              11
implying that economic elites put more weight on the rents generated by supplying votes to
national politicians. Hence, they are willing to tolerate more of it in spite of the disorder
that it brings. In this case, the emphasis for getting electoral support is shifted from public
good provision to ballot stuffing. For these reasons, with more overlap we expect more ballot
stuffing, more transfers to from national to local politicians, and less public good provision.


3       Historical Background and Context
3.1      Context of the 1922 Election9
Colombia has had a long history of elections (Deas, 1993). However, if elections have been
traditional in Colombia, fraud has been an electoral tradition. In 1879, the following de-
scription could be found in the Diario de Cundinamarca:

            “elections in Colombia are ... terrible confrontations of press, agitation, in-
        trigue, letters, bribes, weapons, incentives for vengeance, politics, choler, men-
        ace” (Guerra, 1922, p. 608).

    The data we use to measure ballot stuffing comes from the 1922 presidential elections
which pitted the Conservative Pedro Nel Ospina against the Liberal Benjamı́n Herrera. The
election was unique in the period for featuring an open, competitive contest between the
Liberals and Conservatives. Prior to 1914 the election of the President was indirect. In
1914, the first direct elections of President since 1857 “took place with ‘an entire absence of
party strife and feeling”’ (Posada-Carbó, 1997, p. 261). For the 1918 elections, the Liberals,
led by Benjamı́n Herrera, decided to “try again the old tactic of supporting a Conservative
candidate, to promote divisions within the ruling party, which seemed impossible to beat
in open confrontation” (Melo, 1995). By 1922, however, Liberals were convinced that their
party had good chances of gaining office with fair elections, and fraud accusations were
widely publicized in the Liberal press. Finally, the 1926 elections “could be described as the
‘private act of a few public employees”’ (Posada-Carbó, 1997, p. 260). This leaves the 1922
elections to examine.
    9
   This section draws mainly from Bushnell (1993), Mazzuca and Robinson (2009), Melo (1995) and Posada-
Carbó (1997).




                                                  12
3.2     Electoral Legislation and State Strength
Legislative activity between the 1890s and 1916 reveals the ongoing concern of politicians
to control fraud and reflects the weakness of the state (see Montoya, 1938). The content
of the numerous reform proposals shows that irregularities in the making of voting lists,
vote buying, the strategic allocation of voting tables, double-voting, and participation of
the armed forces in elections were among the elements that, in the views of politicians,
corrupted elections. An indication of the extent of this fraud comes from the fact that in
despair at its inability of to stop local party officials and supporters from defrauding the
Liberals in congressional elections Conservative elites shared power with the Liberals via the
“incomplete vote.” (Mazzuca and Robinson, 2009).10 This system gave Liberals one third of
the seats in legislature, no matter how many votes they received.

3.2.1     Laws and Main Reforms, 1888-191611

There were persistent efforts to control or eliminate electoral fraud for the simple reason that
it threatened political stability. Law 7 of 1888 attempted to draft a comprehensive Electoral
Code to organize electoral institutions. Though its scope was more limited than that of the
Electoral Code to be adopted in 1916, Law 7 established the main electoral institutions and
their functions. For our purposes the most important feature of these laws were the Jurados
Electorales (electoral juries). One such jury was elected for each electoral district by the
departmental Junta de Distrito Electoral. It compiled the lists of voters, elected the Jurados
de Votación (voting overseers) to be allocated at each voting table, and counted the votes.
The Jurados Electorales, therefore, had a great deal of influence over the final vote tallies in
a municipality: they could decide whom to exclude from the voter rolls or, if they so chose,
they could create official voting tallies that suited their political alliances. Also, since the
lower rungs of this bureaucracy (e.g. the Jurados de Votación) were political appointees
of higher ones, this meant that if a party dominated the national legislature it ultimately
controlled the entire electoral system.
    An important reform was Law 85 of December 31 of 1916, proposed by the government
to counter a Liberal project, was opposed by Liberal senator Fabio Lozano on the basis that
  10
      Other scholars have emphasized as well the unruliness of these political bosses. Deas (1993, p. 213)
notes “A conservative governor admitted in 1854 that though these [caciques] were ‘friends’ he could have
no control over them” and Reyes (1978) concurs, and argues that, in the early twentieth Century, “it was
still hard for the Central government to confront a regional cacique” (p. 118).
   11
      This section draws mainly from Montoya (1938) and Registradurı́a Nacional del Estado Civil (1991).



                                                   13
it would not stop

           “the outrageous scandal of the prodigious multiplication of Conservative votes
       to drown the Liberal majorities in the most important centers of the country ...
       In election time we will still have what specialists call chocorazos in Magdalena;
       canastadas in Boyacá and Cundinamarca; milagros de Santa Isabel in Tolima”
       (AS, 1917: 1117).

    In spite of its deficiencies, Law 85 included several clauses aimed at reducing electoral
corruption. Apart from stipulating that voting lists should be published, article 179 declared
null elections in which the number of voters exceeded the number of those inscribed in the
electoral census. Fines were also established for Police and Army officials influencing their
subordinates in electoral matters, and imprisonment was established as the punishment for
some electoral practices such as falsification of electoral documents and violence against
electoral authorities.
    Before the 1922 elections, two Laws were adopted that reformed some aspects of Law 85
of 1916: Law 70 of 1917 and Law 96 of 1920. A very illustrative article in Law 70 in terms
of the politicians’ concern about ballot stuffing was added over the course of the debate
by Senator Arango and other senators (AS, 1917: 386, 392). The article disenfranchised
municipalities where the number of votes exceeded one third of the total population of the
respective municipality.12 To this end, the municipalities’ population would have to be
computed from the latest civil census available or, in its absence, from the latest national
census available.13
    In 1920, a group of Liberal politicians proposed a new modification of the Electoral Code
of 1916, which included the introduction of a cédula, an electoral ID, and a lowered threshold
for disenfranchising municipalities. The proposed threshold was 15% of the municipality’s
population for elections of members of Local Councils and Departmental Assemblies (in
which all males older than 21 years old could participate) and 10% of the population for
presidential and congressional elections (in which male citizens had to fulfill the age require-
ment plus one of the following: being literate, owning property of $1,000 pesos or more,
or earning a yearly income of over $300 pesos). Most of these modifications were derailed
by Conservatives, but Law 96 of 1920 ultimately did include measures such as mandating
  12
     As will be shown below, this rule became a binding constraint on the behavior of politicians rigging
the election. In spite of the record magnitude of ballot-stuffing across the country, only six municipalities
exceeded this upper bound.
  13
     Unfortunately, there are no records of the debates on these articles in the Anales del Congreso.


                                                     14
publication of the electoral census in a visible place and within time frames that facilitated
protests from citizens.14
    It was against the backdrop of this institutional framework and ongoing debate on the
electoral organization that the 1922 elections took place. We now review some key aspects
of the 1922 presidential election and fraud episode.


3.3     The 1922 Episode and the Convención de Ibagué
The presidential contest between Ospina and Herrera in 1922 was very competitive. Herrera
won in every major city. Ospina obtained high vote shares in the countryside. The elections
were obscured, however, by fraud accusations, which were so widespread that they led Liberal
elites to actively challenge the result. As Deas (1993) puts it, “In 1922 the Conservative
divisions were exploited by an independent Liberal coalition, and the situation was saved by
the use of force at the local level and a general reliance on fraud” (p. 218).
    Liberal representative to the national electoral council, Luis de Greiff, demanded upon
completion of vote counting that the following be added to the record: “the Liberal repre-
sentative’s ... conviction [is] that such verdict is not the genuine expression of popular will,
but the result of the most scandalous fraud, tolerated by authorities and facilitated, in many
cases, by government agents” (quoted in Blanco et al, 1922, p. 403). The Conservative
majority rejected the proposition and proclaimed Ospina as President without any mention
of the fraud denunciations.
    Following the elections, Herrera decided to call for an extraordinary Liberal convention
in the city of Ibagué, to decide, among other things, on the posture that the party would
take regarding the new government. According to Pedro Juan Navarro, after the 1922
elections and with the Convención de Ibagué “the nation’s horizon was tragically obscured
by the possibility of a Civil War” (Navarro, 1935, p. 46). The threat gradually disappeared,
however, and General Herrera’s motto at the time “The Nation before the parties” became
famous. The Convención de Ibagué left a very complete record of Liberal complaints both
in the official summary of the convention and in a book commissioned by the convention to
demonstrate Conservative abuses.15
   14
      The debate over each of the elements of the reform was extremely animated. The spirit of the discussion
may be illustrated with Conservative congressman Sotero Peñuela’s closing comment in one of his interven-
tions: “When you in a family find an unruly young man, arrogant, vicious, if he is not Liberal, sooner or
later he ends in that party. Doctor Tirado Macı́as once told us in the House that the women of certain life
are all Liberal: the reason is clear” (ACR, 1920: 500).
   15
      Several Conservative commentators attacked the Liberal claims (e.g. Guerra,1922, Peñuela, 1922, p. 4).


                                                     15
    The irregularities denounced include the alteration of the electoral registry, the political
activity of the clergy, and the homicide of Liberals. It is worth reproducing the following
passage from Los Partidos Polı́ticos en Colombia, where Liberals summarized their view on
the tools that Conservatism used to remain in power:

          “Conservatism takes shelter in a castle of illegal strengths ... The electoral
      law, interpreted and executed by an ad-hoc power of eminently political origin,
      autonomous only in appearance, yet docile mirror in reality of the executive will.
      It has been impossible to introduce, into this law, the reforms that Liberalism
      has requested over and over, except when those reforms are innocuous and do
      not effectively threaten the Conservative hegemony ... if we add the combative
      and at times implacable attitude of priests it is clear that we find ourselves, as a
      nation, witnessing maybe a unique problem in the world” (Blanco et al, 1922, p.
      15, 17).

    Even considering some degree of exaggeration in the Liberal discourse, it is clear that
Conservatives used diverse fraudulent methods during the elections. Ballot-stuffing and
coercion seemed to follow regional patterns. Regarding ballot stuffing, Liberals accusations
claimed that the “fraudulent multiplication” of votes was largest in Cundinamarca and the
Santanderes (the departments of Santander and Norte de Santander), where there were
Liberal majorities and hence

          “it was necessary ... to rely on the greatest fraud ever registered. The multi-
      plication of votes caused vertigo” (Blanco et al, 1922, p. 27).

     Regarding other departments, Liberals claimed that in Valle, Antioquia and Caldas,
fraud consisted mostly of inscribing Conservatives in the voting lists even when they did
not meet the legal requirements, and obstructing the registration of Liberals. Apparently,
fraud was less widespread there, “where, if there were irregularities, at least the scandalous
‘chocorazos’ of other departments were not observed” (Blanco et al, 1922, p. 399). In
Atlántico and Magdalena, the substitution of voting lists with fake ones is regarded as the
most common fraud, and finally in Nariño and Boyacá, where Conservatism was the norm
amongst “illiterate farmers,” Conservatism “multiplied votes appallingly, and hence the two
illiterate Departments lead the number of voters” (Blanco et al, 1922, p. 27). These claims
are basically consistent with our data in Table 1. We indeed find very high levels of ballot
stuffing in Cundinamarca and the Santanderes, but much less in Antioquia, Valle and Caldas.

                                              16
3.4     Corroborating the Mechanism16
Having described the background, context, and immediate aftermath of the election, we now
turn to a more detailed discussion of fraud itself.

3.4.1    The Rewards of Fraud

Though we cannot directly observe the political kickbacks received by politicians who helped
the Conservative party carry the election, the historical record has circumstantial but com-
pelling evidence that those who stuffed the ballot dramatically benefited from a greater share
of the economic rents.
    As late as the end of 1921, Ospina lacked any significant political presence in Cundina-
marca.17 At the same time, local Conservative Alfredo Vásquez Cobo controlled five of six
representatives to the department’s assembly (Colmenares, 1984, p. 38). Using this power,
Vásquez Cobo had granted himself a monopoly over the department’s liquor rents and with
those funds had created a formidable electoral machine in the region (Vélez, 1921, p. 17,
41, 75). Vásquez seems to have used his machine to support Pedro Nel Ospina in 1922,
so Cundinamarca was ultimately one of the provinces that delivered the greatest number
of fraudulent votes to Ospina’s election. Tellingly, the first foreign loan processed by the
Ospina administration (for five million dollars or one fifth of the entire indemnity payment)
was destined to Vásquez’s pet public works project: the Pacific railroad, in Vásquez’s home
region.
    Probably the most apparent instance of Ospina’s political indebtedness was toward the
Boyacá caciques. Boyacá, an impoverished, fervently Catholic, rural department, was an-
other epicenter of Conservative ballot stuffing in 1922. Ospina appointed several of these
caciques to important political jobs for which they were not qualified. One, Aristóbulo
Archila, was made the Treasury Minister, even though he was “as slow in financial matters
and economic science, as he was experienced, sagacious, and domineering in the intricate
small-town politicking of the Conservative party” (Navarro, 1935, p. 103). Moreover, Ospina
appointed him in spite of well-founded rumors that the person could not speak English.18
  16
      This section draws largely from Chaves (2008).
  17
      In a last ditch effort to court Cundinamarca voters, Ospina started appearing in public dressed in the
traditional garb of Cundinamarques peasants, a move that earned him repeated mockery from the national
press (Colmenares, 1984, p. 102).
   18
      Political cartoonist Ricardo Rendon gave the sharpest commentary on naming an unprepared, if po-
litically powerful, rural boss for this office. Rendon’s cartoon shows Archila talking to Edwin Kemmerer,
the Princeton economist who advised and supervised Colombia’s financial transformations during Ospina’s


                                                    17
3.4.2    Ballot-stuffing and Jurados Electorales

As we discussed above, ballot-stuffing was generally the work of Conservative-dominated
Jurados Electorales. Liberals filed thousands of complaints detailing the many delays and
irregularities in the formation of voting lists. A couple of examples, from Barranquilla,
Atlántico (a historically Liberal city) and from Chiquinquirá, Cundinamarca, suffice to il-
lustrate the type of legal and bureaucratic maneuvering used to tamper with vote tallies.
Liberals in Barranquilla griped that “Here, all sorts of obstructions are being placed in front
of Liberal voters, and the [electoral] census record has been distorted, once sealed and signed,
to inflate it in the last minute with nine hundred additional names, and in spite of protests, it
appears that this scandal will not be rectified” (Paz and Solano, 1922, p. 54, from a telegram
by the Liberal Committee in Barranquilla). Similarly, reports surfaced from Chiquinquirá
claiming that “In this city inscription activity involved only Liberals, who are the majority
and reached one thousand names. However, in the definite lists six thousand Conservatives
appeared also, filling the allowed legal space” (quoted in Paz and Solano, 1922, p. 65, from
Liberal Committee in Chiquinquirá).


4       The Data
4.1     Dependent Variables
4.1.1    Ballot Stuffing

Our measure of ballot stuffing - the extent of fraudulent votes - relies on the comparison of
the total number of votes cast in each municipality with a reasonable estimate of the size of
the franchise from information of the 1918 National Census. This measure is imprecise since
we do not have accurate data on the real level of turnout. The arbitrary exclusion of voters
from the electoral registries, which historical evidence suggests was common, is especially
problematic, as several of the municipalities that reveal no ballot stuffing in our database
might have experienced stuffing nonetheless. In spite of this caveat, that should be kept in
mind, ballot stuffing was perhaps one of the most prevalent forms of fraud (indeed, it was
so common that there were colloquial names for the practice of it, as shown in the quote
from Lozano above). Finally, our measure of ballot stuffing is not likely to be influenced
tenure. Instead of discussing bonds, interest rates, or money supply, Kemmerer is giving a primary school
English lesson: “Pencil, book, ruler, paper, box pen,” he says, pointing at the objects on the desk (quoted
on Colmenares, 1984, p. 197).


                                                    18
by the strategic effects of other measures of electoral fraud based on testimonies of party
followers.19
    To estimate ballot stuffing we proceed as follows. As explained above, under the 1916
Electoral Code, suffrage rights were restricted to adult males (over 21 years of age), and
for presidential elections male citizens had to fulfill the age requirement plus one of the
following: being literate, owning property of $1,000 pesos or more, or earning a yearly
income of over $300 pesos. The income and wealth requirements implied by these thresholds
are fairly restrictive. For example, nominal GDP per-capita in Colombia in 1922 was about
$84 (GRECO, 2002) so that to qualify to vote using the income criterion an illiterate person
would have had to earn almost 3 times average income. Given that around 50% of adult
males were literate in 1918, it is plausible that very few illiterates could have earned such high
incomes. Using data on land ownership for the department of Cundinamarca in 1890 (see
below) and adjusting for prices suggests that if one owned $1,000 worth of land one would
be in the top 21% of landowners. Hence, it seems very unlikely that an illiterate male would
have been able to qualify to vote on the basis of wealth holdings either. In consequence we
assume that everyone who could qualify to vote on the basis of land ownership and income
were also literate. This assumption implies that landowners and earners of income over $300
are subsets of the literate males, and that the number of adult literate males is a reasonable
estimate of the franchise.
    We therefore use the 1918 National Census to compute the number of males over 20 years
of age in every municipality (the census does not report males over 21), and multiply this
number by the literacy rate of men in each municipality. Since the presidential election was
held in 1922 and the Census was made in 1918, we may be underestimating the franchise.
Hence, assuming a rate of population growth consistent with the information from the 1918
and 1928 National Censuses, we also adjust our estimate of the adult literate male population
to allow for population growth. This constitutes our measure of the size of the franchise in
each municipality. It is clear that this measure of the franchise is an overestimate since it
assumes a 100% voter turnout and since only people older than 21 could vote. This will
  19
    The idea of constructing a measure of ballot stuffing based on reasonable estimates of the real size of the
franchise is not new. As soon as the 1922 elections were over and the official count was relased, Liberals soon
noticed that General Benjamı́n Herrera obtained around one thousand more votes than the ones obtained
by Marco Fidel Suárez, the winning conservative candidate, in the 1918 elections (see, e.g., Navarro, 1935, p.
37). In Los Partidos Polı́ticos en Colombia, where Liberal complaints were summarized, Liberals used the
available statistics to draw some calculations in the spirit of the ones we construct in this section showing
results for each department and the country as a whole, and attributing the “multiplication of votes” to the
conservative party (see Rodrı́guez, 1922).



                                                      19
therefore tend to create relatively conservative measures of electoral fraud.
   We combine our estimate of the franchise with the total number of votes cast in each
municipality according to the official electoral registries sent by local authorities to the Gran
Consejo Electoral.

4.1.2   Public Goods

We used two measures of public goods. Unfortunately the 1918 census only has one such
measure, the percentage of people vaccinated. We supplement this with data from the 1937
census. This records for each municipality the total number of buildings and also the number
of buildings which lack access to electricity, water and sewage. We therefore constructed the
fraction of buildings without access to all public services by combining these two pieces of
information, which provides us with another interesting measure of public good provision.


4.2     Explanatory Variables
4.2.1   State Strength

One of the most important hypotheses we wish to investigate in our paper is that the state
of the state reduced the extent of ballot stuffing and coercion. The simplest proxy for this is
a measure of the presence of the state in different dimensions and for this we use data from
the 1918 population census on the number of public employees and the number of agents
of the armed forces in each municipality. Ideally, we would like to examine the impact of
the police and the army separately. Unfortunately, the 1918 Census does not distinguish
between the two.

4.2.2   Land Inequality

Data on land inequality comes from Acemoglu et al. (2008). These authors collected cadas-
tral (land census) data collected by the state of Cundinamarca in 1879 and 1890. We use
a very standard measure of land inequality from their paper - the land gini coefficient,
which measures land inequality among landowners. For each municipality at each date, we
construct the gini coefficient using the standard formula
                                                  nt Xnt
                                           1 X
                                 gmt =                   |yi,t − yj,t |                      (8)
                                         n2t ȳt i=1 j=1



                                                  20
where i = 1, ..., nt denotes the total number of land owners at time t, yi,t is the value of land
                                                    nt
owned by individual i at time t, and and ȳt = n1t
                                                    P
                                                       yi,t is the average value of land at time
                                                    i=1
t. Throughout most of our analysis, we average the gini coefficients across the two dates for
each municipality to arrive to our measure of (average) land gini. The average gini over this
entire period was 0.65 (see Table 2 below).

4.2.3   Overlap

We constructed a measure of the overlap between political officeholding and landed wealth.
To do this we classified the individuals in our sample according to whether they were politi-
cians, rich, or both. We define an individual as being both rich and a politician if we can
find an exact match of the first and last name in the Cundinamarca cadastral surveys and in
the list of mayors within each municipality. Acemoglu et. al. (2008) collected data on 2300
politician (mayor) names between 1875 and 1895 from the Registro del Estado and Gaceta
de Cundinamarca, official newspapers which published the names of principal and substitute
mayors appointed in each municipality. Naturally, this procedure may lead to an overstate-
ment of overlap if we match two different persons with the same first and last name, though
this appears to be unlikely within a municipality. On the other hand, there are various
reasons for understating overlap, since rich landowners may be politicians in neighboring
municipalities or they may have substantial political influence without becoming mayor’s
themselves.
    To construct our measure of overlap, let us introduce some notation. Let Nmt be the
set of adult males living in municipality m at time t, Lmt be the set of adult males without
any substantial landholdings or political power, Rmt be the rich, i.e. those with substantial
landholdings and finally let Pmt be those with political power (mayors). It is clear that:

                                   Nmt = Lmt ∪ Rmt ∪ Pmt .

Let #Rmt be the number of individuals in the set Rmt , and define #Nmt , #Pmt , # (Rmt ∪ Pmt )
and #Lmt similarly. Since we can directly compute #Pmt and #Rmt , and observe #Nmt ,
the number of individuals who are neither rich nor politicians can be computed as

                               #Lmt = #Nmt − # (Rmt ∪ Pmt ) .

   For the purposes of our analysis, we define individuals whose land plots are in the top 25%


                                               21
most valuable plots as “rich landowners”. In these calculations, we compute the thresholds
for the entire region (and not for each municipality separately) so as to exploit the variation
in the presence of big landowners driven by inequality across regions which we want to take
into account.20 In calculating the number of rich landowners in each municipality, we use
the cadastral surveys for 1879 and 1890. For politicians, we use neighboring dates to these,
so that for 1879, any individual who is a mayor between 1877 and 1882 is considered a
politician, and for 1890, we look at the window from 1888 to 1892.
    Our measure of overlap in municipality m at time t is computed as

                                               # (Rmt ∩ Pmt )
                                       omt =                  .
                                               # (Rmt ∪ Pmt )
Our main measure of overlap is the average of this index for the two dates 1879 and 1890.

4.2.4      Coercion

To measure coercion we coded the information from the proceedings of the Convención de
Ibagué. In the book there are many accusations of coercion which we sorted into different
types of coercion using dummy variables to capture whether or not a particular type of
violence was present in a municipality. These are

   1. Violence=1 if the municipality had reports of actual violence breaking out: brawls,
      gun-shots which hit their target, confrontations with injured or casualties.

   2. Intimidation/Harassment=1 for reports of incarcerating Liberals, subjecting them to
      random searches and detainment, coercive measures to prevent Liberal propagandizing
      or activism.

   3. Arms distribution/paramilitary activity=1 for reports of organized armed Conserva-
      tives who are not police or army or distribution of arms for these bodies. Reports of
      intimidation by these bodies.

   4. Coercion=1 indicator for the union of violence, intimidation, arms etc. 1 if any of the
      above happened.

       In the empirical work we investigate only Coercion.
  20
    We have also computed an alternative measure where individuals whose land plots are in the top 50%
most valuable plots are counted as “rich landowners,” with very similar results. We do not report these
results to save space.


                                                  22
4.2.5   Other Covariates

In addition to our main explanatory variables we try to control for other factors which may
be correlated with these. We consider three types of controls: geographical, historical, and
contemporaneous.
    As geographical controls we use the distance (in kilometers) of each municipality to Bo-
gotá and to the Magdalena river (both from Instituto Geográfico Agustı́n Codazzi). The
literature suggests that there may be large differences between core and peripheral munici-
palities, hence it is desirable to control for this directly. Distance to Bogotá is crucial since
the city was both the political and economic center of Cundinamarca (and the country),
whereas the Magdalena river was key for transportation and trade.
    Our historical controls include: state functionaries in 1794, distance to royal roads (in
kilometers), percent of slaves in 1843, a dummy variable for whether the municipality was a
colonial city, and the earliest foundation date. These variables are from a number of primary
sources, originally compiled and used by Garcı́a-Jimeno (2005). State functionaries are from
Guı́a de Forasteros del Nuevo Reino de Granada by Joaquı́n Duran y Dı́az. Duran y Dı́az
constructed a full account of the Colonial State bureaucracy and fiscal accounts for 1794,
coding all the crown employees in each city, and allowing us also to code the dummy variable
for colonial city. Percent of slaves are from the 1843 census published by the Secretarı́a del
Interior in the Estadı́stica General de la Nueva Granada. The earliest foundation date of
the municipality is from Bernard and Zambrano (1993). Like our geographical variables,
some of these controls allow us to take into account how peripheral each area was. Older
municipalities with more state functionaries historically, like municipalities closer to Bogotá,
could exhibit different levels of fraud, as the presence of the state is likely to be stronger in
such municipalities. The percent of slave population in 1843, on the other hand, may capture
other important dimensions, like differences in the types of economic activities historically
important and in the social structure of municipalities.
    Turning to contemporaneous controls, unfortunately we do not have a good control for
the level of economic development at the municipality level. Though the censuses do report
data on literacy and schooling we do not use this as a control variable for ballot stuffing since
they are mechanically related to our measure of ballot stuffing given that we use the literate
male population to construct the number of stuffed ballots. However, the 1918 census does
have information on the proportion of the population in skilled occupations and since this
is very likely related to income per-capita we use this variable as an imperfect control for
income per-capita. In addition, to control for differences stemming from variation in ethnic

                                               23
composition, we control for the percent of indigenous people and black (Afro-Colombian)
population in 1918, also from the 1918 census.


4.3    Descriptive Statistics
Table 2 reports the descriptive statistics. The first row reports the ratio of stuffed ballots
to adult males for the 91 municipalities for which we have data. The first row shows that
the mean number of stuffed ballots was 29% of the total adult male population. We then
split the sample into those municipalities with below median levels of ballot stuffing and
those with above median levels. This shows that the average stuffed ballots as a percentage
of the adult population was 5% in below median, and 54% in above median municipalities.
Rows 3 and 4 then looks at our other main dependent variable, public goods provision. In
all municipalities on average 35% of adults were vaccinated. This number is 37% for low
ballot stuffing municipalities and 33%, over 10% lower, in municipalities with high amounts
of stuffing. Access to public services in 1937 appears little different however across these two
groups.
    The next panel of Table 2 then looks at out main explanatory variables. There are some
quite interesting patterns here. First, average overlap is over 20% higher in municipalities
with high levels of ballot stuffing (0.076 as opposed to 0.061). Here the number 0.076 implies
that of the entire economic and political elite, meaning rich landowners and people who have
been mayor, 7.6% of them are both rich and political office holders. The land gini however
is about 5% higher in low ballot stuffing municipalities. The last two rows here show the
average number of armed forces or bureaucrats relative to the population of the municipality,
so that, for example, on average 0.4% of the population were bureaucrats. These numbers
do not seem to be different between high and low ballot stuffing municipalities.
    The final panel of the tables examines some of the covariates we use. Most interesting
perhaps is our measure of coercion. We see here that this is significantly higher in municipal-
ities with low ballot stuffing, as one might conjecture from a theoretical point of view since it
seems likely that coercion and stuffing are strategic substitutes (rather than complements).
There are a few other patterns of interest. Surprisingly low ballot stuffing municipalities
seem to be further from Bogotá and they also had a larger presence of the state in late
colonial times. Otherwise, the two types of municipalities seem quite comparable.




                                               24
5       Econometric Analysis
5.1     Ballot Stuffing
5.1.1    Basic Results

Having presented the main features of our data we now proceed to the econometric analysis.
To do so we estimate simple ordinary least squares regressions. The basic model we estimate
is
                          ym = αgm + βom + γpm + X0m ζ + εm .                           (9)

In (9) ym is our explanatory variable of interest, either ballot stuffing or some measure of
public goods provision. Throughout we measure ballot stuffing as log 1 + nsmm where sm
represents the number of stuffed ballots in municipality m and nm the adult male population
of the municipality. In (9) gm is the land gini in municipality m, and om is our measure of the
overlap between the economic and the political elite and pm is one of our measures of state
presence (which we use to proxy strength). Finally, X0m is a vector of covariates, such as our
measure of coercion, the proportion of skilled workers in the labor force, or the foundation
date of the municipality which also includes a constant. The error term εm captures all
omitted influences, including any deviations from linearity. Equation (9) will consistently
estimate the parameters of interest if Cov(gm , εm ) =Cov(om , εm ) =Cov(pm , εm ) = 0. Nev-
ertheless, we emphasize that these covariance restrictions are unlikely to hold in practice,
since the presence of the state and political outcomes, such as ballot stuffing are all jointly
determined and this is why we are cautious in interpretations our findings as causal.
    Table 3 presents the basic results of estimating (9). We split the table into two panels,
where the only difference is that in the bottom panel, B, we control for coercion. In this
table there are no covariates other than our main explanatory variables. The top panel
A starts in column 1 with the most parsimonious model where we regress the dependent
variable log 1 + psmm
                        on the land gini. Here α̂ = −0.615 with a standard error of 0.205 and
highly significant statistically (at the 1% level). This suggests that higher land inequality is
correlated with lower ballot stuffing. In column 2 we again run a parsimonious specification
where the only explanatory variable is the extent of overlap. Here β̂ = 1.282 (s.e.=0.662)
which is significant at the 10% level. This suggests a positive correlation between the extent
of overlap in a municipality and the amount of ballot stuffing. Column 3 then uses the
presence of the armed forces as a measure of pm . Here γ̂ = −3.135 (s.e.=1.504). Column
4 instead uses the presence of government bureaucrats as a measure of state strength. In

                                              25
both cases the estimated coefficient is statistically significant at the 5% level though the
quantitative effect of bureaucracy is 5 times larger. In both cases more state presence, which
we interpret as strength, is correlated with less ballot stuffing. In column 5 we add both
of these measures of state presence at the same time and in this case only bureaucracy is
statistically significant. Finally in column 6 we add all of the main explanatory variables
together. The coefficients on the land gini and overlap hardly change and they both remain
statistically significant. The coefficients of both measures of state presence drop a lot however
and neither is significant at standard confidence levels. The evidence on state presence then
is less strong and it is possible that the results in columns (3)-(5) are being driven by the
fact that state presence is correlated with land inequality and/or overlap.
    Panel B reproduces all these regressions with the addition of coercion in all columns.
The basic patterns from panel A are very robust to this. Adding coercion does little to
change the size of the estimated coefficients or the statistical significance, the one exception
being overlap in column 6 when we add all of the explanatory variables, which just loses
significance. Coercion itself has a negative sign, as we anticipated, but it is only significant
in column 3.

5.1.2   Robustness

We now examine the robustness of the results in Table 3 by controlling for the covariates
we discussed above. In Table 4 we focus on the robustness of land inequality and overlap.
Table 5 focuses instead on state presence.
     In Table 4 panel A examines the robustness of land inequality, while panel B focuses on
the robustness of overlap. The different columns are distinguished by the different control
variables which they use on the right side of (9). Thus in panel A column 1 the coefficient
on Control is the coefficient on the distance from the centroid of the municipality to Bogotá.
In column 2 control is the distance to the Magdalena River etc. The main point of panel
A is to notice that with the single exception of the distance to Royal Roads, the estimated
effect of land inequality on ballot stuffing is very robust. The coefficient changes little and
it is usually significant at the 1% level.
     Panel B likewise shows that the estimated coefficient and significance level of overlap is
similarly robust to the addition of all these different covariates. The one time it just loses
significance is in column 8 when we add the proportion of the labor force that is skilled.
     The general message here is that the correlations we found in Table 3 between land
inequality, overlap and ballot stuffing are very robust to the inclusion of our three sets of

                                               26
controls: geographic, historical, and contemporaneous variables.
     Table 5 then moves to examine the robustness of our two measures of state presence.
Panel A focuses on the presence of armed forces and panel B on the presence of state
bureaucracy. Both panels again show that the negative correlation between state presence
and ballot stuffing presented in Table 3 is very robust. The coefficient changes little and it
is usually significant at the 1% level. The single exception occurs in panel B when, while
still negative, the correlation between bureaucracy and ballot stuffing is not significant when
controlling for distance to Royal Roads.
     Table 5 thus reassures the findings of Acemoglu et al. (2008) and our earlier observations
about the Colombian state, though subject to the caveats we discussed when analyzing the
results from Table 3. Though the Colombian state may have been weak in 1922, where it was
present it served to reduce the extent of fraud. Bureaucrats and the armed forces reduced
ballot stuffing. This is certainly different from what some have argued. For instance Pinzón
(1994) claims that “the official bias of the police during the campaign was clear. On January
13 of 1922, a political demonstration of liberals in Bogotá was violently crashed by armed
conservatives with police support (...) For a long time there had been little discussion over
the electoral participation of the army, but precisely some of the accusations of corruption
in these elections referred to that” (p. 78, 79). Yet Montoya (1935, p. 42) argues, referring
to the role of the army,

     “It is undeniable that for long time and under different political regimes, the
     Colombian government used the armed forces as an instrument for fraud, and that
     members of the army were docile and at times eager agents of such condemnable
     system; but it is not less evident, to the honor and joy of our Nation, that those
     practices have disappeared”

    Taken together with the results for land inequality and overlap, these results may be
interpreted with our theoretical model and contrasted with existing findings. In Cundi-
namarca landed elites were not competing with the state, as they may have been in 19th
century Germany (Ziblatt, 2009) or Chile in the 1950s (Baland and Robinson, 2008, 2012).
Instead, they were substituting for it and in doing so reduced the extent of fraud. This
explains why high land inequality is negatively correlated with ballot stuffing. Not all elites
were traditional however and some had used their political offices and connections to acquire
wealth. In these places, municipalities of high overlap, elites needed to supply fraudulent
ballots to national politicians to guarantee their power and newly found wealth.

                                              27
5.2    Public Goods
Tables 3 to 5 are therefore largely supportive of our theory of the interaction between eco-
nomic elites, political elites, and electoral fraud. Yet to further examine the validity of
our framework, we can examine its implications for public good provision. The same logic
underlying the positive correlation between overlap and ballot stuffing implies a negative
correlation with public goods. Similarly, the negative correlation between inequality and
state capacity with ballot stuffing mirrors an expected positive correlation with public good
provision.
    Tables 6-8 examine this by looking at the vaccination rate in 1918 as our key dependent
variable. Table 6 has the same structure as Panel A of Table 3, with columns 1 to 4 running
a parsimonious specification for each one of our key determinants of fraud and public good
provision: inequality, overlap, and state presence (armed forces and bureaucracy). In column
1, we regress the vaccination rate on land inequality and find, as predicted, a positive and
highly significant positive coefficient. The correlation with the extent of overlap, in column 2,
is also of the expected negative sign, albeit significant only at the 10% level. Columns 3 and 4
examine the role of state presence measured with armed forces (column 3) and bureaucrats
(column 4). Both are positive and significant at the 1% level. Moreover, the coefficients
retain significance when both dimensions of the state are included together as regressors,
in column 5. Finally in column 6 we add all of the main explanatory variables together.
The coefficients on the land gini and armed forces fall slightly but both remain statistically
significant. Overlap, which was marginally significant, is still negative but smaller and no
longer significant in this fuller specification. The coefficient on bureaucracy also falls, to half
its size in columns 4 and 5, and is not significant either.
    Hence, Table 6 falls largely in line with the predictions of our model. Where inequality
is high, ballot stuffing is not only smaller; we also find that public good provision is higher.
While the evidence is somewhat weaker, we also find that more overlap, if anything, is
correlated with less public good provision. Finally, and perhaps less surprising, there is
more public good provision in places with more state presence.
    In Tables 7 and 8 we perform the same robustness tests on our regressions for the vacci-
nation rate as we did for ballot stuffing in Tables 4 and 5. In Panel A of Table 7, we find
that the positive correlation between inequality and public goods is very robust to our ge-
ographic, historical, and contemporaneous controls. In columns 1-10 the coefficient on land
gini is very stable, and typically significant at the 1% level. In Panel B, showing regressions
for the vaccination rate on overlap, we constantly find a negative coefficient, yet it is less

                                                28
stable and is not significant when controlling for state functionaries (column 3), distance
to royal roads (column 4), or the percent of the population who are skilled (column 8) or
black (column 10). In the remaining 6 columns overlap is significantly correlated with the
vaccination rate, typically at the 10% level.
    Table 8 examines the robustness of state presence. Both Panel A for armed forces and
Panel B for bureaucracy send a very clear message. The positive correlation between both
measures of state presence and the vaccination rate is robust to all our controls. Indeed, the
coefficient on state presence is significant at the 1% level with a single exception, in column
4 of panel B where significance is at the 10% level.
    Finally, Tables 9-11 complement our results on public goods by using an alternative
measure of public good delivery. As noted before, while we have no other good measure of
public goods in 1918, from the 1937 census we constructed the fraction of buildings without
access to all public services (hence a measure of public good underprovision). In Tables
9-11 we repeat the same specifications as in Tables 6-8, using 1 minus such fraction as our
measure of public good provision. Reassuringly, the results fall in line with those of Tables
6-8.


6     Conclusions
In this paper we have developed a model to investigate the circumstances in which politicians
would use electoral fraud, specifically ballot stuffing, as opposed to making policy concessions,
which we measured as public good provision. The model predicted that fraud should be
higher and public good provision lower, the weaker is the state, lower in land inequality and
the higher is the extent to which economic and political elites coincide (overlap). We tested
these predictions using a unique measure of ballot stuffing we constructed from Colombia’s
1922 presidential elections. Our findings, summarized above, are quite distinct from existing
studies. For one, our focus is very much on the role of the state. Though politics in Colombia
was highly partisan, our results suggest that by 1922 some element of a ‘Weberian state’ had
emerged in Colombia and that at least some state officials were focused on reducing, not
implementing fraud. For another, we found that land inequality is negatively correlated with
ballot stuffing. Contrary to other studies which have found evidence suggesting that landed
elites are implicated in fraud, the data from Colombia suggests the opposite. We argue that
this is a consequence of state weakness. Though the state might have fought against fraud,
its ability to do so was highly limited. Consequently, landed elites in Colombia found it in

                                               29
their interests to substitute for the state, not undermine it, and as such fought against the
chaos and illegality that went along with electoral fraud.
    Nevertheless, one should keep in mind the problems with the data sources which we have
used to draw these conclusions. Though we have real data on recorded vote totals from the
1922 election we had to estimate the franchise because we have no objective information on
turnout. We believe that this means that our estimates are a lower bound on the extent
of ballot stuffing, but this obviously introduces potential biases into our estimates that are
hard to evaluate because we do not know what influenced the extent of turnout across
municipalities or the extent to which it might have been correlated with our explanatory
variables. This measure of fraud is complementary to existing measures which only rely
on accusations of fraud. Indeed, we used accusations ourselves to construct a measure of
electoral coercion. Exploring the determinants of variation in such ballot stuffing is obviously
a fascinating research agenda.




                                              30
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Marı́a Angélica Bautista, Pablo Querubı́n and James A.
Robinson (2008) “Economic and Political Inequality in Development: The Case of Cun-
dinamarca, Colombia,” in Elhanan Helpman ed. Institutions and Economic Performance,
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
    Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2006) Economic Origins of Dictator-
ship and Democracy, New York: Cambridge University Press.
    Anales de la Camara de Representantes (ACR), Various numbers.
    Anales del Senado (AS), Various numbers.
    Bauer, Arnold J. (1975) Chilean rural society from the Spanish conquest to 1930, New
York: Cambridge University Press.
    Blanco, Pedro, Armando Solano, and Jorge Rodrı́guez et al. (1922) Los Par-
tidos Polı́ticos en Colombia, Bogotá: Aguila Negra.
    Baland, Jean Marie and James A. Robinson (2008) “Land and Power: Theory
and Evidence from Chile,” American Economic Review, 98, 1737–65.
    Baland, Jean Marie and James A. Robinson (2012) “The Political Value of Land:
Political Reform and Land Prices in Chile,” American Journal of Political Science, 56(3),
601-619.
    Bensel, Richard F. (2004) The American ballot box in the mid-nineteenth century,
New York: Cambridge University Press.
    Bernard, Olivier and Fabio Zambrano (1993) Ciudad y Territorio: El Proceso de
Poblamiento en Colombia, Bogotá: Academia de Historia de Bogotá.
    Brading, David A. (1973) “Government and Elite in Late Colonial Mexico,” Hispanic
American Historical Review, 53(3), 389-414.
    Bushnell, David (1993) The Making of Modern Colombia: A Nation in Spite of Itself.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
    Chaves, Isaı́as (2008) “Ballots, Bullets, and American Money: Explaining the Inci-
dence of Electoral Fraud in Colombia, 1921-1925,” Unpublished Senior Thesis, Department
of History, Harvard University.
    Collier, Ruth Berins (1999) Paths Towards Democracy: The Working Class and
Elites n Westrn Europe and South America, New York: Cambridge University Press.
    Colmenares, Germán (1984) Ricardo Rendón, Una Fuente Para la Historia de la
Opinión Pública, Bogotá: Fondo Cultural Cafetero.


                                           31
    Cox, Gary W. and J. Morgan Kousser (1981) “Turnout and Rural Corruption:
New York as a Test Case,” American Journal of Political Science, 25, 646-663.
    Deas, Malcolm (1993) “Algunas notas sobre el caciquismo en Colombia,” In Del poder
y la gramática y otros ensayos sobre historia, polı́tica y literatura colombianas, Bogotá: Ter-
cer Mundo Editores.
    Dekel, Eddie, Matthew Jackson and Asher Wolinsky (2008) “Vote Buying: Gen-
eral Elections,” Journal of Political Economy, 116, 351-380.
    Delpar, Helen (1981) Red against blue: the Liberal Party in Colombian politics, 1863-
1899, Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press.
    Diaz-Cayeros, Alberto, Federico Estévez and Beatriz Magaloni (2012) Forth-
coming. Strategies of Vote-Buying: Poverty, Democracy, and Social Transfers in Mexico.
Typescript, Stanford University.
    Dunning, Thad and Susan C. Stokes (2008) “Persuasion vs. Mobilization.” Paper
Prepared for Presentation at the Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Associ-
ation, Boston, MA.
    Gans-Morse, Jordan, Sebastián Mazzuca, and Simeon Nichter (2011) “Varieties
of Clientelism: Machine Politics During Elections,”
    http://faculty.wcas.northwestern.edu/˜jlg562/documents/VarietiesofClientelism December2011.pdf
    Garcı́a-Jimeno, Camilo (2005), “Colonial Institutions And Long-Run Economic Per-
formance In Colombia: Is there Evidence of Persistence?,” Documentos Cede 2152, Univer-
sidad de los Andes.
    GRECO (2002) El Crecimiento Económico Colombiano en el Siglo XX, Bogotá: Fond
de Cultura Económica.
    Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman (2001) Special Interest Politics, Cam-
bridge: MIT Press.
    Guerra, José Joaquı́n (1922) Viceversas Liberales. Documentos Relativos a la Histo-
ria del Liberalismo Colombiano, Bogotá: Editorial La Cruzada.
    Hirst, John (2006) Making Votes Secret: Victoria’s introduction of a new method of
voting that has spread around the world, Melbourne: Victoria Electoral Commission.
    Hora, Roy (2001) The Landowners of the Argentine Pampas: A Social and Political
History 1860-1945, New York: Oxford University Press.
    Lehoucq, Fabrice E. and Iván Molina (2002) Stuffing the Ballot Box. Fraud, Elec-
toral Reform, and Democratization in Costa Rica, New York: Cambridge University Press.
    Lehoucq, Fabrice (2003) “Electoral Fraud: Causes, Types, and Consequences,” An-


                                          32
nual Review of Political Science, 6, 233-256.
    Lindbeck, Assar and Jörgen Weibull (1987) “Balanced Budget Redistribution as
the Outcome of Political Competition,” Public Choice, LII, 272-297.
    Mazzuca, Sebastián and James A. Robinson (2009) “Political Conflict and Power-
sharing in the Origins of Modern Colombia,” Hispanic American Historical Review, 89, 285-
321.
    Melo, Jorge Orlando (1995) “La República Conservadora,” in Melo, Jorge Orlando
(ed), Colombia Hoy: Perspectivas Hacia el Siglo XXI, Bogotá: Tercer Mundo.
    Montoya, Hernán (1938) La Cédula y el Sufragio, Bogotá: República de Colombia,
Ministerio de Gobierno.
    Navarro, Pedro Juan (1935) El Parlamento en Pijama. Este libro también podrı́a
llamarse Aguafuerte del Partido Conservador, Bogotá: Mundo al Dı́a.
    Nichter, Simeon (2008) “Vote Buying or Turnout Buying? Machine Politics and the
Secret Ballot,” American Political Science Review, 102, 19-31.
    Paz, Felipe and Armando Solano (1922) La Convención de Ibagué, Bogotá: Edito-
rial de Cromos.
    Peñuela, Sotero (1922) El Liberalismo: lo que ha sido y lo que es, Bogotá: Casa
Editorial de La Cruzada.
    Pinzón, Patricia (1994) El ejército y las elecciones: ensayo histórico, Bogotá: Cerec.
    Posada-Carbó, Eduardo (1997) “Limits of Power: Elections Under the Conservative
Hegemony in Colombia, 1886-1930,” The Hispanic American Economic Review, 77, 245-279.
    Posada-Carbó, Eduardo (2000) “Electoral Juggling: A Comparative History of the
Corruption of Suffrage in Latin America, 1830-1930,” Journal of Latin American Studies,
32, 611-644.
    Ratcliff, Richard E. and Maurice Zeitlin (1988) Landlords and Capitalists: The
Dominant Class of Chile, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
    Registradurı́a Nacional del Estado Civil (1991) Historia Electoral Colombiana,
Bogotá: Imprenta Nacional de Colombia.
    Reyes, Alejandro (1978) Latifundio y Poder Polı́tico. La Hacienda Ganadera en
Sucre. Bogotá: Editorial CINEP.
    Rodrı́guez, Jorge (1922) “Prestidigitación Electoral,” In Blanco, Pedro et al., Los
Partidos Polı́ticos en Colombia, Bogotá: Aguila Negra.
    Rueschemeyer, Dietrich, Evelyn H. Stephens and John D. Stephens (1992)
Capitalist Development and Democracy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


                                             33
    Safford, Frank R (1972) “Social Aspects of Politics in Nineteenth Century Spanish
Amer-ica: New Grenada, 1825-1850,” Journal of Social History, 5, 344-370.
    Safford, Frank R (1974) “Bases of Political Alignments in Early Republican Spanish
America,” in Richard Graham and Peter Smith, eds., New Approaches to Latin American
History, Austin: University of Texas Press.
    Safford, Frank R (1985) “Politics, Ideology and Society in Post-Independence Spanish
America,” in Leslie Bethel ed. Cambridge History of Latin America, vol. 3, New York:
Cambridge University Press.
    Schwartz, Stuart B. (1996) “The Landed Elite,” in Louisa Schell Hoberman and Susan
Migden Socolow eds. The countryside in colonial Latin America, Albuquerque: University
of New Mexico Press.
    Smith, Peter H. (1978) “The Breakdown of Democracy in Argentina, 1916-1930,” in
Juan J. Linz and Alfred Stepan eds. The Breakdown of Democratic Regimes: Latin America,
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
    Stokes, Susan C. (2005) “Perverse Accountability: A Formal Model of Machine Poli-
tics with Evidence from Argentina,” American Political Science Review, 99, 315-325.
    Uribe-Uran, Victor M. (2000) Honorable lives: lawyers, family, and politics in
Colombia, 1780-1850, Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
    Vélez L., Antonio (1921) Alfredo Vásquez Cobo, El Candidato Reo, Bogotá: Aguila
Negra Editorial.
    Wilkinson, Steven I. (2004) Votes and violence: electoral competition and ethnic riots
in India, New York: Cambridge University Press.
    Ziblatt, Daniel (2009) “Shaping Democratic Practice and the Causes of Electoral
Fraud: Theory and Evidence from pre-1914 Germany,” American Political Science Review,
103, 1-21.




                                           34
                                      Table 1: The 1922 Elections in Colombia:
                          Election Outcome and Estimates of Stuffed Ballots by Department

                                                            Votes for
                                          Votes for Pedro                                                      Total
                                Total                       Benjamin    Ospina-   Stuffed   Stuffed Ballots/
     Department                           Nel Ospina                                                           Population,
                                votes                       Herrera     Herrera   Ballots   Total Votes
                                          (Conservative)                                                       1918
                                                            (Liberal)
     Antioquia                  76,420    47,987            28,403      19,584    11,658    0.15               821027
     Arauca                     425       146               278         -132      10        0.02               6070
     Atlantico                  9,905     4,840             5,064       -224      1,488     0.15               117915
     Bolivar                    49,548    33,650            15,888      17,762    29,207    0.59               416561
     Boyaca                     83,764    61,977            21,747      40,230    39,688    0.47               590587
     Caldas                     50,186    28,610            21,566      7,044     7,104     0.14               419697
     Caqueta                    363       270               93          177       124       0.34               2957
     Casanare                   68        10                58          -48       1         0.02               1382




35
     Cauca                      23,024    13,644            9,367       4,277     8,416     0.37               238071
     Choco                      7,214     3,467             3,746       -279      2,649     0.37               61371
     Cundinamarca               117,471   76,634            40,723      35,911    48,517    0.41               800439
     Guajira                    1,460     1,063             397         666       1,407     0.96               2908
     Huila                      13,864    8,830             4,997       3,833     2,513     0.18               181202
     Magdalena                  18,577    11,657            6,918       4,739     7,465     0.40               186254
     Meta                       2,477     1,255             1,221       34        808       0.33               10695
     Narino                     29,843    23,880            5,959       17,921    4,237     0.14               327367
     Norte de Santander         35,705    26,894            8,804       18,090    17,449    0.49               222552
     Putumayo                   850       660               190         470       414       0.49               5009
     San Andres y Providencia   566       465               100         365       0         0.00               5953
     Santander                  55,492    37,784            17,699      20,085    23,926    0.43               439161
     Tolima                     39,083    19,019            20,057      -1,038    18,485    0.47               320084
     Valle                      35,547    17,284            18,249      -965      4,440     0.12               266371
     TOTAL                      651,852   420,026           231,524     188,502   230,007   0.35               5443633
                                      Table 2: Summary statistics

                                              Overall                      Low Ballot Stuffing          High Ballot Stuffing

       Variable             Mean     Std. Dev. Min.         Max.    N    Mean Std. Dev.          N    Mean     Std. Dev.       N

Dependent variables
Stuffed ballots/total       0.294      0.298            0   1.092   91   0.054     0.055         46   0.541      0.236     45
adult males
Log of (1+Stuffed
                            0.234      0.218            0   0.738   91   0.051     0.052         46   0.421      0.153     45
Ballots/Adult Males)

Vaccination rate             0.35      0.173            0   0.775   91   0.374      0.17         46   0.326      0.174     45
Frac. of buildings access
                            0.079      0.099            0   0.631   90   0.077     0.097         46    0.08      0.102     44
to public services, 1937

Main explanatory variables
Average Overlap (Top
                            0.068      0.037            0   0.187   91   0.061     0.039         46   0.076      0.035     45
25%)
Land Gini (average
                             0.65      0.099       0.409    0.852   91   0.668     0.091         46   0.631      0.106     45
1879, 1890)

Armed Forces                0.001      0.006            0   0.058   91   0.001     0.008         46     0        0.002     45

Bureaucracy                 0.004      0.003            0   0.015   91   0.004     0.003         46   0.004      0.002     45

Controls

Coercion                    0.209      0.409            0     1     91   0.261     0.444         46   0.156      0.367     45

Dist. to Bogotá (kms)      86.22     44.288        15       217    91   91.217    43.767        46   81.111    44.722     45
Dist. Magdalena river
                            63.017    36.992       2.055    154.44 91    61.692    37.602        46   64.372    36.732     45
(kms)

State functionaries, 1794   1.538     12.173            0    116    91   2.826     17.096        46   0.222      0.823     45

Dist. Royal roads (kms)     18.295    14.147       0.438    58.139 91    15.522    15.023        46   21.13      12.74     45

% slaves in 1843            0.002      0.008            0   0.05    91   0.003      0.01         46   0.001      0.004     45

Colonial city               0.022      0.147            0     1     91     0         0           46   0.044      0.208     45

Foundation Date/1,000        1.67      0.104       1.537    1.865   91   1.683     0.111         46   1.658      0.096     45

% skilled                   0.104      0.101            0   0.405   91   0.113     0.106         46   0.093      0.095     45

% indian                    0.043      0.055            0   0.265   91   0.041     0.062         46   0.045      0.047     45

% black                     0.032      0.04             0   0.259   91   0.031     0.044         46   0.033      0.036     45




                                                            36
   Table 3: Ballot stuffing: the role of inequality, overlap, and state presence


                                        (1)         (2)       (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)
  Dependent variable: Log (1+stuffed ballots/adult males)
  Panel A: Stuffed ballots and overlap, inequality, and state presence

  Land Gini (average 1879, 1890)    -0.615***                                                      -0.545**
                                     (0.205)                                                        (0.234)
  Average Overlap (Top 25%)                      1.282*                                             1.087*
                                                 (0.662)                                            (0.638)
  Armed Forces                                             -3.135**                    -2.622        -1.492
                                                            (1.504)                   (1.658)       (1.639)
  Bureaucracy                                                         -15.30**       -14.75**        -3.684
                                                                       (7.188)        (7.168)       (8.227)

  Observations                          91          91         91        91             91           91
  R-squared                           0.079       0.049      0.008      0.032          0.037        0.123
  Panel B: Stuffed ballots and overlap, inequality, and state presence, controlling for coercion

  Land Gini (average 1879, 1890)    -0.580***                                                      -0.521**
                                     (0.207)                                                        (0.234)
  Average Overlap (Top 25%)                      1.225*                                              1.062
                                                 (0.672)                                            (0.642)
  Armed Forces                                             -3.267**                    -2.793        -1.667
                                                            (1.611)                   (1.753)       (1.729)
  Bureaucracy                                                          -13.71*        -13.09*        -2.763
                                                                       (7.278)        (7.261)       (8.255)
  Coercion                            -0.0636    -0.0745 -0.0834*      -0.0704        -0.0719       -0.0570
                                     (0.0495)   (0.0469) (0.0501)     (0.0517)       (0.0522)      (0.0481)

  Observations                           91         91        91          91           91            91
  R-squared                            0.093      0.068      0.032       0.049        0.055         0.134

Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                     37
                                        Table 4: Ballot stuffing: the role of inequality and overlap
                                                              Robustness tests


                                     (1)          (2)        (3)                   (4)             (5)              (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)        (10)
      Dependent variable: Log (1+stuffed ballots/adult males)
                                   Geographical controls                                   Historical controls                              Contemporaneous controls
                                                                                Dist.
                                                     Dist. Mag-   State func-   Royal
                                        Dist.                                                  % slaves,     Colonial        Foundation
      “Control” is...                                dalena       tionaries,                                                            % skilled    % indian    % black
                                        Bogotá                                 roads          1843          city            Date
                                                     river        1794          (kms)
      Panel A: Inequality, robustness

      Land Gini (average 1879, 1890)    -0.700***    -0.616***     -0.601***      -0.377        -0.599***        -0.616***   -0.641***   -0.590***   -0.669***   -0.621***
                                         (0.212)      (0.205)       (0.207)      (0.264)         (0.207)          (0.206)     (0.206)     (0.213)     (0.211)     (0.209)




38
      Control                            -0.000746    -9.22e-05   -0.00154***    0.00305        -2.166**          -0.0324      -0.170      -0.202      0.444       0.274
                                        (0.000563)   (0.000609)    (0.000320)   (0.00185)        (0.991)         (0.0255)     (0.214)     (0.256)     (0.478)     (0.546)

      Observations                         91            91            91           91             91               91           91          91         91          91
      R-squared                           0.101        0.079         0.086        0.106           0.085            0.079       0.085       0.088       0.091       0.082
      Panel B: Overlap, robustness

      Average Overlap (Top 25%)            1.248*      1.282*        1.231*        1.090*         1.221*          1.281*      1.274*       1.167      1.271*     1.313**
                                          (0.666)      (0.665)       (0.667)      (0.629)        (0.672)          (0.667)     (0.669)     (0.736)     (0.667)    (0.642)
      Control                            -0.000189    1.21e-05    -0.00153***   0.00415***       -2.008*         -0.00363     -0.0553      -0.139      0.128      -0.117
                                        (0.000503)   (0.000618)    (0.000368)    (0.00151)       (1.032)         (0.0234)     (0.209)     (0.273)     (0.448)    (0.722)

      Observations                         91            91            91           91             91               91           91          91         91          91
      R-squared                           0.050        0.049         0.056        0.120           0.053            0.049       0.049       0.052       0.050       0.049

     Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                         Table 5: Ballot stuffing: the role of state presence
                                                          Robustness tests


                            (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)         (5)            (6)       (7)        (8)        (9)        (10)
        Dependent variable: Log (1+stuffed ballots/adult males)
                         Geographical controls                        Historical controls                        Contemporaneous controls
                                                              Dist.
                                    Dist. Mag- State func- Royal
                        Dist.                                             % slaves,     Colonial    Foundation
        “Control” is...             dalena         tionaries,                                                  % skilled % indian     % black
                        Bogotá                               roads       1843          city        Date
                                    river          1794       (kms)
        Panel A: State presence -armed forces, robustness

        Armed Forces      -3.586**    -3.148**       -2.915*      -2.746**    -3.199**   -3.147**    -3.039*    -3.331**   -3.112**   -3.036*
                           (1.602)     (1.501)       (1.659)       (1.212)     (1.473)    (1.513)    (1.537)     (1.449)    (1.471)   (1.544)
        Control          -0.000420    -4.44e-05   -0.00182***   0.00446***   -2.953***    -0.0220    -0.0612      -0.280     0.171     0.131




39
                        (0.000549)   (0.000622)    (0.000350)    (0.00149)     (0.972)   (0.0269)    (0.218)     (0.256)    (0.455)   (0.647)

        Observations        91            91           91           91          91         91           91         91         91         91
        R-squared          0.015        0.008        0.018        0.092        0.019      0.008       0.009      0.025      0.010      0.009
        Panel A: State presence -bureaucracy, robustness

        Bureaucracy       -16.44**     -15.47**      -14.13*       -8.687    -15.26**    -15.31**    -15.14**   -14.71**   -15.87**   -15.18**
                           (7.327)      (7.290)      (7.262)      (7.036)     (7.361)     (7.231)     (7.319)    (7.344)    (7.242)    (7.176)
        Control          -0.000474    -0.000121   -0.00140***   0.00405***   -2.885**     -0.0218     -0.0468     -0.250     0.252      0.135
                        (0.000527)   (0.000614)    (0.000395)    (0.00152)    (1.362)    (0.0255)     (0.214)    (0.251)    (0.438)    (0.641)

        Observations       91            91            91           91          91         91           91         91         91         91
        R-squared         0.041        0.032         0.038        0.095        0.042      0.032       0.032      0.045      0.036      0.032

     Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
   Table 6: Public goods-vaccination rate: the role of inequality, overlap, and
                                state presence


                                    (1)           (2)       (3)           (4)      (5)      (6)
     Dependent variable: vaccination rate

     Land Gini (average 1879, 1890) 0.743***                                              0.627***
                                     (0.169)                                               (0.169)
     Average Overlap (Top 25%)                  -0.858*                                     -0.513
                                                (0.488)                                    (0.478)
     Armed Forces                                         4.260***               3.562*** 2.574***
                                                           (0.629)                (0.551)  (0.551)
     Bureaucracy                                                     20.82***    20.08***   10.19
                                                                      (6.758)     (6.739)  (6.826)

     Observations                        91        91       91            91       91       91
     R-squared                         0.183     0.034     0.023         0.093    0.109    0.235

Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                  40
                           Table 7: Public goods-vaccination rate: the role of inequality and overlap
                                                       Robustness tests


                                      (1)           (2)                (3)           (4)            (5)              (6)          (7)        (8)        (9)        (10)
      Dependent variable: vaccination rate
                                    Geographical controls                                   Historical controls                              Contemporaneous controls
                                                                                 Dist.
                                                      Dist. Mag-   State func-   Royal
                                        Dist.                                                   % slaves,     Colonial         Foundation
      “Control” is...                                 dalena       tionaries,                                                             % skilled   % indian   % black
                                        Bogotá                                  roads          1843          city             Date
                                                      river        1794          (kms)
      Panel A: Inequality, robustness

      Land Gini (average 1879, 1890)      0.596***     0.774***      0.735***      0.433**       0.765***          0.739***     0.707***   0.656***   0.703***   0.759***
                                           (0.180)      (0.156)       (0.170)       (0.203)       (0.170)           (0.170)      (0.170)    (0.141)    (0.169)    (0.168)
      Control                           -0.00129***   0.00189***   0.000870***   -0.00397***     -3.066***        -0.0641***      -0.232   0.714***     0.322     -0.674*




41
                                         (0.000341)   (0.000498)    (0.000187)    (0.00130)       (0.671)          (0.0193)      (0.149)    (0.215)    (0.245)    (0.362)

      Observations                          91            91            91            91            91               91           91          91         91        91
      R-squared                            0.285        0.346         0.186         0.256          0.201            0.186        0.202      0.354      0.193      0.207
      Panel B: Overlap, robustness

      Average Overlap (Top 25%)           -1.169***     -0.817*       -0.823         -0.607       -0.943*           -0.875*      -0.906*     -0.227   -0.911*     -0.753
                                           (0.440)      (0.429)      (0.495)        (0.443)       (0.498)           (0.492)      (0.468)    (0.475)   (0.472)    (0.528)
      Control                           -0.00178***   0.00178***   0.00106***    -0.00544***     -2.816***        -0.0907***    -0.349**   0.765***   0.638**     -0.392
                                         (0.000320)   (0.000550)   (0.000254)     (0.00102)       (0.867)          (0.0308)      (0.156)    (0.216)   (0.310)    (0.499)

      Observations                          91            91            91            91            91               91           91          91         91        91
      R-squared                            0.238        0.180         0.040         0.230          0.049            0.040        0.078      0.215      0.076      0.042

     Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                    Table 8: Public goods-vaccination rate: the role of state presence
                                                            Robustness tests


                         (1)           (2)              (3)           (4)            (5)              (6)         (7)        (8)        (9)        (10)
        Dependent variable: vaccination rate
                       Geographical controls                                 Historical controls                             Contemporaneous controls
                                                                  Dist.
                                        Dist. Mag- State func-    Royal
                          Dist.                                                  % slaves,     Colonial        Foundation
        “Control” is...                 dalena     tionaries,                                                             % skilled   % indian   % black
                          Bogotá                                 roads          1843          city            Date
                                        river      1794           (kms)
        Panel A: State presence -armed forces, robustness

        Armed Forces        2.563***     4.810***     4.117***      3.774***      4.215***         4.219***     4.821***   4.823***   4.341***   3.888***
                             (0.717)      (0.714)      (0.531)       (0.678)       (0.628)           (0.634)     (0.694)    (0.564)    (0.650)    (0.696)
        Control           -0.00158***   0.00184***   0.00119***   -0.00558***     -2.060**         -0.0762**    -0.360**   0.803***    0.611**     -0.497




42
                           (0.000352)   (0.000564)   (0.000220)    (0.000999)      (0.911)          (0.0369)     (0.162)    (0.200)    (0.286)    (0.453)

        Observations        91            91           91             91              91               91         91          91         91         91
        R-squared          0.184        0.178         0.030          0.231          0.032            0.028       0.070      0.243      0.061      0.037
        Panel A: State presence -bureaucracy, robustness

        Bureaucracy         17.22***     23.61***     20.33***       12.70*        20.85***        20.77***     22.13***   19.03***   19.67***   20.40***
                             (6.228)      (5.326)      (6.928)       (6.758)        (6.676)          (6.814)     (6.542)    (6.345)    (6.652)    (6.798)
        Control           -0.00150***   0.00196***   0.000586*    -0.00498***     -2.152***        -0.0764**    -0.379**   0.763***    0.510*      -0.498
                           (0.000337)   (0.000516)   (0.000296)    (0.000986)       (0.770)         (0.0334)     (0.153)    (0.183)    (0.293)    (0.440)

        Observations          91           91           91            91              91               91         91          91         91         91
        R-squared            0.238        0.267        0.095         0.245          0.102            0.097       0.144      0.291      0.119      0.107

     Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Table 9: Public goods-fraction of buildings with access to public services, 1937:
               the role of inequality, overlap, and state presence


                                   (1)      (2)     (3)       (4)         (5)               (6)
   Dependent variable: fraction of buildings with access to public services, 1937

   Land Gini (average 1879, 1890)   0.358***                                              0.223***
                                    (0.0804)                                              (0.0777)
   Average Overlap (Top 25%)                   -0.465*                                      -0.128
                                               (0.251)                                     (0.205)
   Armed Forces                                          5.143***              4.596***   4.265***
                                                          (1.398)               (1.123)    (1.117)
   Bureaucracy                                                      16.70***   15.75***   12.44***
                                                                     (4.298)    (4.117)    (4.389)

   Observations                         90       90         90        90         90         90
   R-squared                          0.131    0.031      0.105      0.185      0.268      0.315

Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                  43
                     Table 10: Public goods-fraction of buildings with access to public services, 1937:
                                            the role of inequality and overlap
                                                     Robustness tests


                                          (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)            (6)          (7)        (8)        (9)        (10)
      Dependent variable: fraction of buildings with access to public services, 1937
                                       Geographical controls                      Historical controls                            Contemporaneous controls
                                                                          Dist.
                                                   Dist. Mag- State func- Royal
                                      Dist.                                          % slaves,      Colonial       Foundation
      “Control” is...                              dalena     tionaries,                                                      % skilled   % indian   % black
                                      Bogotá                             roads      1843           city           Date
                                                   river      1794        (kms)
      Panel A: Inequality, robustness

      Land Gini (average 1879, 1890)     0.280***      0.354***     0.337***     0.304***    0.365***   0.358***    0.357***   0.364***   0.344***    0.370***
                                          (0.0735)      (0.0806)    (0.0789)      (0.104)    (0.0830)   (0.0807)    (0.0876)   (0.0796)   (0.0865)    (0.0789)




44
      Control                          -0.000685***    -0.000207   0.00230***    -0.000697     -1.006    0.00168    -0.00668    -0.0514     0.116    -0.519***
                                        (0.000187)    (0.000319)   (0.000132)   (0.000845)    (0.726)   (0.0266)     (0.141)   (0.0696)    (0.152)     (0.175)

      Observations                         90            90            90           90         90          90          90         90        90          90
      R-squared                           0.220         0.137        0.212        0.138       0.137      0.131       0.131      0.134      0.135       0.176
      Panel B: Overlap, robustness

      Average Overlap (Top 25%)          -0.631***      -0.467*       -0.385       -0.388    -0.493*     -0.467*    -0.476*     -0.517*   -0.487*      -0.363
                                          (0.225)       (0.253)      (0.244)      (0.244)    (0.261)     (0.254)    (0.246)     (0.261)   (0.246)     (0.268)
      Control                          -0.000926***    -0.000260   0.00239***   -0.00175**    -0.920     -0.0118    -0.0673     -0.0667   0.272*       -0.382
                                        (0.000202)    (0.000318)   (0.000160)   (0.000669)   (0.789)    (0.0355)    (0.137)    (0.0746)   (0.155)     (0.237)

      Observations                         90            90            90           90         90          90          90         90        90          90
      R-squared                           0.201         0.040        0.117        0.093       0.036      0.031       0.036      0.035      0.054       0.054

     Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                     Table 11: Public goods-fraction of buildings with access to public services, 1937:
                                                the role of state presence
                                                     Robustness tests


                           (1)           (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)              (6)       (7)        (8)        (9)        (10)
      Dependent variable: fraction of buildings with access to public services, 1937
                        Geographical controls                        Historical controls                           Contemporaneous controls
                                                             Dist.
                                    Dist. Mag- State func- Royal
                       Dist.                                             % slaves,       Colonial    Foundation
      “Control” is...               dalena        tionaries,                                                    % skilled   % indian   % black
                       Bogotá                               roads       1843            city        Date
                                    river         1794       (kms)
      Panel A: State presence -armed forces, robustness

      Armed Forces      4.331***       5.082***    4.859***      4.983***     5.132***    5.142***    5.275***   5.145***   5.178***   4.858***
                         (1.445)        (1.356)     (1.107)       (1.411)      (1.398)     (1.405)     (1.345)    (1.418)    (1.364)    (1.316)




45
      Control         -0.000754***    -0.000213   0.00236***   -0.00178***      -0.473    -0.00104     -0.0862   0.00342     0.262*    -0.377**
                       (0.000199)    (0.000307)   (0.000126)    (0.000641)     (0.766)    (0.0385)     (0.133)   (0.0683)    (0.143)    (0.188)

      Observations         90             90           90           90          90            90         90         90        90         90
      R-squared           0.218         0.111        0.190        0.170        0.106        0.105      0.113      0.105      0.127      0.129
      Panel A: State presence -bureaucracy, robustness

      Bureaucracy       14.95***       16.50***    15.07***     14.93***      16.71***    16.70***    17.02***   16.79***   16.31***   16.36***
                         (4.181)        (4.127)     (4.211)      (3.964)       (4.300)     (4.319)     (4.110)    (4.315)    (4.478)    (4.252)
      Control         -0.000727***    -0.000145   0.00197***    -0.00108*       -0.572    -0.00285     -0.0921    -0.0359     0.176    -0.409**
                       (0.000202)    (0.000295)   (0.000232)   (0.000548)      (0.584)    (0.0356)     (0.122)   (0.0620)    (0.158)    (0.193)

      Observations        90             90           90            90          90            90         90         90        90         90
      R-squared          0.290         0.188        0.242         0.207        0.187        0.185      0.194      0.186      0.195      0.213

     Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
A      Appendix: Comparative Static Results
Equilibrium stuffing is given by (4) evaluated at the equilibrium values (5)-(7). Using a star
                                                                                     ∗         I∗
(∗) to denote the equilibrium values, taking the derivative, and noting that ∂t   ∂ θ̃
                                                                                       = − ∂G
                                                                                            ∂ θ̃
from the government budget constraint, we get:

                           1 [1 + µ (α − 1)] t∗ − α u (τ y) − u GI∗ − ψ
                                                                  
                ∂S
                     = −
                ∂ θ̃     2γS θ̃2               α (1 − τ ) y
                         ∂GI∗ 1 αu0 G∗I − [1 + µ (α − 1)]
                                          
                       +
                          ∂ θ̃ 2γS θ̃     α (1 − τ ) y

Using (5) for u0 GI∗ and simplifying,
                    

                                                                                  !
                  ∂S         1     ∂GI∗ 1                  4θ̃ (1 − µ)        1
                       =−       S+                 1       1
                                                                                      < 0.
                  ∂ θ̃       θ̃     ∂ θ̃ 2γS θ̃   γS
                                                        + γC + 4θ̃ (1 − τ ) y α

With similar algebra for overlap, we find that:

            ∂S     1 [1 + (α − 1)] t∗ ∂GI∗ 1                         4θ̃ (1 − µ)        1
               =                     −                                                    > 0.
            ∂µ   2γS θ̃ α (1 − τ ) y   ∂µ 2γS θ̃              1
                                                             γS
                                                                     1
                                                                  + γC + 4θ̃ (1 − τ ) y α

Finally, for the marginal costs of fraud,
                                                                                  !
                                        I
                 ∂S           1    ∂G 1                    4θ̃ (1 − µ)        1
                     =−         S+                  1      1
                                                                                      < 0,
                 ∂γS         γS    ∂γS 2γS θ̃      γS
                                                        + γC + 4θ̃ (1 − τ ) y α

                       ∂S     ∂GI 1                  4θ̃ (1 − µ)        1
                           =−                1       1
                                                                          < 0.
                       ∂γC    ∂γC 2γS θ̃    γS
                                                  + γC + 4θ̃ (1 − τ ) y α




                                                  46
