                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  GLOBALLY CORRELATED NOMINAL FLUCTUATIONS

                                          Espen Henriksen
                                          Finn E. Kydland
                                           Roman Sustek

                                        Working Paper 15123
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15123


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2009




An older version of this paper was circulated under the title “The High Cross-country Correlations
of Prices and Interest Rates”. We thank Jonathan Heathcote, Narayana Kocherlakota, Haroon Mumtaz,
Eugene Savin, Jens Sondergaard, Kjetil Storesletten, Paolo Surico, Eric Young, and seminar participants
at UCSB, UC—Davis, USC, Wharton, the Universities of Oslo, Iowa, and Southampton, Dallas Fed,
Norges Bank, Bank of Korea, Universidad de Alicante, and Yonsei University, as well as conference
participants at ESEM, Midwest Macro Meetings, Money Macro Finance Group, Econometric Society
Summer Meetings, SED Meetings, Nordic Summer Symposium in Macroeconomics, and CFCM workshop
for valuable comments and suggestions. The views in this paper are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect those of the Bank of England, the Monetary Policy Committee, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Espen Henriksen, Finn E. Kydland, and Roman Sustek. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Globally Correlated Nominal Fluctuations
Espen Henriksen, Finn E. Kydland, and Roman Sustek
NBER Working Paper No. 15123
July 2009, Revised April 2011
JEL No. E31,E32,E43,F42

                                           ABSTRACT

Cyclical fluctuations in nominal variables—aggregate price levels and nominal interest rates—are
documented to be substantially more synchronized across countries than cyclical fluctuations in real
output. A transparent mechanism that can account for this striking feature of the nominal environment
is highlighted. It is based on (small) cross-country spillovers of shocks and an interaction between
Taylor rules and no-arbitrage conditions. The mechanism is quantitatively important for a wide range
of plausible parameterizations and is found to be robust to modifications of the economic environment
that help account for other important features of domestic and international aggregate fluctuations.


Espen Henriksen                                   Roman Sustek
University of California, Santa Barbara           Monetary Assessment and Strategy Division
2127 North Hall                                   Bank of England
Santa Barbara, CA 93106                           London
espen@econ.ucsb.edu                               Roman.Sustek@bankofengland.co.uk

Finn E. Kydland
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-9210
and NBER
kydland@econ.ucsb.edu
1       Introduction
A growing empirical literature shows that national inflation rates contain a large ‘global’
component (Ciccarelli and Mojon, 2010; Mumtaz and Surico, forthcoming; Neely and Rapach,
2008). Put simply, in the last half a century or so movements in inflation rates have been
highly synchronized across countries. A large literature has also established existence of
the ‘world business cycle’—recurrent fluctuations in real economic activity that tend to
coincide across countries—and characterized its salient features.1 Recently, a few studies
have investigated how the two sides of international comovements, nominal and real, are
empirically related to each other. Mumtaz, Simonelli, and Surico (2011) use a dynamic
factor model to jointly identify a world cycle in both output growth and inflation. They
find, among other things, that the ‘world’ factor generally contributes more to domestic
inflation than output growth and that its importance in domestic inflation has grown over
time. Wang and Wen (2007) document that cross-country correlations of inflation rates
are much higher than cross-country correlations of cyclical movements in output. Both
studies thus suggest that cross-country movements in the nominal environment are more
synchronized than cross-country movements in real activity.
   A part of the reason for the strong cross-country comovement of inflation uncovered
by the literature is the similarity in inflation trends across industrialized economies, which
occurred perhaps due to similar low-frequency changes in monetary policy: low inflation
in the 1960s, high in the 1970s, gradually declining in the 1980s, and low again since the
mid-1990s. Surprisingly though, as documented in the first part of this paper, fluctua-
tions in the nominal environment are substantially more synchronized across countries
than fluctuations in real activity even when we focus only at medium-term business-cycle
frequencies; that is, after removing low-frequency movements from the data. To the extent
that domestic monetary policy is more likely to be able to control the domestic nominal
environment than the real economy, it is not at all obvious why this should be the case.2
Accounting for this feature of the data within a theoretical framework therefore seems
important for our understanding of how domestic nominal variables are determined in
an international environment—an issue that has recently concerned policy makers.3 In
the second part of the paper we highlight a quantitatively important mechanism that can
account for this empirical regularity, yet appears consistent with a number of other im-
portant aspects of domestic and international aggregate fluctuations, both nominal and
    1
     See, among others, Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1992), Gregory, Head, and Raynauld (1997),
Kose, Otrok, and Whiteman (2003), and Kose, Otrok, and Whiteman (2008).
   2
     In addition, as discussed below, quantitative-theoretical models had a difficulty generating high cross-
country comovements of nominal variables.
   3
     See, for instance, Bean (2006), Bernanke (2007), Besley (2008), Mishkin (2007), and Sentance (2008).
real. The mechanism is based on cross-country spillovers of shocks and an interaction
between Taylor-type rules and domestic no-arbitrage conditions.
   We focus on two key nominal variables, the aggregate price level and the short-term
nominal interest rate—the monetary policy instrument. Our empirical observations are
based on a sample of the largest industrial economies.4 Using business cycle components—
medium-term fluctuations in the data with periodicity of approximately 8 to 32 quarters—
of aggregate price levels, short-term nominal interest rates, and real GDP obtained with
a band-pass filter, we find that the fluctuations in the three variables are similar in terms
of their volatility and persistence, but markedly different in terms of their cross-country
comovements.5 Specifically, for the period 1960.Q1–2006.Q4 the average bilateral correla-
tion of price levels is 0.52, that of short-term nominal interest rates 0.57, while that of real
GDP is only 0.25. Moreover, the bilateral correlations of the two nominal variables vary
substantially less across country pairs than those of real GDP. This empirical regularity
is broadly robust to the inclusion of other economies as the required data become avail-
able, the exclusion of the Bretton Woods period of fixed exchange rates, the exclusion of
commodity prices from price indexes, and to splitting the sample into two subsamples in
1984, the year generally associated with the start of the so-called “Great Moderation”—a
period of relatively low output volatility and a greater focus by central banks on nominal
stability. Furthermore, the findings are statistically significant.
   A large literature argues that monetary policy of major central banks is reasonably
well approximated by the so-called ‘Taylor rule’—a parsimonious feedback rule whereby
the central bank sets the short-term nominal interest rate in response to movements
in domestic output and changes in the domestic price level.6 The high cross-country
correlations of short-term nominal interest rates can thus potentially be accounted for
by the high cross-country correlations of prices. But in equilibrium, prices and nominal
interest rates are jointly determined. How, then, do responses of national central banks to
domestic economic conditions lead to substantially stronger cross-country comovements
of the two nominal variables than of output?
   4
     Namely, Australia, Canada, Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States for the
period 1960.Q1–2006.Q4. In addition, from 1970.Q1 our sample includes also Austria and France.
   5
     Focusing on the price level allows us to remove low-frequency movements from the data with only
one transformation. In contrast, filtering inflation leads to a double transformation of the price level,
as inflation is already a transformation—first difference—of the data. In addition, it allows us to treat
the price level in the same way as output, which in modern business cycle theory is usually filtered with
either the Hodrick-Prescott or a band-pass filter to arrive at business-cycle frequencies.
   6
     See, among many others, Taylor (1993) and Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000) for the United States,
Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1998) for most of the G7 countries, and Nelson (2000) for the United Kingdom.
Woodford (2003), chapter 1, provides a useful survey. Some studies estimate Taylor rules only for the post-
1979 period, although other, for example Clarida et al. (2000), Orphanides (2002), and Taylor (1999),
argue that a Taylor rule is a useful proxy for monetary policy also in the 1960s and 1970s.


                                                    2
   The mechanism presented in the second part of the paper follows in equilibrium mainly
from two, empirically plausible, assumptions: (i) Taylor rules provide a reasonable de-
scription of monetary policy in major industrialized economies and (ii) there are positive
spillovers of shocks across countries. No-arbitrage conditions between returns on domes-
tic nominal bonds and real capital (its marginal product) then provide a link between
expected future states of the economy, monetary policy, and current prices and interest
rates.
   We start by examining the mechanism within a fairly parsimonious baseline model—a
two-country economy where in each country a representative individual maximizes welfare
subject to stylized representations of the national income and product account identities,
as in Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1994) and Heathcote and Perri (2002).7 This is a
useful benchmark for at least three reasons: (i) a large class of dynamic general equilib-
rium models in international macroeconomics are various extensions of this model; (ii) the
mechanism in this model is quantitatively important; and (iii) the model allows a trans-
parent description and understanding of the mechanism. The only shocks in this model are
technology (i.e., total factor productivity, TFP) shocks. A number of studies document
positive spillovers, although of different strength, of such shocks across countries (e.g.,
Backus et al., 1992; Heathcote and Perri, 2002; Rabanal, Rubio-Ramirez, and Tuesta, forthcoming).
In addition, Ahmed, Ickes, Wang, and Yoo (1993) and Crucini, Kose, and Otrok (2011)
provide empirical support that TFP shocks play a dominant role in driving the world
business cycle.
    We find that the mechanism is quantitatively important for even some of the smallest
estimates of spillovers of such shocks found in the literature. In addition, the mechanism
turns out to be quantitatively important for a broad range of plausible parameter values
of the Taylor rule, shopping time technology, import share of GDP, and the elasticity of
substitution between domestic and foreign goods in final expenditures. It is also robust
to alternative assumptions about the structure of international asset markets. This is
because domestic no-arbitrage conditions for real and nominal assets, rather than cross-
country no-arbitrage conditions, are of first-order importance for the workings of the
   7
    Two studies have previously investigated the implications of two-country business cycle models for
cross-country correlations of nominal variables. Kollmann (2001) constructs a model with sticky prices
and wages, and technology and money supply shocks with cross-country spillovers. The model does
not generate high cross-country correlations for both prices and interest rates. A baseline version with
only technology shocks and no nominal rigidities produces very low cross-country correlations for both
nominal variables. Wang and Wen (2007) demonstrate that neither a prototypical sticky-price model nor
a sticky-information model (both set off by money supply shocks) can generate at the same time high
cross-country correlations of inflation and realistic dynamics of inflation in relation to domestic output.
Both papers model monetary policy as an exogenous stochastic process for money growth, rather than
as a Taylor rule.



                                                    3
mechanism.
   In a recursive competitive equilibrium the absence of arbitrage between returns on
a country’s real capital and nominal bonds, together with a Taylor rule, implies that
the country’s current price level and the nominal interest rate depend on the country’s
expected output and real returns to capital (i.e., its marginal product) in all future periods.
Intuitively, agents anticipate future responses of the central bank to the state of the
economy and the current interest rate and the price level reflect these expectations. Due to
positive spillovers of technology shocks across countries, a persistent domestic technology
shock affects not only current and future productivity in the domestic economy, but
also future productivity in the foreign economy—over time productivity in the foreign
economy is expected to catch up with productivity in the domestic economy. Thus,
although current output (determined in equilibrium in large part by the current level of
technology) in the two economies may be different, future output and marginal product of
capital are expected to converge to similar paths, leading to similar responses of current
prices and nominal interest rates. Interestingly, even though prices are fully flexible and
forward looking, in equilibrium the price level turns out to be relatively smooth and its
changes, that is inflation, are persistent.
   As is well known, the baseline model, like many other models, falls short of ac-
counting for a number of features of international and domestic aggregate fluctuations.
Two features that are of particular relevance, given our focus on nominal fluctuations,
are: (i) the high volatility of nominal exchange rates in combination with smooth price
levels (the so-called Mussa, 1986, puzzle) and (ii) the (strikingly similar across coun-
tries) lead-lag pattern of correlations of the domestic price level and nominal inter-
est rate with domestic output, which we refer to as the ‘domestic nominal business
cycle’. Recent studies (Canzoneri, Cumby, and Diba, 2007; Atkeson and Kehoe, 2008;
Alvarez, Atkeson, and Kehoe, 2009; Backus, Gavazzoni, Telmer, and Zin, 2010) argue that
exchange rate and interest rate fluctuations over the business cycle are structurally related
to cyclical distortions in standard asset-market Euler equations that occur due to vari-
ous ‘frictions’, such as limited participation, time-varying risk aversion, or time-varying
uncertainty.
   We are agnostic about the exact form of such distortions and capture their effects
by introducing ‘wedges’, in the form of distortionary taxes, into Euler equations in the
baseline model. We then choose their joint stochastic processes with technology shocks
to match the observed exchange rate dynamics and the domestic nominal business cycle.
Such extensions, while making the model consistent with the two aforementioned facts, do
not overturn the basic implications of the mechanism for the cross-country correlations of


                                              4
the two nominal variables relative to that of output. We also show how other distortions
in the equilibrium conditions of the baseline model affect the mechanism, thus outlining
how the mechanism may work in various specific extensions with detailed frictions that
other researchers may consider.
   The outline of the rest of the paper is as follows. Section 2 documents the empirical
regularities, Section 3 introduces the baseline model, Section 4 describes its calibration,
Section 5 presents quantitative findings, Section 6 explains the mechanism, Section 7
conducts sensitivity analysis, Section 8 studies the robustness of the mechanism to the
aforementioned extensions, and Section 9 concludes.


2       Properties of nominal business cycles
Our empirical analysis is mainly based on quarterly data for real GDP, price levels mea-
sured by the consumer price index, and short-term nominal interest rates, usually yields on
3-month government bills, which we take as a proxy for interest rates controlled by mon-
etary policy. The data are for Australia, Canada, Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom,
and the United States, for the period 1960.Q1-2006.Q4. In addition, we include Austria
and France from 1970.Q1.8 All statistics discussed in this section are for business-cycle
components of the three variables obtained with the Christiano and Fitzgerald (2003)
band-pass filter. Before applying the filter, the series for real GDP and price levels were
transformed by taking natural logarithms. Their fluctuations are thus measured as per-
centage deviations from ‘trend’.


2.1     International nominal business cycles
We calculate the bilateral cross-country correlations for the two nominal variables (i.e., the
correlations of a country’s variable with the same variable of each of the other countries)
and compare them with those for real GDP. Figure 1 provides a graphical representation
of the main finding. It plots the bilateral correlations of the price levels and the nominal
interest rates against the bilateral correlations of output for the six-country sample. As we
can see, all but one point lie above the 45-degree line, meaning that for almost all country
    8
    For other developed economies, the required data are jointly available only from either late 1970s
or early 1980s. However, we prefer to trade off the number of countries for series that include both
the relatively stable 1960s, as well as the volatile 1970s. Furthermore, most of the economies for which
the data are available from either late 1970s or early 1980s are European economies that participated
in the EMS. Including those countries into our sample would therefore make the sample biased towards
economies that operated under a fixed exchange rate for most of our sample period (see the discussion
below on how this may potentially affect our empirical findings).



                                                   5
pairs, the bilateral correlations of the two nominal variables are higher than those of real
GDP. In addition, the correlations for the two nominal variables are also less dispersed.
    The individual correlations are reported in Table 1, for the six-country sample going
back to 1960.Q1, and in Table 2 for the eight-country sample, which goes back to 1970.Q1.
In the six-country sample, for all 15 pairs the bilateral correlation of nominal interest rates
is higher than that of output, and in all but one case the bilateral correlation of prices is
also higher. The mean (in the cross-section) bilateral correlations of the nominal interest
rates and the price levels are 0.57 and 0.52, respectively—about twice the mean bilateral
correlation of real GDP, which is 0.27. In addition, the coefficients of variation (i.e., the
standard deviations divided by the corresponding mean) of the bilateral correlations of the
nominal interest rates and the price levels are 0.22 and 0.28, respectively, while that of the
bilateral correlations of real GDP is 0.89. This clearly indicates that, as mentioned above,
the bilateral correlations of the two nominal variables are substantially less dispersed in
the cross-section than those of real GDP.
   For each country pair Table 1 also reports (in parentheses) the 5th percentiles for øR
                                                                                        ij =
corr(Ri , Rj ) − corr(GDPi , GDPj ) and øpij = corr(pi , pj ) − corr(GDPi , GDPj ), respectively.
The percentiles are obtained by bootstrapping from the sample (see Hardle, Horowitz, and Kreiss,
2001) and provide a test of statistical significance that the observed cross-country corre-
lations of the two nominal variables are higher than those of real GDP. A value of the
5th percentile greater than zero indicates that with 95% probability the ‘true’ bilateral
correlation of the nominal interest rates (or prices) for a given country pair is greater than
that of output. The percentiles are also computed for the mean values of the bilateral
correlations in the cross-section. We see that the bilateral correlations of the nominal
interest rates are significantly higher than those of output in 11 cases out of 15 and the
correlations of prices are higher in 10 cases. In addition, the mean bilateral correlations
for both nominal variables are significantly higher than that for output.
    These findings broadly hold also in the eight-country sample (2). Here in 19 cases
out of 28 the bilateral correlations of the nominal interest rates are higher than those
of output (15 significantly) and in 22 cases the bilateral correlations of prices are higher
(15 significantly). The mean bilateral correlations of the nominal interest rates and the
price levels are both 0.59, while that of real GDP is only 0.43 and these differences are
statistically significant. Finally, the coefficients of variation are around 0.2 for the two
nominal variables, and slightly above 0.5 for real GDP.
   Even though the two nominal variables differ markedly from output in terms of their
cross-country comovements, they are comparably volatile and persistent. For example,
the mean standard deviation of output in the sample of the six countries is 1.39, while


                                              6
the mean standard deviation of the price level is 1.28 and that of the nominal interest
rate is 1.319 ; and the mean first-order autocorrelation coefficient of output is 0.92, while
that of the price level is 0.94 and that of the nominal interest rate is 0.91.

2.1.1    Robustness checks

For a part of our sample period—the Bretton Woods years—national monetary policies
were constrained by governments’ obligations to maintain fixed exchange rates with the
dollar. It is well known that under fixed exchange rates the domestic economy is not
insulated from nominal shocks originating abroad.10 In order to check that the high
cross-country correlations of prices and nominal interest rates are not driven by the Bret-
ton Woods agreement, we report in Tables 1 and 2 also the mean bilateral correlations
and coefficients of variation for the period 1974.Q1-2006.Q4, which excludes the Bretton
Woods years. The summary statistics are, however, little changed.
  Global commodity price shocks may be another source of the strong cross-country
comovements of the price indexes (and thus, through a Taylor-type rule, of the nominal
interest rates). We therefore computed the cross-country correlations of CPI stripped off
energy and food prices for those countries for which such data series are long enough.
These are Austria, Canada, France, Germany, Japan, and the United States. The data,
which are available from 1970.Q1, come from Mumtaz and Surico (forthcoming).11 We
found that for 10 out of the 15 country pairs the correlations of prices are still higher
than the correlations of real GDP. The mean bilateral correlation of the price levels is 0.6,
while that of output is 0.5, and the difference is statistically significant. This finding is
in line with the results of Mumtaz and Surico (forthcoming) who report that, except for
the 1970s, there is little empirical relationship between oil and other commodity prices
on one hand and changes in headline aggregate price indexes on the other.
   After the ‘Great Inflation’ of the 1970s, most central banks in industrialized economies
adopted a much tougher stance on inflation. In order to check if this policy change
affects the cross-country correlations, we split the sample into two subsamples in 1984,
the year broadly associated with the start of the so-called ‘Great Moderation’—a period
of relatively low output variability and substantially more stable nominal environment.
The summary statistics for the cross-section are contained in Tables 1 and 2. We see that
although the mean cross-country correlations of all three variables declined after 1984,
   9
     The standard deviations of the nominal interest rates are for fluctuations measured in percentage
points.
  10
     Some researchers (e.g., Eichengreen, 1996), however, argue that during the Bretton Woods period
central banks were able to retain a significant degree of monetary autonomy by imposing various capital
controls, and thus were able to control the domestic nominal environment.
  11
     We thank Paolo Surico for providing us with the data.


                                                  7
those of the two nominal variables remained substantially (and statistically significantly)
higher than that of output. For example, in the eight-country sample, the post-1984 mean
bilateral correlation of the nominal interest rates is 0.46, that of the price levels is 0.45,
while that of real GDP is only 0.19.


2.2    Domestic nominal business cycles
Kydland and Prescott (1990) have pointed out that a key characteristic of the nominal
side of the U.S. business cycle is a countercyclical behavior of prices—i.e., the aggregate
price level is negatively correlated with output over the business cycle. Backus and Kehoe
(1992) and Mumtaz et al. (2011) extend this finding to a number of developed economies.
The left-hand side panel of Figure 2 confirms this. The figure plots the correlation of a
country’s price level in period t+j with its output in period t, for j ∈ {−5, −4, −3, −2, −1,
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5}. We see that for all economies in our sample, the contemporaneous correla-
tion (i.e., that for j = 0) is negative. Another striking feature of the data is the systematic
phase shift of the price level—in all countries the price level is more negatively correlated
with future output than with current output.12
    In the right-hand side panel of Figure 2 we extend this analysis to the nominal interest
rate. As in the case of the price level, the dynamics of the nominal interest rate exhibit a
clear phase shift—the nominal interest rate is strongly negatively correlated with future
output and positively correlated with past output. Although this dynamics of the nominal
interest rate is well known for the United States (e.g., King and Watson, 1996), as in the
case of the price level, it is striking that it extends to other developed economies. As a
robustness check on the mechanism investigated, we therefore explore if the mechanism
can be consistent with both, the high cross-country correlations of prices and nominal
interest rates, as well as with the lead-lag patterns in Figure 2.


3     Baseline model
The baseline model economy consists of two countries, each populated by a represen-
tative individual who maximizes welfare subject to stylized representations of the na-
tional income and product account identities. In each country, there are two nomi-
nal assets: money and one-period bonds. Monetary policy is conducted according to
a Taylor-type rule. The real side of the economy is founded on Backus et al. (1994) and
Heathcote and Perri (2002).
 12
     A related finding has been documented for inflation rates by Fuhrer and Moore (1995) and
Galı́ and Gertler (1999) for the United States and by Wang and Wen (2007) for other countries.


                                              8
    Before proceeding, we set our notation and terminology. A world economy consists
of two countries, denoted 1 and 2, which are populated by equal measures of identical,
infinitely lived consumers. Producers in each country use country-specific capital and
labor to produce a single good, which we refer to as a ‘local’ good. The good produced
in country 1 is labeled by a, while that produced in country 2 is labeled by b. These are
the only goods traded in the world economy. Within each country, goods a and b are
combined to form a good that can be used for local consumption and investment, and
which we refer to as an ‘expenditure’ good.


3.1     Preferences and technology
Preferences of the representative consumer in country i are characterized by the utility
function
                                         X
                                         ∞
                                    E0         β t U (cit , 1 − nit − sit ) ,                       (1)
                                         t=0
                                                      1−γ
where U (c, 1 − n − s) = cµ (1 − n − s)1−µ                     / (1 − γ), with 0 < µ < 1 and γ ≥ 0, and
where cit is consumption, nit is time spent working, and sit is time spent in transaction-
related activities. This ‘shopping time’ is given by the following parametric representation
                                                                    κ2
                                                           pit cit
                                          sit = κ1                         ,                        (2)
                                                            mit

where κ1 > 0, κ2 ≥ 1, pit is the domestic price level (i.e., the price of country i’s expendi-
ture good in terms of country i’s money), and mit is domestic nominal money balances.
   Consumers supply labor and capital to domestically located, perfectly competitive pro-
ducers, who have access to an aggregate Cobb-Douglas production function zit H (kit , nit ) =
zit kitα nit1−α = yit . Here, zit is a country-specific technology level, kit is capital, yit is out-
put of the local good (either a or b), and 0 < α < 1 is the capital share in production.
Technologies in the two countries follow a joint first-order autoregressive process

                        λt+1 = A0 + Aλt + εt+1 ,                      εt+1 ∼ N (0, Σ) ,             (3)

where λt = [ln z1t , ln z2t ]′ . Market clearing for goods a and b requires

                                a1t + a2t = y1t       and b1t + b2t = y2t ,                         (4)

where a1t is the amount of good a used by country 1, while a2t is the amount used by
country 2. Similarly, b1t is the amount of good b used by country 1, while b2t is the amount


                                                        9
used by country 2.
   Consumption and investment are composites of foreign and domestic goods

                     c1t + x1t = G (a1t , b1t )        and c2t + x2t = G (b2t , a2t ) ,                   (5)

                                                                      −(1/ρ)
where xit is investment, and G (a, b) = (ω1 a−ρ + ω2 b−ρ )                     , with 0 < ω1 < 1, ω2 = 1−ω1 ,
and ρ ≥ −1. Here, ω1 determines the extent to which there is a home bias in domestic
expenditures and ρ controls the elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign
goods. Investment contributes to capital accumulation according to the law of motion

                                       ki,t+1 = (1 − δ) kit + xit ,                                       (6)

where 0 < δ < 1 is a depreciation rate.
   The prices of goods a and b in terms of the expenditure good of country 1 are deter-
mined competitively, and therefore given by the marginal products of these two goods

                            a      ∂G (a1t , b1t )            b      ∂G (a1t , b1t )
                           q1t =                   ,         q1t =                   .                    (7)
                                      ∂a1t                              ∂b1t

Similarly, the prices of the two goods in terms of country 2’s expenditure good are given
by
                            a      ∂G (b2t , a2t )            b      ∂G (b2t , a2t )
                           q2t =                   ,         q2t =                   .                    (8)
                                      ∂a2t                              ∂b2t
Using these prices, we can measure output of the two countries in terms of their respective
                        a                       a           b                        b
expenditure goods as q1t  z1t H (k1t , n1t ) = q1t y1t and q2t z2t H (k2t , n2t ) = q2t y2t . This is the
definition of real GDP employed by Heathcote and Perri (2002) which we adopt. We thus
                                      a                    b
use the following notation GDP1t ≡ q1t  y1t and GDP2t ≡ q2t  y2t . Total expenditures in
each country are related to GDP as

               a         b
                                                                  b         a
                                                                                   
  c1t + x1t + q1t a2t − q1t b1t = GDP1t           and c2t + x2t + q2t b1t − q2t a2t = GDP2t , (9)

where the expressions in the parentheses are net exports, denoted by nx1t and nx2t ,
respectively. These equalities follow from combining the resource constraints (5) with
the goods-market-clearing conditions (4), and from using the constant-returns-to-scale
property of the G(., .) functions, together with the pricing functions (7) and (8). Each
resulting equality is then pre-multiplied by the price of the local goods to obtain equations
(9).




                                                        10
3.2     Monetary policy
A central bank in each country controls the nominal rate of return Rit on a one-period
domestically traded bond, which pays one unit of country i’s money in all states of the
world in period t + 1. The central bank sets the rate of return according to a feedback
rule
            Rit = (1 − φ) [R + νy (ln GDPit − ln GDP ) + νπ (πit − π)] + φRi,t−1 ,               (10)

where πit ≡ ln pit − ln pi,t−1 is the inflation rate, and a variable’s symbol without a time
subscript represents the variable’s steady-state value. In line with the literature we allow
for the possibility that the central bank ‘smooths’ the nominal interest rate by putting a
weight 0 < φ < 1 on the past interest rate. The central bank then elastically supplies,
through lump-sum transfers vit to consumers, whatever amount of nominal money bal-
ances the consumers demand. Demand for money is implicitly defined by a first-order
condition for money
                            unt smt = (uct + unt sct )[1 + 1/(1 + Rt )],                         (11)

which follows from the consumer’s problem described in the definition of the equilibrium
                        ′
below. Here, smt = s(.) (pt /mt )2 ct , and unt , for example, is the derivative of the utility
function with respect to nt (for simplicity of notation the country subscripts have been
dropped). The nominal money stock thus evolves as

                                        mit = mi,t−1 + vit .                                     (12)

We do not justify this monetary policy rule in terms of its welfare implications. We simply
take it as the most parsimonious, empirically plausible, approximation of monetary policy
in industrialized economies, as suggested by the literature, and study its implications for
the cross-country behavior of nominal variables.


3.3     Consumer’s budget constraint
Consumers hold money in order to economize on shopping time. In addition, they accu-
mulate capital, a one-period internationally traded bond fit , which pays one unit of good
a in all states of the world in period t + 1, and the domestically traded bond, which we
denote by dit .13 Measured in terms of the domestic expenditure good, the consumer’s
  13
    As in Heathcote and Perri (2002), the denomination of the internationally traded bond has only
second-order effects on equilibrium, which are not captured by our computational method. The denomi-
nation of the bond thus does not affect the computed equilibrium allocations and prices. We could also
extend the model by allowing consumers in country i to hold the nominal bond of country j, but this
would only clutter the model without affecting the computed equilibrium. The existence of such a bond


                                                 11
budget constraint is

 qita fit         dit       mit                                                          di,t−1 mi,t−1 vit
            +             +     + cit + xit = qitς (ritk kit + wit nit ) + qita fi,t−1 +       +      + ,
1+    rtf   pit (1 + Rit ) pit                                                            pit    pit    pit
                                                                                                       (13)
where rtf is the real rate of return (in terms of good a) on the internationally traded bond,
ritk is the rate of return on domestic capital, equal in equilibrium to the marginal product
of capital zit Hk (kit , nit ), wit is the wage rate, and qitς is equal to q1t
                                                                            a
                                                                               in the case of country
            b
1, and to q2t in the case of country 2.


3.4         Terms of trade and exchange rates
Following Backus et al. (1994), terms of trade e are defined as the price of good b in terms
of good a
                                              b    a     b    a
                                        et ≡ q1t /q1t = q2t /q2t ,                                    (14)

where the equality holds in equilibrium. And following Heathcote and Perri (2002), the
real exchange rate is defined as the price of the expenditure good of country 2 relative
                                                                a       a       a    a
to the price of the expenditure good of country 1, i.e. (1/q1t    )/(1/q2t ) = q2t /q1t , which,
                                            b    b
by applying relationship (14), is equal to q2t /q1t . An increase in this ratio represents an
appreciation of the real exchange rate from country 1’s perspective as less of this country’s
expenditure good (relative to the amount of country 2’s expenditure good) is needed to
purchase one unit of good a or b. The nominal exchange rate is consequently defined as

                                               a    a
                                      nert = (q2t /q1t )(p2t /p1t ).                                  (15)


3.5         Recursive competitive equilibrium
In each country, the consumer chooses state-contingent plans for cit , xit , ki,t+1 , mit , dit ,
fit , nit , and sit in order to maximize (1) subject to (2), (6), and (13), taking all prices
as given. In all states of the world, the prices of capital and labor services, and of the
two local goods a and b, are given by their respective marginal products. In period t the
state of the world economy is defined by the vector of technology levels λ, a vector of
domestic endogenous state variables Υi = (pi,t−1 , Ri,t−1 , kit , ϑi,t−1 , fi,t−1 ), and a vector of
foreign state variables Υj = (pj,t−1 , Rj,t−1 , kjt , ϑj,t−1 , fj,t−1), where ϑi,t−1 ≡ di,t−1 + mi,t−1 ,
and similarly for ϑj,t−1 .
would imply a no-arbitrage condition involving the nominal exchange rate, but this no-arbitrage condi-
tion (in its first-order approximation) holds even without such a complication. Further, as consumers of
country i do not ‘shop’ in country j, they would never want to hold money of country j. We can thus
also abstract from cross-border money holdings.


                                                    12
    The equilibrium of the world economy is then characterized by a set of pricing functions
for each country {rik (λ, Υi , Υj ), wi (λ, Υi , Υj ), qia (λ, Υi , Υj ), qib (λ, Υi , Υj ), pi (λ, Υi , Υj ),
Ri (λ, Υi , Υj )}, a set of aggregate decision rules for each country {ni (λ, Υi , Υj ), ki (λ, Υi , Υj ),
mi (λ, Υi , Υj ), di (λ, Υi , Υj ), fi (λ, Υi , Υj )}, and a pricing function for the rate of return
on the internationally traded bond r f (λ, Υi , Υj ), such that the allocations and prices
generated by these functions satisfy the consumer’s optimization problem, the resource
constraints (5), the goods-market-clearing conditions (4), a market-clearing condition for
domestically traded bonds dit = 0, a market-clearing condition for the internationally
traded bond f1 + f2 = 0, and the monetary policy rule (10).14


4      Calibration
Table 3 summarizes the parameter values for our benchmark experiment. Results of a
thorough sensitivity analysis are reported in Section 7. As preferences and technology are
the same as in Backus et al. (1994), the parameters of utility and production functions,
and of the stochastic process for technology shocks, are either the same as in their paper,
or are calibrated to the same targets. We therefore do not discuss them here and refer
the reader to their paper for details.
   The parameters of the shopping time function (2) are chosen so that the money demand
function in the model has the same interest rate elasticity and implies the same average
velocity of money as its empirical counterpart estimated for the United States. The money
demand function in the model is given implicitly by the consumer’s first-order condition
for money holdings, which in steady state has the form
                                          pc κ2 p        
                                                      1   R
                                   κ1 κ2            =         .
                                           m      m   w 1+R

Setting the curvature parameter κ2 equal to 1, the money demand function becomes
                                                     0.5
                                       m             1
                                         = κ1 cw 1 +         ,
                                       p             R

which has interest elasticity equal to −0.5, in line with a number of empirical studies (see
Lucas, 2000). We set the level parameter κ1 equal to 0.0054, which implies annual velocity
  14
     We compute log-linear approximations to the equilibrium decision rules and pricing functions
in the neighborhood of the model’s non-stochastic steady-state, using the method described by
Hansen and Prescott (1995). Before computing the equilibrium, all nominal variables are transformed so
that they are stationary. Following Heathcote and Perri (2002) we also impose a tiny quadratic cost of
adjusting holdings of the internationally traded bond in the consumer’s optimization problem in order to
ensure stationarity of international bond holdings.


                                                     13
of money equal to 6.1—the average U.S. annual velocity of M1 in the period 1959-2006.
   The estimates of the parameters of the monetary policy rule (10) vary greatly in
the literature, depending on the countries considered, periods covered, and the exact
specification of the rule. For our benchmark experiment we set the weight on inflation
νπ equal to 1.5 and the weight on output νy equal to 0.125—the values used by Taylor
(1993).15 In addition, we set the steady-state inflation rate π equal to 0.0091—the average
quarterly inflation rate in the United States between 1959 and 2006—and the smoothing
coefficient φ equal to 0.75, which is within the range of estimates obtained in the literature
(e.g., Clarida et al., 2000; Sack and Wieland, 2000).


5      Quantitative findings
This section reports quantitative findings for the benchmark calibration. We organize
it in two parts: cross-country correlations and correlations of domestic variables with
domestic output. Although the results for real variables are well known, we report them
for completeness. As we will see later, certain features of the dynamics of the real economy
have implications for the dynamics of the nominal variables.


5.1     International business cycle
Table 4 reports the cross-country correlations of the price levels, the nominal interest
rates, and output for the model and the data (the cross-sectional averages). As in
the case of the data, the artificial series generated by the model are filtered with the
Christiano and Fitzgerald (2003) filter. The statistics for the model are averages for 100
runs of the model.
   We see that the baseline model generates the main feature of the international nominal
business cycle: The cross-country correlations of the price levels and the nominal interest
rates are substantially higher than that of output. In addition, in line with the data, the
cross-country correlations of the price levels and the nominal interest rates are similar.
Furthermore, the model’s quantitative predictions are reasonably close to the data as
well. In particular, in the model the cross-country correlations of the price levels and the
nominal interest rates are 0.69 and 0.68, respectively, while the cross-country correlation of
real GDP is only 0.23. In the data the mean values of these correlations are, respectively,
0.52, 0.57, and 0.27 for the six country sample going back to 1960.Q1, and 0.59, 0.59,
  15
    Taylor uses the weight on output equal to 0.5. This value is scaled down by four in our calibration in
order to make it consistent with the nominal interest rate and inflation in our model, which are measured
at quarterly rates, rather than annual rates as in his paper.



                                                   14
and 0.43 for the eight-country sample starting in 1970.Q1. It is important to stress that
this result was not generated by deliberate choice of parameter values. Recall that the
parameterization of the real side of the economy is based on Backus et al. (1994), while the
parameterization of the nominal side is based on empirical properties of money demand
functions and ‘standard’ values of the Taylor rule.


5.2    Domestic business cycle
Table 5 reports the usual, in the literature, statistics for the model’s domestic business
cycle and compares them with those of the U.S. economy, which we take as representative
(Backus and Kehoe, 1992; Backus et al., 1994; Zimmermann, 1997). In particular, we
report the standard deviations of key domestic variables, relative to that of real GDP,
and their correlations with real GDP at various leads and lags. We also report the J-
curve—a dynamic relationship between net exports and the terms of trade.
   We see that the model accounts for about 80 percent of GDP fluctuations and, in line
with the data, produces consumption about half as volatile as GDP, investment about
three times as volatile as GDP, and net exports about 25 percent as volatile as GDP.
Hours, however, are somewhat less volatile in the model than in the data. In addition,
in line with the data, consumption, investment, and hours are procyclical, while net
exports are countercyclical. Furthermore, the model generates a J-curve—net exports are
negatively correlated with future terms of trade and positively correlated with past terms
of trade.
    As for the two nominal variables, the model correctly generates a countercyclical price
level and produces standard deviations of the price level and the nominal interest rate,
relative to that of GDP, similar to those for the U.S. economy. However, the model fails
to produce the empirical lead-lag pattern of the price level and the comovement between
output and the nominal interest rate—in the model price level lags output negatively and
the nominal interest rate is negatively correlated with output contemporaneously without
any phase shift. This failure is not surprising—these are well known anomalies, at least
for the United States, and we would therefore not expect the baseline model to account for
them. However, as a robustness check, in Subsection 7.3, we make the model consistent
with the observed dynamics of the two nominal variables in relation with domestic output
and ask if the model can still produce higher cross-country correlations of the two nominal
variables than that of output.
   Table 5 also reports the cyclical behavior of the nominal exchange rate. This is for
completeness as the exchange rate and the two nominal interest rates are structurally
related in the model (more on this below). It is clear that the exchange rate is substantially


                                             15
less volatile in the model than in the data and that its lead-lag relationship with real GDP
is opposite to that in the data.16 Again, capturing the observed exchange rate dynamics
within theoretical models is a well known challenge. As a robustness check, in Subsection
7.4 we repeat our experiments while aligning the model more closely with the observed
exchange rate behavior.


6      The mechanism
We can gain understanding of our main result by plotting the responses of the model’s
variables to a 1% positive technology shock. These responses are contained in Figure
3. As the focus is on nominal variables, we describe the responses of the real variables
only briefly and refer the reader to Backus et al. (1994) and Heathcote and Perri (2002).
In this section it is useful to abstract from the effects of nominal variables on the real
economy, which in our model occur (through the first-order condition for money) due to
an inflation tax. This tax affects the real money balances held by the consumer and thus
the allocation of time between transactions, work, and leisure. These effects are small for
the benchmark calibration and taking them into account would unnecessarily complicate
the description of the mechanism without changing the main insight.


6.1      Real variables
Because the shocks in the two countries are correlated, a 1% increase in technology in
country 1 leads, on impact, to an increase in technology in country 2 by 0.258%, where
0.258 is the correlation coefficient of the ε’s. More importantly, due to spillovers, technol-
ogy in country 2 gradually catches up with technology in country 1. As a result of a higher
current and expected future technology level, consumption in both countries increases,
but it increases by less in country 2 than in country 1. There are two reasons for this.
First, the net present value of country 2’s future income is smaller than that of country 1.
This is because technology in country 2 does not reach the level of technology in country
1 for a while. Second, there is intertemporal trade between the two countries: in order
to take advantage of higher total factor productivity, country 1 increases investment by
borrowing from country 2. Country 2 is thus giving up some of its current consumption
in return for higher future consumption. This intertemporal trade is reflected in the de-
cline of net exports of country 1, and the increase in the real return on the internationally
traded bond. Because of the initially higher technology level in country 1, GDP is initially
  16
    As the ratio of the price levels in the data is relatively little volatile, the dynamics of real and nominal
exchange rates in the data are similar.


                                                      16
higher in country 1 than in country 2 (also labor is higher due to intertemporal substitu-
tion). However, as technology in country 2 catches up with technology in country 1, GDP
in country 2 catches up with GDP in country 1. As a result of initially higher output in
country 1, the price of good a falls, reflecting its abundance in the world market relative
to good b. The terms of trade of country 1 therefore worsen, following the technology
shock.


6.2      Nominal variables
The dynamics of the price level and the nominal interest rate are determined by the
interaction between Taylor rules and no-arbitrage conditions.

6.2.1    Domestic and international no-arbitrage relations

The Euler equations for the accumulation of capital, and domestic and foreign bonds in
country i are, respectively,
                                                k
                                                          
                                  Et Qit 1 + ri,t+1   −δ     = 1,
                                                        
                                       1
                           Et Qit                (1 + Rit ) = 1,
                                   1 + πi,t+1
                                    a                   
                                        qi,t+1          f
                               Et Qit      a
                                                  (1 + rt ) = 1,
                                          qi,t

where Qit ≡ β(Uc,t+1 − Ul,t+1 sc,t+1 )/(Uct − Ult sct ) is country i’s stochastic discount factor.
It is convenient to log-linearize these conditions around the model’s non-stochastic steady
state (as preferences are standard time-additive expected utility CRRA preferences, little
is lost by log-linearization)

                                             bit + Et rbk
                                          Et Q          i,t+1 = 0,                           (16)
                                    bit + Et Q
                                    R        bit − Et π  bi,t+1 = 0,                         (17)
                                 f      bit + Et qba − qba = 0,
                               rbt + Et Q                                                    (18)
                                                   i,t+1      it


        k
where rbi,t+1      k
               ≡ (ri,t+1                        bit ≡ (Rit − R)/(1 + R), π
                         − r k )/(1 + r k − δ), R                        bit ≡ (πit − π)/(1 +
      f        f    f           f
π), rbt ≡ (rt − r )/(1 + r ) are percentage deviations of the gross rates from steady
state, and Q  bit ≡ log Qit − log Qi is the percentage deviation of the stochastic discount
factor. Combining equations (16) and (17), and (16) and (18), then gives, respectively,
a no-arbitrage condition for domestic real and nominal assets, and for real domestic and




                                                17
international assets

                                     k
                                Et rbi,t+1   bit − Et π
                                           = R        bi,t+1 ,                           (19)
                                     k
                                Et rbi,t+1 = rbtf + Et qbi,t+1
                                                         a
                                                               − qbita .                 (20)

In addition, combining equation (20) for country 1 with that for country 2 gives a rela-
tionship between the return to capital in the two countries

                        k            a         a
                                                          a      a           k
                   Et rb1,t+1 + Et qb2,t+1 − qb1,t+1   − (b
                                                          q2t − qb1t ) = Et rb2,t+1 ,    (21)

           a         a
                                a      a
where Et qb2,t+1 − qb1,t+1   − (b
                                q2t − qb1t ) is the expected change in the real exchange rate.
Notice, that due to the expected changes in the real exchange rate, the expected real
returns on capital in the two countries do not need to be equalized. In addition, using
a log-linearized version of equation (15) together with equation (19), we can re-write
equation (21) in its nominal form as

                                 b1t + Et n
                                 R        d         d
                                           er t+1 − n       b2t .
                                                     er t = R                            (22)

This is, of course, the standard ‘uncovered interest rate parity’ condition.

6.2.2   Equilibrium prices and nominal interest rates

Abstracting from the small inflation tax effects, we can think of the real variables as
being determined independently of the nominal variables. Thus, given the equilibrium
real quantities and prices, whose dynamics were described above, the equilibrium nominal
interest rate and the price level in country i are determined by the no-arbitrage condition
for real and nominal assets (19) and the (log-linearized) Taylor rule

                                       bit = νeπ π
                                       R         bit + νey Ybit ,                        (23)

where νeπ ≡ νπ (1 + π)/(1 + R), νey ≡ νy /(1 + R), and Ybit ≡ log GDPit − log GDP , and
where for expositional reasons we set φ equal to zero (the argument, however, holds even
for non-zero φ). Combining the equilibrium conditions (19) and (23) yields a first-order
difference equation in inflation

                                   k
                              Et rbi,t+1                   bit + νey Ybit .
                                              bi,t+1 = νeπ π
                                         + Et π                                          (24)




                                                  18
For νπ > 1, equation (24) can be solved by forward substitution, excluding unstable
equilibria that lead to either hyperinflations or hyperdeflations.17 For a given pt−1 , this
gives pt as a difference between the expected discounted sum of future real returns to
capital and the expected discounted sum of current and future output
                                  "∞            #          "∞             #
                                   X 1 j                      X 1 j
              pbit = pbi,t−1 + Et           k
                                          rbi,t+j   − νey Et         Ybi,t+j−1 ,                     (25)
                                   j=1
                                       e
                                       νπ                     j=1
                                                                  e
                                                                  νπ


where the ‘discount factor’ is the inverse of the wight on inflation in the Taylor rule. The
current price level thus reflects the expected future paths of output and the real return
to capital.
    Intuitively, period-t price level has to be consistent, according to the Taylor rule, with
period-t output and the nominal interest rate, which (through the no-arbitrage condition
(19)) has to be consistent with the expected real return to capital and the price level in
period t + 1. Period-(t + 1) price level in turn has to be consistent with period-(t + 1)
output and the nominal interest rate, which has to be consistent with the expected real
return to capital and the price level in period t+2, and so on. As a result of this recursion,
period-t price level reflects all future states of the real economy.
  How is the equilibrium price level supported? As the monetary authority supplies
money elastically through lump-sum transfers, which in our setting are equivalent to
open market operations (see Cooley and Hansen, 1995), the price level is supported by
nominal money balances required by consumers to achieve real money balances dictated
by the first-order condition for money (11).
   Substituting the price level from equation (25) into the Taylor rule (23) then gives a
similar expression for the nominal interest rate
                             "    ∞     j−1         #          "∞           #
                                 X    1                           X 1 j
                  bit = Et
                  R                             k
                                              rbi,t+j   − νey Et         Ybi,t+j .                   (26)
                                 j=1
                                      e
                                      νπ                          j=1
                                                                      e
                                                                      νπ


Notice the slight differences in the indexes, compared with equation (25).

6.2.3    ‘Stickiness’ of prices and the role of international asset markets

Notice from equation (25) that by increasing the weight on inflation in the Taylor rule, we
can make the price level arbitrarily smooth—i.e., reduce its responsiveness to shocks. The
price level can thus appear fairly ‘sticky’ despite prices being fully flexible and forward-
  17
     Hyperinflations in the model are costly because they make agents spend an increasingly larger amount
of time in transaction-related activities, while hyperdeflations are costly because they lead to depletion
of capital.


                                                   19
looking. Notice also that we have used only the domestic no-arbitrage condition to arrive
at equations (25) and (26). The structure of international asset markets (i.e., the degree
of their completeness), which affects the form of the cross-country no-arbitrage conditions,
affects domestic prices and the nominal interest rate only to the extent to which it affects
the dynamics of yit and ritk .

6.2.4    Responses of prices and nominal interest rates to technology shocks

As follows from equation (21), due to real exchange rate movements, cross-country bor-
rowing and lending does not necessarily equate the returns to capital in the two economies.
This is indeed the case in our benchmark experiment, as we see in Figure 3: The return
to capital in country 1 increases on impact, while the return to capital in country 2 in-
creases only gradually as technology in country 2 catches up with technology in country
1. The expected discounted sums of the rates of return in the two countries nevertheless
increase on impact, as in both countries the return to capital is expected to stay above its
steady-state level for much of the duration of the technology shock. A similar argument
also applies to the expected discounted sums of output. Thus, although output differs
across the two countries between the impact period and the time when country 2 catches
up with country 1, the discounted sums increase on impact in both countries. Because the
price level and the nominal interest rate depend on the difference between the expected
discounted sums of returns to capital and GDP, the sign of their responses depends on
the relative weight on GDP in the Taylor rule. It turns out that, for our benchmark
experiment, the weight on GDP is sufficiently large, leading to a fall in price levels and
nominal interest rates in the two countries following the technology shock in country 1.
Notice that the changes in the price levels are gradual but sustained, implying a highly
persistent inflation rate—the first, second, and third-order autocorrelation coefficients of
the inflation rate, in the simulation of the model, are 0.87, 0.65, and 0.35, respectively.
   The movements in the nominal interest rates have implications for exchange rate
dynamics through the uncovered interest rate parity (22). As the nominal interest rate of
country 1 is below that of country 2 in the plots in Figure 3, the nominal exchange rate
is increasing (i.e., appreciating from the perspective of country 1).


7       Sensitivity analysis
In order to check robustness of the quantitative finding, we conduct a thorough sensitivity
analysis. Due to space constraints, we report results only for those experiments that lead
to noticeable changes in the main result. These are for the parameters of the monetary


                                            20
policy rule (νπ , νy , φ) and the degree of spillovers of technology shocks (A12 ). Varying the
elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods (σ), the steady-state import
share of GDP (b1 /y1 ), and the shopping-time parameters (κ1 , κ2 ) has only a limited effect.
In addition, as should be expected from the discussion in the previous section, changes in
the structure of international asset markets (in particular, we imposed financial autarky—
i.e., no international borrowing or lending) has only a limited effect.


7.1     Parameters of the Taylor rule
Figure 4 plots the cross-country correlations for output and the two nominal variables for
alternative values of νy , which we vary between -0.05 and 0.25—a range that covers most
of the estimates found in the literature.18 We see that except for a small interval between
0.025 and 0.06, the cross-country correlations of the price level and the nominal interest
rate are higher than that of real GDP.
   In the top panels of Figure 5 we plot the international correlations for alternative
weights on inflation. We plot these correlations for two alternative weights on output:
our benchmark weight of 0.125, and a zero weight. In empirical Taylor rules, νπ is usually
in the range from 0.8 to 2.5. In the model, however, when νπ is too close to one, the
equilibrium becomes indeterminate. This is a common feature of this class of models. We
therefore restrict νπ to be in the interval from 1.05 to 2.5. As can be seen, except for the
case of a zero weight on output, together with the weight on inflation being close to our
lower bound, the cross-country correlations of the two nominal variables are higher than
that of output. The large increase in the cross-country correlation of output in the right-
hand side panel is due to substantial inflation tax effects that kick in when the weight on
output is relatively large and the weight on inflation is relatively small.
    Some specifications of Taylor rules include a smoothing coefficient while others do not.
When the coefficient is included its estimates are usually in the range between 0.5 and
0.9 (see Woodford, 2003, chapter 1). The mid-panels of Figure 5 therefore report how the
cross-country correlations change when φ is varied between 0 and 0.99. We see that the
main result is robust to such variation.


7.2     Spillovers
The estimates of the spillover term in the transition matrix A vary in the literature.
Backus et al. (1992) estimate this term to be 0.088, our benchmark value, while Heathcote and Perri
  18
    These values are the values reported in the literature, divided by four in order to make them consistent
with the inflation and interest rates in the model, which are expressed at a quarterly rate.



                                                    21
(2002) obtain an estimate around 0.025. Baxter and Crucini (1995) find little evidence
for non-zero spillovers. We therefore vary A12 between 0 and 0.1. In all these experiments
the diagonal elements of A are adjusted so that the highest eigenvalue is the same as in
the benchmark experiment, thus keeping persistence of the shocks constant. We see in
the bottom panels of Figure 5 that except for the case of no spillovers, nominal variables
are correlated more strongly across countries than output. Crucially, the gap between
the cross-country correlations of the two nominal variables and that of GDP opens up
rapidly as we move away from the case of no spillovers. The quantitative implications of
the mechanism thus do not rely on unrealistically large spilovers. For example, even for a
modest degree of spillovers, such as that found by Heathcote and Perri (2002), the model
generates a gap between the cross-country correlations of the two nominal variables and
that of real GDP close to that observed in the data (for the benchmark value of 0.088 the
gap is too wide). For example, in the case of prices, the gap is about 0.35, when νy = 0,
and about 0.2, when νy = 0.125. However, as should be clear from the description of
the mechanism, the spillover term must be non-zero for the main result to hold at least
qualitatively.


8     Domestic nominal business cycle and exchange rate
      dynamics
This section derives expressions for equilibrium prices and nominal interest rates that hold
in the presence of various distortions, and carries out quantitative experiments for two
types of distortions that help align the model with the observed properties of domestic
nominal business cycles and exchange rate dynamics.


8.1    The mechanism in the presence of distortions
For researchers who would like to imbed the mechanism highlighted above into more
complex environments, it may be helpful to outline how various distortions may affect
the workings of the mechanism. We do so by drawing on the insight from business cycle
accounting (Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan, 2007) that the distortionary effects of vari-
ous frictions can be summarized by appropriately constructed distortionary taxes. In an
extension of this approach to monetary models, Sustek (forthcoming) shows that equilib-
rium inflation dynamics (when monetary policy is conducted according to a Taylor rule)




                                            22
can be characterized by a generalized version of the log-linear equation (24). Specifically,

                                   c ki,t+1 + χb τbitb + Et π
                   − χk τbitk + Et mp                                    bit + νey Ybit ,
                                                            bi,t+1 = νeπ π                  (27)

      c ki,t+1 is the marginal product of capital, τbitk is a tax on capital, which creates
where mp
a wedge between the market return to capital and its marginal product, τbitb is a tax on
nominal bonds, which creates a wedge in the Euler equation for domestic bonds (17),
and χb > 0 and χk > 0 are constants. Here, the taxes on capital and bonds are the only
‘wedges’ that show up in the equilibrium conditions that determine the price level and the
nominal interest rate. Wedges in other equilibrium conditions have only indirect effects
on these two variables by affecting either output (in the case when the weight on output
in the Taylor rule is nonzero) or the marginal product of capital.
    Sustek (forthcoming) demonstrates that the tax on capital captures, for example, dis-
tortionary effects of nominal price rigidities, while the tax on bonds captures distortionary
effects of asset market frictions, such as limited participation. The tax on bonds can also
reflect time-varying volatility or time-varying risk aversion. The price level in the presence
of these distortions is given by
                              "∞           #         "∞              #
                               X 1 j                    X 1 j
          pbit = pbi,t−1 + Et            k
                                      c i,t+j − νey Et
                                      mp                       Ybi,t+j−1
                               j=1
                                   e
                                   νπ                   j=1
                                                            e
                                                            νπ

                         "∞              #         "∞              #
                          X 1 j                       X 1 j
                                   k                           b
                  −χk Et         τbi,t+j−1   + χb Et         τbi,t+j−1   .
                          j=1
                              e
                              νπ                      j=1
                                                          e
                                                          νπ

A similar expression can be also derived for the nominal interest rate. The degree of
cross-country comovements of prices and nominal interest rates then depends on how
strongly the four discounted sums co-move across countries. For example, if a given
shock is expected to be propagated in the two countries in a similar way (meaning its
distortions lead to similar movements in one or both wedges) the nominal variables in the
two countries will move in the same direction.


8.2    Domestic nominal business cycle
This subsection investigates the quantitative strength of the mechanism once a tax on
domestic bonds is introduced into the model. Recall that the baseline model does not
generate the observed lead-lag pattern neither for the nominal interest rate nor for the
price level. As noted in the Introduction, recent research argues that the observed dy-
namics of interest rates are structurally related to variations of a wedge in the standard


                                                    23
Euler equation for bonds. Although there have been a few attempts to provide a theory
of such a relationship, a well established model is not yet available. We therefore remain
agnostic about the sources of the variation and proceed by introducing a tax on adjust-
ing domestic bonds τitb into the budget constraint in each country. We then choose its
stochastic process so as to replicate the lead-lag pattern of the nominal interest rate for
the United States, which we take as representative of the patterns in Figure 2 and ask
if the model generates both the observed lead-lag pattern of the price level and higher
cross-country correlations of the two nominal variables than that of output.
   The budget constraint of the representative consumer in country i is now
                                                                       
         qita fit                                dit             di,t−1      mit
                    + (1 +    τitb )                           −           +         + cit + xit =
        1 + rtf                            pit (1 + Rit )         pit         pit
                                                                                           mi,t−1 vit
                                                qitς (ritk kit + wit nit ) + qita fi,t−1 +         +     + Tit ,
                                                                                             pit     pit

where Tit is the proceeds from taxing the accumulation of domestic bonds, which are
rebated back to the consumer in a lump sum way. The Euler equation for domestic bonds
becomes                        "                           !                             #
                                                   b
                                              1 + τi,t+1            1
                           Et Qit                                                (1 + Rit ) = 1.
                                               1 + τitb         1 + πi,t+1

We postulate a joint stochastic process for the tax and technology shocks
                                                                                        
                        ln z1,t+1                       Λ11 Λ12 Λ13 Λ14               ln z1t
                     b                                                           b 
                     τ1,t+1                                                       τ1t 
                             = Λ0 +  Λ21 Λ22 Λ23 Λ24                                    
                    ln z             Λ                                           ln z  + εt+1 .              (28)
                     2,t+1           13 Λ14 Λ11 Λ12                               2t 
                        b
                      τ2,t+1            Λ23 Λ24 Λ21 Λ22                                τ2tb

Notice that we impose symmetry across the two countries in the stochastic process, set
the steady-state value of τitb equal to zero, and let εt+1 ∼ N(0, Ω), where the elements
of Ω related to the innovations in technology are the same as those in Σ, the covariance
matrix in the stochastic process (3); those related to the innovations in the tax set equal
to zero.
    This stochastic process has eight parameters that need to be calibrated: Λ11 , Λ12 ,
Λ13 , Λ14 , Λ21 , Λ22 , Λ23 , and Λ24 . We choose their values by minimizing the distance be-
tween eight moments in the data and the same moments in the model: corr(R1t , R1,t−1 ),
the persistence of the nominal interest rate; corr(R1,t−3 , GDP1t ), corr(R1,t−1 , GDP1t ),
corr(R1,t+1 , GDP1t ), corr(R1,t+3 , GDP1t ), every other cross-correlation coefficient in the
row for the nominal interest rate in Table 5, panel B; and corr(ln z1t , ln z1,t−1 ), corr(ln z1t , ln z2,t−1 ),
and corr(ln z1t , ln z2,t−3 ), in order to ensure that technology shocks in the extended model

                                                                 24
have approximately the same persistence and spillovers as in the baseline model—i.e., es-
timating the stochastic process for technology shocks (3) on time series for ln z1t and ln z2t
generated by the stochastic process (28) yields approximately the same autocorrelations
and spillovers. The resulting values of the eight parameters are contained in panel A of
Table 6. All other parameters are as in Table 3.
   Although we do not take a firm stand on the interpretation of τ b , it is interesting that
the calibration implies a positive, and relatively large, Λ21 . This means that after a posi-
tive technology shock the tax on domestic bonds increases, making the bond relatively less
attractive. This is consistent with interpreting the tax as capturing counter-cyclical risk
premia—following a positive technology shock (a boom period) a short-term government
bond becomes relatively less attractive—flight out of quality.
   Panels B and C of Table 6 report the results. Recall that in the baseline model,
the price level lags output negatively, while in the data it leads negatively. The extended
model, in contrast, generates the correct phase shift of the price level while still producing
a negative contemporaneous correlation between the price level and output. In addition,
it still produces higher cross-country correlations of the two nominal variables than that
of output. It is also important to realize that because τ b affects only the two nominal
variables (it shows up only in the Euler equation for bonds), the desirable business cycle
properties of real variables in the baseline economy are preserved in the extended economy.


8.3    Exchange rate dynamics
In a similar way to that in the previous subsection we also investigate the robustness of
the mechanism to aligning the model with the observed exchange rate dynamics. In this
case the tax is imposed on the accumulation of the real international bond fit . As such
it distorts the Euler equation (18), which now becomes
                            "           f
                                                !                    #
                                                     a
                                   1 + τi,t+1       qi,t+1
                         Et Qit                        a
                                                           (1 + rtf ) = 1.
                                     1 + τitf        qi,t

As a result, the log-linear uncovered interest rate parity condition (22) also changes to
b1t + (∆τ f − ∆τ f ) + (Et n
R                             d         d
                               er t+1 − n         b2t , where ∆τ f = Et τbf − τbf , and the
                                         er t ) = R
         1,t+1     2,t+1                                        i,t+1     i,t+1 i,t
‘hat’ denotes a percentage deviation from steady-state. The interpretation of the tax is as
in the case of the tax on domestic bonds, except that it now applies to the international
asset market. It is important to note that as the tax does not show up in the Euler
equation for domestic bonds, it affects the the price level and the nominal interest rate
only indirectly by affecting output and the real return to capital (by affecting the real


                                                25
exchange rate and thus international trade and borrowing and lending).
   As in the previous case we postulate a VAR(1) process for technology and the tax in the
two countries. The Λ’s are again chosen by minimizing a distance between moments in the
data and in the model: corr(ln z1t , ln z1,t−1 ), corr(ln z1t , ln z2,t−1 ), corr(ln z1t , ln z2,t−3 ), for
the same reasons as before; corr(ln ner1t , ln ner1,t−1 ), nominal exchange rate persistence;
corr(ner1,t−3 , GDP1t ), corr(ner1,t−1 , GDP1t ), corr(ner1,t+1 , GDP1t ), corr(ner1,t+3 , GDP1t );
the lead-lag pattern of the nominal exchange rate in relation to output; and std(nert )/ std(GDPt ),
its volatility relative to that of real GDP. We also allow var ετt to be non-zero and include
it among the parameters of the stochastic process to be calibrated—this way we have as
many parameters as moments. All other parameters are as in Table 3.
   We consider two versions of this extension: without and with capital adjustment
costs, ϕ(kt+1 − kt )2 , which reduce the volatility of investment and net exports in response
to volatility of the real exchange rate.19 In the case with capital adjustment costs, we
also include std(xt )/ std(GDPt ) among the moments and include ϕ among the parameters
chosen to match the moments. In light of our discussion of the mechanism with distortions,
it is worth pointing out that the capital adjustment cost works like a tax on capital—it
creates a wedge in the Euler equation for capital (Chari et al., 2007).
    The parameters of the VAR process, and of the capital adjustment cost, are reported
in Table 7. The table also contains the results for the cross-country correlations, as well as
for the dynamics of the exchange rate, investment, and net exports in relation to domestic
GDP. We see that in both cases the cross-country correlations of the two nominal variables
are higher than the cross-country correlation of GDP, while the model accounts for about
61% of nominal exchange rate volatility (for a given volatility of real GDP). This is about
2.5 times more than in the baseline model.
    Finally, it is important to point out that, for the reasons discussed in Section 6, price
levels are relatively smooth even when the baseline model is extended as we have done
here. The mechanism is thus consistent with a key feature of international relative price
movements pointed out by Mussa (1986): the ratio of price levels is smooth whereas the
nominal exchange rate is volatile, implying (as can be seen from equation (15)) a volatile
real exchange rate. In the case without capital adjustment costs, the (absolute, that is
not relative to GDP) standard deviation of the nominal exchange rate is 2.00, while that
of the ratio of the price levels is only 0.15. In the case with capital adjustment costs, the
standard deviation of the nominal exchange rate is 2.17, while that of the ratio of the
  19
    There is a trade-off between achieving realistic volatility of the exchange rate on one hand and of
investment and net exports on the other. Matching the volatility of the exchange rate exactly produces
almost five times as volatile investment and net exports as in the data. It also prevents the model from
generating realistic lead-lag relationship between the exchange rate and real GDP.



                                                    26
price levels is 1.08.


9     Concluding remarks
This study makes the empirical contribution of documenting that, at business cycle fre-
quencies, fluctuations in aggregate price levels and nominal interest rates are substantially
more synchronized across countries than are fluctuations in output. This is an intriguing
empirical regularity both from a theoretical point of view, as well as from the perspective
of the policy debate about how the domestic nominal environment is determined in a
globalized world.
    We then ask what is the key mechanism that brings about this striking empirical regu-
larity. To this end, we employ an international business cycle model that includes nominal
assets and, in each country, a monetary authority who follows a rule with considerable
empirical support. For a benchmark calibration, the cross-country correlation of output
is slightly lower than that in the data, while the cross-country correlations of prices and
nominal interest rates are slightly higher. Even though the answer to our question very
much involves dynamics, it is quite transparent within our abstraction. Due to spillovers
over time of shocks across countries, expected future responses of national central banks
to fluctuations in domestic output and inflation generate movements in current prices and
interest rates that strongly co-move across countries even when output does not. Interna-
tional nominal business cycles are thus highly synchronized even when national monetary
policies focus squarely on domestic output and inflation. A key element of our finding is
that even a modest degree of spillovers, in the range of the smaller estimates found in the
literature, is sufficient to generate correlations such as those in the data.
   Having refrained from making our model more detailed than necessary for our question
while maintaining transparency of our answer, naturally there are some deviations in the
data relative to the model. The most notable ones, in our context, are in the forms of
lead-lag properties of prices and nominal interest rates as well as exchange-rate volatility
exceeding that implied by the model. A question is, then, can these deviations be reduced
significantly without invalidating our findings? To provide at least a preliminary answer
to that question, we borrow insights from the recent business cycle accounting literature.
This literature attributes business cycle fluctuations to a small number of wedges. For our
purpose, the most relevant ones are time-varying wedges in Euler equations for financial
assets. Choosing their stochastic processes appropriately makes the model also consistent
with the key features of domestic nominal business cycles and with exchange rate dynamics
while maintaining our key relative-correlations finding. It is well known that more than


                                             27
one ‘deep’ model feature may map into the same wedge. We relate these wedges to recent
literature on interest rate and exchange rate dynamics and interpret them as capturing
various distortions in asset markets or time-varying risk premia. A promising avenue for
future research is to focus on exploring which mechanisms can distort the Euler equations
over the business cycle in a similar way as the wedges in our model. More generally,
model features from which we have abstracted may imply mechanisms that interact to
strengthen or weaken that emphasized in this paper.




                                           28
References
Ahmed, S., Ickes, B. W., Wang, P., Yoo, B. S., 1993. International business cycles. Amer-
 ican Economic Review 83, 335–59.

Alvarez, F., Atkeson, A., Kehoe, P. J., 2009. Time-varying risk, interest rates, and ex-
  change rates in general equilibrium. Review of Economic Studies 76, 851–78.

Atkeson, A., Kehoe, P. J., 2008. On the need for a new approach to analyzing monetary
  policy. NBER Working Paper No. 14260.

Backus, D., Gavazzoni, F., Telmer, C., Zin, S. E., 2010. Monetary policy and the uncov-
  ered interest rate parity puzzle. NBER Working Paper No. 16218.

Backus, D. K., Kehoe, P. J., 1992. International evidence on the historical properties of
  business cycles. American Economic Review 82, 864–88.

Backus, D. K., Kehoe, P. J., Kydland, F. E., 1992. International real business cycles.
  Journal of Political Economy 100, 745–75.

Backus, D. K., Kehoe, P. J., Kydland, F. E., 1994. Dynamics of the trade balance and
  the terms of trade: The J-curve? American Economic Review 84, 84–103.

Baxter, M., Crucini, M. J., 1995. Business cycles and the asset structure of foreign trade.
  International Economic Review 36, 821–54.

Bean, C., 2006. Globalisation and inflation. speech to the lse Economics Society, London
  School of Economics, London, U.K., October 24, 2006.

Bernanke, B. S., 2007. Globalization and monetary policy. speech at the Fourth Economic
  Summit, Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, CA, March 2, 2007.

Besley, T., 2008. Inflation and the global economy. speech at the Canada-U.K. Chamber
  of Commerce, London, U.K., April 22, 2008.

Canzoneri, M., Cumby, R. E., Diba, B. T., 2007. Euler equations and money market
  interest rates: A challenge for monetary policy models. Journal of Monetary Economics
  54, 1863–81.

Chari, V. V., Kehoe, P. J., McGrattan, E. R., 2007. Business cycle accounting. Econo-
  metrica 75, 781–836.

Christiano, L. J., Fitzgerald, T. J., 2003. The band pass filter. International Economic
  Review 44, 435–65.

Ciccarelli, M., Mojon, B., 2010. Global inflation. Review of Economics and Statistics 92,
  524–35.

Clarida, R., Gali, J., Gertler, M., 1998. Monetary policy rules in practice: Some interna-
  tional evidence. European Economic Review 42, 1033–67.


                                            29
Clarida, R., Gali, J., Gertler, M., 2000. Monetary policy rules and macroeconomics sta-
  bility: Evidence and some theory. Quarterly Journal of Economics 115, 147–80.

Cooley, T. F., Hansen, G. D., 1995. Money and the business cycle. In: Cooley, T. F.
  (Ed.), Frontiers of business cycle research. Princeton University Press.

Crucini, M. J., Kose, A. M., Otrok, C., 2011. What are the driving forces of international
  business cycles. Review of Economic Dynamics 14, 156–75.

Eichengreen, B., 1996. Globalizing Capital: A History of the International Monetary
  System. Princeton University Press.

Fuhrer, J., Moore, G., 1995. Inflation persistence. Quarterly Journal of Economics 110,
  127–159.

Galı́, J., Gertler, M., 1999. Inflation dynamics: A structural econometric analysis 44,
 195–222.

Gregory, A. W., Head, A., Raynauld, J., 1997. Measuring world business cycles. Interna-
  tional Economic Review 38, 667–702.

Hansen, G. D., Prescott, E. C., 1995. Recursive methods for computing equilibria of
  business cycle models. In: Cooley, T. F. (Ed.), Frontiers of business cycle research.
  Princeton University Press.

Hardle, W., Horowitz, J., Kreiss, J.-P., 2001. Bootstrap methods for time series. Mimeo,
  Humboldt Universitat.

Heathcote, J., Perri, F., 2002. Financial autarky and international business cycles. Journal
  of Monetary Economics 49, 601–27.

King, R. G., Watson, M. W., 1996. Money, prices, interest rates and the business cycle.
  Review of Economics and Statistics 78, 35–53.

Kollmann, R., 2001. Explaining international comovements of output and asset returns:
 The role of money and nominal rigidities. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control
 25, 1547–83.

Kose, A., Otrok, C., Whiteman, C., 2003. International business cycles: World, region
 and country-specific factors. American Economic Review 93, 1216–39.

Kose, A., Otrok, C., Whiteman, C., 2008. Understanding the evolution of world business
 cycles. Journal of International Economics 75, 110–30.

Kydland, F. E., Prescott, E. C., 1990. Business cycles: Real facts and a monetary myth.
 Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review Spring, 3–18.

Lucas, R. E. J., 2000. Inflation and welfare. Econometrica 68, 247–74.




                                            30
Mishkin, F., 2007. Globalization, macroeconomic performance, and monetary policy.
 speech at the Domestic Prices in an Integrated World Economy Conference, Board
 of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington DC, September 27, 2007.

Mumtaz, H., Simonelli, S., Surico, P., 2011. International comovements, business cycles
 and inflation: A historical perspective. Review of Economic Dynamics 14, 176–98.

Mumtaz, H., Surico, P., forthcoming. Evolving international inflation dynamics: Evidence
 from a time-varying dynamic factor model. Journal of European Economic Association.

Mussa, M., 1986. Nominal exchange rate regimes and the behavior of real exchange rates:
 Evidence and implications. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 25,
 117–213.

Neely, C. J., Rapach, D. E., 2008. Is inflation an international phenomenon? Federal
  Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper 2008-025.

Nelson, E., 2000. UK monetary policy 1972 - 1997: A guide using Taylor rules. Bank of
  England Working Paper 120.

Orphanides, A., 2002. Monetary policy rules and the Great Inflation. American Economic
  Review 92, 115–120.

Rabanal, P., Rubio-Ramirez, J. F., Tuesta, V., forthcoming. Cointegrated TFP processes
  and international business cycles. Journal of Monetary Economics.

Sack, B. P., Wieland, V., 2000. Interest rate smoothing and optimal monetary policy: A
  review of recent empirical evidence. Journal of Economics and Business 52, 205–28.

Sentance, A., 2008. Global inflation: How big a threat? speech at the 38th International
  Pensions Conference, Winsdor, July 15, 2008.

Sustek, R., forthcoming. Monetary business cycle accounting. Review of Economic Dy-
  namics.

Taylor, J. B., 1993. Discretion versus policy rules in practice. Carnegie-Rochester Confer-
  ence Series on Public Policy 39, 195–204.

Taylor, J. B., 1999. A historical analysis of monetary policy rules. In: Taylor, J. B. (Ed.),
  Monetary policy rules. University of Chicage Press.

Wang, P., Wen, Y., 2007. Inflation dynamics: A cross-country investigation. Journal of
 Monetary Economics 54, 2004–31.

Woodford, M., 2003. Interest and prices: Foundations of a theory of monetary policy.
 Princeton University Press.

Zimmermann, C., 1997. International real business cycles among heterogenous countries.
  European Economic Review 41, 319–55.



                                             31
Appendix: Data sources
For all countries, data on real GDP and the price level (consumer price index) come from
the International Financial Statistics (IFS) database. For Germany, the consumer price
index for the period 1960.Q1-1991.Q4 is for West Germany only. Wherever possible, the
nominal interest rate is the yield on a 3-month government bond. For Austria we use the
yield on a 1-year government bond, and for France and Japan we use a money market
rate. The interest rate data for Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States come
from the IFS database; for Australia, Canada, and Germany from the Global Financial
Data database; for Austria from Datastream; and for France from the IFS database for
the period 1970.Q1-1999.Q1, and from Datastream for the period 1999.Q2-2006.Q4.




                                          32
                                      0.9

                                      0.8

                                      0.7

                                      0.6
          corr(R ,R ), corr(p ,p )
                           2




                                      0.5
                           1




                                      0.4
                           2




                                      0.3
                           1




                                      0.2

                                      0.1

                                       0
                                                                                                    corr(R ,R )
                                     −0.1                                                                 1   2
                                                    o                                               corr(p ,p )
                                                   45                                                     1   2
                                     −0.2
                                       −0.2 −0.1        0   0.1   0.2   0.3    0.4    0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8       0.9
                                                                        corr(y ,y )
                                                                              1   2



Figure 1: Cross-country comovement of nominal variables vs cross-country comovement
of real GDP—the six-country sample, 1960.Q1-2006.Q4.




                                                                         33
                                           Table 1: Cross-country correlations, 1960.Q1-2006.Q4
                   (a) Real GDP                           (b) Nominal interest rates                                      (c) Price levels

           aus      can    ger    jap    uk            aus       can        ger      jap          uk             aus      can        ger      jap          uk
     can   0.53                                  can   0.61                                               can    0.68
                                                       (-0.03)                                                   (0.04)

     ger   -0.02    0.16                         ger   0.52      0.62                                     ger    0.25     0.43
                                                        (0.37)    (0.29)                                         (0.09)   (0.12)

     jap   -0.12   -0.06   0.39                  jap   0.39      0.39      0.47                           jap    0.33     0.63      0.41
                                                        (0.35)    (0.30)   (-0.06)                               (0.26)   (0.55)    (-0.10)

     uk    0.19     0.45   0.21   0.18           uk    0.58      0.56      0.63      0.63                 uk     0.50     0.52      0.42      0.58
                                                        (0.25)   (-0.02)   (0.28)    (0.30)                      (0.18)   (-0.06)    (0.08)   (0.26)
34




     us    0.23     0.72   0.42   0.21   0.56    us    0.55      0.84      0.72      0.43        0.57     us     0.47     0.71      0.51      0.76        0.61
                                                        (0.18)    (0.05)   (0.18)    (0.05)     (-0.11)          (0.06)   (-0.12)   (-0.03)   (0.44)     (-0.06)


     mean = 0.27      CV = 0.89                  mean = 0.57     (0.22)    CV = 0.22                      mean = 0.52     (0.18)    CV = 0.28
     Excluding Bretton Woods period              Excluding Bretton Woods period                           Excluding Bretton Woods period
     mean = 0.25 CV = 1.21                       mean = 0.57 (0.23) CV = 0.26                             mean = 0.50 (0.16) CV = 0.29
     pre-1984              post-1984             pre-1984                  post-1984                      pre-1984                  post-1984
     mean = 0.34           mean = 0.16           mean = 0.61     (0.16)    mean = 0.53        (0.27)      mean = 0.60     (0.18)    mean = 0.30        (0.03)

     CV = 0.71             CV = 3.00             CV = 0.20                 CV = 0.37                      CV = 0.17                 CV = 1.03
                                                 Note: The numbers in parentheses are                     Note:          The numbers in parenthe-
                                                 the 5th percentiles for corr(Ri , Rj ) −                 ses    are       the   5th    percentiles    for
                                                 corr(GDPi , GDPj ) obtained by bootstrap-                corr(pi , pj ) − corr(GDPi , GDPj ) obtained by
                                                 ing.                                                     bootstraping.
                                                  Table 2: Cross-country correlations, 1970.Q1-2006.Q4
                      (a) Real GDP                               (b) Nominal interest rates                                                      (c) Price levels

           aus aut can fra ger jap uk                       aus       aut can            fra      ger      jap       uk            aus       aut can            fra     ger      jap       uk
     aut    0.05                                       aut 0.63                                                               aut 0.43
     can    0.74   0.35                                      (0.42)                                                                (0.20)

     fra    0.21   0.70   0.53                         can 0.65 0.64                                                          can 0.71 0.59
     ger   -0.10   0.68   0.18   0.47                       (-0.18)   (0.14)                                                       (-0.10)   (0.11)

     jap    0.03   0.39   0.12   0.50 0.55             fra 0.48 0.57 0.49                                                     fra 0.66 0.72 0.82
     uk     0.26   0.48   0.56   0.74 0.24 0.40              (0.11) (-0.29) (-0.21)                                                (0.34) (-0.10)     (0.17)

     us     0.39   0.56   0.69   0.67 0.53 0.52 0.65   ger 0.58 0.73 0.70 0.77                                                ger 0.23 0.69 0.54 0.57
                                                             (0.48) (-0.06)    (0.35)    (0.15)                                    (0.10) (-0.09)     (0.19) (-0.07)
     mean = 0.43          CV = 0.54
                                                       jap 0.44 0.55 0.37 0.47 0.61                                           jap 0.36 0.57 0.62 0.78 0.52
35




     Excluding Bretton Woods period                          (0.26)   (0.01)   (0.08) (-0.23) (-0.08)                              (0.17)    (0.05)   (0.35)    (0.18) (-0.16)
     mean = 0.34 CV = 0.76                             uk   0.59 0.45 0.57 0.47 0.74 0.68                                     uk   0.50 0.65 0.53 0.71 0.43 0.54
                                                             (0.16) (-0.18) (-0.12) (-0.40)       (0.33)   (0.10)                  (0.10)    (0.04) (-0.18) (-0.13) (-0.02) (-0.03)
     post-1984
     mean = 0.19          CV = 2.07                    us   0.58 0.61 0.85 0.57 0.77 0.46 0.58                                us   0.44 0.69 0.67 0.76 0.59 0.77                          0.57
                                                             (0.05) (-0.10)    (0.07) (-0.25)     (0.10) (-0.23)    (-0.21)        (-0.14)   (0.01) (-0.15)     (0.01) (-0.07)   (0.14)   (-0.22)


                                                       mean = 0.59        (0.07)        CV = 0.20                             mean = 0.59        (0.08)        CV = 0.23
                                                       Excluding Bretton Woods period                                         Excluding Bretton Woods period
                                                       mean = 0.55 (0.13) CV = 0.25                                           mean = 0.59 (0.18) CV = 0.24
                                                       post-1984                                                              post-1984
                                                       mean = 0.46        (0.17)        CV = 0.48                             mean = 0.45        (0.16)        CV = 0.56
                                                       Note: The numbers in parentheses are the 5th                           Note: The numbers in parentheses are the 5th
                                                       percentiles for corr(Ri , Rj ) − corr(GDPi , GDPj )                    percentiles for corr(pi , pj ) − corr(GDPi , GDPj )
                                                       obtained by bootstraping.                                              obtained by bootstraping.
                     Price level                                          Nominal interest rate
  1                                                          1
        aust                                                       aust
        can                                                        can
 0.8    ger                                                 0.8    ger
        jap                                                        jap
        uk                                                         uk
 0.6                                                        0.6
        us                                                         us
        astr                                                       astr
 0.4    fra                                                 0.4    fra


 0.2                                                        0.2


  0                                                          0


−0.2                                                    −0.2


−0.4                                                    −0.4


−0.6                                                    −0.6


−0.8                                                    −0.8


 −1                                                         −1
  −5   −4      −3   −2   −1   0    1   2   3   4   5         −5   −4      −3   −2   −1   0   1   2   3   4   5




Figure 2: Correlations of nominal variables in period t + j with real GDP in period t.




                                                       36
                         Table 3: Baseline calibration

Symbol                          Value                   Definition
Preferences
γ                               2.0                     Relative risk aversion
µ                               0.34                    Consumption share in utility
β                               0.989                   Discount factor

Technology
δ                               0.025                   Depreciation rate
α                               0.36                    Capital share in production
ω1                              0.761                   Weight on domestic good
ω2                              0.239                   Weight on foreign good
σ = 1/(1 + ρ)                   1.5                     Elasticity of substitution

Shopping time
κ1                              0.0054                  Level parameter
κ2                              1.0                     Curvature parameter

Monetary policy rule
π                               0.0091                  Steady-state inflation rate
νy                              0.125                   Weight on GDP
νπ                              1.5                     Weight on inflation
φ                               0.75                    Smoothing coefficient

Process for technology shocks                      
A0 =                              0.00072 0.00072
                                             
                                  0.906 0.088
A=
                                  0.088 0.906
Var ε1 = Var ε2 =               0.008522
Corr(ε1 , ε2 ) =                0.258




                                           37
                  Table 4: International business cyclea

                                                          Correlation
                                           (p1 , p2 )   (R1 , R2 ) (GDP1 , GDP2 )
Model economy                                0.69         0.68         0.23
Six-country sample, 1960.Q1-2006.Q4          0.52         0.57         0.27
Eight-country sample, 1970.Q1-2006.Q4        0.59         0.59         0.43
 a The entries for the model are averages for 100 runs of the length of 188
 periods each. As in the case of the data, the series for output and prices in
 the model are in logs and all series are filtered with the Christiano-Fitzgerald
 (2003) band-pass filter.




                                      38
                                                            Table 5: Domestic business cycle

                                                                        A. Model economya
                                               Rel.               Correlations of GDP in period t with variable υ in period t + j:
     υt+j                                      st.dev.b        j = -4    -3      -2     -1      0        1       2        3        4
     GDP (qy)                                      1.21         0.02         0.29        0.62        0.89          1.00       0.89         0.62        0.29        0.02
     Consumption (c)                               0.53        -0.06         0.20        0.51         0.80         0.95       0.90         0.69        0.42         0.17
     Investment (x)                                3.35         0.04         0.29        0.60         0.85         0.93       0.79         0.51        0.18       -0.08
     Hours (n)                                     0.43         0.08         0.34        0.66        0.90          0.97       0.82         0.52        0.17       -0.10
     Net exports (nx)                              0.25         0.05        -0.13       -0.35       -0.54        -0.61       -0.53        -0.33       -0.11         0.06
     Price level (p)                               1.00         0.47         0.34        0.12        -0.13       -0.37       -0.52        -0.57       -0.54        -0.46
     Nominal interest rate (R)                     0.67         0.02         -0.24       -0.55       -0.82        -0.95       -0.88        -0.66       -0.37       -0.12
     Nom. exchange rate (ner)                      0.75         -0.42        -0.35       -0.21       -0.03         0.16        0.29         0.34        0.33        0.28
                                                               Correlations of terms of trade (et ) with net exports (nxt+j )
     J-curve                                                   -0.50    -0.64 -0.75 -0.73 -0.57 -0.27             0.08    0.37                                     0.54

                                                                          B. U.S. economyc
39




                                               Rel.               Correlations of GDP in period t with variable υ in period t + j:
     υt+j                                      st.dev.b        j = -4    -3      -2     -1      0        1       2        3        4
     GDP                                           1.48          0.22        0.50        0.75        0.93         1.00        0.93         0.75         0.50       0.22
     Consumption                                   0.52          0.15        0.37        0.58        0.73         0.80        0.78         0.68         0.53       0.34
     Investment                                    2.99          0.35        0.58        0.78        0.91         0.94        0.86         0.68         0.43       0.17
     Hours                                         0.90         -0.07        0.19        0.46        0.71         0.88        0.95         0.91         0.76       0.55
     Net exports                                   0.25        -0.48        -0.52       -0.56       -0.58        -0.58       -0.52        -0.39        -0.21      -0.01
     Price level                                   0.82        -0.70        -0.77       -0.78       -0.73        -0.60       -0.43        -0.23       -0.03        0.16
     Nominal interest rate                         0.73        -0.66        -0.47       -0.22        0.06         0.31        0.49         0.58        0.59        0.53
     Nom. exchange rate                            3.09         0.23         0.21        0.21        0.20         0.19        0.17         0.14        0.08        0.01
                                                               Correlations of terms of trade (et ) with net exports (nxt+j )
     J-curve                                                   -0.09    -0.12 -0.16 -0.14 -0.03           0.17    0.39    0.55                                     0.60
     a
        The entries are averages for 100 runs of the length of 188 periods each. Except for net exports and the nominal interest rate, all artificial series are in logs; the
     nominal interest rate is expressed at annual rates. Before computing the statistics, the artificial series were filtered with the Christiano-Fitzgerald (2003) band-pass
     filter.
     b
        Standard deviations are measured relative to that of GDP; the standard deviation of GDP is in absolute terms.
     c
       Except for net exports and the nominal interest rate, all data series are in logs; net exports are measured as a fraction of trend GDP and the nominal interest
     rate is expressed at annual rates. All statistics are based on series filtered with the Christiano-Fitzgerald (2003) band-pass filter. Consumption is measured as
     the sum of nondurables, services, and government expenditures; investment as the sum of fixed private investment and consumer durables; hours as total hours in
     nonagricultural establishments; and terms of trade as the ratio of import and export price deflators.
          Technology (z)                    Consumption (c)                      Investment (x)                         Net exports (nx)
  1                                1                                  6                                     0.4
               country 1
                                                                      4                                     0.2

0.5                               0.5                                 2                                      0

                                                                      0                                    −0.2
            country 2
  0                                0                                 −2                                    −0.4
      0         20          40          0         20          40           0              20          40          0            20          40



            GDP (qy)                           Labor (n)                       Price of good a (qa)                   Return to capital (rk)
1.5                               0.8                                 0                                     0.3

                                  0.6                              −0.02                                    0.2
  1
                                  0.4                              −0.04                                    0.1
0.5
                                  0.2                              −0.06                                     0

  0                                0                               −0.08                                   −0.1
      0         20          40          0         20          40           0              20          40          0            20          40

                                                                     Return on international bond
          Price level (p)           Nominal interest rate (R)         (rf) and terms of trade (e)                     Nom. exch. rate (ner)
  0                                0                                0.15                                     3

                                                                     0.1                       e
                                                                                                             2
 −5                              −0.5                               0.05              f
                                                                                      r
                                                                                                             1
                                                                      0

−10                               −1                               −0.05                                     0
      0         20          40          0         20          40           0              20          40          0            20          40




Figure 3: Responses to a 1% technology shock in country 1 for the base-
line calibration; rates of return are measured as percentage point devia-
tions from steady state at annual rates; all other variables as percentage
deviations.




                                                                           40
              1

             0.8

             0.6

                                                             corr(GDP1t,GDP2t)
             0.4

             0.2

              0                              corr(p ,p )
                                                        1t   2t

            −0.2

            −0.4
                     corr(R ,R )
                            1t   2t
            −0.6

            −0.8

             −1
             −0.05      0             0.05    0.1                 0.15   0.2     0.25
                                                    ν
                                                        Y


Figure 4: Sensitivity analysis: varying the weight on GDP in the
Taylor rule.




                                             41
                      Weight on inflation in the Taylor rule
               νy = 0                                      νy = 0.125
 1                                                                                 1

0.9                                 corr(R ,R )                                  0.9
                                             1t   2t
0.8                                                                              0.8

0.7                                                                              0.7
       corr(p ,p )                                                                                                               corr(p1t,p2t)
0.6              1t    2t                                                        0.6

0.5                                                                              0.5

0.4                                                                              0.4                             corr(R1t,R2t)
0.3                           corr(GDP ,GDP )                                    0.3
                                             1t        2t
0.2                                                                              0.2
                                                                                        corr(GDP1t,GDP2t)
0.1                                                                              0.1

 0                                                                                 0
  1    1.25           1.5           1.75          2          2.25   2.5             1     1.25      1.5           1.75           2       2.25    2.5
                                     νπ                                                                            νπ

                                                       Interest rate smoothing
               νy = 0                                                                              νy = 0.125
  1                                                                               1

0.9                                 corr(R1t,R2t)                                0.9

0.8                                                                              0.8
                                                                                          corr(p1t,p2t)
0.7                                          corr(p1t,p2t)                       0.7

0.6                                                                              0.6

0.5                                                                              0.5
                                                                                                    corr(R1t,R2t)
0.4                                                                              0.4

0.3                               corr(GDP1t,GDP2t)                              0.3

0.2                                                                              0.2                                     corr(GDP1t,GDP2t)
0.1                                                                              0.1

  0                                                                               0
   0     0.2                0.4             0.6             0.8      1             0        0.2           0.4              0.6          0.8      1
                                     φ                                                                             φ

                                                                    Spillovers
               νy = 0                                                                              νy = 0.125
 1                                                                                1

0.9           corr(R1t,R2t)                                                      0.9

0.8                                                                              0.8

0.7                                                                              0.7

0.6                                                                              0.6       corr(p1t,p2t)
                 corr(p1t,p2t)
0.5                                                                              0.5                                  corr(R1t,R2t)
0.4                                                                              0.4

0.3                                        corr(GDP1t,GDP2t)                     0.3

0.2                                                                              0.2
                                                                                                                  corr(GDP1t,GDP2t)
0.1                                                                              0.1

 0                                                                                0
  0      0.02               0.04           0.06         0.08        0.1            0       0.02           0.04            0.06         0.08      0.1
                                    A                                                                             A
                                     12                                                                            12



                                           Figure 5: Sensitivity analysis




                                                                           42
Table 6: Extension with a time-varying wedge in the Euler equation for domestic bonds


                A. Parameters of the transition matrix of the VAR(1) processa
                 Λ11      Λ12      Λ13         Λ14     Λ21       Λ22      Λ23      Λ24
                0.075    0.642     0.18       -0.44   0.808     -0.112   0.999    0.496

                                 B. Domestic nominal business cycle
                Rel.     Correlations of GDP in period t with variable υ in period t + j:
      υt+j      stdb    j = -4     -3     -2     -1      0        1       2     3      4
      p         0.50     0.06     -0.17       -0.38     -0.43    -0.32    -0.05   0.25    0.41   0.41
      R         0.85    -0.16     -0.29       -0.33     -0.19     0.10     0.44   0.67    0.68   0.48

                                     C. Cross-country correlations
                                 (p1 , p2 )    (R1 , R2 )    (GDP1 , GDP2 )
                                   0.73          0.91             0.41

  a The  parameters are chosen by minimizing the distance between data and
  model moments. The moments include: corr(R1t , R1,t−1 ), corr(R1,t−3 , GDP1t ),
  corr(R1,t−1 , GDP1t ), corr(R1,t+1 , GDP1t ), corr(R1,t+3 , GDP1t ), corr(ln z1t , z1,t−1 ),
  corr(ln z1t , z2,t−1 ), and corr(ln z1t , z2,t−3 ).
  b Standard deviations are divided by that of GDP .
                                                      1t




                                                        43
Table 7: Extension with a time-varying wedge in the Euler equation for foreign bonds


                                                  A. New parametersa
                   Λ11     Λ12     Λ13       Λ14           Λ21       Λ22      Λ23       Λ24     Var ετt     ϕ
     ϕ=0          0.707   0.007   0.297     -0.005        -2.352    -0.003   -0.004    -0.001   4.8e−4     0
     ϕ>0          0.742   0.007   0.263     -0.004        -3.258    -0.003   -0.004    -0.001   7.29e−4    0.23


              B. Cyclical behavior of the nominal exch. rate, investment, and net exports
                      Rel.      Correlations of GDP in period t with variable υ in period t + j:
ϕ           υt+j      stdb   j = -4    -3       -2    -1      0       1        2       3        4
0           ner       1.86    -0.14    0.04          0.25       0.37     0.30       0.07   -0.17   -0.29    -0.24
            x         5.78    -0.17    0.06          0.40       0.65     0.67       0.42    0.05   -0.23    -0.32
            nx        1.03     0.15   -0.04         -0.27      -0.41    -0.35      -0.11    0.16    0.32     0.29
0.23        ner       1.89    -0.28       -0.09      0.22       0.46     0.49       0.28   -0.03   -0.27    -0.32
            x         4.93    -0.19        0.07      0.44       0.73     0.77       0.52    0.11   -0.23    -0.36
            nx        0.88     0.18       -0.03     -0.32      -0.51    -0.48      -0.21   0.13     0.37    0.39


                                          C. Cross-country correlations
                                             (p1 , p2 )    (R1 , R2 )   (GDP1 , GDP2 )
                              ϕ=0              0.94          0.92               0.45
                              ϕ = 0.23         0.65          0.30               0.19

    a The  parameters are chosen by minimizing the distance between data and model
    moments.           The moments include:                corr(ner1t , ner1,t−1 ), corr(ner1,t−3 , GDP1t ),
    corr(ner1,t−1 , GDP1t ), corr(ner1,t+1 , GDP1t ), corr(ner1,t+3 , GDP1t ), corr(ln z1t , z1,t−1 ),
    corr(ln z1t , z2,t−1 ), corr(ln z1t , z2,t−3 ), and std(ner1t )/ std(GDP1t ), and in the case of ϕ > 0
    also std(x1t )/ std(GDP1t ).
    b Standard deviations are measured relative to that of GDP .
                                                                             1t




                                                            44
