                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         MONETARY-FISCAL POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS

                                             Troy Davig
                                            Eric M. Leeper

                                        Working Paper 15133
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15133


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2009




We thank Ignazio Angeloni, Dale Henderson, Jim Nason, and seminar participants at the Konstanz
Seminar, Sveriges Riksbank, and the conference on "Monetary-Fiscal Policy Interactions, Expectations,
and Dynamics in the Current Economic Crisis'' at Princeton University for comments. Research Department,
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, troy.davig@kc.frb.org; Department of Economics, Indiana University
and NBER, eleeper@indiana.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Troy Davig and Eric M. Leeper. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Monetary-Fiscal Policy Interactions and Fiscal Stimulus
Troy Davig and Eric M. Leeper
NBER Working Paper No. 15133
July 2009
JEL No. E31,E52,E6,E62

                                             ABSTRACT

Increases in government spending trigger substitution effects—both inter- and intra-temporal—and
a wealth effect. The ultimate impacts on the economy hinge on current and expected monetary and
fiscal policy behavior. Studies that impose active monetary policy and passive fiscal policy typically
find that government consumption crowds out private consumption: higher future taxes create a strong
negative wealth effect, while the active monetary response increases the real interest rate. This paper
estimates Markov-switching policy rules for the United States and finds that monetary and fiscal policies
fluctuate between active and passive behavior. When the estimated joint policy process is imposed
on a conventional new Keynesian model, government spending generates positive consumption multipliers
in some policy regimes and in simulated data in which all policy regimes are realized. The paper reports
the model's predictions of the macroeconomic impacts of the American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act's implied path for government spending under alternative monetary-fiscal policy combinations.


Troy Davig
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
Kansas City, MO 64198
Troy.Davig@kc.frb.org

Eric M. Leeper
Department of Economics
304 Wylie Hall
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405
and NBER
eleeper@indiana.edu
              MONETARY-FISCAL POLICY INTERACTIONS
                     AND FISCAL STIMULUS

                             TROY DAVIG AND ERIC M. LEEPER




                                       1. Introduction

   Monetary and fiscal policy responses to the recession of 2007-09 have been un-
usually aggressive, particularly in the United States. The Federal Reserve rapidly
reduced the federal funds rate more than 500 basis points, beginning in the summer
of 2007, and the rate has effectively been at its zero bound since December 2008.
Early in 2009 the U.S. Congress passed the $787 billion American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act, in addition to the $125 billion provided by the Economic Stimu-
lus Act of 2008. The Congressional Budget Office (2009) projects that the Federal
deficit will be 13 percent of GDP in 2009 and, with the passage of President Obama’s
budget, deficits will hover around 5 percent of GDP through 2019; as a consequence,
government debt as a share of GDP is expected to rise from 40 percent in 2008 to 80
percent in 2019. With the exception of wars and the Great Depression, the projected
speed of debt accumulation is unprecedented in the United States. This unified and
aggressive monetary-fiscal front to stimulate the economy is a distinctive feature of
the current policy response.
   The overriding objective of the stimulus efforts is to spur job creation by increasing
aggregate demand, particularly in the short run [Romer and Bernstein (2009), Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2008)]. Because private consumption
constitutes about two-thirds of GDP, the typical argument has stimulus raise con-
sumption demand, the demand for labor, and employment. It is ironic that the
   Date: July 14, 2009. We thank Ignazio Angeloni, Dale Henderson, Jim Nason, and seminar partic-
ipants at the Konstanz Seminar, Sveriges Riksbank, and the conference on “Monetary-Fiscal Policy
Interactions, Expectations, and Dynamics in the Current Economic Crisis” at Princeton University
for comments. Research Department, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, troy.davig@kc.frb.org;
Department of Economics, Indiana University and NBER, eleeper@indiana.edu. The views ex-
pressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City or the Federal Reserve System.
                                                 1
                      POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                                  2

consumption response to an increase in government spending is the linchpin in the
transmission mechanism for fiscal stimulus: economic theory and empirical evidence
do not universally support the idea that higher government purchases raise private
consumption.
   Two features of the macro policy response have received little modeling attention,
despite being central to the predictions of the impacts of the policy actions. First,
monetary and fiscal policy have reacted jointly in an effort to stimulate aggregate
demand. A long line of research emphasizes that separating monetary and fiscal poli-
cies overlooks policy interactions that are important for determining equilibrium.1
Second, few economic observers expect that the current recession-fighting mix of
macro policies will persist indefinitely; eventually, policies will return to “normal.”
Because the impacts of current policies depend, in part, on expectations of possible
future monetary-fiscal policy regimes, predictions need to condition on the current
regime and incorporate prospective future regimes.2 Intertemporal aspects of mone-
tary and fiscal policy interactions determine how any fiscal stimulus is expected to
be financed, which theory suggests is a critical determinant of the efficacy of the
stimulus.
   This paper addresses these two features in a conventional dynamic stochastic gen-
eral equilibrium (DSGE) model with nominal price rigidities and complete specifica-
tions of monetary and fiscal policies. The model embeds the possibility that policy
rules may evolve over time according to a known probability distribution and that
private agents form expectations of policy according to that distribution. We esti-
mate simple interest rate and tax policy rules whose parameters are governed by a
Markov chain. The estimated joint monetary-fiscal policy process is inserted into
the calibrated DSGE model. Government spending, which is a central focus of the
analysis, evolves exogenously.




  1
     Examples include Sargent and Wallace (1981), Wallace (1981), Aiyagari and Gertler (1985),
Sims (1988), and Leeper (1991).
   2
     Work along these lines is more limited, but includes Leeper and Zha (2003), Davig and Leeper
(2006), Chung, Davig, and Leeper (2007), and Davig and Leeper (2007), Svensson and Williams
(2007, 2008), Bianchi (2009), and Farmer, Zha, and Waggoner (2009).
                       POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                                   3

   In this setting, an increase in unproductive government spending sets in motion
both intra- and inter-temporal substitution effects, as well as a wealth effect.3,4 Rel-
ative sizes of these effects determine how real wages, employment, consumption, and
inflation react. Typical analyses assume passive fiscal behavior, which couples higher
government spending with an equivalent increase in lump-sum taxes to pay for the
spending, while the analyses also assume active monetary policy [see, for example,
Gali, Lopez-Salido, and Valles (2007), Ravn, Schmitt-Grohe, and Uribe (2007), and
Monacelli and Perotti (2008)].5 Under this set of policies, the intra-temporal sub-
stitution effect is triggered when higher government spending increases aggregate
demand and, because output is demand-determined, raises the demand for labor. As
the real wage rises, households work harder, substituting consumption for leisure.
An increase in the real wage is necessary for government spending to have a positive
effect on private consumption. Higher real wages increase firms’ marginal costs and
cause them to raise prices, if given the opportunity under the Calvo (1983) pricing
mechanism.
  Inter-temporal effects work through the real interest rate, whose movements de-
pend on how monetary policy responds to changes in inflation arising from changes
in government purchases. When prices are sticky, an increase in government pur-
chases gradually raises the price level, thereby raising the expected path of inflation.
An active monetary response raises the nominal interest rate sharply, which raises
the real rate and induces agents to postpone consumption. Higher taxes create a
negative wealth effect that shifts out the supply of labor—when leisure is a normal
good—further increasing hours worked, but offsetting at least some of the increase
in real wage. Most importantly, because consumption is also a normal good, higher
taxes induce households to shift down their consumption paths, ultimately reducing
equilibrium consumption, as Barro and King (1984) and Baxter and King (1993)
show.

  3
    We use the term “unproductive” government spending to refer to those government purchases
of goods and services that do not directly enhance the production possibilities or productivity of
private firms.
   4Monacelli and Perotti (2008) nicely explain how these mechanisms operate under flexible and

sticky prices and under the two sets of preference specifications due to King, Plosser, and Rebelo
(1988) and Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huffman (1988).
   5Monetary policy is passive when the central bank raises the nominal interest rate only weakly

in response to inflation and fiscal policy is active when taxes and spending do not adjust in order
to stabilize government debt [Leeper (1991)].
                      POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                                4

   Changes in government spending are most often studied in a regime with active
monetary and passive fiscal policy. One exception is Kim (2003), who follows up on
the analysis in Woodford (1998) to show that under alternative assumptions about
the monetary-fiscal regime—specifically, passive monetary policy and active fiscal
policy—higher government spending consistently raises both output and consump-
tion. Under that alternative mix of policies, higher government spending also creates
higher expected inflation. Instead of raising the real rate, passive monetary policy
does not increase nominal rates strongly with inflation, so the real rate declines. The
lower real rate reduces the return to saving and induces agents to increase current
consumption demand. Active fiscal policy means that higher taxes are not expected
to fully finance the increase in government spending, and the usual negative wealth
effect on labor supply and consumption is mitigated, even with standard preferences
such as those introduced by King, Plosser, and Rebelo (1988).
   These substitution and wealth effects operate in the model with regime-switching
policies, but their relative sizes vary across regimes. We explain these mechanisms
using two viewpoints. The first is from the perspective of the firms’ and households’
optimal decisions, as explained above. A second viewpoint utilizes the intertemporal
equilibrium condition that equates the real value of nominal government liabilities to
the expected present value of future net-of-interest surpluses inclusive of seigniorage
revenues.6 From this standpoint, a higher expected path of government spending,
with no associated higher path of taxes, reduces the fiscal backing for government
liabilities, driving down their value.7 Households convert government debt into con-
sumption, reinforcing the initial increase in aggregate demand. The value of debt
in terms of goods must fall, so the price level must rise. Regime-switching policies
imply that this debt revaluation mechanism is always in play, but its importance is
a quantitative matter, depending on the relative probabilities of various regimes.
  This paper reports quantitative results. Government spending multipliers for
output—computed as the present value of the change in output as a ratio of the
present value of the change in government spending—vary from a bit below 1 to
near 2, depending on the monetary-fiscal regime that is assumed to prevail. The as-
sociated multipliers for consumption may be negative or close to one, depending on

  6Leeper    and Yun (2006) develop a Slutsky-Hicks decomposition to systematically study these
effects in the context of changes in distorting taxes.
   7Cochrane (2005, p. 502) refers to this intertemporal equilibrium condition as a “valuation

equation for government debt.”
                    POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                            5

the policy regime. VARs estimated from simulated data in which policies fluctuate
among all four possible combinations—one active and one passive; both passive; both
active—yield mean government spending impact multipliers that peak for output at
about 1.7 and for consumption at about 0.7, close to estimates from the fiscal VAR
literature.
  The model in this paper assumes a fixed capital stock, which shuts off the possible
channel that would allow consumption to rise by crowding out investment. Thus, our
quantitative estimates are conservative relative to models that exploit this channel
to raise the consumption multiplier.
   The channels through which government spending affects prices and quantities in
this paper seem highly plausible. They rely only on the observation that monetary-
fiscal regimes have changed and are expected to continue to change over time, fluc-
tuating between active and passive periods. Otherwise, the environment we study
is completely conventional. Existing methods for generating positive government
spending multipliers for consumption do not conflict, and likely would amplify, the
channels that this work highlights.
   With the calibrated model in hand, we simulate the impacts of the government
spending component of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 un-
der alternative monetary-fiscal regimes. When monetary policy is active and fiscal
policy is passive, the fiscal stimulus creates a modest expansion in output and it
raises inflation and real interest rates, while government debt and taxes rise substan-
tially and persistently. On the other hand, passive monetary policy and active fiscal
policy generate an appreciably larger boom in output and consumption, and a signif-
icantly larger run-up in inflation, while rapidly reducing the real value of government
liabilities.
  The paper concludes by considering the probable scenario that, as inflation rises
due to the fiscal stimulus, the Federal Reserve combats inflation by switching to
an active stance, but fiscal policy continues to be active. Of course, doubly active
policies, if they were expected to persist indefinitely, would imply that no equilibrium
exists. With Markov switching, however, the economy can visit such a regime because
individuals expect the visit to be temporary. In this scenario, output, consumption,
and inflation are chronically higher, while debt explodes and real interest rates decline
dramatically and persistently.
                      POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                                 6

   Taken together, the paper’s results argue forcefully that the impacts of a fiscal
stimulus cannot be understood without studying monetary and fiscal policies jointly.
Moreover, different assumptions about joint monetary-fiscal behavior can lead to
sharply different conclusions about the likely consequences of fiscal stimulus.


         2. Selective Review of Work on Government Spending

   In recent years, a small industry of research has sprung up to reconcile the theoreti-
cal and empirical findings about the impacts of increases in unproductive government
spending on private consumption. As initially pointed out by Barro and King (1984)
and Baxter and King (1993), neo-classical theory predicts that higher government
consumption that is financed by lump-sum taxes reduces household wealth and,
therefore, the path of private consumption. In contrast, a range of empirical studies
finds that government consumption crowds in private consumption [Blanchard and
Perotti (2002), Perotti (2007), Ravn, Schmitt-Grohe, and Uribe (2007), Mountford
and Uhlig (2009)].8 Using U.S. data, Gali, Lopez-Salido, and Valles (2007) estimate
the government spending multiplier for output to be 0.80 initially and rising to 1.74
after two years, while the multiplier for consumption is always positive and is 0.17 on
impact and 0.95 after two years. Monacelli and Perotti (2008) report similar results
across several empirical specifications.
  A variety of theoretical channels have been suggested to ensure that the negative
wealth effect on consumption does not overwhelm the substitution effect. Many
suggestions amount to changing the representative household’s preferences. Ravn,
Schmitt-Grohe, and Uribe (2007), for example, assume deep habits that amplify the
increase in real wages and, therefore, the size of the substitution effect. Monacelli and
Perotti (2008) eliminate the wealth effect on labor supply, which generates strong
complementarity between consumption and work effort.9

  8Not  all empirical work supports the crowding in view. Ramey and Shapiro (1998) and Ramey
(2007), for example, argue that anticipated increases in government spending reduce private
consumption.
   9Bouakez and Rebei (2007) intervene on preferences by assuming private consumption and pub-

lic goods are complements. Linnemann (2006) obtains positive government spending multipliers
for consumption in a frictionless real business cycle model by assuming particular non-separable
preferences over consumption and leisure, but Bilbiie (2008) shows that Linnemann’s preferences
imply both a downward sloping labor supply function and that consumption is an inferior good.
                   POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                          7

   Gali, Lopez-Salido, and Valles (2007) is a departure from efforts to intervene on
preferences, but the alternative is rather complex. Heterogenous agents—some fully
optimizing and others operating by rules of thumb—are combined with imperfectly
competitive labor markets—labor unions set wages—in a new Keynesian model with
sticky prices to produce positive government spending multipliers for consumption.
  This paper combines an off-the-shelf new Keynesian model—described in the next
section—with estimated regime-switching monetary and fiscal policies to explore
more thoroughly the channel that Kim (2003) points to by which government spend-
ing can have multiplied impacts on output and, therefore, produce positive multipli-
ers for consumption.


  3. A New Keynesian Model with Variable Government Purchases

  The analysis is conducted in a conventional new Keynesian model with fixed capi-
tal and elastic labor supply. Nominal rigidities are introduced through Calvo (1983)
pricing by monopolistically competitive final goods producing firms. Unproductive
government spending is financed through a combination of lump-sum taxes, seignior-
age revenues, and one-period nominal government bonds.


3.1. Households. The representative household chooses {Ct , Nt, Mt , Bt } to maxi-
mize                      "                                     #
                   X∞         1−σ      1+η                  1−κ
                            C t+i    Nt+i     (Mt+i /Pt+i )
                Et     βi         −χ       +δ                                  (1)
                   i=0
                            1−σ      1+η          1−κ
with 0 < β < 1, σ > 0, η > 0, κ > 0, χ > 0 and δ > 0, where Ct is a composite
consumption good consisting of differentiated goods, cjt , which are aggregated using
the Dixit and Stiglitz (1977) aggregator
                                   Z       1             θ−1
                                                            θ
                                                 θ−1
                            Ct =                cjt dj
                                                  θ
                                                                 , θ > 1.         (2)
                                        0


  The household chooses each good cjt to minimize total expenditure, yielding the
demand functions for each good j
                                      −θ
                                      pjt
                               cjt =         Ct ,                             (3)
                                       Pt
                       POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                       8

             hR              i    1
               1    1−θ          1−θ
where Pt ≡    0
                   pjt  dj             .

  The household’s budget constraint is
                               
              Mt Bt             Wt          Mt−1 (1 + rt−1 )Bt−1
         Ct +     +    + τt ≤          Nt +     +                + Πt ,           (4)
              Pt    Pt          Pt           Pt        Pt
where τt is lump-sum taxes/transfers, Bt is one-period nominal bond holdings, 1+rt−1
is the risk-free nominal interest rate between t − 1 and t, and Πt is profits from the
firm. The household maximizes (1) subject to (4), yielding
                                                     Ntη      Wt
                                                   χ −σ =                         (5)
                                                    Ct        Pt
                                                                σ
                                                             Ct      Pt
                                           1 = β(1 + rt )                .        (6)
                                                            Ct+1    Pt+1
resulting in the following relation between real money balances, the nominal rate
and the composite consumption good,
                                              −1/κ
                            Mt      κ     rt          σ/κ
                                 =δ                  Ct .                     (7)
                             Pt         1 + rt

  The government’s demand for goods is in the same proportion as households,
                                          −θ                hR θ−1 i θ−1
                                                                        θ
                                          pjt                   1
yielding the government’s demand as gjt = Pt   Gt , where Gt = 0 gjt dj
                                                                    θ
                                                                           .

  Necessary and sufficient conditions for household optimization require (5)-(7) to
hold in every period and the household’s budget constraints to bind with equality.
In addition, the present value of households’ expected expenditures are bounded and
the following transversality condition holds
                                               
                                             AT
                                 lim Et qt,T      = 0,                           (8)
                                T →∞         PT
where At = Bt + Mt and qt,T = (1 + rT −1 )/(PT /Pt ).

3.2. Firms. A continuum of monopolistically competitive firms produce goods using
labor. Production of good j is
                                                    yjt = ZNjt ,                  (9)
where Z is aggregate technology, common across firms and taken to be constant.
                        POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                          9

  Aggregating consumers’ and government’s demand, firm j faces the demand curve
                                      −θ
                                      pjt
                               yjt =          Yt ,                         (10)
                                      Pt
where Yt is defined by
                                 Ct + Gt = Yt .                            (11)
Equating supply and demand for individual goods,
                                      −θ
                                       pjt
                             ZNjt =           Yt .                                    (12)
                                       Pt

  Following Calvo (1983), a fraction 1 − ϕ firms are permitted to adjust their prices
each period, while the fraction ϕ are not permitted to adjust. If firms are permitted
to adjust prices at t, they choose a new optimal price, p∗t , to maximize the expected
discounted sum of profits given by
                                   "      1−θ         ∗ −θ #
                     X∞
                                       p∗
                                                         pt
                                        t
                  Et     ϕi qt,t+i              − Ψt+i            Yt+i ,               (13)
                     i=0
                                      Pt+i              Pt+i
                                                          1−θ
                                                            p
where the real profit flow of firm j at period t, Πjt = Pjtt      Yt − W Pt
                                                                           t
                                                                             Njt , has been
rewritten using (12). Ψt is real marginal cost, defined as
                                                Wt
                                         Ψt =      .                                   (14)
                                               ZPt
The first-order condition that determines p∗t can be written as
                                                                  θ
                            E P∞ (ϕβ)i(Y − G )−σ Pt+i Ψ Y
            p∗t          θ     t  i=0       t+i    t+i        Pt        t+i t+i
                =                P∞                                 θ−1
                                                                                ,     (15)
            Pt          θ−1               i                    Pt+i
                               Et i=0 (ϕβ) (Yt+i − Gt+i ) −σ
                                                                Pt
                                                                          Yt+i
which we denote by                         
                              p∗t        θ    K1t
                                   =              ,                                   (16)
                              Pt       θ − 1 K2t
where the numerator and the denominator have recursive representations:
                                                             θ
                                                         Pt+1
                 K1t = (Yt − Gt ) ΨtYt + ϕβEt K1t+1
                                  −σ
                                                                                      (17)
                                                          Pt
and                                                       θ−1
                                                      Pt+1
                 K2t = (Yt − Gt ) Yt + ϕβEtK2t+1
                                  −σ
                                                                .                     (18)
                                                       Pt
                    POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                            10

   Solving (16) for p∗t and using the result in the aggregate price index, Pt1−θ =
                      1−θ
(1 − ϕ)(p∗t )1−θ + ϕPt−1  , yields
                                                    1−θ
                               θ−1 1 1−ϕ         K1t
                             πt = −            µ          ,                    (19)
                                   ϕ     ϕ       K2t
where µ ≡ θ/(θ − 1) is the markup.
  We assume that individual
                       R1   labor services may be aggregated linearly to produce
aggregate labor, Nt = 0 Njt dj. Linear aggregation of individual market clearing
conditions implies ZNt = ∆tYt , where ∆t is a measure of relative price dispersion
defined by
                                   Z 1  −θ
                                         pjt
                             ∆t =               dj.                           (20)
                                    0    Pt
Now the aggregate production function is given by
                                             Z
                                      Yt =      Nt .                                (21)
                                             ∆t

  It isR natural to define aggregate profits as the sum of individual firm profits,
         1
Πt = 0 Πjtdj. Integrating over firms’ profits and combining the household’s and
the government’s budget constraints yields the aggregate resource constraint
                                   Z
                                      Nt = Ct + Gt .                                (22)
                                   ∆t
From the definitions of price dispersion and the aggregate price index, relative price
dispersion evolves according to
                                        ∗ −θ
                                         pt
                         ∆t = (1 − ϕ)           + ϕπtθ ∆t−1 ,                     (23)
                                         Pt
where πt = Pt /Pt−1 .
   Following Woodford (2003), we define potential, or the natural level of, output, Ytp ,
to be the equilibrium level of output that would be realized if prices were perfectly
flexible. Potential output, then, emerges from the model when ϕ = 0, so all firms can
adjust prices every period. In the current setup, potential would vary systematically
with government spending, but not with monetary policy or lump-sum tax shocks.
In the empirical work, we use the Congressional Budget Office’s measure of potential
GDP, which is essentially a smooth trend for output, YtT ; it certainly does not
coincide with the theoretical concept of the natural level of output. To make our
                     POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                                11

theory line up with the empirical work, we define the output gap, yt , as yt = Yt − YtT ,
with YtT ≡ 1 for all t, since we abstract from growth.



                                4. Policy Specification

4.1. Regime-Switching Policy Rules. To account for possible changes in regime,
the policy rules take the same form as in Davig and Leeper (2006). Specifically, the
monetary policy rule is

                  rt = α0 (StM ) + απ (StM )πt + αy (StM )yt + σr (StM )εrt ,             (24)

where πt is inflation, yt is the output gap, and εrt ∼i.i.d. N (0, 1) is the disturbance.
StM indicates the monetary policy regime and follows a four-state Markov chain. The
variance of the errors switches between two different values independently of the
coefficients in the rule. Since coefficients may take two different regime-dependent
values as well, there are a total of four monetary regimes. Estimates are given in
table 1 and filtered and smoothed probabilities are given in figure 1. The sample runs
from 1949:Q1 to 2008:Q4. The rule also includes a dummy to account for the credit
controls in place in the early 1980s; however, its estimated value is insignificant.
  The fiscal rule also takes the same form as in Davig and Leeper (2006). All
parameters are restricted to switch simultaneously, so a change in behavior, say in
the response of taxes to the output gap, imposes a change in the responses to debt
and government purchases. The fiscal rule is

            τt = γ0 (StF ) + γb (StF )bt−1 + γy (StF )yt + γg (StF )gt + στ (StF )ετt ,   (25)

where τt is the ratio of lump-sum taxes—defined as government revenues less transfers—
to output, bt−1 is lagged debt-to-output ratio, gt is the government purchase-to-
output ratio and ετt ∼ N(0, 1). StF indicates the fiscal policy regime, which follows
a Markov chain with transition matrix P F . The fiscal rule also allows the variance
of the errors to switch between two values, but the changes are restricted to occur
simultaneously with changes in the coefficients. Consequently, there are two fiscal
regimes. The sample ends one quarter earlier than the sample for estimating the
monetary rule due to data availability. Estimates are given in table 2 and filtered
and smoothed probabilities are in figure 2.
                       POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                                   12

  When embedding the rules into the new Keynesian model, we aggregate the four
monetary states into two states that differ across reaction coefficients.10 This has no
impact on the numerical solution in the next section because, although we estimate
the policy rules allowing for random disturbances, we turn off the random shocks to
taxes and monetary policy when solving the model. The only random disturbance
we consider is to government purchases.
 The aggregated transition matrix for monetary policy and estimated transition
matrix for fiscal policy are as follows
                                                       
                       M       .97 .03       F    .94 .06
                      P =                 , P =             .             (26)
                               .01 .99            .05 .95

 The joint transition matrix governing the monetary-fiscal regime is then P =
P ⊗ P F . Figure 3 illustrates the estimated timing of the monetary-fiscal regime.
  M


   Throughout the first half of the sample, monetary policy was passive, consis-
tent with estimates of Taylor rules [Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1999) or Lubik and
Schorfheide (2004)]. Fiscal policy, however, switched between active and passive
regimes. Monetary studies that maintain the assumption that fiscal policy is perpet-
ually passive would conclude that the rational expectations equilibrium is indetermi-
nate, as Lubik and Schorfheide (2004) argue. The early to mid-1980s was a period
in which both policies were active, a policy mix that would imply non-existence
of equilibrium if it were expected to persist indefinitely. This was also a time when
economic commentators described U.S. fiscal policy as unsustainable because govern-
ment debt was growing rapidly as a share of GDP. While monetary policy remained
active through the 1980s, first under Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker and
then Chariman Alan Greenspan, fiscal policy adopted a passive stance as many of
the Reagan tax cuts were reversed. The recessions of 1990-91 and 2000-01 induced
monetary policy to switch to being passive, while the tax cuts of George W. Bush
are reflected as an active fiscal stance through the 2000s. The joint policy process
throughout much of the 2000s has been passive monetary policy and active fiscal
  10The   aggregation sums transition probabilities across volatility regimes, then weights each sum
so that the percentage of time spent in the active monetary policy regime is the same in the
two-state chain as in the four-state chain. For example, based on the definition of monetary
                                                                                                  
regimes given in table 1, then Pr[St = 1|St−1 = 1] ≡ Pr[StM = 1]/ Pr[StM = 1] + Pr[StM = 2] +
                                         
 Pr[StM = 2]/ Pr[StM = 1] + Pr[StM = 2] , where St is the aggregated regime, StM = 1 is the low-
volatility active regime and StM = 2 is the high-volatility active regime.
                     POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                            13

policy. Evidently, there is substantial instability in fiscal policy, but greater stability
in monetary policy behavior, an outcome also found by Favero and Monacelli (2005).
  Government purchases evolve according to
                                      
                     log (Gt ) = log G (1 − ρ) + ρ log (Gt−1 ) + εt ,                 (27)

where εt ∼ N(0, σ 2 ).


4.2. The Government’s Flow Budget Identity. The processes for {Gt , τt , Mt , Bt}
must satisfy the flow government budget identity

                                Mt − Mt−1 Bt (1 + rt−1 )Bt−1
                    Gt = τt +            +    −              .                        (28)
                                   Pt      Pt      Pt

given M−1 > 0 and (1 + r−1 )B−1 .


4.3. Steady-State Values. Steady-state debt levels conditional on the AM/PF,
PF/PF and PM/AF regimes are set to be equal across regimes. Mechanically, this
is done by substituting the tax rule into the budget constraint and setting output to
its deterministic steady state level of unity, then solving for the intercept in the tax
policy rule. These calculations yield
                                                                     
                    F
                                    π                    F
                                                                 β −1
              γ0 St = G − m                − b 1 + γ St −                 ,         (29)
                                   1+π                          (1 + π)
                                                 
where each variable, except γ0 StF and γ StF is set to its steady-state value. An
analogous procedure is performed on the monetary policy rule, (24), and the money
demand relation, (7). As with debt, steady-state rates of inflation are set to be equal
across the AM/PF, PF/PF and PM/AF regimes.
  For the AM/AF regime, steady-state debt is not a well defined concept, since
real debt follows a nonstationary path. In this regime, an innovation to the level of
debt does not elicit a sufficient response from future taxes to stabilize the path of
debt. However, the active-active regime is not expected to last indefinitely, as the
transversality condition on debt is satisfied via an expectation of a switch to a future
policy regime.
                    POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                            14

                          5. Solution and Calibration

   We set the parameters governing preferences, technology and price adjustment
to be consistent with Rotemberg and Woodford (1997) and Woodford (2003). The
model is calibrated at a quarterly frequency. Firms markup the prices of their goods
over marginal cost by 15 percent, implying µ = θ(1 − θ)−1 = 1.15, and 66 percent of
firms cannot reset their price each period (ϕ = .66). The quarterly real interest rate
is set to 1 percent (β = .99). Preferences over consumption are logarithmic, so σ = 1.
We also set the Frisch labor supply elasticity to unity, so η = 1 and set χ so the steady
state share of time spent in employment is 0.2. Intermediate goods-producing firms
utilize a constant-returns-to-scale production function. The technology parameter,
Z, is set to normalize the deterministic steady state level of output to unity. Steady
state inflation is set to 2 percent and the steady state debt-output ratio is set to .35.
  For real balances, we set δ so velocity in the deterministic steady state, defined as
cP/M, corresponds to the average U.S. monetary base velocity at 2.4. We take this
value from Davig and Leeper (2006), where we computed it using data from 1959-2004
on the average real level of expenditure on non-durable consumption plus services.
The parameter that determines the interest elasticity of real money balances, κ, is set
to 2.6 [Mankiw and Summers (1986), Lucas (1988), Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan
(2000)].
  Coefficients in the monetary and fiscal rules are set to their estimated values with
one exception: the coefficient on government purchases in the fiscal rule is set to
zero. The actual estimates for these coefficients are positive and imply that taxes
begin rising in the same period as the increase in government purchases. Ruling out
the immediate tax response to government purchases better isolates the impact of
government purchases. Taxes continue to respond, however, to the movements in
debt and output generated by the change in government purchases.
   To obtain parameter values in the process for government purchases, we estimate
ρ and σ 2 in (27) by detrending the log of real total government purchases from
1949:Q1-2009:Q1. Estimation yields a value for ρ of .9 and the value of σ 2 implies a
one-standard deviation shock raises the level of government purchases 1.5%. Steady
state purchases, G, is set so purchases equal 20% of output in the deterministic
steady state.
                    POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                           15

  We solve the model numerically using the monotone map method described in
Davig and Leeper (2006).


               6. Dynamic Impacts of Government Purchases

  In the new Keynesian framework, the general mechanisms through which a change
in government purchases affects the equilibrium, regardless of the monetary-fiscal
regime, are:

     • higher government spending raises demand for the goods sold by monopolis-
       tically competitive intermediate-goods producing firms;
     • intermediate-goods producing firms meet demand at posted prices by increas-
       ing their demand for labor;
     • higher labor demand raises real wages and real marginal costs;
     • firms that have the option of reevaluating their pricing decision will increase
       their prices.

These mechanisms operate across each monetary-fiscal regime. Also, the positive
comovement of output and prices occurs in each regime, so an unproductive govern-
ment spending shock looks like a traditional “demand” shock regardless of policy.
The policy regime, however, does play a critical role in determining the movement
of real rates, consumption and the path for inflation.
   To highlight the differences and similarities across regimes, figure 4 reports the im-
pulse responses to a two-standard deviation shock to government purchases, which
translates to a 3 percent rise in the level of purchases, conditional on each of the
three stationary regimes. The experiment holds regime fixed, although agents’ ex-
pectations functions embed the probability that regimes can change. In each regime,
output rises as government purchases increase demand, causing firms to hire more
labor and increase production. Households experience a rise in their real wage due
to the increase in demand for their labor services (i.e., they slide along their labor
supply curve), but also realize some decline in wealth arising from higher expected
tax payments. From the monopolistic firms’ perspective, the rise in the real wage
drives up their real marginal costs. Since government purchases are serially corre-
lated, the rise in marginal costs is expected to be persistent; if given the opportunity
under the Calvo pricing restrictions, an individual firm will respond to the shock by
raising its price.
                    POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                            16

   Under active monetary and passive fiscal policy, which is the benchmark policy
configuration in many studies and exhibits Ricardian equivalence in the fixed-regime
setting, the monetary authority responds aggressively to the rise in inflation by in-
creasing the nominal rate more than one-for-one (dashed lines). As figure 4 indicates,
the monetary response persistently raises the real rate and dampens consumption
demand from households. As purchases return to their steady state level, the real
rate falls and consumption rises back to steady state. Since inflation remains rela-
tively subdued, seigniorage revenues play a small role in governing debt dynamics.
Taxes respond to lagged debt and rise as the government issues debt to finance the
expanded level of purchases. However, taxes do not respond sufficiently to result
in monotonically declining debt, so debt peaks roughly 10 periods after the initial
shock.
   The dynamics of output and consumption in the active monetary/passive fiscal
(AM/PF) regime qualitatively resemble those of a standard real-business cycle model,
where an increase in government purchases acts as a negative shock to lifetime wealth,
which causes agents to decrease both consumption and leisure. The rise in time spent
working stimulates output, but not enough to cause consumption to rise. The drop
in consumption, both in the AM/PF regime and real business cycle model stands in
contrast to traditional Keynesian policy analysis. Textbook formulations posit that
an increase in government purchases generates dynamics—sometimes referred to as
“Keynesian hydraulics”—that produce a multiple increase in output and consump-
tion, where the multiple depends on the marginal propensity to consume [Branson
(1989)].
   As discussed in the introduction, mechanisms that cause consumption to rise in
modern general equilibrium settings often require modifying preferences or introduc-
ing incomplete markets and labor market imperfections. An alternative to these
modifications is to assume a different policy regime with passive monetary and ac-
tive fiscal policy. Kim (2003) shows in a fixed-regime new Keynesian model that
an increase in government purchases can increase consumption under passive mon-
etary/active fiscal (PM/AF) policy by inducing the real rate to decline. Figure 4
demonstrates that the same mechanism exists in the regime-switching framework
(light solid lines). The increase in government purchases, which is expected to be
persistent, raises current and future demand, so raises inflation expectations. Under
passive monetary policy, the monetary authority responds to the increase in inflation
less than one-for-one and lets the real rate fall. The lower future path of the real rate
                    POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                          17

lowers the return to saving, which stimulates demand as households pull consump-
tion forward. This model holds the capital stock fixed and is a closed economy, so the
increase in government purchases and consumption generates an output multiplier
greater than one and a larger increase in output than under AM/PF policy. The
large increase in output above potential generates a substantially larger increase in
inflation than in the AM/PF regime.
   The larger response of output under passive monetary policy also raises taxes by
more on impact than under active monetary policy, since the tax rule specifies taxes
rise in response to the output gap. Under passive monetary/passive fiscal (PM/PF)
policy, the response of taxes to output is larger than in PM/AF, so taxes increase
relatively more and debt rises by less on impact.
   To better understand the debt dynamics, recall that following intertemporal equi-
librium condition must hold in every regime
                                      X∞                             
          Mt−1 + (1 + rt−1 )Bt−1                              rT MT
                                 = Et      qt,T τT − GT +                 ,     (30)
                    Pt                T =t
                                                            1 + r T PT


which indicates that the present value of primary surpluses and seigniorage must
equal the real value of outstanding nominal government liabilities. Holding every-
thing constant except government purchases, equilibrium condition (30) implies that
an increase in government purchases, financed by new debt issuance, lowers the
present value of primary surpluses and creates an imbalance between the initial
value of liabilities and their expected backing (i.e., the right-hand side variables).
   To restore balance, a number of adjustments can occur. First, the present value
of taxes may rise by exactly the amount that government purchases changed, which
is the adjustment that occurs under a Ricardian regime. Second, the present value
of seigniorage may rise. Third, the current price level may jump, revaluing existing
liabilities. In the regime switching setting, all of these adjustments occur and the
relative importance of each adjustment for reestablishing equilibrium condition (30)
depends on the joint monetary-fiscal policy process.
  At each point in time, real debt must be backed by the present value of primary
surpluses and seigniorage, which depend on how the policy process is expected to
evolve. A policy combination that implies less total backing will cause agents to try
to substitute out of debt holdings, which will be consistent in equilibrium with a rise
in consumption demand. The rise in demand increases the current price level to a
                       POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                                  18

level that restores balance between the left- and right-hand sides of (30). The rise
in the price level can then be understood from two perspectives, either the firm’s
pricing decision or the intertemporal equilibrium condition (30).
   Figure 5 decomposes the debt dynamics between changes in the present value of
primary surpluses and seigniorage, again conditional on monetary-fiscal regime. The
upper-left panel reports the paths for debt in different regimes and the lower two pan-
els report the responses of the present value of primary surpluses and seigniorage.
The paths for primary surpluses and seigniorage are given in terms of percentage
changes, which are then weighted by their share of debt. Define xt to be the ex-
pected present value of primary surpluses and zt to be the expected present value of
seigniorage, beginning at t + 1. Rewrite (30) as BPtt = xt + zt, which log-linearized
becomes
                                    bbt = x x   z
                                            bt + zbt,                              (31)
                                          b     b
where bars denote steady state values conditional on regime and hats denote the log
deviations. Equation (31) indicates that the percentage change in debt is a weighted
average of the percentage changes in the present value of surpluses and seigniorage.11
The reason for weighting the responses of primary surpluses and seigniorage in figure
5 is that the linear aggregation of each value approximates the change in debt, which
eases the interpretation of determining the driving forces behind debt dynamics.
   In figure 5, debt rises under AM/PF and is backed by roughly an equal rise in both
primary surpluses and seigniorage (dashed lines). The rise in government purchases
exerts downward pressure on the present value of primary surpluses, but primary
surpluses rise because passive fiscal policy raises taxes. Because the real interest rate
rises, a large and persistent increase in surpluses is required to raise the present value
of surpluses. In contrast, the present value of primary surpluses falls under passive
monetary policy and seigniorage rises. The recovery of the present value of primary
surpluses to its steady state under passive policy is slow relative to the return of
seigniorage. Thus, the backing of debt actually falls below its steady state debt level
as seigniorage falls, causing debt to fall below its steady state level. Active monetary
policy, by keeping real interest rates high, prolongs and extends the fiscal adjustments
that bring debt back to steady state. Passive monetary policy, by contrast, allows
jumps in inflation that rapidly stabilize debt by reducing its real value.
  11In  the figure, the sums of xbt and zbt do not exactly equal bbt due to the approximation error
arising from the log-linearization of (30).
                      POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                                   19

                      7. Government Purchase Multipliers

7.1. Impact vs. Present Value Multipliers. Empirical studies that measure the
effect of exogenous changes in government purchases, such as Blanchard and Perotti
(2002), report the following impact multiplier
                                                     ∆Yt+k
                              Impact Multiplier(k) =       ,
                                                      ∆Gt
which is the increase in the level of output j periods ahead in response to an increase
in government purchases equal to size ∆Gt at time t.
  There are several issues with this definition of the multiplier. First, if the process
governing government purchases is serially correlated, then a change in government
purchases portends a path of future government purchases. Measuring the impact on
output using ∆Yt+j /∆Gt does not take into account how expected future purchases
impact ∆Yt+j , so this measure can easily be biased. Second, ∆Yt+j /∆Gt is not in
present value units, so a unit increase in output 50 years in the future is treated as
equivalent to a unit increase in output this year. Without discounting, the multiplier
calculation can be a misleading guide to policy decisions.12
  To remedy both of these issues, we follow the measure in Mountford and Uhlig
(2009) and report the change in the present value of additional output over different
horizons generated by a $1 change in the present value of government purchases,
                                                         j
                                                       k Q
                                                       P
                                                  Et             (1 + rt+i )−j ∆Yt+k
                                                       j=0 i=0
              Present Value Multiplier(k) =              j
                                                       k Q
                                                                                            .
                                                       P                       −j
                                                  Et             (1 + rt+i )        ∆Gt+k
                                                       j=0 i=0

In our context, this is the increase in the present value of output over the next k
periods, conditional on holding the prevailing monetary and fiscal regime fixed.

7.2. Multipliers Across Monetary-Fiscal Regimes. Table 3 reports the present
value output multipliers over different horizons conditioning on each of the station-
ary regimes. In general, the long-run government multiplier is greater than unity
for regimes with passive monetary policy, which implies the consumption multiplier
  12Romer   and Bernstein (2009) use impact multipliers to project the likely impacts of the 2009
stimulus package. One reason, however, that empirical work does not often report discounted values
is because discount factors are not readily available.
                       POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                                     20

in these policy regimes is positive. The positive consumption multiplier arises for
reasons explained early—passive monetary policy allows the real rate to fall, which
raises aggregate consumption demand. The output multiplier is slightly larger under
active fiscal policy because agents expected lower future taxes relative to the passive
fiscal regime. To be precise, roughly 91 percent of the increase in government pur-
chases is backed by higher future taxes under the PM/PF regime, whereas it is 89
percent under the PM/AF regime. The slightly larger tax liability under the PM/PF
regime explains the slightly lower multipliers.
   Table 4 reports the impacts of government purchases on the price level, which
generally mimic the pattern for the multipliers. The larger the increase in demand,
or final output, as measured by the multipliers, the larger is the impact on the price
level. Not surprisingly, the largest impacts on the price level occurs under passive
monetary policy.

7.3. Simulating Time Series. Suppose that the model in section 3 were the true
data generating process and an econometrician employs standard VAR techniques
to identify the impacts of an exogenous change in government spending. What
multipliers for output and consumption will the econometrician obtain?
  To simulate the time series we draw sequences of the government spending shock
and the monetary and fiscal policy states, {εgt , StM , StF }Tt=1 , and solve the nonlinear
model for each date t. Setting T = 500, we discard the first 250 periods, ensuring that
the model has settled into its ergodic distribution. From this we have one sample of
equilibrium data of length 250 periods, roughly comparable to a post-war quarterly
sample. For each sample we estimate a bivariate VAR in government spending and
consumption. We order Gt first and use a Choleski decomposition to identify an
exogenous shock to spending. The simulation is performed 571 times.13
  Figure 6 plots the mean and 68 percent probability band for responses of gov-
ernment spending and private consumption to a serially correlated shock to Gt nor-
malized to equal $1 in the initial period. We compute impact multipliers to be
  13In  simulations where the regime realizations produce active monetary and active fiscal policy,
debt temporarily assumes a nonstationary path because neither the monetary or fiscal authority
is acting in a manner that ensures long-run solvency. When the doubly active regime persists too
long, the solution moves far off the grid for the discretized state space and approximation errors can
produce imply economically infeasible solutions. We discard any draws that exhibit such behavior,
leaving us with 571 samples of time series.
                    POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                          21

comparable to empirical work. Private consumption responds strongly on impact,
with a mean jump of over 80 cents. The multiplier remains positive for about six
quarters before turning mildly negative. Multipliers in this range are reported by
Monacelli and Perotti (2008) for U.S. data, though their estimates imply a weak ini-
tial response of consumption that gradually builds to a peak 8 to 10 quarters after the
shock. Our simple model has little internal propagation, so the large impact effect
and rapid decay are to be expected. Nonetheless, the figure shows that the setup
in which monetary and fiscal regimes fluctuate over time is capable of generating
consumption responses of the magnitude observed in U.S. time series.


              8. Simulating Fiscal Simulus: The 2009 ARRA

   The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 is the fiscal stimulus pack-
aged passed by Congress with the primary intention of stabilizing economic activity
following the sharp decline in output late in 2008. The total size of the package is
$787 billion and comprises both additional government spending and tax cuts. This
section illustrates that the likely impact of the stimulus rests with how monetary
and fiscal policies are expected to respond going forward.
  In line with the focus of the paper thus far, we analyze the impact of the additional
purchases contained in the stimulus package. The stimulus package contains spending
on infrastructure, healthcare, energy, and so forth and it includes $144 billion in
federal transfers to state and local governments. These transfers do not necessarily
need to go toward increasing purchases, but instead could be used to avoid tax hikes
or borrowing. Following Romer and Bernstein (2009) and Cogan, Cwik, Taylor,
and Wieland (2009), we assume that 60 percent of the transfers to state and local
governments go toward increasing purchases. Using this assumption, Cogan, Cwik,
Taylor, and Wieland (2009) report the increase in government purchases, on a yearly
basis, due to the stimulus package.
  Figure 7 compares the paths of several variables in response to the path of the
additional government purchases from the ARRA as estimated from Cogan, Cwik,
Taylor, and Wieland (2009). The government spending stimulus, depicted in the
third panel in the left column, is injected into the economy as a sequence of shocks.
We compute responses under both AM/PF and PM/AF. Under AM/PF (solid lines),
the active monetary response drives up the real rate in response to the increase
in purchases. Total output and inflation, however, follow a hump-shape and peak
                    POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                           22

roughly at the same time as the peak in government purchases. Fiscal financing of
the increase in spending occurs very gradually, with both debt and taxes above their
steady state levels for many years.
   Under PM/AF (dashed lines), passive monetary policy allows the real interest rate
to fall, so stimulates consumption demand. Inflation peaks nearly 300 basis points
above its steady state level about five quarters after the initial impulse. Relatively
high inflation erodes the real value of outstanding debt, leaving it considerably below
its level in the AM/PF regime.
   To obtain a sense of how much future variability can be attributed to shifts in
policy regime, figure 8 reports the mean response of a monte carlo exercise that uses
the Cogan, Cwik, Taylor, and Wieland (2009) path for government purchases, but
randomly draws over regimes. Dashed lines represent two-standard deviation bands
computed at each point in time. The initial regime is set to PM/AF, so the initial
rise in government purchases is often occurring under this same regime, since it is
relatively persistent. Persistence of the regime causes the mean response of the real
rate to fall, but then assumes a less certain path as the effect of some draws of active
monetary policy are realized.


8.1. Fiscal Foresight. Table 5 formally quantifies the ARRA path of Cogan, Cwik,
Taylor, and Wieland (2009) in terms of output multipliers. One issue that arises in
such computations is whether agents fully internalize the future path of govern-
ment purchases, or are surprised each period—that is, they have no foresight about
the stimulus package. One method to incorporate foresight is to modify the pro-
cess for government purchases by adding moving average terms to the government
purchase process and convert it to an ARMA(1,5). We calibrate the moving av-
erage coefficients using a minimum distance estimator based on the Cogan, Cwik,
Taylor, and Wieland (2009) path and impulse response of the ARMA(1,5). Under
the ARMA(1,5) process, a shock to purchases implies a path similar to that of the
ARRA, except agents have full knowledge of its trajectory. The ARMA(1,5) adds five
state variables, which renders the nonlinear solution method for the regime-switching
model impractical. To obtain a sense of how important fiscal foresight is, we move
to a linear fixed-regime setting.
   The top portion of table 5 reports the multipliers under the assumption of no
foresight. A similar pattern emerges as in the regime-switching setting following the
                       POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                                    23

AR(1) shock, except the multipliers under the PM/AF regime are considerably larger.
Under foresight, however, agents have knowledge of the rising level of purchases so
substantially revise up their expectations of future inflation in response to a shock.
The passive monetary response causes a sharp drop in the real rate and the large
present-value multiplier, which is 4.83 after five quarters under PM/AF. In contrast,
the monetary authority responds aggressively to the higher inflation in the AM/PF,
which pushes the real rate higher relative to the case of no foresight and dampens
the multiplier.


8.2. What If Monetary Policy Becomes Active? In both of the regimes in fig-
ure 7, inflation rises. In the regime that probably best describes policy behavior
through 2008 and 2009, passive monetary/active fiscal policy, inflation rises substan-
tially for several years. A plausible response of the Federal Reserve to rising inflation
is to switch to being active. In the absence of a coordinated switch in fiscal policy
to a passive stance, both policies would be active, at least for a time. If regime were
fixed and both policies were active, no equilibrium would exist. In the present envi-
ronment, because agents anticipate the active/active regime will not persist forever,
the economy can visit such a regime periodically and temporarily. As the estimated
policy rules suggest, the U.S. economy resided in an active/active regime for much
of the 1980s [see figure 3].14
   Figure 9 superimposes the paths of macroeconomic variables given the government
spending associated with the ARRA when policy is doubly active onto the paths in
figure 7. Active monetary/active fiscal policies produce markedly different paths for
macro variables: inflation rises and remains well above its initial level; output and
consumption boom; government debt grows with no tendency to be stabilized. Ac-
tive monetary policy attempts to combat the rise in inflation by raising the nominal
interest rate sharply, which raises the real interest rate. Although monetary policy
continues to exert influence over the real rate, it can no longer use that mechanism
to reduce aggregate demand and inflation: rapidly rising debt with no prospect of
higher future taxes generates increases in aggregate demand that swamp any poten-
tial reduction in demand induced by higher real rates. Ironically, higher real interest

  14Davig (2005) studies  the implications for empirical tests of the government’s intertemporal bud-
get constraint of an environment in which periodically government debt grows at an unsustainable
rate.
                        POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                                     24

rates exacerbate the central bank’s difficulties in controlling inflation by raising debt
service, the growth rate of debt, and the resulting positive wealth effects.15
   In sum, the failure of fiscal policy to raise taxes and stabilize debt impedes mone-
tary policy’s efforts in fighting inflation. Although the economy experiences a boom,
it does so by generating chronically higher inflation and a growing ratio of govern-
ment debt to GDP. The active/active scenario exemplifies the need for monetary and
fiscal policy to work together to control inflation.

                                         9. Conclusion

   This paper has embedded estimated Markov-switching rules for U.S. monetary
and fiscal policy into an otherwise conventional calibrated DSGE model with nom-
inal rigidities to deliver some quantitative predictions of the impacts of government
spending increases. When monetary and fiscal policy regimes vary—from active
monetary/passive fiscal to passive monetary/active fiscal to doubly passive to dou-
bly active—government spending multipliers can vary widely. An increase in govern-
ment spending of $1 in present value raises output by $0.80 in present value under
AM/PF, while it raises output by as much as $1.80 in present value when monetary
policy is passive. In our simple model, this translates into a decrease in consumption
of $0.20 in present value under AM/PF, but and increase in consumption of about
$0.80 in present value under passive monetary policy.
  The paper also simulates the general equilibrium impacts of the government spend-
ing path implied by the 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. When
the government spending path is modeled as a sequence of shocks to spending, the
present-value multiplier for output is about $0.68 under a fixed regime of AM/PF,
while it can be well over $3.00 in a fixed PM/AF regime. If the government spending
path is treated as foreseen by economic agents—because the path is announced by
the passage of the Act—the present-value multiplier for output falls somewhat when
the regime is AM/PF, but it rises to nearly $5.00 in the short run when policy obeys
a PM/AF regime.



  15A  permanent regime of active monetary and active fiscal policy is unsustainable. This can be
seen in figure 9: the combination of rising debt, falling surpluses, and higher real interest rates are
incompatible with the intertemporal equilibrium condition, (30).
                   POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                         25

             Appendix A. Data Description: Fiscal Variables

  The fiscal policy variables we use in estimating the switching fiscal rule (25) are
at a quarterly frequency and defined as follows:

     • τt = (Federal Receipts - Federal Transfers)/(Nominal GDP)
          – Federal Receipts: Line 1 of NIPA Table 3.2
          – Federal Transfers: Line 21 of NIPA Table 3.2
          – Nominal GDP: Line 1 of NIPA Table 1.1.5
            P3
     • bt = (Market value of privately held gross federal debt)t−j /(Nominal GDP)t−j
            j=0
          – Debt series available from Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas website
     • yt = ln(Nominal GDP/Nominal CBO potential GDP)
          – Nominal CBO potential GDP available from Congressional Budget Office
            website
     • gt = (Nominal Federal government consumption expenditures and gross in-
       vestment)/(Nominal GDP)
          – Nominal Federal government consumption expenditures and gross in-
            vestment: Line 21 of NIPA Table 1.1.5
                   POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                      26

                                  References
Aiyagari, S. R., and M. Gertler (1985): “The Backing of Government Debt
  and Monetarism,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 16(1), 19–44.
Barro, R. J., and R. G. King (1984): “Time-Separable Preferences and
  Intertemporal-Substitution Models of Business Cycles,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 99(4), 817–839.
Baxter, M., and R. G. King (1993): “Fiscal Policy in General Equilibrium,”
  American Economic Review, 83(3), 315–334.
Bianchi, F. (2009): “Regime Switches, Agents’ Beliefs, and Post-World War II U.S.
  Macroeconomic Dynamics,” Manuscript, Princeton University.
Bilbiie, F. (2008): “Non-Separable Preferences, Fiscal Policy Puzzles and Inferior
  Goods,” forthcoming in Journal of Money, Credit and Banking.
Blanchard, O. J., and R. Perotti (2002): “An Empirical Characterization of
  the Dynamic Effects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(4), 1329–1368.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2008): “Press Re-
  lease: Federal Open Market Committee,” October 29.
Bouakez, H., and N. Rebei (2007): “Why Does Private Consumption Rise After
  a Government Spending Shock?,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 40(3), 954–979.
Branson, W. H. (1989): Macroeconomic Theory and Policy. Harper and Row, New
  York, 3rd edn.
Calvo, G. A. (1983): “Staggered Prices in a Utility Maximizing Model,” Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 12(3), 383–398.
Chari, V. V., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan (2000): “Sticky Price
  Models of the Business Cycle: Can the Contract Multiplier Solve the Persistence
  Problem?,” Econometrica, 68(5), 1151–1179.
Chung, H., T. Davig, and E. M. Leeper (2007): “Monetary and Fiscal Policy
  Switching,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 39(4), 809–842.
Clarida, R., J. Gali, and M. Gertler (1999): “The Science of Monetary Policy:
  A New Keynesian Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature, 37(4), 1661–1707.
Cochrane, J. H. (2005): “Money as Stock,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
  52(3), 501–528.
Cogan, J. F., T. Cwik, J. B. Taylor, and V. Wieland (2009): “New Keyne-
  sian versus Old Keynesian Government Spending Multipliers,” Manuscript, Stan-
  ford University.
                   POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                      27

Congressional Budget Office (2009): A Preliminary Analysis of the Presi-
  dent’s Budget and an Update of CBO’s Budget and Economic Outlook, vol. March.
  CBO, Washington, D.C.
Davig, T. (2005): “Periodically Expanding Discounted Debt: A Threat to Fiscal
  Policy Sustainability?,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 20(7), 829–840.
Davig, T., and E. M. Leeper (2006): “Fluctuating Macro Policies and the Fiscal
  Theory,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2006, ed. by D. Acemoglu, K. Rogoff,
  and M. Woodford, pp. 247–298. MIT Press, Cambridge.
          (2007): “Generalizing the Taylor Principle,” American Economic Review,
  97(3), 607–635.
Dixit, A. K., and J. E. Stiglitz (1977): “Monopolistic Competition and Opti-
  mum Product Diversity,” American Economic Review, 67(3), 297–308.
Farmer, R. E. A., T. Zha, and D. Waggoner (2009): “Understanding Markov-
  Switching Rational Expectations Models,” NBER Working Paper No. 14710.
Favero, C. A., and T. Monacelli (2005): “Fiscal Policy Rules and Regime
  (In)Stability: Evidence from the U.S.,” Manuscript, IGIER.
Gali, J., J. D. Lopez-Salido, and J. Valles (2007): “Understanding the Effects
  of Government Spending on Consumption,” Journal of the European Economic
  Association, 5(1), 227–270.
Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and G. W. Huffman (1988): “Investment,
  Capacity Utilization, and the Real Business Cycle,” American Economic Review,
  78(3), 402–417.
Kim, S. (2003): “Structural Shocks and the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level in the
  Sticky Price Model,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 7(5), 759–782.
King, R. G., C. I. Plosser, and S. T. Rebelo (1988): “Production, Growth,
  and Business Cycles: I. The Basic Neoclassical Model,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics, 21(March/May), 195–232.
Leeper, E. M. (1991): “Equilibria Under ‘Active’ and ‘Passive’ Monetary and
  Fiscal Policies,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 27(1), 129–147.
Leeper, E. M., and T. Yun (2006): “The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level:
  Background and Beyond,” International Tax and Public Finance, 13(4), 373–409.
Leeper, E. M., and T. Zha (2003): “Modest Policy Interventions,” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 50(8), 1673–1700.
Linnemann, L. (2006): “The Effect of Government Spending on Private Consump-
  tion: A Puzzle?,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 38(7), 1715–1735.
                  POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                      28

Lubik, T. A., and F. Schorfheide (2004): “Testing for Indeterminacy: An
  Application to U.S. Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review, 94(1), 190–
  217.
Lucas, Jr., R. E. (1988): “Money Demand in the United States: A Quantitative
  Review,” Carneige-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, pp. 137–168.
Mankiw, N. G., and L. H. Summers (1986): “Money Demand and the Effects
  of Fiscal Policies,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 18(4), 415–429.
Monacelli, T., and R. Perotti (2008): “Fiscal Policy, Wealth Effects, and
  Markups,” NBER Working Paper No. 14584.
Mountford, A., and H. Uhlig (2009): “What Are the Effects of Fiscal Policy
  Shocks?,” forthcoming in Journal of Applied Econometrics.
Perotti, R. (2007): “In Search of the Transmission Mechanism of Fiscal Pol-
  icy,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2007, ed. by D. Acemoglu, K. Rogoff, and
  M. Woodford, vol. 22, pp. 169–226. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, NBER
  Working Paper No. 13143.
Ramey, V. A. (2007): “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s All in the
  Timing,” Manuscript, University of California, San Diego.
Ramey, V. A., and M. D. Shapiro (1998): “Costly Capital Reallocation and
  the Effects of Government Spending,” Carneige-Rochester Conference Series on
  Public Policy, 48, 145–194.
Ravn, M. O., S. Schmitt-Grohe, and M. Uribe (2007): “Explaining the Effects
  of Government Spending Shocks on Consumption and the Real Exchange Rate,”
  NBER Working Paper No. 13328.
Romer, C., and J. Bernstein (2009): The Job Impact of the American Recovery
  and Reinvestment Plan. Obama Transition Team, Washington, D.C., January 9.
Rotemberg, J. J., and M. Woodford (1997): “An Optimization-Based Econo-
  metric Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,” in NBER Macroeco-
  nomics Annual 1997, ed. by B. S. Bernanke, and J. J. Rotemberg, pp. 297–346.
  MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Sargent, T. J., and N. Wallace (1981): “Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arith-
  metic,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 5(Fall), 1–17.
Sims, C. A. (1988): “Identifying Policy Effects,” in Empirical Macroeconomics for
  Interdependent Economics, ed. by R. C. Bryant, pp. 308–321. The Brookings In-
  stitution, Washington, DC.
                   POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                      29

Svensson, L. E. O., and N. Williams (2007): “Monetary Policy with Model
  Uncertainty: Distribution Foreacast Targeting,” Manuscript, University of Wis-
  consin.
          (2008): “Optimal Monetary Policy Under Uncertainty: A Markov Jump-
  Linear-Quadratic Approach,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 90(4),
  275–293.
Wallace, N. (1981): “A Modigliani-Miller Theorem for Open-Market Operations,”
  American Economic Review, 71(3), 267–274.
Woodford, M. (1998): “Control of the Public Debt: A Requirement for Price
  Stability?,” in The Debt Burden and Its Consequences for Monetary Policy, ed.
  by G. Calvo, and M. King, pp. 117–154. St. Martin’s Press, New York.
          (2003): Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.
  Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.
               POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                       30

                       Active                            Passive
  State      StM =1             StM =2        StM  =3              StM = 4
   α0         .0068              .0068          .0058               .0058
             (.0005)            (.0005)        (.0002)             (.0002)

    απ       1.2936             1.2936         .5305                .5305
             (.062)             (.062)         (.02)                (.02)

    αy        .0249             .0249           .0485               .0485
              (.005)            (.005)         (.0046)             (.0046)

    σr2    1.61615e-005   9.18552e-007 2.07447e-005 5.51202e-007
          (9.67157e-006) (1.95885e-006) (3.4185e-006) (1.75348e-006)

Table 1. Monetary policy rule estimates. Log likelihood value = −1079.52.


                        State     StF = 1   StF = 2
                         γ0         .029       .004
                                  (.0025)   (.0036)
                          γb        .071      -.025
                                  (.0044)   (.0066)
                          γy        .498       .324
                                   (.025)    (.035)
                          γg        .409     1.022
                                   (.026)    (.030)
                          στ2     4.25e-5 4.98e-005
                                 (6.82e-6) (8.58e-6)

   Table 2. Tax policy rule estimates. Log likelihood value = −820.76.
             POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                            31

                                       P V (∆Y )
                                         after
                                       P V (∆G)
          Regime    5 quarters 10 quarters 25 quarters              ∞

          AM/PF       .79                 .80              .84     .86
          PM/PF       1.64               1.51              1.39    1.37
          PM/AF       1.72               1.58              1.4     1.36
                              P V (∆C)       P V (∆Y )
                      Note:   P V (∆G)   =   P V (∆G)    − 1.
Table 3. Present value multipliers from the regime-switching model.

                                 %∆P after
           Regime    5 quarters 10 quarters 25 quarters

            AM/PF         .76        1.34   2.37
            PM/PF        2.19        3.18   3.98
            PM/AF        2.41        3.40   3.95
Table 4. Impact of a 3% increase in government purchases on the
price level in the regime-switching model.

                                                   P V (∆Y )
                                                   after
                                                   P V (∆G)
 Regime                      5 quarters 10 quarters 25 quarters           ∞

 No Foresight—AR(1)
 AM/PF                           .68               .68             .68    .68
 PM/AF                          3.29               2.88           2.41    2.3

 Foresight—ARMA(1,5)
 AM/PF                      .52          .61           .63      .63
 PM/AF                     4.83          3.10         2.31     2.17
Table 5. Present value multipliers from the fixed-regime model; with
and without foresight.
             POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                                32



                         Active Monetary Policy, High σ
 1
                                                           Filtered Probabilities
0.5                                                        Smoothed Probabilities

 0
      1950      1960      1970         1980         1990       2000            2010
                         Active Monetary Policy, Low σ
 1

0.5

 0
      1950      1960      1970         1980         1990       2000            2010
                        Passive Monetary Policy, High σ
 1

0.5

 0
      1950      1960      1970         1980         1990       2000            2010
                        Passive Monetary Policy, Low σ
 1

0.5

 0
      1950      1960      1970         1980         1990       2000            2010




             Figure 1. Monetary Regime Probabilities
         POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                                                        33


                              Probability of Active Fiscal Policy
 1


0.9


0.8


0.7


0.6


0.5


0.4


0.3


0.2


0.1                                                                     Filtered Probabilities
                                                                        Smoothed Probabilities
 0
      1950            1960           1970          1980          1990          2000              2010




         Figure 2. U.S. Fiscal Regime Probabilities


             AM,PF − Ricardian
             AM,AF − Explosive
             PM,PF − Indeterminacy
             PM,AF − Fiscal Theory




      1950     1955   1960   1965    1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995    2000   2005




       Figure 3. U.S. Monetary and Fiscal Regimes
                               POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                                                          34



                                    Output Gap                                                        Consumption
                 1.5
                                                           AM/PF                   0.6
                  1                                        PM/PF                   0.4
%




                                                                   %
                 0.5                                       PM/AF                   0.2
                  0                                                                  0
                −0.5                                                              −0.2
                       0   5   10      15        20   25     30                          0   5   10      15      20   25   30
                                     Inflation                                                         Real Rate
                300                                                                50




                                                                   basis points
 basis points




                200
                                                                                    0
                100
                  0                                                               −50

                       0   5   10      15        20   25     30                          0   5   10      15      20   25   30
                                    Nominal R                                                         Debt (level)
                200                                                                 2
basis points




                100                                                                 1




                                                                        %
                                                                                    0
                  0
                                                                                   −1
                       0   5   10      15        20   25     30                          0   5   10      15      20   25   30
                                Gov Purchases                                                            Taxes
                  4                                                                 3
                                                                                    2
           %




                                                                        %
                  2                                                                 1
                                                                                    0
                  0                                                                −1
                       0   5   10      15        20   25     30                          0   5   10      15      20   25   30




Figure 4. Responses to a shock to government purchases, condition-
ing on remaining in the prevailing regime. In deviations from steady
state. Time units in quarters.
                                              POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                                                                     35


                                                    Debt (level)                                                           Primary Surplus
                                 2                                                                           10


                                1.5                                                                           0


                                 1                                                                          −10
%




                                                                                   %
                                0.5                                                                         −20


                                 0                                                                          −30


                               −0.5                                                                         −40
                                      0   5    10      15     20   25   30                                         0   5   10   15    20     25     30



                                              PV Primary Surplus                                                           PV Seigniorage
                                1.5                                                                           3
%, weighted by share of debt




                                                                             %, weighted by share of debt
                                                                                                                                                  AM/PF
                                 1                                                                           2.5                                  PM/PF
                                                                                                                                                  PM/AF
                                                                                                              2
                                0.5
                                                                                                             1.5
                                 0
                                                                                                              1
                               −0.5
                                                                                                             0.5
                                −1                                                                            0

                               −1.5                                                                         −0.5
                                      0   5    10      15     20   25   30                                         0   5   10   15    20     25     30




Figure 5. Responses of fiscal variables to a shock to government pur-
chases, conditioning on remaining in the prevailing regime. In devia-
tions from steady state. Time units in quarters.
                 POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                           36


                                Response of Government Spending
    1


   0.8


   0.6


   0.4


   0.2


    0
         0   2        4     6        8         10         12       14   16   18   20



                                 Private Consumption Multipliers


   0.8

   0.6

   0.4

   0.2

    0

  −0.2
         0   2        4     6        8         10         12       14   16   18   20




Figure 6. Government spending impact multipliers for consumption
from VAR fit to simulated data from the regime-switching model. Time
units in quarters.
                               POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                                                       37



                                      Output Gap                                                          Consumption
                 1.5
                                                    PM/AF                             0.6
                  1
                                                                                      0.4
                                                    AM/PF
%




                                                                      %
                 0.5                                                                  0.2
                  0                                                                     0
                −0.5                                                                 −0.2
                       0   5    10     15      20     25    30   35                         0   5   10      15   20     25    30   35
                                        Inflation                                                          Real Rate
                300                                                                   50
 basis points




                                                                      basis points
                200
                                                                                       0
                100
                  0                                                                  −50
                       0   5    10     15      20     25    30   35                         0   5   10      15   20     25    30   35
                                     Gov Purchases                                                           Taxes
                  4                                                                    3
                                                                                       2
                  2
            %




                                                                           %
                                                                                       1
                                                                                       0
                  0
                                                                                      −1
                       0   5    10     15      20     25    30   35                         0   5   10      15   20     25    30   35
                                            Debt                                                         Primary Surplus
                  4                                                                   20

                  2                                                                    0
            %




                  0                                                   %              −20

                                                                                     −40
                       0   5    10     15      20     25    30   35                         0   5   10      15   20     25    30   35




Figure 7. Impacts of the government spending path implied by the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, conditioning on
either active monetary/passive fiscal (AM/PF) policy (solid lines) and
passive monetary/active fiscal (PM/AF) policy (dashed lines) regime.
In deviations from steady state. Time units in quarters.
                               POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                                         38



                                   Output Gap                                              Consumption
                1.5                                                           1
                   1
                                                                            0.5
  %




                                                              %
                0.5
                                                                              0
                   0
               −0.5                                                        −0.5
                       0   5        10       15   20   25                         0   5     10           15   20    25
                                     Inflation                                              Real Rate
                                                                             50
basis points




                                                            basis points
                300
                200                                                           0
                100
                                                                           −50
                   0
               −100                                                        −100
                       0   5        10       15   20   25                         0   5     10           15   20    25
                                 Gov Purchases                                                   Taxes
                   4
                                                                              2
               %




                                                                       %
                   2
                                                                              0

                   0                                                        −2
                       0   5        10       15   20   25                         0   5     10           15   20    25
                                   Debt (Level)                                           Primary Surplus
                   2                                                          0
                   1                                                       −20
           %




                                                                 %
                   0                                                       −40

                −1                                                         −60

                       0   5        10       15   20   25                         0   5     10           15   20    25




Figure 8. Simulating the 2009 ARRA randomly drawing over future
monetary and fiscal regimes, including two-standard deviation error
bands. Initial regime is passive monetary/active fiscal. In deviations
from steady state. Time units in quarters.
                               POLICY INTERACTIONS AND FISCAL STIMULUS                                                       39


                                      Output Gap                                                          Consumption
                 1.5                                                                  0.8
                  1                      PM/AF      AM/AF
%                                                                                     0.4




                                                                      %
                 0.5
                                                                                       0
                  0
                                     AM/PF
                −0.5                                                                 −0.4
                       0   5    10     15      20    25     30   35                         0   5   10      15   20     25    30   35
                                        Inflation                                                          Real Rate
                300                                                                   50
 basis points




                                                                      basis points
                200
                                                                                       0
                100
                  0                                                                  −50

                       0   5    10     15      20    25     30   35                         0   5   10      15   20     25    30   35
                                     Gov Purchases                                                           Taxes
                                                                                       3
                  4
                                                                                       2
            %




                                                                           %
                  2                                                                    1
                                                                                       0
                  0
                                                                                      −1
                       0   5    10     15      20    25     30   35                         0   5   10      15   20     25    30   35
                                            Debt                                                         Primary Surplus
                 10                                                                   20
                                                                                       0
                  5                                                                  −20
      %




                                                                      %
                                                                                     −40
                  0                                                                  −60
                       0   5    10     15      20    25     30   35                         0   5   10      15   20     25    30   35




Figure 9. Impacts of the government spending path implied by the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, conditioning on
active monetary/active fiscal (AM/AF) regime (dotted-dashed lines).
Also depicted are active monetary/passive fiscal (AM/PF) policy (solid
lines) and passive monetary/active fiscal (PM/AF) policy regimes
(dashed lines). In deviations from steady state. Time units in quarters.
