                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 WORLD MARKETS FOR MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS

                                             Isil Erel
                                           Rose C. Liao
                                        Michael S. Weisbach

                                        Working Paper 15132
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15132


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2009




We would like to thank Andrew Karolyi, Rene Stulz, and participants in seminars at Ohio University
and Ohio State University for helpful suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Isil Erel, Rose C. Liao, and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
World Markets for Mergers and Acquisitions
Isil Erel, Rose C. Liao, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 15132
July 2009
JEL No. F3,G34

                                              ABSTRACT

Despite the fact that one-third of worldwide mergers involve firms from different countries, the vast
majority of the academic literature on mergers studies domestic mergers. What little has been written
about cross-border mergers has focused on public firms, usually from the United States. Yet, the vast
majority of cross-border mergers involve private firms that are not from the United States. We provide
an analysis of a sample of 56,978 cross-border mergers occurring between 1990 and 2007. We first
characterize the patterns of who buys whom: Geography matters, with firms being much more likely
to purchase firms in nearby countries than in countries far away. Purchasers are usually but not always
from developed countries and they tend to purchase firms in countries with lower investor protection
and accounting standards. A significant factor in determining acquisition patterns is currency movements;
firms tend to purchase firms from countries relative to which the acquirer’s currency has appreciated.
In addition economy-wide factors reflected in the country’s stock market returns lead to acquisitions
as well. Both the currency and stock market effect could reflect either misvaluation or wealth explanations.
Our evidence is more consistent with the wealth explanation than the misvaluation explanation.


Isil Erel                                            Michael S. Weisbach
Department of Finance                                Department of Finance
Ohio State University                                Fisher College of Business
832 Fisher Hall                                      Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue                                     2100 Neil Ave.
Columbus, OH 43210                                   Columbus, OH 43210
and                                                  and NBER
erel@fisher.osu.edu                                  weisbach_2@fisher.osu.edu

Rose C. Liao
Department of Finance and Economics
Rutgers Business School
111 Washington Street
Newark, NJ 07102
liao_102@fisher.osu.edu
1. Introduction.

        The volume of cross-border acquisitions has been growing worldwide, from 30 percent of the

total merger volume in 1998 to 45 percent in 2007. Some of these cross-border mergers occur for

exactly the same reasons as domestic mergers, e.g., synergies, market power, and/or managerial

preferences. Yet, in an international context, there are a number of additional factors, such as cross-

country differences in macroeconomic conditions, legal regimes, political systems, culture,

regulatory environments, and tax systems, that could affect cross-border mergers.1 One particularly

important factor in international merger decisions is valuation differences between acquiring and

target firms. Differences in valuation between potential acquirers and targets have been documented

to be one motive for domestic mergers. 2 These valuation differences are likely to be even more

important in an international context since movements in country-level stock markets and currencies

provide additional sources of valuation differences.

        This paper considers the extent to which valuation differences and other international factors

motivate cross-border mergers and acquisitions. Valuation differences between acquirers and targets

can be broken into three components:            Differences in country-level stock market movements,

differences in firm-specific stock price movements relative to country-level indices, or appreciation

or depreciation of the currencies in which acquirers’ and targets’ securities are traded. Each of these

components potentially reflects an alternative source of valuation difference that could motivate




1
  The extent to which a number of these factors explain cross-border mergers has been explored in previous work.
In particular, Graham and Krugman (1995) summarize earlier literature on macroeconomic conditions; Dewenter
(1995) and Froot and Stein (1991) examine relative wealth effects; Rossi and Volpin (2004) examine why corporate
governance proxied by legal regimes can affect cross-border M&A patterns; Chakrabarti, Jayaraman and Gupta-
Mukherjee (2005) find that culture disparity leads to better outcome in cross-border M&As; Desai, Foley and Hines
(2004) find that US multinationals move capital toward low-tax locations.
2
  See Shleifer and Vishny (2003), Rhodes-Kropf and Viswanathan (2004), Dong, Hirshleifer, Richardson and Teoh
(2006), and Harford (2005).


                                                       1
mergers. We estimate the effect of these factors on merger propensities using a sample of 56,978

cross-border mergers occurring between 1990 and 2007.

        In contrast to most of the prior literature that focuses on mergers of public acquirers and

targets involving U.S. firms, our sample better reflects the universe of cross-border mergers, the

majority of which involve private firms, mostly from outside of the U.S.      In our sample, 80% of

completed cross-border deals between 1990 and 2007 targeted a non-US firm, while 75% did not

involve a US firm as an acquirer. The majority of acquirers (90%) are from “developed” countries,

while the other 10% being from “developing” countries. A surprisingly large number of cross-border

transactions involve firms in Eastern Europe (2,115 deals), Asia (7,009 deals), South America (2,587

deals), Africa (853 deals), Central America (810 deals), and Middle East (617 deals). Furthermore,

the vast majority of cross-border mergers involve private firms as either bidder or target: 96% of the

deals involve a private target, 26% involve a private acquirer, and 97% have either private acquirers

or targets. Hence, the inclusion of private firms in our analysis is important, especially since most

other studies use samples of publicly-traded firms or lump private acquisitions in with other

investments as foreign direct investment (FDI).

        Our results suggest that valuation differences between acquirers and targets significantly

affect the likelihood of a cross-border merger. The cross-border acquirer is more likely to be from a

country whose currency has appreciated relative to the target’s currency and whose country’s stock

market has outperformed the target firm’s country’s market. In addition, if the companies are public,

the acquirer’s firm-specific abnormal performance is likely to be better than the target’s. The

estimated effects are fairly large: Our estimates imply that a 100% difference in country-level stock

returns between two countries leads to a 17.4% increase in the expected number of acquisitions of the

worse performing country’s firms by the better-performing country’s firms.         Similarly, a 75%

appreciation of one country’s currency relative to another’s leads to a 50.4% increase in the number

of acquisitions of firms in countries with relatively depreciated currency.


                                                   2
       Differences in valuation can affect merger propensities through two main channels. Froot

and Stein (1991) argue that differences in wealth that occur because of exchange rate or other shocks

provide a financing advantage, lowering the cost of a potential acquisition. A wealthier country

effectively has a lower cost of capital, leading its firms to purchase assets outside the country,

including other companies. More generally, international acquisitions provide a way in which newly

wealthier shareholders can increase their exposure internationally without purchasing foreign stocks.

       In addition, valuations can drive mergers if these valuations diverge from fundamentals (see

Shleifer and Vishny (2003), Dong et al. (2006), Rhodes-Kropf and Viswanathan (2004), and Baker,

Foley and Wurgler (2009)). Given misvaluation, managers of a relatively overvalued firm will have

incentives to purchase relatively undervalued assets, especially if they can use their overvalued

stocks as a means of payment. In an international context this divergence from fundamentals could

occur for two reasons: First, overall investor sentiment could vary across countries, creating a wedge

in firm values in the local-currency across countries. Second, the currencies in which the companies

are valued can appreciate or depreciate more than is warranted by changes in underlying economic

conditions, leading the companies to be relatively misvalued.

       We focus on measures of relative valuation between bidders and targets at the country level,

and, when possible, at the firm level. We consider the relative stock market performance of the

countries of the acquiring and target firms prior to the mergers, broken up into local currency and

exchange rate components. We also analyze a country-level ‘market-to-book’ measure, similar to

that used by Baker et al. (2009). Further, we examine the relative firm-level stock performance as

well as the market-to-book ratios of the subsample of mergers between public acquirers and targets.

       Based on univariate comparisons of pre-merger performance between bidders and targets,

acquirers outperform targets by all measures. The local-currency return of the acquirer is 0.3%

higher during the 12 months, 0.92% the 24 months, and 2.12% during the 36 months before the deal

occurs. Similarly, the exchange rate of the acquirer tends to appreciate relative to that of the target


                                                  3
before the deal, 1.12%, 2.13% and 3.43% in the 12, 24 and 36 months prior to the mergers,

respectively.   Given these results, not surprisingly, the market-to-book ratio of the acquirers’

countries is 9.93% higher at the time of the deal. This pattern is true for both private and public

acquirers and targets.

        When we restrict ourselves to public acquirers and targets so that we can compare the firm-

level returns, we again find that acquirers outperform targets prior to the acquisitions. The difference

in local-currency returns is 10.38%, 19.34%, and 23.36% for 12, 24 and 36 months prior to the

acquisition, respectively. In addition, the average market to book ratio is higher for acquirers than

for targets, mirroring for what has previously been documented for U.S. domestic acquisitions (see

Rhodes-Kropf and Viswanathan (2004)).

        We next evaluate the possibility that valuation could motivate cross-border mergers in a

multivariate context. We first estimate models predicting the number of deals in a particular country-

pair as a function of relative market conditions in the two countries. We find that differences in local

currency returns as well as exchange rate returns predict the volume of mergers between particular

country pairs. In addition, differences in country-level market to book ratios predict cross-border

merger volume as well. These findings are consistent with the view that the difference in valuation is

an important driver of cross-border merger activity.

        We consider the types of mergers for which stock-market and currency valuation differences

appear to be the most important motives. Our results suggest that currency movements predict

mergers mostly for within-region country-pairs and also appear to be most important when the

acquiring country is wealthier than the target. This pattern is consistent with the view that firms in

wealthier countries purchase firms in poorer nearby countries because they are relatively inexpensive

following currency depreciation. We also find that valuation differences in country-level stock

market predict mergers mostly when the acquiring country is wealthier than the target, consistent




                                                   4
with the view that firms in wealthier countries purchase foreign firms following a decline in the

poorer country’s stock market.

        There are two potential (though not mutually exclusive) explanations for the stock-return

differences between acquirer and targets prior to the acquisitions. First, the returns can affect changes

in the relative wealth of the two countries. Second, the returns can reflect differential divergence

from fundamentals. We use an approach suggested by Baker et al. (2009) to differentiate the two

explanations. In particular, we estimate an equation predicting a country’s market to book ratio using

future returns. Baker et al. (2009) suggest that the fitted values from such a regression should reflect

overvaluation while the residuals reflect a wealth effect. We find evidence consistent with the wealth

effect, which is strong in magnitude and persistent across different sub-samples, rather than the

mispricing effect.

        We then examine at the deal level whether valuation differences drive cross-border M&As

controlling for firm-specific factors. We find that differences in US dollar firm returns predict higher

likelihood of cross-border deals compared to domestic deals. Furthermore, when we decompose

valuation differences between acquiring and target firms to three components, we find that acquiring

firms in cross-border mergers outperform their domestic capital market.

        The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 discusses the previous literature

on cross-country mergers, including some relevant papers on FDI. Section 3 describes the data.

Section 4 presents the results while Section 5 concludes.



2. Prior literature on Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions

        Despite the fact that a large proportion of worldwide merger activity involves firms from

different countries, the voluminous literature on mergers has focused almost exclusively on domestic




                                                   5
deals.3 While this literature also helps to understand international mergers, it does not address a

number of factors related to country-based differences between firms. Nonetheless, there has been

some work on cross-border mergers, which tends to either lump together mergers with other

international investments as FDI or to analyze only mergers between public firms.

        Much of earlier work has focused on synergies, marketing ability, or technological

advantages to explain why a foreign firm would value domestic assets more highly than would a

domestic firm (see Graham and Krugman (1995) for a summary). Other factors including relative

labor costs and tax incentives have been used to explain the general pattern that FDI flows from

developed to less developed countries (e.g. Cushman (1987) and Swenson (1989)).

        However, none of these studies provide theoretical justification for a relation between

currency movements and cross-border mergers or other components of FDI. Froot and Stein (1991)

suggest one such story, in which wealth effects matter because information problems in financial

contracting cause external financing to be more costly than internal financing. When a firm’s value

increases, so does its access to capital relative to alternative bidders whose value did not increase by

as much. Consequently, when a potential foreign acquirer’s value increases, for example through

unhedged exchange rate changes or stock market fluctuations, then the potential foreign acquirer can

bid more aggressively for domestic assets than domestic rival bidders can do. In equilibrium, relative

value changes lead to an increase in cross-border acquisitions by firms in the relatively wealthy

country. The prediction that FDI increases following exchange rate movements has been tested by

Klein and Rosengren (1994), Dewenter (1995), Klein, Peek and Rosengren (2002), and Desai, Foley

and Forbes (2009), all of whom focus on FDI inflows and outflows from the United States.

        A different reason for the relation between price levels and mergers is that cross-border

mergers are caused by the mispricing of stocks. Shleifer and Vishny (2003) develop a model in


3
 See Jensen and Ruback (1983), Jarrell, Brickley and Netter (1988) or Andrade, Mitchell and Stafford (2001) for
surveys.


                                                        6
which overvaluation can lead to mergers. In their model, managers of an overvalued acquirer issue

shares at inflated prices to buy less-overpriced assets.             This transaction transfers value to the

shareholders of the acquiring firm by arbitraging the price difference between the acquiring firm’s

stock price and fundamentals. Their model seems particularly applicable in an international setting,

since differences in valuation are likely to occur because of either exchange rate or stock price

movements. Using a sample of U.S. domestic mergers, Rhodes-Kropf, Robinson and Viswanathan

(2005) provide empirical support for the implications of this theory.

           Baker et al. (2009) provide a direct test of the Froot and Stein (1991) wealth hypothesis and

the Shleifer and Vishny (2003) mispricing hypothesis. These authors consider the way in which

relative price levels affect FDI inflows and outflows to the United States. An important issue in this

analysis is the fact that most FDI purchases are of real assets or private companies, which are not

directly affected by stock price valuations. Baker et al. (2009) argue that the mispricing channel

could nonetheless operate, even without new public equity issuances. If overvalued equity reduces

the cost of debt by its effects on perceived collateral values and through widely-used credit-rating

models, then an overpriced stock market could increase private firms’ access to capital. Using data

on U.S. FDI, Baker et al. (2009) find support for both the wealth and mispricing hypotheses.

           Until recently, few studies use deal-level analysis to examine factors that affect the intensity

and pattern of cross-border M&As. Rossi and Volpin (2004) construct country-pair samples based

on deals involving public firms and find that differences in investor protection affect the incidence of

cross-border deals. Firms in countries with weaker protection tend to be targets of firms from

countries with stronger protection, presumably because the better investor protection provides an

incremental source of value.4 Ferreira, Massa and Matos (2009) also focus on public firms involved

in cross-border M&A deals. These authors find that foreign institutional ownership is positively

associated with the intensity of cross-border M&A activity worldwide, which could occur for a
4
    See also Bris and Cabolis (2008) and Martynova and Renneboog (2008) for related findings.


                                                          7
number of reasons, including foreign ownership facilitating the transfer, foreign ownership being

correlated with more professionally managed companies, or foreign owners being more likely to sell

to foreign buyers than local owners.



3. Data

            Our analysis is based on Security Data Corporation’s (SDC) Mergers and Corporate

Transactions database for data on mergers and acquisitions announced between 1990 and 2007 and

completed by the end of 2007. We exclude LBOs, spin-offs, recapitalizations, self-tender offers,

exchange offers, repurchases, partial equity stake purchases, acquisitions of remaining interest, and

privatizations, as well as deals in which the target or the acquirer is a government agency, or in the

financial or utilities industry.5 We end up with 187,841 mergers with the total transaction value

equal to $7.54 trillion, 56,978 of which are cross-border with total transaction value equal to $2.21

trillion.

            We obtain data on monthly firm-level and country-level stock returns, as well as exchange

rate quotes from Datastream.6 We then deflate these return indices using the 1990 constant consumer

price index (CPI) and calculate real returns for stocks in both local currency and U.S. dollars.7 When

calculating real returns for E.U. countries, we use the Euro as the currency (for the E.U. firms

adopting it) after 1999 and deflate it using corresponding E.U. CPI. For country-level market-equity-

to-book-equity ratio, we follow Fama and French (1998) and sum the market value of all firms within

a country, normalized by the sum of book values for the same firms.



5
  We only include countries which have consistent stock market data during 1990 and 2007. The number (value) of
deals dropped due to lack of information on stock market return is 4,061 ($145 billion), approximately 2% (1.9%) of
the sample.
6
  Since U.K. has the widest Datastream coverage for the quoted exchange rates, we use National Exchange Rates for
the U.K. and manually convert these currency quotes to get the quotes for the U.S.
7
  For Australia and New Zealand, we only have quarterly price level. When extrapolating to monthly level
information using Natural (or simple) Spline Fitting method (to smooth out the prices), we assume that the price
level represents the end of month/quarter.


                                                        8
        We use various data sources for country-level controls. We obtain each country’s legal origin

as well as proxies for the level of investor protection (the “Rule of Law” and “Anti-director Rights

variables) from La Porta et al. (LLSV, 1998), ratings on the disclosure of accounting information

reported by the Center for International Financial Analysis and Research, and a newly assembled

anti-self dealing index from Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2007). We also

include culture variables: language (English, Spanish or others) and religion (Protestant, Catholic,

Muslim, Buddhist or Others) from Stulz and Williamson (2003). We obtain annual Gross National

Product (in US Dollars) normalized by population and annual real growth rate of the Gross Domestic

Product from the World Development Indicator report.

        For the public firms in our M&A sample, we obtain accounting and ownership information

from Worldscope. In particular, Worldscope provides firm-level data on firm size (book value of

total assets), book leverage (long-term debt divided by total assets), cash ratio (cash holdings divided

by total assets), two-year geometric sales growth, and return on equity as well as the market-to-book

ratio of the equity.



4. Results

4.1. Stylized Facts about Cross-Border Mergers.

        Mergers involving acquirers and targets from different countries are substantial, both in terms

of absolute number, and the value of deals as a fraction of worldwide M&A activity. Panel A of

Figure 1 plots the quantity of cross-border deals over our sample period. As with domestic deals, the

volume of cross-border mergers increases throughout the 1990s, declines after the stock market crash

of 2000, and increases again between 2003 and 2007. Panel B plots the quantity and value of cross-

border deals as a fraction of total deals. Cross-border mergers are typically between 20 and 40

percent of worldwide merger volume. The fraction of cross-border deals also follows the overall




                                                   9
level of the stock market; the fraction drops in the early 1990s, increases in the later 1990s to a peak

in 2000, and then increases again with the stock market between 2003 and 2007.

       One fact that is clearly evident is that most cross-border mergers do not involve U.S. firms.

Figure 2 graphs the fraction of U.S. acquirers and targets over time, both weighting each deal equally

and by deal size. In most years, between 12 and 28 percent of acquirers are from the U.S. and

between 20 and 37 percent of the targets are from the U.S. When we weigh by deal size, the fraction

of U.S. deals grows somewhat but still the overwhelming majority of deals do not involve U.S. firms.

       Table 1 characterizes the pattern of cross-country acquisitions in our sample. The columns

represent the countries of the acquiring companies while the rows represent those of the target

companies. The diagonal entries of the matrix are therefore the number domestic mergers for a

particular country and the off-diagonal entries are the number of deals in a particular country pair.

The totals exclude domestic mergers and hence represent the number of cross-border mergers to and

from a particular country. The country with the largest number of acquisitions is the U.S.; U.S. firms

were acquirers in 15,034 cross-border mergers and were targets in 11,886 mergers, which is

substantial but certainly do not represent the majority of the 56,978 cross-border mergers.

       A casual glance at Table 1 indicates that geography clearly matters. Domestic mergers are by

far the largest in number for all countries. Of the cross-border mergers, there is a large tendency to

purchase companies in nearby countries. For example, of the 226 cross-border acquisitions by New

Zealand companies, about two-thirds, 145, were Australian companies. By far the largest target of

Hong Kong based companies were Chinese companies (214 of 633 cross-border acquisitions of Hong

Kong companies), and aside from the U.S., the vast majority of German cross-border acquisitions

were from other European companies.

       Table 2 characterizes the target firms by country, documenting the numbers that are bought

by domestic firms, foreign firms, and the industry breakdown of these firms. This table indicates that

the domestic/cross-border breakdown varies substantially across countries. In large countries there


                                                  10
tends to be many more domestic targets than cross-border ones; for example in the U.S., the number

of U.S. firms that are targets of cross-border acquisitions is only about 15% of the targets of the

domestic ones. In contrast, in a number of smaller countries there are actually more cross-border

targets than domestic ones. This pattern is not surprising since there are more potential domestic

acquirers in large countries than in small ones.

4.2. Cross-Sectional Determinants of Cross-Border Mergers

        To analyze the cross-sectional patterns among acquirers and targets formally, we use a

multivariate regression framework. We consider all (ordered) country pairs, and construct a variable

that equals the number of acquisitions by firms in one country of firms in the second at any point

during the sample period, normalized by the total number of domestic acquisitions in the target

country. This variable provides a measure of the propensity of firms of one country to acquire firms

of another one. In a similar fashion, we construct the intensities of cross-border deals separately

using only public target and acquirers and private target and acquirers.

        We then estimate equations predicting this variable as a function of the characteristics of the

countries. Since each observation is a “country pair”, the total number of observations is the square

of the number of observations minus the number of observations (37×36 = 1332). We include the

stock return difference of the country indices (average annual local real stock market return) and the

relative appreciation of the two countries’ currencies (the average annual real exchange rate return)

over the entire sample period because, as we have argued above, changes in relative valuation are

likely to lead to acquisitions. Regulatory and legal differences between countries are potential causes

of cross-border acquisitions (Rossi and Volpin (2004)), so we include the difference in the LLSV

measures of accounting quality (an index created by the Center for International Financial Analysis

and Research to rate the quality of 1990 annual reports on their disclosure of accounting information)

and legal protection (the product of the “Rule of Law” and “Anti-director Rights” variables). To

capture the regional effect discussed above, we include the distance between the capital cities of a


                                                   11
country pair.8 To evaluate if a common culture makes mergers more likely, we include variables

indicating whether the target and acquirer’s primary religion, are the same and whether their primary

language (English, Spanish or others) are the same (Stulz and Williamson (2003)). To reflect the

differences in wealth between any pair of countries as well as the change in this difference, we

include the difference in the log of gross national product in 1990 (in US dollars) divided by the

population and the average annual real growth rate of the gross domestic product from 1990 to 2007

(source: WDI report). Finally, each equation contains dummies for each country (so that each

observation has two dummy variables, one of the acquirer and one for the target country).9

         Table 3 contains estimates of this equation. There are a number of patterns among acquirers

and targets. First, the regional effect discussed above is evident; holding other things constant, being

closer to one another substantially increases the likelihood that there are acquisitions between two

countries. Second, there is a currency effect. Firms from countries whose currencies appreciated

over the sample period tended to be purchasers of firms whose currency tended to depreciate. Third,

consistent with Rossi and Volpin (2004), having a better legal protection of minority shareholders’

rights and having higher quality accounting disclosure system each increase the likelihood that firms

from a country will be purchasers of firms from another country. Finally the likelihood that a firm

from one country purchases a firm from another increases when the two countries share a common

language.     There is no evidence that sharing a common religion has any impact on merger

propensities.


8
  We obtain latitude and longitude of capital cities of each country from
http://www.mapsofworld.com/utilities/world-latitude-longitude.htm. We then apply the standard formula: 3963.0 *
arcos [sin(lat1) * sin(lat2) + cos (lat1) * cos (lat2) * cos (lon2 - lon1)], where lon and lat are the longitudes and
latitudes of the acquirer and the target country locations, respectively.
9
  We have also estimated equations similar to those in Table 3 including bilateral trade flow calculated as the value
of imports by destination country from origin country as a percentage of total imports by destination country
(source: United Nation Commodity Trade database). The idea of including this variable is that trade flow is likely to
be related to the amount of business done between two countries and consequently the synergistic motives for
mergers. The results from this specification are similar to those reported below except that the coefficient on the
trade variable is positive and statistically significant. We do not include this variable because it is not available for
roughly 15% of the country pairs in our sample.


                                                          12
4.3. Differences in Valuation Using Country-Level Panel Data: Univariate Evidence

        Table 4 summarizes the valuation differences between acquirers and targets. As measures of

valuation, we report differences in market to book, differences in exchange rate returns, and

differences in local-currency stock returns prior to the acquisition, both at the country and firm levels.

We report the country-level stock returns, the firm-level stock returns, and currency returns each for

1, 2 and 3 years intervals prior to the acquisition.

        The first column presents these return differences for the entire sample of cross-border

mergers. For both the level of valuation (the market to book ratio) and the recent change in valuation

(both through local stock market returns and by change in the exchange rate), acquirers are valued

higher than targets. The market-to-book ratio averages almost 10% higher for acquiring countries

than for target countries. In addition, the average local stock market returns are higher for acquiring

firm countries than target firm countries, by 0.3% in the first year before the merger, 0.92% in the

two years prior to the merger and by 2.12% over the three years prior to the merger. Finally, the

exchange rate of acquiring companies appreciates relative to that of the target companies, by 1.12%

in the year prior the acquisition, by 2.13% in the two years and 3.43% of the three years prior to the

acquisition. All these results are consistent with the view that firms purchase firms when they are

relatively highly valued, either because of a wealth effect or to take advantage of overvaluation.

        For the subsample of mergers for which the acquirers and targets are both publicly traded and

hence have observable stock returns, acquirers substantially outperform targets prior to the

acquisitions. The differences are much larger than the country-level differences, about 10% in the

year prior to the acquisition, 19% in the two-year period prior to the acquisition and 23% in the three-

year period prior to the acquisition. This relation is again consistent with the valuation arguments

and similar to what others have found for domestic acquisitions (see Rhodes-Kropf and Viswanathan

(2004), Dong et al. (2006), and Harford (2005)).




                                                       13
          This pattern can be clearly seen in Panel A of Figure 3. Prior to month 0, the month of the

acquisition, both the local currency return and exchange rate return differences are positive, meaning

that the acquirer’s country’s stock market outperformed the target’s and that the acquirer’s currency

appreciated relative to the targets during the 3 years prior to the acquisition. Subsequent to the

acquisition, however, the local currency return difference disappears, meaning that the target country

outperforms the acquirer’s during the 3 years subsequent to the acquisition. However, the acquirer’s

currency continues to appreciate, leaving the common-currency returns in the two countries’ stock

markets approximately the same following the acquisitions.

          We break down the pre-acquisition returns by characteristics of the deals in the remaining

columns of Table 4. The second through fifth columns consider deals by whether the acquirer and

target are from developing or developed countries, using the World Bank definition of “high income”

economies.10 The pre-acquisition local return differences are positive for each category although

they are substantially larger when a developed acquirer buys a developed target and when a

developing acquirer buys a developed target (12.79% and 9.54% differences for the two categories

for the three years prior to the acquisition). However the currency movements prior to the deal go in

opposite directions for these two categories. When a developing acquirer buys a developed target the

acquirer’s currency actually depreciates prior to the acquisition. On the other hand, when a developed

acquirer buys a developing target, it generally follows a period of strong relative appreciation. This

pattern could reflect a general appreciation of developed currencies relative to developing ones over

our sample period and suggests that we should control for these effects econometrically (as we do

below).


10
  It is not obvious how one should define countries as developing or developed. We have used alternative
definitions of developing and developed and the pattern of preacquistion returns is similar to what report here.
Besides world bank definition of “high income” countries, we also use the “developed” definition in Demirgüç-Kunt
and Levine (2001). If claims on private sector by deposit money banks as a share of GDP and the total value traded
on the stock market as a share of GDP in a given country are both below period mean, the country is flagged as
“developing”.


                                                       14
          In Columns 6-9 of Table 4, we report pre-acquisition valuation differences for different legal

regimes in the acquiring and target countries.11 In general, weak law target countries are associated

with higher pre-acquisition differences, in terms of market to book ratios, local currency returns and

exchange rate returns, especially when the acquirer is from a strong law country. This pattern

suggests that governance-driven cross-border acquisitions characterized by Rossi and Volpin (2004)

tend to occur during times when the target company’s country is doing relatively poorly. The

potential governance improvements from the stronger legal protection appear to be supplemented by

a valuation effect.

          In the final four columns of Table 4, we break down the valuation differences by whether the

acquirer and target are from the same region of the world, and also by whether they are related or

diversifying mergers. 12 In general the valuation metrics are similar regardless of whether the

acquirer and target are in the same or different regions. However, the valuation differences tend to

be somewhat larger for related than for diversifying mergers for most of the measures of valuation

we use.

4.4. Differences in Valuation Using Country-Level Panel Data: Multivariate Evidence

          To formally evaluate the hypothesis that relative valuation can affect merger propensities, we

rely on a multivariate framework that controls for other potentially relevant factors. It is not obvious,

however, what the most natural approach is to address this question. One possibility is to use deal

level data on the acquirer’s and target’s market valuations. This approach has the advantage of

utilizing the most accurate measure of firm values in the comparison.                      However, it has the

disadvantage of only being usable for the subsample of deals having both public acquirers and public

targets. As discussed above, the vast majority of cross-border acquisitions have either private

11
   If the Shareholder Protection Index (the product of “Rule of Law” and “Antidirector Rights” variables from La
Porta et al. (1998)) is below median, we categorize the country as “Weak Law”.
12
   If target and acquirer’s countries are from the same broadly-defined continent (Africa, America, Asia, and
Europe), we call the deal “same region” (Source: World Atlas 1995). We define deals as “related” if the target firm
and the acquiring firm have the same 3-digit SIC code.


                                                        15
acquirers or targets (or both), so using deal level data necessitates discarding the vast majority of the

sample. An alternative approach relies on country-level data. This approach has the disadvantage of

ignoring firm-level information (where available) but has the advantage of being able to utilize the

entire sample of deals. In addition, a number of hypotheses of interest, in particular those concerning

currency movements and country-level stock market movements, are testable using country level

data. Since each approach has both advantages and disadvantages, we use both: We first estimate

equations using the entire sample of deals using country-level data on market indices, valuation

levels, and exchange rates. We then estimate similar equations with deal-level data on the smaller

sample of deals involving public acquirers and targets.

        We estimate an econometric specification in which the dependent variable is the number of

deals for a particular country pair in a specified year, normalized by the total number of deals for that

target country in that year.13 Our sample consists of country pairs with one observation per year for

each pair, for a total of 16,524 observations. To control for the cross-sectional factors discussed

above as well as long-term trends in currency movements that affect merger propensities (Table 3),

we include country-pair fixed effects.14 This specification allows us to exploit time-series variation

in relative valuations while controlling for cross-country differences. We estimate the equation using

OLS and report heteroskedastic-consistent estimates of the standard errors.

        Table 5 presents estimates of this equation. The stock return and currency differences are

measured over the 12 months prior to the year in question.15 “∆Currency R12” is the difference in the

past 12-month real exchange-rate return between acquirer and target country currencies. “∆Market

R12” is the difference in the past 12-month local real stock-market return between acquirer and target
13
   We have also estimated all equations reported below using a dependent variable equal to the log of one plus the
normalized number of deals from a particular country pair. The results using this alternative dependent variable are
similar to those reported below.
14
   Note that the pairs are ordered, so that, for example, there would be a U.S.-Canada dummy variable as well as a
Canada-U.S. dummy variable in each equation.
15
   We have also estimated these equations using 24 and 36 month windows for measuring stock and currency returns
prior to the acquisition with similar results. In addition, we have estimated these equations on U.S. and non-U.S.
subsamples, again with results similar to those reported in Table 5.


                                                        16
country market indices, while “∆Market MTB” is the difference in the value-weighted market-to-

book equity ratio between acquirer and target country. All equations also include differences in the

log of GDP and the differences in GDP growth rates as well as year and country-pair dummies.

Columns 1-6 include all deals, columns 7-12 restrict the sample to deals involving private acquirers

and targets, while columns 13-18 include only public acquirers and targets.16

         Columns 1, 7 and 13 present the basic regression for each group of deals. Except in the

public-firms subsample, the coefficients on the return and currency differences, as well as the GDP

and growth differences, are positive and statistically significantly different from zero. These positive

coefficients on the valuation differences imply that when valuations are higher in one country than

another, the expected number of acquisitions by the first country’s firms of the second country’s

firms increases. To interpret the magnitudes of these coefficients, it is convenient to calculate the

percentage increase in expected acquisitions for a country pair implied by a given return differential.

Interpreted this way, the coefficients in Panel A of Table 5 imply that for 100% difference in local

currency returns leads to a 17.4% increase in the expected number of acquisitions for a particular

country pair.17 Similarly, a 75% difference in exchange rate returns implies a 50.4% increase in

acquisitions. 18 These effects appear to be fairly large, implying that the effects of valuation on

merger probabilities are substantial.19



16
   We restrict the sample to those country-pairs with at least one merger at some point during the sample period. We
have estimated these equations using samples including all country pairs, as well as only those country pairs with at
least 10 mergers over the entire sample. In each case the results are similar to those reported in Table 5.
17
   The average ratio of cross-border merger to domestic mergers for a given country-pair in a given year is 0.0461.
Using the coefficient of the country-level 12 month real stock returns in column (1) of Table 5, we can calculate the
percentage change in the ratio for an average country pair: (0.008*100%)/0.0461=17.4%. We emphasize that 100%
country-level 12 month stock return difference between target and acquirer is not a rare event. In our sample, 55
country-pairs had a return difference at least this large.
18
   Similar to our calculation for country-level stock market returns, the percentage change in the number of cross-
border merger when there is a 75% difference in exchange rate returns, is (0.031*75%)/0.0461=50.4%. Note also
that 75% difference between target and acquirer in currency movement is not a rare event. 95 country-pairs had such
experience in the past 15 years, mostly due to currency depreciation in target countries, e.g. Turkey and Brazil
(1994), and Argentina and Peru (1990).
19
   The linear specification is convenient, but it is possible that there are important nonlinearities it does not capture.
We intend to investigate this possibility in future drafts of this paper. In particular, we intend to explore the extent


                                                           17
        Columns 2, 8 and 14 of Table 5, break up the local market and currency returns by a dummy

variable which equals 1 if the GDP per capita in the acquirer country is larger than that in the target

country, while Columns 3, 9 and 15 perform a similar decomposition for regional differences. The

findings in these columns indicate that both the stock return and currency differences have the largest

impact on merger propensities when firms from wealthier countries are considering purchasing firms

from poorer countries. The regional decomposition indicates that the currency effect is largest for

country-pairs in the same region. However, for the whole sample, the stock market effect is positive

and statistically significantly different from zero for out-of-region deals and equals zero for mergers

within a region.20

        Columns 4, 10 and 16 consider how country-level differences in market-to-book ratios affect

merger likelihoods. The coefficients on the market to book differences are again positive and

statistically significantly different from zero, except in the last panel, where the coefficient is positive

but not significant. To interpret the magnitude of the coefficient on market to book ratios from the

equation in Column 4, keeping all other variables constant, the model implies that a difference of one

in market-to-book ratios leads to an expected increase of 7% increase in the volume of cross-border

mergers. 21

        We break down the impact of country-level market to book ratio differences on mergers by

the relative wealth of the countries and by the regional differences in the remaining columns of Table

5, Panel A. These results suggest that, consistent with the results using returns and currencies,

valuation differences are most important when firms from wealthier countries purchase firms from

nearby poorer countries. This pattern is consistent with some cross-border mergers occurring when

to which all market and currency movements affect merger propensities, or if the effect is only important for
extreme movements.
20
   For deals within region, the effect is the sum of the coefficient on ∆Market R12 plus the coefficient on this
variable interacted with the “Same Region” dummy variable. Since the sum of these coefficients equals zero, the
net effect of stock market returns for within region mergers is zero.
21
   A difference of one (or larger) in country-level market-to-book ratios is not uncommon. For example market-to-
book ratios for the U.K. and Belgium in 1997 are respectively 2.7 and 1.7 for a difference of one, while market-to-
book ratios for the U.S. and South Korea in 1998 are respectively 2.6 and 0.6,which is a difference of two.


                                                        18
firms in richer countries purchasing firms from nearby poorer countries when they are relatively

inexpensive following a currency depreciation or a decline in the poorer country’s stock market.

4.4.1. Interpreting the Relation between Valuation and Merger Propensities.

        There are two possible explanations for the relation between valuation and merger

propensities. Increases in relative valuation, either through stock price increases or currency

appreciation, could reflect real increases in wealth, leading to improved firms’ abilities to finance

acquisitions (Froot and Stein (1991)). Alternatively, the changes in relative valuation could reflect

errors in valuation, in which case firms should rationally take advantage of this misvaluation to

purchase relatively cheap assets, i.e., firms in another country that are not as overvalued (Shleifer and

Vishny (2003)). The overvaluation argument applies mainly to public acquirers who can either issue

equity or make stock acquisitions to take advantage of the high valuation, but as Baker et al. (2009)

argue, it could potentially apply to private acquirers as well if the overvalued equity market lowers

the cost of capital in a country for private firms. Of course, the Shleifer and Vishny argument

applied to undervaluation following a currency crisis or large stock market decline would apply

equally for public and private firms.

        A prediction of the incorrect relative valuation argument is that subsequent to acquisitions by

relatively overvalued firms, there should be a price reversal and acquirers should underperform

relative to targets. In particular, the overvaluation argument implies that if an acquirer purchases a

target to arbitrage differences in the price levels across countries, these differences should narrow

subsequent to the acquisition. To evaluate this possibility, we include future return differences in

Panel A of Table 6. The results are somewhat ambiguous, but seem to indicate that, if anything, the

difference in currency returns tends to persist following the acquisition. This pattern is inconsistent

with the notion that overvaluation explains the impact of valuation on merger decisions.

        To test this hypothesis formally, we follow an approach developed by Baker et al. (2009).

These authors argue that the market to book ratio can be broken into two components: the component


                                                   19
due to real expected wealth and the component due to over or under reaction by the market to news.

To estimate the magnitude of each component, Baker et al. (2009) estimate equations where the

market to book ratio is a function of future stock returns. To the extent that the market to book ratio

reflects overvaluation at the time of acquisitions, periods of high acquisitions should be followed by

periods of poor returns. The “fitted” component of market to book should represent that component

arising from overvaluation while the “residual” component comes from real wealth effect.

         In the first-stage equation, where country-level market-to-book ratios are predicted using

future returns, the coefficients on future returns are negative. This finding is consistent with the

literature and suggests that higher country-level market-to-book ratios do lead to lower future stock

returns in that country. However, when we break down the market to book differences between

countries into “fitted” and “residual” components (see Panel B of Table 6), for most specifications

only the residual is positively related to acquisitions, as predicted by the wealth-effect hypothesis.

Only in the sample of acquisitions of private firms, for which stock market misvaluation is least

likely to affect acquisitions, is the difference of the fitted values statistically significant.22 In the

sample of deals involving public targets and acquirers, the coefficient on the difference in fitted

components is actually negative, which is the opposite of what the overvaluation hypothesis predicts.

Consequently, this evidence suggests that the valuation effect occurs because of the wealth effect

described by Froot and Stein (1991) rather than the mispricing effect discussed by Shleifer and

Vishny (2003).

4.5. Valuation Using Deal-Level Panel Data

         We have documented that valuation appears to play an important role in determining which

firms are likely to merge. Acquirers tend to be valued relatively highly compared to targets, using

prior returns or market to book ratios as measures of valuation. This difference in valuation between


22
  The “private sample” includes all acquisitions with either a private acquirer or target, so that the “public sample”
includes just the deals for which both acquirer and target are public.


                                                          20
acquirers and targets appears to occur due to both stock market and currency effects. Yet, the results

presented so far are all done at the country level. Consequently, they do not control for firm-level

factors that potentially affect the decision to merge, including the firm’s own valuation.

        To control for firm-level factors, we consider the subsample of firms for which we have

public data on both acquirers and targets. Unfortunately, this subsample is both relatively small and

unrepresentative of the overall sample of mergers, because firms in this subsample are much more

likely to be from developed rather than developing countries. Of the 56,978 cross-border mergers in

our sample, only 911 have both public acquirers and targets, and also have data available on firm

level variables we use to control for other factors that potentially affect mergers. Of these 911

mergers, 877 have acquirers from developed countries and 780 targets are from developed countries.

While these mergers are interesting in their own right, they are not representative of cross-border

mergers in general.

        To estimate the factors that affect mergers, one would ideally like to consider every possible

pair of firms that could conceivably merge and estimate the likelihood that any two of them actually

do merge. Unfortunately, this approach would be infeasible as the number of possible combinations

would be extremely large relative to the number of actual mergers. Instead, we adopt two alternative

approaches designed to infer the factors leading one firm to buy another.

4.5.1. Cross-Border vs. Domestic Mergers.

        We first consider the sample of all mergers of publicly traded firms (including domestic

ones), and estimate the characteristics of the firms involved with the merger that are associated with

it being a cross-border that lead a particular merger to be either cross-border or domestic. We

estimate logit models that predict whether an observed merger is domestic or cross-border as a

function of deal characteristics. Intuitively, this approach presumes that domestic mergers can

provide a benchmark through which we can understand the nature of cross-border mergers.




                                                  21
           We present estimates of these equations in Table 7. The first two columns include the

difference in the acquirer and target returns, converted to U.S. dollars, as an explanatory variable.

Both coefficients are positive and in the second column, which controls for whether the two firms are

in the related industries and the sizes of the targets and acquirers, the coefficient is statistically

significantly different from zero. The positive coefficient indicates that cross-border acquisitions

tend to have larger return differences between acquirers and targets.

           In Columns 3 and 4 we break up the return differences into three components, the differences

in local stock market indices, the currency return between the two countries’ currencies, and the

differences in firm-level excess returns relative to the market. 23 The coefficients on all three

variables are positive, but often insignificant. The positive coefficients on currency differences and

differences in local market returns are consistent with the valuation arguments and suggest that

differences in these variables are determinants of cross-border mergers.

4.5.2. Predicting the identity of target and acquirers

           Another way to evaluate the motives for cross-border mergers is to characterize the attributes

of the firms involved as targets and acquirers relative to each other. If the underlying reason for the

merger is to take advantage of valuation differences, then one ought to be able to predict which firms

will be acquirers or targets using measures of valuation. Consequently, we consider the sample

consisting of all firms involved in a public/public cross-border merger and estimate equations

predicting whether a particular firm is a target or acquirer. Because the dependent variable is

dichotomous, we estimate the equations by logit and present the results in Table 8. We estimate

these equations for both domestic and cross-border mergers; the domestic mergers are in Columns 1-

4 while the cross-border ones are in 5-8.

           The results in Table 8 indicate that for both domestic and cross-border mergers, acquirers

outperform targets prior to the acquisition.                This finding is consistent with prior literature on
23
     For the domestic deals, the differences in the local market returns and the currency returns will be identically zero.


                                                             22
domestic mergers suggesting that acquirers typically have higher valuations than targets. In Columns

7 and 8, we break down each return for the cross-border sample into 3 components, reflecting the

local stock market index (in local currency), the currency return (relative to U.S. dollars), and the

local firm-specific residual. The results indicate that only the firm specific component of returns is

related to whether a firm is an acquirer or a target, not the local stock-market return or the currency

return. These results are somewhat different from what we found at the country level but similar to

the deal-level regressions in Table 7 using the domestic/cross-border specification. This difference

between country-level results and deal-level results is somewhat puzzling and could potentially

reflect the fact the sample of public cross-border deals is relatively small and concentrated in

developed countries, for which pre-acquisition currency differences are very small (see Table 4).



5. Conclusion

        About one-third of worldwide mergers combine firms from two different countries. As the

world’s economy becomes increasingly integrated, cross-border mergers are likely to become even

more important in the future. Yet, in the voluminous academic literature on mergers, the vast

majority of research has studied domestic deals. Moreover, what little work that has been done on

cross-border mergers has focused on public and/or U.S. based firms. Understanding the patterns and

motivations for cross-border mergers is consequently an important and understudied research topic.

        In contrast to the presumptions of the academic literature, most cross-border mergers do not

involve U.S. firms and do involve privately-held firms. In our sample of 56,978 cross-border

mergers that occurred between 1990 and 2007, 97% involved a private firm as either acquirer or

target, while 53% did not involve a U.S. firm. Geography matters; the odds of acquiring a firm in a

nearby country are substantially higher than the odds of acquiring a firm in a country far away. In

addition, higher economic development, better legal protection and better accounting quality are all

associated with the likelihood of being an acquirer rather than a target.


                                                   23
       A major factor determining the pattern of cross-border mergers is currency movements. Over

the entire sample period, countries whose currencies have appreciated are more likely to have

acquiring firms while countries whose currencies have depreciated are more likely to have targeted

firms. Controlling for these overall time trends econometrically, short-term movements between two

countries’ currencies increase the likelihood that firms in the country with the appreciating currency

purchase firms in the country with the depreciating currency.

       In addition, the relative stock market performance between two countries affects the

propensity of firms in these countries to merge. Our estimates indicate that the greater the difference

in stock market performance between the countries, the more likely that firms in the superior-

performing country purchase firms in the worse-performing country.

       The impacts of currency movements and of stock market performance on merger propensities

are likely symptomatic of a more general valuation effect, in which more highly valued firms tend to

purchase lower-valued firms. This effect has been documented for domestic acquisitions of U.S.

firms in a number of studies, and has been generally attributed to misvaluation arguments ( Shleifer

and Vishny (2003), Rhodes-Kropf and Viswanathan (2004)). Yet in an international context, there

is an additional reason why higher-valued firms would purchase lower-valued firms; firms from

wealthier countries will have a tendency to purchase firms from poorer countries because of a cost of

capital effect described by Froot and Stein (1991). We evaluate both the mispricing and wealth

explanations econometrically and find support for the wealth explanation rather than the mispricing

explanation.

       With the increasing integration of the world economy, it is likely that more mergers will

involve firms from different countries. We have provided a preliminary analysis of the patterns and

reasons for cross-border mergers. Some of these mergers undoubtedly occur for the same synergistic

reasons as domestic mergers. Yet others appear to reflect country-level factors such as currency

appreciation and macroeconomic performance. The extent to which each type of factor affects the


                                                  24
likelihood of firms to purchase one another is an important topic for future research.




                                         25
References

Andrade, G., M. Mitchell, and E. Stafford, 2001, New evidence and perspectives on mergers, The
      Journal of Economic Perspectives 15, 103-120.

Baker, M., C. F. Foley, and J. Wurgler, 2009, Multinationals as arbitrageurs: The effect of stock
       market valuations on foreign direct investment, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Bris, A. and C. Cabolis, 2008, The Value of Investor Protection: Firm Evidence from Cross-Border
        Mergers, Working Paper, IMD.

Chakrabarti, R., N. Jayaraman, and S. Gupta-Mukherjee, 2005, Mars-venus marriages: Culture and
      cross-border M&A, Journal of International Business Studies 40, 216-236.

Cushman, D. O., 1987, The effect of real wages and labor productivity on foreign direct investment,
      Southern Economic Journal July, 174-185.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A., and R. Levine, 2001. Financial structure and economic growth (MIT press).

Desai, M. A., C. F. Foley, and J. R. Hines, 2004, Foreign direct investment in a world of multiple
       taxes, Journal of Public Economics 88, 2727-2744.

Desai, M.A., C. F. Foley, and K. J. Forbes, 2009, Financial Constraints and Growth: Multinational
       and Local Firm Reesponses to Currency Depreciations, forthcoming, Review of Financial
       Studies.

Dewenter, K. L., 1995, Do exchange rate changes drive foreign direct investment?, The Journal of
      Business 68, 405-433.

Djankov, S., R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer, 2008, The law and economics of self-
      dealing, Journal of Financial Economics 88: 430-465.

Dong, M., D. Hirshleifer, S. Richardson, and S. H. Teoh, 2006, Does investor misvaluation drive the
      takeover market?, The Journal of Finance 61, 725-762.

Fama, E., and K. French, 1998, Value versus growth: The international evidence, Journal of Finance
       53, 1975-99.

Ferreira, M., M. Massa, and P. Matos, 2009, Shareholders at the gate? Cross-country evidence on the
        role of institutional investors in mergers and acquisitions, Review of Financial Studies,
        forthcoming.

Froot, K. A., and J. C. Stein, 1991, Exchange-rates and foreign direct-investment - an imperfect
       capital-markets approach, Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, 1191-1217.

Graham, E. M., and P. R. Krugman, 1995. Foreign direct investment in the united states (Institute for
      International Economics, Washington, D.C.).

Harford, J., 2005, What drives merger waves?, Journal of Financial Economics 77, 529-560.


                                                 26
Jarrell, G. A., J. A. Brickley, and J. M. Netter, 1988, The market for corporate control: The empirical
         evidence since 1980, Journal of Economic Perspectives 2, 49-68.

Jensen, M., and R. S. Ruback, 1983, The market for corporate control: The scientific evidence
       Journal of Financial Economics 11, 5-50.

Klein, M., and E. Rosengren, 1994, The real exchange rate and foreign direct investment in the
       united states: Relative wealth vs. Relative wage effects, Journal of International Economics
       36, 373-90.

Klein, M. W., J. Peek, and E. S. Rosengren, 2002, Troubled banks, impaired foreign direct
       investment: The role of relative access to credit, The American Economic Review 92, 664-
       682.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny (LLSV), 1998, Law and finance,
       Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.

Martynova, M. and L. Renneboog, 2008, Spillover of Corporate Governance Standards in Cross-
      Border Mergers and Acquisitions, Working Paper, Tilburg University and ECGI.

Rhodes-Kropf, M., D. T. Robinson, and S. Viswanathan, 2005, Valuation waves and merger activity:
      The empirical evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 77, 561-603.

Rhodes-Kropf, M., and S. Viswanathan, 2004, Market valuation and merger waves, Journal of
      Finance 59, 2685-2718.

Rossi, S., and P. F. Volpin, 2004, Cross-country determinants of mergers and acquisitions, Journal of
        Financial Economics 74, 277-304.

Shleifer, A., and R. W. Vishny, 2003, Stock market driven acquisitions, Journal of Financial
        Economics 70, 295-311.

Stulz, R. M., and R. Williamson, 2003, Culture, openness, and finance, Journal of Financial
       Economics 70, 313-349.

Swenson, D. L., 1989, The impact of U.S. Tax reform on foreign direct investment in the United
      States, M.I.T. Working Paper.




                                                  27
Figure 1. Number (Value) of cross-border mergers and acquisitions. This figure plots the number
(value) of cross-border deals between 1990 and 2007. Deals in which acquirer’s ultimate
ownership is less than 50% or the total deal value less than $1 million are excluded.




                                              28
Figure 2. Percentage of U.S. targets (acquirers) in cross-border M&As.




                                              29
Figure 3. Geometric Return Differences between Target and Acquirer. The graph on the left is
the mean and on the right in the median.




World Sample




Developing Acquirer, developing target




                                              30
Developed Acquirer, developing target




Developing Acquirer, Developed Target




                                        31
Developed Acquirer, Developed Target




World sample mean excluding deals involving U.S. firms.




                                            32
World sample of public firms.




                                33
Table 1. Number of Mergers and Acquisitions across country-pair. Initial sample of block acquisitions from Thomson Financial’s Security Data Corporation
(SDC) Platinum Mergers and Acquisitions (M&A) database. We exclude deals that are LBOs, spin-offs, recapitalizations, self-tender, exchange offers, repurchases, acquisitions of
remaining interest, minority stake purchases and privatizations as well as deals in which the target or the acquirer is a government agency, or in the financial or utilities industry.
                                                                                                                        Origin Country
Destination          AR AS AU BL BR CA CC CE CH CO CT CY DN                 FN   FR GR HK HU ID IN IR IS IT               JP LX MA MX NO NT NZ PE PH PL PO RU SA SG SK SP                  SW     SZ TH TK TW       UK        US VE WG Total
Argentina(AR)        201 1     4   4 30 42          13      1         5           57 1 1              2   6        17      4           16 1 28 3            1             2          54     5     14 1               58       243 4 22       640
Austria(AS)             341 4      8        19 1                     19       7   35 3 1 2            2   7    1 25        7   8        1 7 25                  2 1       2 1         5    19     33       1         52        84      255 637
Australia(AU)             3 4,875 7 2 145               1            20       7   62       43      5 16 24 6        8     69 2 51 1 10 64 145                5      1 1 58 75 5       5    40      47 2 1 2         430       812       63 2,238
Belgium(BL)              7 13 494          12                       21      12 169 4 1                9 16 2 17          24 5               9 206 1             1 3 1 6 1            9     30     18       1        148       197       79 1,022
Brazil(BR)           40 3 14 9 565 48               15      4        14       6   94       3          6   8    8 41      18 6          19 9 28 3                   35     4 5        52    16     22       1 1       58       388       60 1,038
Canada(CA)            1 10 59 14 7 6,220 1               8           12      11 112 2 16           3 11 13 9 19           58 11 4       4 13 54 5 1 3                  1 9 1 3        6    34      56         4     328      2,516 1 80 3,500
Czech Republic(CC)       31 1      9 1 10 143                 1      14       6   38 1 1 8            5   6    1    7      3   3            9 25                8      6 1            8    16      23                47        77       76   442
Chile(CE)             6       14 1 4 39            101               1       1     8           1      1   1         4      1            7 6 10 5 3              1 2                  21     3      1          1      13        82   1    8   246
China(CH)             1 2 36 14 1 43                   513           9       10   31 2 214         3 9    1    2 13      53 1 27 1 6 19 3                   3             2 120 34 6       11     10 4       19      58       301       22 1,091
Colombia(CO)          1       2        3 17         3      37                1     8                  1                    4   2       10       1    1 2                  2         13      3      4                  6        35  1     1   121
Croatia(CT)              12                                   26      3            7   1       5      1        1    4      1                    2                                     1     1       2                 8         4        6    59
Cyprus(CY)                                  1                    37                1   7                                                                               1                           1                  2         1             14
Denmark(DN)               5    4 10          9           1     1 1 889       39   39 1 2               3 11 3 11           8   2    1      94 38                1      1 1 4          4     198 28                  117       173       80   890
Finland(FN)              9     7   7       16                        69    1,614 34        2 1        2 22 2 11          23 4              53 24                       7 1 5         11     281 31 1 2 1             60       147       41   874
France(FR)            1 20 28 236 7 116                  4           68      38 4,837 8 13 2          12 27 13 164 97 28 1              1 22 209                    8 2 6 5 2 87            116 154 2         1     708       970      434 3,610
Greece(GR)                     1   3         4                    6                6 339                            7      1   2            1   6                   1 2                       3     5                15        18        9    90
Hong Kong(HK)                 28 1          22          42           10       4   20 3 348         2 1         4    2     30       73           6            2            4 80 8      2       4     7   3 1 4        67       170       14   614
Hungary(HU)              28        4         3   2             2      2       5   28 3        136      2  2    4 11        5   2            4 42                5      2     2        2      11    14      1 1       26        69       52   334
Indonesia(ID)                 10 1         15                                 1    2   1 9        98 4              1    16        19       2   4           1             2 24 8             2     7    4 1          26        32        7   199
India(IN)                5 24 3            15           1            5       2    39       8       1 764 1     2 12      16       17        5 19            1 1        3 6 11 7       6     19    28 3              101       233       43   637
Ireland-Rep(IR)           1    5   4         8                        6       1   18 2 2              4 354 1       3      5   1    1   1 6 10                  1 1 3 3 2             2       5    5    1 1         265       172       15   555
Israel(IS)                     2   2        10                        3            8        1         1   1 160 2          1                    3                         3 1 1               3     3      1 1       26       171       12   256
Italy(IT)                24 17 23 6 24                  3            24      19 236 13 10 1 1 10 9             9 1,633 29 16 2              7 98 1                  2 5 5 2          38      60   65       1        233       428      164 1,585
Japan(JP)                      1   5         6          4             4       2   31 3 12          2 1    1    3    1 5,698         1          16            1         1 2 1 12 2            11    8    1     9      46       259       42   488
Luxembourg(LX)           1        16                                               8   2                            3          8                5    1                           1   1       4     2                 12        13       14    83
Malaysia(MA)                  17             6                        6       2    7       17      2 2         1    1     19     1,711 1 2      7    4       4         1 2 123 1      2       2    8          4      28        43        9   321
Mexico(MX)            2        4   3 6 116           4 1 2            8       2   24 3 4                  4         6      7   1       188 1 18 3 1 1                        2 1 35          10     8         1      33       320 1 18       650
Norway(NO)                3    4   5 2       8                    1 102      55   27 1                 1  2    2    5      3   4    2   1 688 30             1      1 1 2 1           2     193 21                  103       130       26   739
Netherlands(NT)          16 26 95 5 44               2 1          1 36       27 122 3 9 1              9 60 9 29          39 9      4   2 18 1,512 2            2 2 1 9 3            16      66    47 1 2 3         441       436      228 1,826
New Zealand(NZ)           2 302 1           41           2            4       3    8        5      1 2    7               19       13       2 14 570         1            6 13 2              5     7   3            71       140        6   680
Peru(PE)              1        2   1 3 54            6      1                          1 1                                          2   3       2       39                            5            3                  7        30        1   123
Philippines(PH)              10             9                                     6        5                             11       10 2          1          115              12 1     1       2     2                 13       32        2    119
Poland(PL)               9     1 11        12 4               2     26       16   45 3         5      6 12 3 19            2 13            16 39               227 4 2 2 1 2 13             23    10                 57        76       63   497
Portugal(PO)             1     3   5 5      5       1                8        1   44 1 1 2            2   2        11      2   1        1 4 13                    246                72      12   12                 51        40       20   320
Russian Fed(RU)          4    2    7       24 2                  8   9      23    10 5         3      2   2        11      3   9           14 18 1              6     526            4      25    15      3          59        83       30   382
South Africa(SA)              36 2          35                        4       4   23 2 3               7  3    1    7     11 4      5       2 11 2           1      2 1 790 3 1              15    15         1     170       113       36   520
Singapore(SG)                 28 1          7           1        1   7       4    16      35      10 22        2    5    25       98       10 8      1      1             3 614 2    1       9     7   9      6      42       116       15   492
South Korea(SK)           2    3   4        10          1             4       1   27       4          2        4         30         2   1 2 10                         1 1 6 631 2            3    8          2      27       107       30   294
Spain(SP)             2 6     8 32 4 27             5      2 1      44       8   296 8 3              7 10 4 121 29 2                   6 15 133                1 60 1 1 1         1,896    60    35                271       287      169 1,659
Sweden(SW)               9 10 14           24                       176     198 67 3 5                4 10 4 11          23 9      1      182 65                1      1 2 3         2     1,558 31           2     218       288 1 99 1,463
Switzerland(SZ)          43 9 31           20           1     1      38      15 122        5 1        7 10 15 36         16 6       3       8 49                1 2 5 4 6             4      45 794           2     103       261      311 1,180
Thailand(TH)                   5   2         2          1             2       1    9       10      1 7              1     36 1 23           1   6    2       1 1          2 37 1              3     2 194     4      22        40        9   232
Turkey(TK)                1    1   6         4                    1   2       3   16 5 1 2                2    2 10        2        1           9                   1 4 1             3       4    2      72         27        33       27   170
Taiwan(TW)                     4             5                        2       1    5       11                  1          13        2           2                            21 5             4     1   2    130     10        82       10   181
United Kingdom(UK)       29 177 91 2 305 3              1     2 4 158        66 485 17 60 2 2 82 410 20 92 173 21 21 2 89 313 14                            1 2 8 10 86 42 9 43             206 126 7 2 5          15,196    3,122     443 6,753
United States(US)    10 36 392 121 35 2,752 1 8 34 6 1              128     130 719 28 95 1 10 179 316 169 146 827 28 24 73 86 453 28                       13 1 5 21 75 104 54 91          351 358 9 5 68         3,073    66,948 5 817 11,886
Venezuela(VE)         1            1 4 22            1                2           11                                5          1        2       2                                     7             5                 8        49 16 1       122
Germany(WG)             234 42 105 6 80 5 2 5                  1    124     134 454 13 20 3 2 29 38 16 128 111 40 8                     5 42 443 1          10 6 3 5 18 11 11 37            194 375 1 5 3           724     1,611 1 5,771 5,106
Total                66 557 1,360 919 133 4,236 19 60 112 16 12 23 1,199    866 3,634 150 633 40 45 473 1,044 324 1,027 1,874 242 416 160 758 2,588 226 7 51 41 142 90 333 729 171 675     2,127 1,686 54 29 145   8,468    15,034 15 3,969 56,978




                                                                                                                   34
Table 2 Descriptive statistics of cross-border M&As by target country. The industry classification is by
target firm. Agriculture (001~999), Mining and Construction (1000~1999), Manufacturing (2000~3999), Transportation
excluding Utilities (4000~4999), Trade (5000~5999), and Services (7000~8999).
                                                                              Industries
                                      # of
                           # of   Cross-
Target               Domestic     border                    Mining &
Country                  deals     Deals Agriculture Construction Manufacturing Transportation            Trade Services
Argentina                  201        640            9            93              275              63         72     127
Austria                    341        637            2            17              305              61         93     159
Australia                4,875     2,238           22            247              740            195        261      768
Belgium                    494     1,022             4            28              388            103        152      346
Brazil                     565     1,038           28             71              556              90       102      190
Canada                   6,220     3,500           27            397            1,313            224        385    1,151
Czech Republic             143        442            4            24              211              39         58     104
Chile                      101        246            8            60               79              37         23      39
China                      513     1,091             9            62              656              80         64     212
Colombia                    37        121                         32               48              15         10      16
Croatia                     26         59            2             4               32               4          6      11
Cyprus                      37         14            1             1                5                          4       3
Denmark                    889        890                         33              390              87       143      237
Finland                  1,614        874            6            52              334              92       124      264
France                   4,837     3,610           28             74            1,841            213        471      979
Greece                     339         90                          7               41              14         11      17
Hong Kong                  348        614                         32              201              83         97     201
Hungary                    136        334            3            19              169              42         31      70
Indonesia                   98        199          11             55               94              12          7      18
India                      764        637            5            27              326              41         29     204
Ireland-Rep                354        555            2            22              201              60         82     185
Israel                     160        256            2             3              117              14         15     105
Italy                    1,633     1,585             4            26              998            106        187      262
Japan                    5,698        488            1             4              240              42         75     126
Luxembourg                    8        83                          3               22              14         10      34
Malaysia                 1,711        321            7            15              153              24         62      59
Mexico                     188        650            7           126              312              43         66      96
Norway                     688        739            6            61              215            104        117      236
Netherlands              1,512     1,826           19             60              769            216        276      486
New Zealand                570        680          10             29              223              70       112      233
Peru                        39        123                         69               31              10          8       5
Philippines                115        119            2            23               54               8          7      25
Poland                     227        497            9            25              287              34         69      68
Portugal                   246        320            1            11              144              36         43      84
Russian Fed                526        382            1            95              161              53         21      49
South Africa               790        520            6           114              213              27         52     107
Singapore                  614        492            1            27              180              69         61     153
South Korea                631        294            1             1              190              20         28      52
Spain                    1,896     1,659           13             53              725            133        254      479
Sweden                   1,558     1,463             5            45              632            131        190      460
Switzerland                794     1,180             6            21              597              73       133      348
Thailand                   194        232            2            18              127              19         29      37
Turkey                      72        170            2            20               88              10         18      32
Taiwan                     130        181                          1               97              13         26      43
United Kingdom         15,196      6,753           42            306            2,825            490        844    2,231
United States          66,948     11,886           74            874            5,365            655      1,209    3,693
Venezuela                   16        122            1            32               59              13          5      12
Germany                  5,771      5,106          12            141            2,753            329        663    1,196




                                                          35
Table 3 Cross-sectional analysis of the intensity of cross-border M&As. Dependent variable is the ratio of the number of deals in which the target is from
country i and the acquirer is from country j (where i ≠ j) to the total number of domestic deals in target country i. ∆ (Currency R12)j-i is the difference in the average annual real
exchange rate return in US$ from 1990 to 2007 between acquirer and target country. ∆ (Market R12)j-i is the difference in the average annual local real stock market return from
1990 to 2007 between acquirer and target country. ∆ (Account)j-i is the difference in the index created by the Center for International Financial Analysis and Research to rate the
quality of 1990 annual reports on their disclosure of accounting information. ∆ (Legal)j=i is the difference in the shareholder protection index computed as the product of rule of
law and antidirector rights (LLSV(1998)). Same Language is equal to 1 if target and acquirer’s primary language (English, Spanish or others) are the same. Same Religion is equal
to 1 if target and acquirer’s primary religion (Protestant, Catholic, Muslim, Buddhist or Others) are the same (Stulz and Williamson (2003)). Geographic proximity is minus the
great circle distance calculated using the longitudes and latitudes of the capital cities of target and acquirer countries. Average annual real growth rate of the gross domestic product
is from 1990 to 2007 and Gross national product divided by the population is in 1990 (in US$), both from the WDI report. We calculate Huber–White standard errors.

                             All Target - All Acquirer                             Private Target - Private Acquirer                    Public Target - Public Acquirer
                                 (1)          (2)           (3)       (4)             (5)            (6)           (7)      (8)             (9)          (10)             (11)      (12)
∆ (Currency R12)j-i          0.157***                               0.168***       0.086***                               0.102***      0.304***                                 0.268***
                             (5.36)                                 (5.03)         (3.72)                                 (3.79)        (3.30)                                   (2.62)
∆ (Market R12)j-i            -0.056                                 0.026          -0.054                                 0.013         -0.017                                   0.010
                             (-0.85)                                (0.39)         (-1.14)                                (0.25)        (-0.15)                                  (0.09)
∆ (Account)j-i                             0.013***                 0.009***                      0.004*                  0.001                      0.031***                    0.024***
                                           (4.97)                   (3.37)                        (1.79)                  (0.63)                     (4.17)                      (3.21)
∆ (Legal)j-i                               0.003*                   0.000                         0.003**                 0.001                      -0.001                      -0.004
                                           (1.81)                   (0.07)                        (2.26)                  (0.81)                     (-0.18)                     (-1.06)
Same Language                                            0.026**    0.020*                                     0.018**    0.015*                                   0.051**       0.042
                                                         (2.34)     (1.81)                                     (2.35)     (1.92)                                   (2.02)        (1.40)
Same Religion                                            -0.007     0.003                                      -0.005     -0.001                                   -0.002        0.009
                                                         (-1.51)    (0.70)                                     (-1.64)    (-0.26)                                  (-0.23)       (1.08)
Geographic Proximity                                     0.007***   0.006***                                   0.004***   0.004***                                 0.008***      0.008***
                                                         (8.55)     (8.08)                                     (7.42)     (6.94)                                   (5.22)        (4.86)
∆ ( log GDP per capita)j-i   -0.006**      0.000         0.005*     -0.003         -0.003         0.002        0.004*     -0.000        -0.006       0.002         0.013**       -0.006
                             (-2.17)       (0.21)        (1.83)     (-1.35)        (-1.40)        (0.97)       (1.81)     (-0.14)       (-0.99)      (0.50)        (2.48)        (-1.01)
∆ (GDP growth)j-i            -0.003*       -0.001        -0.002     -0.001         -0.003**       -0.001       -0.002     -0.002        -0.001       -0.001        0.001         -0.002
                             (-1.81)       (-0.48)       (-1.35)    (-1.00)        (-1.96)        (-1.26)      (-1.61)    (-1.61)       (-0.30)      (-0.27)       (0.27)        (-0.81)
Constant                     0.040***      0.036***      0.071***   0.060***       0.025***       0.023***     0.044***   0.040***      0.042***     0.039***      0.077***      0.067***
                             (18.01)       (21.77)       (12.50)    (13.45)        (15.89)        (17.89)      (10.55)    (10.98)       (11.08)      (12.85)       (7.34)        (7.36)
Country Dummies                 yes           yes           yes       yes             yes            yes           yes      yes            yes           yes              yes       yes
Observations                    1036          893          1036       893            1036            893          1036      893            1008          881          1008          881
R-squared                       0.39          0.49          0.42      0.56            0.30           0.36         0.33      0.41           0.21          0.27         0.21          0.31




                                                                                             36
Table 4 Summary statistics on valuation differences between target and acquirer. R12, R24, R36 represent past 12 months, 24 months, 36 months real
returns, respectively. MTB is the market-equity-to-book-equity ratio of equity. For market MTB, we follow Fama and French (1998) and sum the market value of all firms within
a country and divide it by the sum of their book value. Both market-level and firm-level stock returns are in local currency. Definition of developed countries is based on World
Bank high-income economies. Definition of strong law countries is based on the index of shareholder protection provided by LLSV. Same region is equal to 1 if target and
acquirer’s countries are from the same broadly defined continent (Africa, America, Asia, and Europe). Related industry is equal to 1 if target and acquirer’s 3-digit SIC overlaps.

                                                 Developing Target          Developed Target              Weak Law Target
                                                                                                                    Strong Law Target
                                    (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)        (5)               (6)        (7)
                                                                                                                      (8)        (9)                        (10)       (11)         (12)         (13)
                                                                                                                               Strong
                                              Developing    Developed     Developing Developed Weak Law Strong Law Weak Law                              Different     Same      Diversifying Related
                                  Total                                                                                         Law
                                               Acquirer      Acquirer      Acquirer Acquirer   Acquirer  Acquirer  Acquirer                               Region      Region       Merger     Industry
                                                                                                                              Acquirer
Nobs                              51488          311           3853          1056         46268           4300        10591         7565        29032      26000       25488        17734        33754

Market MTBj – Market MTBi        9.93%***      20.58%***     64.74%***      (2.90%)    5.59%***   16.37%***   26.42%***     0.13%    5.52%*** 11.86%*** 7.97%***                   8.50%***    10.68%***
                                [7.25%]***    [31.19%]***   [64.45%]***   [(5.31%)]** [5.98%]*** [10.43%]*** [13.75%]*** [1.37%]*** [7.14%]*** [8.39%]*** [6.81%]***              [6.66%]***   [7.46%]***

Market R12j –Market R12i         0.30%***        1.44%         0.05%       6.03%***   0.20%**          0.65%**        (0.18%)     0.81%***     0.29%***    0.21%*    0.40%***       0.13%       0.39%***
                                [0.33%]***     [(0.40%)]    [(3.86%)]**   [8.68%]*** [0.44%]***       [0.77%]***     [(0.23%)]    [0.60%]**   [0.45%]*** [0.29%]*** [0.35%]***     [0.16%]     [0.45%]***

Market R24j –Market R24i         0.92%***        1.57%       2.13%***      11.09%*** 0.64%***          2.35%***      1.75%***       0.50%      0.49%***   0.88%***   0.96%***      0.58%***     1.10%***
                                [1.10%]***      [4.88%]      [(1.90%)]    [15.24%]*** [1.08%]***      [2.49%]***    [1.30%]***     [0.56%]*   [0.93%]*** [0.95%]*** [1.31%]***    [0.83%]***   [1.28%]***

Market R36j –Market R36i         2.12%***        1.44%       12.79%***     9.54%***    1.22%***        5.01%***      5.74%***       0.20%      0.81%***   2.43%***   1.79%***      1.36%***     2.55%***
                                [2.45%]***      [3.61%]     [17.06%]***   [18.42%]*** [2.03%]***      [4.67%]***    [4.08%]***     [0.33%]*   [1.63%]*** [2.40%]*** [2.46%]***    [2.14%]***   [2.59%]***

Currency R12j –Currency R12i     1.12%***      4.57%***     10.32%***     (5.96%)*** 0.46%***         2.55%***       2.80%***       0.25%      0.58%***   0.88%***   1.42%***     0.88%***      1.25%***
                                [0.26%]***      [1.24%]     [6.18%]***    [(3.68%)]** [0.11%]***       [0.06%]      [1.27%]***     [0.02%]    [0.15%]*** [0.32%]*** [0.22%]***    [0.14%]**    [0.33%]***

Currency R24j – Currency R24i    2.13%***       5.72%**      21.76%***    (13.40%)***    0.79%***      5.89%***      6.04%***       (0.23%)    0.88%***   1.65%***   2.71%***      1.68%***     2.38%***
                                [0.47%]***     [6.23%]**    [18.28%]***   [(8.69%)]**     [0.08%]     [0.22%]***    [2.26%]***    [(0.52%)]** [0.24%]*** [0.59%]*** [0.36%]***    [0.25%]***   [0.57%]***

Currency R36j – Currency R36i    3.43%***      10.11%***     34.22%***    (23.32%)***    1.38%***      9.45%***     10.39%***     (1.72%)*** 1.45%***     2.77%***   4.23%***      2.89%***     3.73%***
                                [0.91%]***    [16.79%]***   [31.37%]***   [(18.75%)]*     [0.14%]     [0.72%]***    [4.76%]***    [(1.95%)]** [0.77%]*** [1.34%]*** [0.71%]***    [0.60%]***   [1.14%]***

Firm MTBj – Firm MTBi            28.95%***      76.90%       47.03%**       17.27%    27.50%***          (11.37%)    77.40%***    (28.68%)* 32.49%*** 44.27%***         7.67%      10.20%     38.94%***
                                [26.23%]***   [125.7%]**    [32.60%]**    [(20.42%)] [25.91%]***          [9.39%]   [50.00%]***    [(6.41%)] [30.16%]*** [30.52%]*** [18.87%]*** [18.84%]*** [30.27%]***

Firm R12j –Firm R12i            10.38%***      25.82%*       6.59%**       22.36%** 10.50%***          8.07%**       8.63%***     11.40%*** 11.04%*** 10.13%*** 10.75%***         9.07%***     11.14%***
                                [6.01%]***    [27.80%]**     [0.25%]      [16.88%]*** [5.98%]***      [7.73%]**      [4.15%]**    [6.91%]*** [6.00%]*** [5.57%]*** [6.70%]***     [3.09%]*     [7.22%]***

Firm R24j –Firm R24i             19.34%***      35.75%       11.96%**      41.81%**      19.61%***    11.45%**       17.04%*** 18.44%*** 21.50%*** 20.89%*** 17.11%*** 16.50%*** 21.01%***
                                [12.15%]***    [49.51%]       [1.70%]      [46.96%]     [12.62%]***   [12.06%]*     [10.12%]*** [12.56%]*** [13.12%]*** [11.86%]*** [12.71%]*** [8.69%]*** [15.01%]***

Firm R36j –Firm R36i             23.36%***     115.8%*      20.37%***      63.13%*** 23.02%*** 19.30%***             21.83%*** 17.79%*** 26.44%*** 23.46%*** 23.20%*** 18.69%*** 26.18%***
                                [17.02%]***    [116.2%]      [8.98%]*     [52.34%]*** [16.96%]*** [7.78%]*          [15.04%]*** [11.16%]*** [22.33%]*** [18.28%]*** [15.38%]*** [14.33%]*** [20.76%]***




                                                                                                    37
Table 5 Analysis of the intensity of cross-border M&As using panel data on country pairs. Dependent variable is the ratio of the number of deals in
which the target is from country i and the acquirer is from country j (where i ≠ j) to the total number of domestic deals in country i. ∆ Currency R12 is the difference in the past12-
month real exchange rate return between acquirer and target country. ∆ Market R12 is the difference in the past 12-month local real stock market return between acquirer and target
country. ∆Market MTB is the difference in the value-weighted market equity to book equity ratio between acquirer and target country. Higher GDP per capital is equal to 1 if
acquirer country’s GDP per capita is larger than or equal to that of target country. Standard errors are robust.

                                                    All Targets-All Acquirers                                     Private Targets-Private Acquirers                              Public Targets-Public Acquirers
                                  (1)       (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)       (6)         (7)        (8)       (9)       (10)       (11)      (12)       (13)     (14)      (15)      (16)       (17)     (18)
∆Market R12                    0.008***    0.001      0.012***                                      0.007**     0.000      0.005                                     0.005    -0.003    -0.001
                                (2.59)     (0.41)       (3.38)                                       (2.23)     (0.09)    (1.57)                                     (0.92)   (-0.58)   (-0.24)
∆Currency R12                  0.031***    0.001        0.006                                       0.025***    0.003      0.012                                    0.026**   -0.001    0.012
                                (3.54)     (0.35)       (0.76)                                       (2.84)     (0.81)    (1.36)                                     (2.07)   (-0.16)   (0.97)
∆Market MTB                                                      0.004***       0.000    0.003***                                   0.004***    0.000     0.003**                                  0.003     0.001    0.000
                                                                  (5.08)        (0.83)    (3.04)                                     (4.12)     (0.17)    (2.23)                                  (1.52)     (0.52)   (0.17)
∆Market R12 × I_ GDP capita               0.012**                                                              0.012**                                                        0.017*
                                           (2.26)                                                               (2.30)                                                        (1.68)
∆Currency R12 × I_GDP capita              0.051***                                                             0.041***                                                       0.063**
                                           (3.35)                                                               (2.58)                                                        (2.22)
∆Market R12 × Same Region                              -0.012*                                                             0.003                                                        0.016
                                                       (-1.89)                                                            (0.52)                                                        (1.49)
∆Currency R12× Same Region                            0.084***                                                            0.047**                                                       0.054
                                                        (3.57)                                                            (1.97)                                                        (1.51)
∆Market MTB × I_ GDP capita                                                 0.007***                                                           0.007***                                                      0.005
                                                                                (4.62)                                                          (4.00)                                                       (1.13)
∆Market MTB × Same Region                                                                 0.003*                                                          0.004*                                                      0.009*
                                                                                          (1.85)                                                          (1.69)                                                      (1.91)
∆ ( log GDP per capita)j-i     0.042*** 0.041*** 0.041*** 0.026*** 0.026*** 0.026***                0.021*** 0.021*** 0.021***       0.012      0.012     0.012*     0.031*   0.032*    0.031*     0.034     0.034    0.035*
                                (5.05)     (4.98)       (4.93)    (3.40)        (3.42)    (3.41)     (3.00)     (2.95)    (2.94)     (1.64)     (1.60)    (1.66)     (1.69)   (1.72)    (1.67)    (1.64)     (1.61)   (1.67)
∆ (GDP growth)j-i               -0.017     -0.017       -0.022    0.039         0.037     0.043*     -0.008     -0.009    -0.006     0.019      0.017      0.024     0.014     0.010    0.023      0.003     0.002    0.010
                                (-0.65)    (-0.66)     (-0.84)    (1.60)        (1.53)    (1.75)     (-0.33)    (-0.36)   (-0.26)    (0.83)     (0.73)    (1.00)     (0.32)   (0.23)    (0.52)    (0.08)     (0.06)   (0.23)
Constant                       0.084*** 0.083*** 0.084*** 0.050*** 0.040*** 0.050***                0.047*** 0.047*** 0.047*** 0.027*** 0.028*** 0.027***           0.019*** 0.019*** 0.019*** 0.054*** 0.054*** 0.054***
                               (12.15)    (12.09)      (12.16)    (13.76)   (12.45)      (13.77)     (8.22)     (8.16)    (8.21)     (8.28)     (7.64)    (8.30)     (2.67)   (2.62)    (2.65)    (5.51)     (5.56)   (5.53)
Year dummies                     yes        yes          yes        yes          yes       yes        yes        yes        yes       yes        yes        yes       yes       yes      yes        yes       yes      yes
Country pair dummies             yes        yes          yes        yes          yes       yes        yes        yes        yes       yes        yes        yes       yes       yes      yes        yes       yes      yes
Observations                    16524      16524        16524     16318         16318     16318      15930      15930     15930      15717      15717     15717      8942      8942      8942      8775      8775     8775
R-squared                        0.49       0.49         0.49      0.52         0.52       0.52       0.34       0.34      0.34       0.36       0.36      0.36       0.34     0.34      0.34      0.35       0.35     0.35




                                                                                                               38
Table 6 Mispricing vs fundamental: Interpreting the relation between valuation and cross-border mergers. Dependent variable is the ratio of the
number of deals in which the target is from country i and the acquirer is from country j (where i ≠ j) to the total number of domestic deals in country i. ∆ Currency FR12 is the
difference in the next12-month real exchange rate return between acquirer and target country. ∆ Market FR12 is the difference in the future 12-month local real stock market return
between acquirer and target country. ∆ (Fitted MTB) is the difference in the predicted value-weighted market-equity-to-book-equity ratio between acquirer and target country,
using future 12-, 24-, 36-month local real stock market return and real exchange rate return. ∆ (Residual MTB) is the difference in the residuals of value-weighted market equity to
book equity ratio between acquirer and target country, using future 12-, 24-, 36-month local real stock market return and real exchange rate return. Fitted MTB=2.017-0.033FR12-
0.137FR24-0.299FR36-0.255EXFR12-0.247EXFR24+0.487EXFR36 (N=642, R2=0.094). Higher GDP per capita is equal to 1 if acquirer country’s GDP per capita is larger than
or equal to that of target country. Panel A reports regressions using future12-month stock market and exchange rate returns. Panel B reports regressions using decomposed market
to book ratio. Standard errors are robust.

Panel A - Direct tests using future returns.


                                                      All Targets-All Acquirers                      Private Targets-Private Acquirers           Public Targets-Public Acquirers
                                               (1)               (2)                (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)        (7)             (8)             (9)
∆Market FR12                                -0.004             -0.001             -0.004          -0.001          -0.000          0.002       0.000          0.007           -0.000
                                            (-1.32)            (-0.30)            (-1.18)         (-0.30)         (-0.02)         (0.52)      (0.02)         (1.18)          (-0.03)
∆Currency FR12                             0.019***          0.011***         0.015**            0.015**          0.006          0.015**      0.008          0.003           -0.004
                                             (3.34)            (2.78)             (2.34)          (2.42)          (1.53)          (2.56)      (0.58)         (0.30)          (-0.26)
∆Market FR12 × I_ GDP capita                                   -0.006                                             -0.002                                     -0.014
                                                               (-0.99)                                            (-0.29)                                    (-1.24)
∆Currency FR12 × I_GDP capita                                  0.014                                              0.016                                      0.011
                                                               (1.30)                                             (1.40)                                     (0.34)
∆Market FR12 × Same Region                                                        0.000                                           -0.007                                     -0.000
                                                                                  (0.00)                                          (-1.12)                                    (-0.02)
∆Currency FR12× Same Region                                                       0.014                                           -0.002                                     0.047
                                                                                  (1.04)                                          (-0.10)                                    (1.28)
∆ ( log GDP per capita)j-i                 0.044***          0.044***        0.044***            0.029***       0.029***         0.030***     0.021          0.021           0.020
                                             (4.88)            (4.86)             (4.87)          (3.73)          (3.72)          (3.75)      (1.04)         (1.04)          (1.01)
∆ (GDP growth)j-i                            0.023             0.023              0.022           0.031           0.031           0.033       0.046          0.045           0.044
                                             (0.89)            (0.90)             (0.85)          (1.28)          (1.28)          (1.33)      (1.14)         (1.10)          (1.07)
Constant                                   0.079***          0.078***        0.079***            0.044***       0.043***         0.044***   0.020***       0.020***        0.021***
                                            (13.01)           (12.79)         (13.00)             (8.44)          (8.27)          (8.42)      (3.06)         (2.97)          (3.10)
Year dummies                                   yes              yes                yes             yes             yes              yes        yes            yes             yes
Country pair dummies                           yes              yes                yes             yes             yes              yes        yes            yes             yes
Observations                                 16112             16112              16112           15455           15455           15455       8766            8766           8766
R-squared                                      0.49             0.49               0.49            0.35            0.35            0.35       0.34            0.34            0.34




                                                                                            39
Panel B - Decomposing Market-to-book

                                            All Targets-All Acquirers          Private Targets-Private Acquirers      Public Targets-Public Acquirers
                                        (1)            (2)           (3)        (4)            (5)            (6)        (7)                (8)            (9)
∆ (Fitted MTB)j-i                     0.001         -0.003         0.003    0.006**         -0.003          0.004     -0.003              -0.003        -0.007
                                      (0.51)       (-1.46)        (0.94)      (2.23)        (-1.45)         (1.47)    (-0.45)            (-0.43)        (-1.05)
∆ (Residual MTB)j-i                 0.005***         0.000      0.004***    0.004***        -0.000        0.003**    0.006**               0.003         0.003
                                      (5.24)        (0.71)        (3.34)      (3.78)        (-0.72)         (2.33)     (2.38)             (1.25)         (0.90)
∆ (Fitted MTB)j-i × I_ GDP capita                    0.009                                 0.015***                                       -0.001
                                                    (1.62)                                   (3.19)                                      (-0.10)
∆ (Residual MTB)j-i × I_GDP                       0.008***                                 0.009***                                       0.007
                                                    (5.09)                                   (4.38)                                       (1.39)
∆ (Fitted MTB)j-i × Same Region                                   -0.005                                    0.005                                     0.014
                                                                  (-0.74)                                   (0.74)                                    (0.97)
∆ (Residual MTB)j-i × Same                                       0.004*                                     0.003                                    0.011*
                                                                  (1.70)                                    (1.19)                                    (1.95)
∆ ( log GDP per capita)j-i           0.016*        0.016*        0.016*       0.006          0.006          0.007      0.017              0.016       0.018
                                      (1.88)        (1.88)        (1.85)      (0.76)         (0.70)         (0.79)     (0.75)             (0.69)      (0.80)
∆ (GDP growth)j-i                   0.058**       0.057**        0.062**     0.045*         0.042*         0.049*     -0.001             -0.003       0.007
                                      (2.27)        (2.23)        (2.44)      (1.86)         (1.75)         (1.94)    (-0.03)            (-0.06)      (0.17)
Constant                            0.038*** 0.049***           0.038***    0.022***       0.021***       0.022***   0.053***           0.053***    0.053***
                                     (10.57)       (14.07)       (10.58)      (6.88)         (6.71)         (6.89)     (5.44)             (5.48)      (5.48)
Year dummies                           yes            yes           yes        yes            yes            yes         yes                yes         yes
Country pair dummies                   yes            yes           yes        yes            yes            yes         yes                yes         yes
Observations                          14099         14099         14099      13548           13548         13548        7811               7811        7811
R-squared                              0.52           0.52          0.52       0.35           0.35           0.35       0.38               0.38        0.38




                                                                               40
Table 7 Deal-level analysis of the intensity of cross-border M&As. Dependent variable is equal to 1 if the
M&A deal is cross-border. The sample include deals in which both target and acquirer are public. Columns (1) and (2) use the
difference in previous year’s firm-level stock returns in $US between the acquirer and the target. Columns (3) and (4) decompose
the difference in firm-level stock returns in $US into 3 parts: market returns in local currency (∆Market R12), currency returns
(∆Currency R12), and firm residual stock returns in local currency (∆Firm USR12-∆Market R12-∆Currency R12). Marginal
effects are reported. Standard errors are robust.

                                                          (1)                 (2)                 (3)                (4)
∆Firm USR12                                             0.012               0.030*
                                                        (0.85)              (1.83)
∆Market R12                                                                                    0.321**              0.188
                                                                                                (2.11)              (1.21)
∆Currency R12                                                                                   0.395               0.449
                                                                                                (1.28)              (1.39)
∆Firm USR12-∆Market R12-∆Currency R12                                                           0.010              0.028*
                                                                                                (0.75)              (1.82)
Log Firm Size (Target)                                                     -0.011                                  -0.009
                                                                           (-1.62)                                 (-1.42)
Log Firm Size (Acquirer)                                                  0.056***                                0.055***
                                                                            (8.23)                                  (8.13)
Same Industry                                                              -0.009                                  -0.011
                                                                           (-0.33)                                 (-0.42)
Year Dummies                                             yes                  yes                yes                  yes
Country Dummies                                          yes                  yes                yes                  yes
Observations                                            2332                 1530               2331                 1529
Pseudo R-square                                         0.339               0.379               0.343               0.381




                                                              41
Table 8 Target vs acquirer in domestic and cross-border M&As. Dependent variable is equal to one if the
merging firm is the acquirer and to zero if the firm is the target. The sample include deals in which both target and acquirer are
public. Panel A contains domestic mergers only while Panel B examines cross-border mergers. First two columns in each panel
use the firm-level stock returns in $US (Firm USR12). Last two columns of each panel decompose firm-level stock returns in
$US into 3 parts: market returns in local currency (Market R12), currency returns (Currency R12), and firm residual stock returns
in local currency (Firm USR12-Market R12-Currency R12). Marginal effects are reported. Standard errors are robust.

                                                   Domestic Deals                                  Cross-border Deals
                                              (1)      (2)        (3)        (4)            (5)        (6)        (7)      (8)
Firm USR12                                0.049*** 0.055***                             0.062***   0.064**
                                            (3.96)   (3.95)                               (2.72)     (2.38)
Market R12                                                                                                      0.098       0.099
                                                                                                                (1.16)     (1.09)
Currency R12                                                                                                    0.108      -0.192
                                                                                                                (0.48)    (-0.80)
Firm USR12-Market R12-Currency R12                             0.050***   0.056***                            0.059**     0.064**
                                                                 (3.91)     (3.90)                              (2.48)     (2.35)
Log Firm Size                             0.122*** 0.136***    0.121***   0.136***      0.132***   0.140*** 0.132***     0.141***
                                           (22.37)  (20.91)     (22.38)    (20.91)       (14.67)    (12.46)    (14.60)    (12.48)
Long-term Debt/Asset                                 0.027                  0.027                    0.180                  0.181
                                                     (0.36)                 (0.36)                   (1.08)                (1.09)
Cash/Asset                                         0.225***               0.222***                 0.318***              0.316***
                                                     (3.59)                 (3.54)                   (2.81)                (2.79)
Sales growth (2-year)                                0.004                  0.004                    0.019                  0.020
                                                     (0.93)                 (0.92)                   (1.42)                (1.45)
Return on Equity                                   0.126***               0.124***                 0.334***              0.335***
                                                     (2.99)                 (2.95)                   (3.92)                (3.99)
Year Dummies                                 Yes      Yes         Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
Country Dummies                              Yes      Yes         Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
Observations                                3625      3262       3625        3262         1304        1178       1302       1176
Pseudo R-square                             0.145    0.171       0.145      0.171         0.271      0.320      0.271       0.321




                                                               42
