                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  MEDICAL LICENSING BOARD CHARACTERISTICS AND PHYSICIAN DISCIPLINE:
                       AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS

                                            Marc T. Law
                                          Zeynep K. Hansen

                                        Working Paper 15140
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15140


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2009




We are grateful to the Federation of State Medical Boards for making available the data used for this
study. Any views expressed are those of the authors’ exclusively. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Marc T. Law and Zeynep K. Hansen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Medical Licensing Board Characteristics and Physician Discipline: An Empirical Analysis
Marc T. Law and Zeynep K. Hansen
NBER Working Paper No. 15140
July 2009
JEL No. I1,I18

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the relationship between the characteristics of medical licensing boards and
the frequency with which boards discipline physicians. Specifically, we take advantage of variation in
the structure of medical licensing boards between 1993 and 2003 to determine the effect of organizational
and budgetary independence, public oversight, and resource constraints on rates of physician discipline. We
find that larger licensing boards, boards with more staff, and boards that are organizationally independent
from state government discipline doctors more frequently. Public oversight and political control over
board budgets do not appear to influence the extent to which medical licensing boards discipline doctors.
These findings are broadly consistent with theories of regulatory behavior that emphasize the importance
of bureaucratic autonomy for effective regulatory enforcement.


Marc T. Law
Department of Economics
University of Vermont
94 University Place
Burlington, VT 05405-0114
Marc.Law@uvm.edu

Zeynep K. Hansen
College of Business and Economics
Department of Economics
Boise State University
1910 University Drive
Boise, ID 83725-1620
and NBER
zeynephansen@boisestate.edu
I. Introduction

       An understanding of the factors that influence the enforcement of laws and

regulations is of clear importance for public policy. The effective design of new regulatory

agencies and the fruitful reform of existing ones require an appreciation of the incentives and

constraints that regulators face. While there is a small literature that investigates the

determinants of regulatory enforcement (Weingast and Moran 1983; Weingast 1984; Moe

1985; Magat Krupnick and Harrington 1986; McCubbins, Noll, and Weingast 1987; Olson

1995, 1996a, 1996b) much work remains to be done. Most of these studies analyze a handful

of federal (i.e. national) regulatory agencies (for instance, the Food and Drug Administration

and the Environmental Protection Agency), making it difficult to generate broad

generalizations, especially to state level regulatory agencies. In addition, because the focus is

generally on national regulatory agencies, empirical identification of the factors that

influence regulatory enforcement comes primarily from temporal changes in regulatory

regime. Causal identification is hampered by the fact that there tend to be relatively few

regime shifts over time, and by the possibility that temporal regime shifts are correlated with

other factors that might also affect the degree of enforcement.

       This study furthers our understanding of regulatory enforcement by analyzing the

disciplinary behavior of medical licensing boards—the state-level organizations that are

responsible for licensing physicians and policing physician conduct. Across states and over

time, medical licensing boards vary in their composition, their size, the resources they

possess, and the organizational and budgetary autonomy they enjoy from state governments.

While a body of scholarship has investigated the effects of medical licensing boards on entry

into the medical profession (Graddy and Nichol 1989; Svorny and Toma 1998), and another

has examined the specific offenses for which medical boards punish doctors (Clay and


                                               2
Conatser 2003; Morrison and Morrison 2001; Dehlendorf and Wolfe 1998; and Morrison and

Wickersham 1998; Grant and Alfred 2007), no recent work has analyzed how the structure of

medical boards affects rates of physician discipline.1 This is a significant omission because

medical licensing boards, along with the tort system, play an important role in policing

physician quality. Medical errors are a leading cause of death in America, and the evidence

indicates that much medical malpractice is never litigated (Baker 2005).2 Our analysis

therefore sheds light on an aspect of medical regulation that may be increasingly important

for health policy.3

        We also generate new insights into the issue of regulatory capture. Among regulation

scholars, it is widely believed that occupational licensing regulation represents the canonical

example of capture of the regulatory apparatus by the industry being regulated (Stigler 1971;

Kleiner 2000). Occupational licensing regulation serves as an entry barrier that potentially

allows a profession to increase prices and profits, often with little offsetting improvement in

the quality of professional services. Moreover, the enforcement of licensing laws is almost

invariably left to the profession itself. Since “insiders” are given the authority to discipline

physicians for unprofessional conduct, an effect of licensing may be the reduced incentive to

punish bad behavior (Derbyshire 1983). Capture of the regulatory apparatus by the profession

may therefore manifest itself in lower rates of physician discipline. Since medical licensing

boards vary in the degree of independence they enjoy from political officials, as well as in the


1
  Dolan and Urban (1983), to our knowledge, are the only scholars who have analyzed the relationship
between medical board characteristics and physician discipline. However, the period they study
(1960-1977), their identification strategy, and their measure of physician discipline differ from ours.
2
  An earlier Harvard study identified that one percent of all hospital discharges in 51 New York
hospitals in 1984 were due to medical negligence. Fewer than two percent of these victims of
negligence filed a malpractice claim and only about half them received some compensation (Localio
et. al. 1991).
3
  A related literature examines the political economy of state insurance commissions, which also vary
in structure and composition across time and space. See Meier (1988, 1991), Klein (1995), and
Willenborg (2000).
                                                  3
extent of outside (i.e. non-physician) oversight, we test this implication of the regulatory

capture hypothesis.

       Finally, our study represents a methodological improvement over other empirical

scholarship of regulatory enforcement behavior. We use the variation in medical board

structure across space and time to identify the factors that influence the extent of regulatory

enforcement. Specifically, we match information on the nature of medical licensing boards

with data on how frequently doctors are disciplined by these boards to estimate the

importance of board composition, budgetary and organizational independence, and overall

resources in determining the degree of regulatory enforcement within a fixed-effect

framework. The effect of board characteristics on the extent of enforcement is therefore

identified from within-board variation in characteristics. This framework provides more

compelling evidence of the causal effect of regulatory regime than existing scholarship that

relies exclusively on temporal variation at the national level.

       We discuss the evolution of state medical boards in Section II. In Section III we

outline hypotheses that might explain medical board regulatory behavior. This is followed in

Section IV by a description of the data that we use to estimate the relationship between

medical board characteristics and the extent of physician discipline. We argue in this section

that the distribution of medical board characteristics across states is sufficiently exogenous

for us to use this variation to identify the effects of board characteristics on physician

discipline. We then discuss the empirical methodology, our regression results, and some

robustness checks in Section V. The empirical analysis is followed by a conclusion and a

discussion of the broader implications of our findings.



II. Evolution of State Medical Boards


                                                4
        State medical boards were created to protect the public from physician incompetence,

but for much of their history their primary role was limited to guarding entry into medical

profession. Indeed, until the 1980s, medical boards seldom disciplined physicians. The

American Medical Association (AMA) reported in 1961 that “disciplinary action by both

medical societies and boards of medical examiners are inadequate,” and that physician

incompetence as well as ethical and legal violations needed to be examined carefully (quoted

in Ameringer 1999, p. 2). According to studies by Robert Derbyshire, a former president of

the Federation of State Medical Boards, state medical boards disciplined about 0.06 percent

of all licensed physicians in any year during 1963-67; there was only a negligible increase in

the number of physicians disciplined between 1968-72; and the rate of discipline was still a

mere 0.14 percent in 1981 (Ameringer 1999, p. 2). Other studies (Dolan and Urban 1983)

showed similar ineffectiveness of board activities on physician discipline during this period.

        Organized medicine enjoyed its “Golden Age” during this immediate postwar period

when physicians enjoyed high levels of prestige and influence. However, after lawsuits for

medical malpractice became more common in 1970s, it became increasingly clear that

physicians had failed to police and discipline their colleagues through inaction and silence

(Ameringer 1999, p. 29). Additionally, beginning in the 1980s continuing in the 1990s, there

were major changes in the organization and structure of health care that fundamentally

altered the role of state medical boards. These changes included crises in the availability and

affordability of medical malpractice insurance;4 the rise of consumer groups’ such as Public

Citizen’s Health Research; increasing media criticism of medical board performance; major

restructuring in the delivery of health care through Health Maintenance Organizations


4
  There have actually been two “crises” in medical malpractice insurance premiums, one in the early
1970s, and another in the late 1980s (Feldstein 2003). Malpractice insurance premiums have
continued to increase since these crises; however, as a percentage of total health care expenditures,
they have remained roughly constant.
                                                 5
(HMOs); and reforms that simplified the collection and dissemination of information on

health care providers. State medical boards were compelled to evolve in response to these

changes in the health care environment. They became better funded, obtained greater

independence in controlling their resources, more capably staffed to investigate physician

discipline cases, and began to incorporate non-physician members.(Ameringer 1999, p. 73).

As a result, according to the Federation of State Medical Boards, rates of physician discipline

increased eight-fold from the early 1980s to the mid-1990s (Ameringer 1999, p. 42).

       In an effort to contain cost increases, managed care organizations emerged as

dominant players in health care markets. By 1995, more than 80 percent of physicians were

affiliated with managed care organizations. An important consequence of this change was

that physicians became more accountable to the third-party payers of medical services under

the system’s cost-cutting incentives to limit access to medical care. Medical decisions were

routinely scrutinized and reviewed by HMOs and insurers. In particular, utilization reviews,

in which HMOs and insurers evaluated the necessity and appropriateness of medical care,

became common practice. Concerns about the autonomy of medical decision-making and the

reputation of the medical profession prompted physicians and state medical boards to

challenge the authority of HMOs to review medical decisions. In response, managed care

organizations argued that utilization reviews were a “business function,” and that state

insurance departments, not state medical boards, should have authority to investigate

coverage decisions even though state medical boards were the only agencies with the

expertise to investigate the quality of medical decisions (Ameringer, 1999, p. 117). In the

nationally followed Murphy case, the courts decided in favor of the Arizona State Medical

Board and ruled that the Arizona medical board had the authority to review HMO decisions

(Ameringer, 1999, p. 118). Thus, the rise of HMOs led to a new relationship between state


                                              6
medical boards, physicians, and state medical societies. The HMOs’ emphasis on cost

savings measures and “business like” decision-making refocused the attention of state

medical boards, physicians and state medical societies on professionalism and professional

autonomy in medical decision making (Ameringer 1999). Accordingly, the quality of medical

decisions and the reputation of the medical profession emerged as paramount concerns of

state medical boards.



III. Hypotheses about regulatory enforcement

       Broadly speaking, the nature and extent of regulatory enforcement will depend on the

incentives that regulators face, and the resources they possess. Other things equal, the degree

of enforcement will be increasing in the resources regulators have at their disposal.

Regulatory agencies with larger budgets or more personnel can enforce laws more rigorously

than those that are more constrained. This prediction is shared by all theories of regulatory

behavior.

       Theories of regulatory behavior differ, however, along other dimensions. At a general

level, we can divide these theories into principal-agent (PA) theories and bureaucratic-

autonomy (BA) theories. PA-theories posit an agency relationship between politicians (i.e.

legislators), who want policies that cater to the median voter in their districts (because

politicians are re-election seekers), and regulators, who are utility maximizers (Weingast and

Moran 1983; McCubbins, Noll and Weingast 1989). In this framework, politicians recognize

that regulators have different objectives than they do, and that they cannot perfectly monitor

regulators. Thus, politicians have an incentive to design an optimal contract with regulators

that aligns the objectives of the regulator with their own. There are several mechanisms

through which politicians can induce regulators to behave according to their wishes. One is


                                               7
through control over agency budgets. The threat of budget cuts in response to “bad” behavior

by the regulator and the potential for budgetary increases in response to “good” behavior may

induce regulators to comply with politicians’ desires. Another is through political or public

oversight of the regulatory agency. If politicians or members of the public (who share

politicians’ preferences) can directly oversee the actions of the regulator, regulators are more

likely to behave in ways that politicians prefer. In the context of medical licensing boards,

greater political control over medical board budgets, and measures that increase political

oversight of medical board behavior (such as reducing the organizational independence of the

board from state government, as well as altering medical board composition to include more

outside members) should increase the extent to which boards enforce standards and impose

discipline on the medical profession.

       BA-theories, on the other hand, highlight the important role that independence from

political meddling has on the effectiveness of regulatory enforcement (Miller 2000;

Carpenter 2001). Scholars in this vein argue that regulatory enforcement is likely to be more

effective if regulators are granted greater independence from political influence. There are

several reasons why independence may facilitate regulatory enforcement. First, effective

enforcement of regulation may not always be in every politician’s best interest. While some

politicians may benefit from more strict enforcement of regulation, others may benefit from

less strict enforcement. For instance, in the context of disciplinary actions taken by medical

boards, politicians whose re-election campaigns receive significant contributions from

organized medicine may desire weaker regulatory enforcement of medical practice

legislation. Measures that insulate regulators from political influence therefore serve as

devices that commit politicians not to intervene in the regulator process (Miller 2000).

Second, regulatory officials, particularly in the context of medical regulation, are often


                                               8
reputation maximizing “professionals” (Carpenter 2001, 2004; Law 2005; Tonon 2008). As

professionals, they may be bound by a code of ethics and a selection mechanism that puts

“doing the right thing” above other objectives. Enforcing regulation effectively may enhance

their prestige and allow them to expand their budgets and authority. Freedom from political

influence may, in turn, permit them the autonomy to enforce regulation more effectively.

With respect to medical licensing boards, BA-theories posit that greater independence

(organizational and budgetary) from political influence, as well as less political or public

oversight of medical licensing boards should result in more effective enforcement. As

discussed earlier, this concern for professional autonomy and the reputation of the medical

profession may have become especially important as a result of the rise of managed care and

increased public scrutiny of the medical profession. Thus, BA-theories and PA-theories

generate different predictions regarding the relationship between organizational and

budgetary autonomy and regulatory effectiveness.



III. Data

       The data on physician discipline and medical board characteristics come from two

sources: the Federation of State Medical Board’s (FSMB) annual Board Action Summary,

which provides information on the number and type of disciplinary actions taken by each

medical board as well as data on the number of licensed physicians who are regulated by

each board in each year from 1991-2003, and the FSMB’s Exchange (Section 2), which

publishes information on the characteristics of each medical board in selected years (1993,

1996, 1999, 2003).

Variable definitions




                                             9
        Our primary dependent variable is the total number of disciplinary actions per 1,000

licensed physicians taken by each medical board in each year. We divide by the licensed

physician population because the number of physicians regulated by each board varies

significantly across boards. Total disciplinary actions equal the sum of licenses removed,

licenses restricted, and other actions. In order to determine how board characteristics affect

the nature of physician discipline, we also use licenses removed per 1,000 licensed

physicians, licenses restricted per 1,000 licensed physicians, and other disciplinary actions

per 1,000 licensed physicians as dependent variables.5

        We construct a variety of variables to control for medical licensing board

characteristics that might influence the degree and nature of physician discipline. PA and BA

theories of regulatory behavior suggest that factors like the size of the medical board, the

resources available to each board, the insider-outsider composition of each medical board,

and the organizational and budgetary independence each board enjoys may influence

disciplinary actions. Accordingly, we collected data on the number of board members per

1,000 licensed physician, the number of full time equivalent (FTE) staff members employed

by each board per 1,000 licensed doctor, as well as information on whether board revenues

are taxed by the state government to control for the resources available to each board to

oversee the medical profession;6 the share of outside (i.e. non-physician) members on each

board to control for the degree of outside oversight over board behavior; and a measure of

medical board independence to proxy for the extent to which the board is organizationally

independent of the state government. According to the Federation of State Medical Boards, a

5
   The FSMB define these categories as follows. Loss of license: includes revocation, suspension,
surrender, or mandatory retirement of license or loss of privileges afforded by that license. Restriction
of license: includes probation, limitation, or restriction of license, or licensed privileges. Other
disciplinary actions: includes modification of a physician’s license, or the privileges granted by that
license, that results in a penalty or reprimand do the physician.
6
  The FMBS Exchange does include some data on medical board budgets. Unfortunately, there were
too many missing observations for us to use this data.
                                                   10
board is “independent” if it is fully empowered to made decisions regarding physician

discipline without having to consult with other organs of state government. Independent

boards exercise all licensing and disciplinary powers. “Semi-independent” boards are subject

to some oversight by some other state government department (for instance, departments of

health). “Advisory” boards, in contrast, exercise a purely advisory role to some central

agency within state government. Finally we constructed a binary variable that indicates

whether the board receives funding from the state government. This variable measures the

budgetary control that legislators may have over the board.7

        Because we only have data on board characteristics for four years, our panel consists

of four cross-sections representing medical board actions and board characteristics in 1993,

1996, 1999 and 2003. Fourteen states have separate medical boards to regulate MD

physicians and DO (osteopathic) physicians; in the remaining jurisdictions, the same medical

licensing board regulates both types of physicians. Accordingly, the number of medical

boards in our sample (65) exceeds the number of states plus the District of Columbia (51).

Due to missing observations, we do not have a balanced panel.

Evolution of medical board characteristics, 1993-2003

        Since our identification strategy exploits within-board variation to estimate the effects

of board characteristics on rates of physician discipline, we present data on the distribution of

board characteristics by year to illustrate how these characteristics evolve over the sample

period. Table 1 displays data on medical board independence from 1993-2003. The columns

in the table report the number of medical boards that fall into each category in a given year.

While the number of purely advisory boards remains the same between 1993 and 2003, there
7
  The FMBS Exchange also reports information on how board members are selected, whether boards
were bifurcated by role, the length of board members’ terms, how frequently the boards meet, and
other characteristics. We did not collect data on these characteristics because they did not vary over
time. The inclusion of board-specific fixed effects controls for the effect of these time invariant board
characteristics on physician discipline.
                                                   11
is some movement between the independent category and semi-independent category, albeit

with no apparent trend towards greater or lesser autonomy. Upon closer inspection of the

data, we found that no board switched from one category to another more than once, and the

four advisory boards were the same throughout this period. Accordingly, identification of the

effects of board independence on physician discipline comes from boards that switch

between independent and semi-independent status.

       Information on the changing distribution of board size per 1,000 licensed physicians

and FTE staff per 1,000 licensed doctors are shown in tables 2 and 3. Our measures of board

size and board staff can change either because the number of board members or staff

changes, or because the number of physicians regulated by the board changes. While the

distribution of board size per 1,000 doctors appears to be relatively stable between 1993 and

2003, there is a trend towards more staff per 1,000 doctors: during this period the number of

boards with fewer than one FTE staff member per 1,000 physicians declined from 14 to 6

while the number of boards with more than four FTE staff per 1,000 physicians increased

from 8 to 13. The resources available to medical boards, in terms of personnel, have therefore

expanded.

       Table 4 presents information on the budgetary status of medical boards. Two trends

are apparent from this table. First, there is a dramatic decline in the number of boards that

receive state funds. Between 1993 and 2003, the number of medical boards that received

funding from state governments fell from 19 to 11. Political control over medical board

budgets therefore seems to have fallen over time. Second, the number of medical boards

whose revenues are taxed by the state government increased from 13 to 22. These two trends

are also correlated. As shown in Table 6, the correlation coefficient between the two dummy

variables is -0.27, which indicates that boards that receive state funds are less likely to be


                                             12
taxed by state governments. We offer two explanations for this correlation. The first is that

political control over board budgets can be exercised either by subsidizing board

expenditures or by imposing taxes on board revenues. The negative correlation between these

two variables may be due to the fact that they are substitute mechanisms for exercising

political control over regulators. A second, and, in our view, more likely explanation is that

the decline in the number of boards receiving state funding and the increase in the number of

boards that are taxed are driven by state-level fiscal needs. In response to growing fiscal

imbalances, state governments respond by reducing expenditures on medical boards (i.e.

requiring boards to be self-funded) and by expanding the tax base in search of greater

revenues (i.e. imposing taxes on medical board revenues). These underlying fiscal trends are

presumably uncorrelated with factors that influence trends in physician quality.

       Table 5 reports information on the distribution of the share of outside (non-physician)

membership on medical licensing boards. An inspection of this table reveals three important

facts. First, no board had a majority of outside members.8 Second, for the overwhelming

majority of boards, the share of outside membership ranges between 10 and 30 percent.

Third, the number of boards with no outside members fell from 6 in 1993 to 2 in 2003.

Accordingly, there seems to be a trend toward greater outside participation on medical

licensing boards.

Does variation in board characteristics permit causal inferences?

       In order to make causal inferences about the relationship between board

characteristics and physician discipline, we need to establish that board characteristics are


8
  If medical board disciplinary decisions are made under a simple majority rule, then our data set
would have insufficient variation along this dimension for us to assess whether outside membership
influences the extent of physician discipline. While we do not have specific information on the
decision rules used by medical boards to make decisions, our understanding is that near unanimity is
usually required, which implies that outsiders may have real influence on board decisions, even if
they are a minority.
                                                13
exogenous with respect to other factors that might influence the quality of physicians and the

demand for physician discipline across jurisdictions. While board characteristics are clearly

not randomly distributed across jurisdictions, our belief is that these characteristics are

sufficiently exogenous so as to allow us to make causal inferences from this variation. Two

pieces of evidence support this perspective. First, as shown in Table 6, licensing board

characteristics are only weakly correlated with each other across jurisdictions. While the size

of the board is well correlated with the number of full time equivalent staff (correlation

coefficient of 0.64), and, as noted earlier, boards that receive state funding are also less likely

to be taxed by state governments (correlation coefficient of -0.27), none of the other

characteristics is highly correlated with any of the others, in either a positive or negative

direction. If, for instance, board characteristics that are associated with greater political

control and oversight over board behavior were highly correlated with each other, we might

be concerned that some omitted factor might be at play that would also be correlated with

rates of physician discipline. The fact that few of these characteristics have any significant

correlation with each other provides some evidence in favor of the view that the distribution

of characteristics is exogenous, at least with respect to underlying preferences for physician

discipline.

       Second, we did not find any systematic relationships among factors that might be

correlated with changes in physician discipline within a given jurisdiction and medical board

characteristics. In order to rule out reverse-causality, we analyzed whether lagged changes in

rates of physician discipline give rise to changes in medical board structure. In these models,

we also included other variables to proxy for changes in health care environment as well as

other changes in political sentiment or tastes within a jurisdiction that might influence the

demand for physician discipline. These control variables include: changes in the Medicaid


                                                14
managed care share in each state, changes in real per capita personal income at the state level,

changes in the state government’s share of state GDP, changes in the Democratic vote share

in the nearest Presidential election, and an indicator variable that equals 1 if the governor of

the state is a Democrat and 0 otherwise. Ordinary least squares regression estimates of the

effects of these variables on each licensing board characteristic are displayed in Table 7.

While there is some evidence that states that experience faster per capita income growth have

a smaller share of outsiders on the board, none of the other variables has a statistically

significant relationship with any of the board characteristics. Board characteristics do not

respond to past changes in state-level Medicaid managed cares shares, to past changes in

rates of physician discipline, nor to changes in our various measures of political sentiment or

state-level tastes that might also be correlated with increased stringency of regulatory

enforcement.9 Accordingly, we are quite confident that our empirical analysis of the effects

of board characteristics on physician discipline will yield valid causal inferences.



IV. Empirical analysis

        Our baseline regression for estimating the effect of medical board characteristics on

the extent of physician discipline is as follows:

        yist = α + Ristβ + Xstγ + Tt + Bi + εist




9
  We also included state-level information on the growth rates of medical malpractice premiums
between 1991 and 2001 in an unreported analysis, and found no significant correlations between
premium growth rates and changes in medical board structure during this time. While the growth of
medical malpractice premiums may have contributed to rising rates of physician discipline by medical
boards (as has been suggested by the literature we surveyed earlier on the evolution of medical
boards), they do not appear to have had an effect on board structure per se, at least during the period
under analysis. Failure to control directly for medical malpractice premiums therefore should not bias
our estimates of the effects of board structure on physician discipline, although it may reduce the fit
of our model if concerns about medical malpractice induced medical boards, in general, to discipline
doctors more carefully.
                                                   15
where yist is the number of disciplinary actions per 1,000 doctors taken by board i in state s in

year t; Rist is a vector of the characteristics of board i located in state s in year t; Xst is a vector

of time varying state-level control variables; Tt and Bi are year and board fixed-effects,

respectively; and εist is an error term. Since this regression framework includes fixed-effects

at the board and year level, identification of the effects of medical board characteristics on

rates of physician discipline come from within-board changes in board characteristics over

time. In other words, we estimate the effect of a given board characteristic on rates of

physician discipline by comparing changes in rates of discipline across boards that

experience a change in that characteristic with boards that do not experience changes in that

characteristic. The coefficient estimates represented by the vector β are therefore estimates of

the effects of board characteristics on rates of physician discipline. The inclusion of board

and year fixed-effects allow us to control for time-invariant, jurisdiction-specific factors that

might affect rates of physician discipline, as well as nation-wide factors that influence rates

of physician discipline.

         We estimate this regression equation by ordinary least squares using four different

dependent variables: total disciplinary actions per 1,000 doctors, number of licenses removed

per 1,000 doctors, number of licenses restricted per 1,000 doctors, and other actions per

1,000 doctors. The board characteristics (Rist) that we control for measure: (i) the resources

available to the board to enforce physician discipline (number of board members per 1,000

licensed physician, the number of full time equivalent staff members employed by each board

per 1,000 licensed doctors, and an indicator variable that equals 1 if the board’s revenues are

taxed by the state government and 0 otherwise); (ii) the organizational and budgetary

autonomy enjoyed by the board (an indicator that equals 1 if the board is classified as




                                                  16
independent and 0 otherwise;10 and another indicator variable that equals 1 if the board

receives state government funding and 0 otherwise); and (iii) the degree of outside oversight

of the board (share of board members who are not physicians).

       Both the PA and BA hypotheses indicate that greater board resources should increase

rates of physician discipline, but these two hypotheses have different predictions regarding

the effects of budgetary and organizational autonomy, and the degree of outside oversight on

the extent of physician discipline. While the PA hypothesis argues that boards that enjoy less

budgetary and organizational autonomy and that are subject to greater oversight should

regulate the medical profession more strictly, the BA hypothesis argues the opposite. Finally,

Xst includes a number of variables that capture state-specific, time varying factors that may

influence the extent of physician discipline within each state (board reporting requirements

and the Medicaid managed care share in each state, real per capita personal income, state

government spending as a share of state GDP, a Democratic governor indicator variable, and

the share of the popular vote that was Democratic in the nearest presidential election). We

included Medicaid managed care share as a proxy for the growth of managed care at the state

level in order to control for the possible influence of changes in the health care environment

on board characteristics.11 Data on the managed care share are taken from Currie and Fahr

(2005). The board reporting requirements variable—a simple index that equals the number of

organizations that must report violations to medical boards—controls for 1990s reforms to




10
   Because identification of the effect of board independence comes entirely from switches between
semi-independent and independent boards, we use a binary variable to measure the effect of
organizational autonomy.
11
   The Medicaid managed care share is admittedly an imperfect proxy for the overall penetration of
managed care at the state level. Unfortunately, we were unable to locate state-level data on overall
managed care penetration rates for the earliest years of our sample.
                                                17
make boards more accountable to the public.12 The remaining variables control for state-level

factors that might influence the level of regulatory stringency. Descriptive statistics for key

regression variables are shown in Table 8.

       For each of the four dependent variables, we estimate four regression models. The

first is simply a pooled OLS regression that omits the year and board fixed effects. The

second includes year effects but not board effects. The third includes board fixed effects but

no year fixed effects. The fourth (the regression equation displayed above) includes both year

and board effects. The last model is our preferred specification as it allows us to make more

compelling casual inferences by controlling for unobserved heterogeneity across boards and

over time. Nevertheless, it is informative to compare these estimates with those obtained

using less structured specifications. First, the inclusion of year and board fixed effects

consumes degrees of freedom. It is possible that the statistical significance of some variables

may therefore disappear when fixed effects are included, not because they are unimportant,

but rather, because there are not enough observations to identify an effect. This is a particular

concern since the number of years included in our panel is small. Second, by comparing

results obtained with and without fixed effects, we can see whether the failure to control for

unobserved heterogeneity significantly biases our findings.



Regression results

        Table 9 presents the regression results obtained when total disciplinary actions per

1,000 physicians is the dependent variable. In Tables 9 through 12 each column represents a

separate regression. Column (1) shows the pooled regression results. The regression



12
   The Federation of State Medical Board categorizes these organizations into sixteen different
groups. The value of this index therefore ranges from 0 to 16. These data are taken from the semi-
annual FSMB Exchange.
                                               18
displayed in column (2) includes year fixed effect while the results shown in column (3)

include only board fixed effects. Column (4) shows the estimates obtained when year and

board fixed effects are included. In each regression, there is a positive and statistically

significant relationship between medical board organizational independence and total

disciplinary actions. As shown in column (4), the number of disciplinary actions per 1,000

doctors increases by 1.66 when medical boards become organizationally independent. This is

an economically significant magnitude, representing an increase of 23.5 percent above the

sample mean. The regressions also suggest that board resources influence the extent to which

medical boards discipline doctors. The number of board members per 1,000 doctors and/or

the number of full time equivalent staff members per 1,000 doctors has a positive and

significant impact on total disciplinary actions per 1,000 doctors. Both of these effects are

also economically significant. According to the estimates shown in column (4), a one unit

increase in the number of board members per 1000 doctors increases the total number of

disciplinary actions per 1000 doctors by 1.14 (14 percent above the sample mean) while a

one unit increase in the number of full time equivalent staff per 1,000 doctors raises the total

number of disciplinary actions per 1,000 doctors by 0.28 (4 percent above the sample mean).

The coefficient estimates for these variables reported in column (4) are also larger in both

size and significance. Finally, none of the other board characteristic controls has a

statistically significant effect on total disciplinary actions, regardless of whether fixed effects

are included. The lack of statistical significance found for most of our board characteristics

covariates is therefore not attributable to a reduction in degrees of freedom brought about by

the inclusion of board and year fixed effects. We also do not find a statistically significant

effect of the Medicaid managed care share on disciplinary actions.13 Reporting requirements


13
     The statistical insignificance of the managed care variable does not necessarily suggest, contrary to
                                                    19
are marginally significant in regressions (1) and (2), but this effect disappears when board

fixed effects are included.

        Tables 10, 11 and 12 display comparable regression results obtained using licenses

removed per 1,000 doctors, licenses restricted per 1,000 doctors, and other disciplinary

actions per 1,000 doctors (respectively) as dependent variables. Glancing across the tables

reveals the following pattern of results. First, at least one measure of board resources (either

the number of board members per 1,000 doctors or the number of full time equivalent staff

members per 1,000 doctors) generally has a positive and statistically significant effect on

physician discipline. Larger and more statistically significant positive effects of board

resources are found when both year and board fixed effects are included. Second,

organizational autonomy has a significant impact on some but not all measures of physician

discipline. Board organizational autonomy is positive and statistically significant when

licenses restricted per 1,000 doctors is the dependent variable, but is not significant when the

remaining two measures of physician discipline are used. Third, other board characteristics

do not generally have a significant effect on any measure of physician discipline. Boards that

receive funds from the state government do not discipline physicians more or less frequently

than boards that enjoy greater budgetary autonomy. Additionally, boards that are taxed by

state government do not discipline doctors differently than those that are not taxed. The

degree of outside influence within the board also does not generally have a statistically

significant relationship with different measures of physician discipline. In none of the year

and board fixed effect regressions displayed in Tables 9-12 is the coefficient on the share of


that the growth of managed care did not contribute to rising rates of physician discipline in general.
Rather, it suggests that cross-state variation in the growth of managed care did not contributed to
differences in physician discipline across jurisdictions. Additionally, it is possible that managed care
reforms and other changes in the health care environment (rising malpractice premiums and increased
scrutiny of the medical profession) may have already induced medical boards to discipline doctors
more carefully by the time our data set begins.
                                                  20
outside members on the board statistically significant. This result is at odds with Dolan and

Urban (1983), who, using data from 1960-1977, find that greater non-physician participation

on medical boards increases the frequency with which physicians are disciplined.14

Accordingly, it would appear that outside oversight and greater political control over medical

board budgets are not associated with more frequent rates of physician discipline.

        Taken as a whole, our regression results suggest the following broad conclusions.

First, overall resources are a key determinant of the extent to which medical boards discipline

doctors. Regardless of which measure of physician discipline used, larger medical boards and

boards with more staff discipline doctors more frequently. This finding is consistent with

both theories of regulatory enforcement behavior, which predict that the degree of

enforcement should be increasing in the resources commanded by regulators.

        Second, our results provide stronger support for bureaucratic autonomy theories of

regulatory behavior than for principal agent theories. There is some evidence that more

independent boards discipline doctors more frequently, at least for some measures of

physician discipline. On the other hand, boards that are subject to greater outside

participation, or greater political control over their budgets, do not discipline doctors more

frequently. The failure to find evidence in favor of the principal agent view may reflect the

fact that during the 1990s, changes in the health care environment (i.e. the rise of HMOs and


14
   There are several reasons why Dolan and Urban’s findings are different from ours. First, their
analysis focuses on a much earlier time period. Dolan and Urban use data from organized medicine’s
“golden age,” a period when physicians and medical boards were under little public scrutiny. In
contrast, our data are from a later period, when changes in the health care environment had forced
medical boards and the medical profession to become more accountable. Second, Dolan and Urban
use a different dependent variable to measure physician discipline. Third, they use a different and
somewhat arbitrarily constructed measure of non-physician participation on medical boards. Finally,
because they do not use fixed-effects, their identification strategy is different. In regressions presented
in first two columns of Table 12, we find positive and statistically significant effect of greater non-
physician participation on the extent of physicians received other disciplinary actions when board
fixed effects are not included. Accordingly, part of the difference may be attributable to a failure to
control for unobserved heterogeneity at the board level.
                                                    21
increased public scrutiny of health care providers) compelled all medical boards to become

more accountable to the public. In this setting, greater political control or political oversight

may not have resulted in stricter physician discipline because physician regulators already

had a strong incentive to police physician conduct.

       Third, our results may shed some light on the issue of regulatory capture. Among

regulation scholars, it is often argued that medical licensing boards, because they are

generally physician-dominated, can be captured by the medical profession and operated in

ways that increase physicians’ welfare at the expense of the public. Capture of the medical

board by the medical profession may manifest itself as reluctance on the part of physician-

dominated boards to discipline doctors. One testable implication of the capture theory is that

boards that are more physician-dominated should discipline doctors less frequently. Another

is that boards that are more organizationally and financially independent should discipline

doctors less frequently. The coefficient estimates displayed in Tables 9 through 12 do not

support these hypotheses. Our preferred estimates suggest that the share of outside

membership on the board has no statistically significant effect on the degree of physician

discipline, regardless of which measure of physician discipline we use. Additionally, boards

that receive state funds do not discipline physicians more frequently. Indeed, greater

organizational autonomy, as noted earlier, is associated with higher, not lower, rates of

physician discipline. Again, this result is consistent with our previous discussion of how

fundamental changes in health care markets altered the role of state medical boards. While

our managed care variable does not have a statistically significant effect on rates of physician

discipline, the qualitative evidence indicates that concerns about professional autonomy,

physician competence, and the reputation of the medical profession became important to

medical boards during the 1990s. The evidence accumulated suggests that these implications


                                               22
of the capture theory may not be well supported during this period, largely because changes

in the health care environment forced medical boards to become more accountable in

general.15

Robustness checks

        We undertook a number of robustness checks to investigate the sensitivity of our

findings. First, we re-estimated the board and year fixed-effect regressions including board

specific trend terms. While the inclusion of board fixed effects controls for unobserved

heterogeneity that is constant within a board, it does not account for unobserved

heterogeneity that may be changing within a board over time. Accordingly, it is possible that

the significant effects that we observe in our regressions are being driven by time-varying,

unobserved heterogeneity within medical boards. One reasonably agnostic way to control for

this possibility is to include board-specific trend terms. As shown in Table 13, a similar

pattern of results is found when board-specific trends are included. Board organizational

independence has a positive and significant effect on three of four measures of physician

discipline, as does board size, while the remaining board characteristic variables are

statistically insignificant. Accordingly, it would appear that our results are robust to the

inclusion of board-specific trend terms.

        Second, we re-estimated the regressions using a lagged value of each measure of

physician discipline as the dependent variable. If the earlier regressions correctly identify the

effect of current board characteristics on contemporaneous rates of physician discipline,

current board characteristics should not affect past rates of physician discipline. Estimating

the regressions using past rates of physician discipline as the dependent variable allow us to


15
  Capture may still manifest itself, however, in excessively strict control over entry into the medical
profession. This is evidenced, for instance, by the continued reluctance of the medical profession to
recognize foreign credentials. Additionally, it is possible that capture resulted in low rates of
physician discipline in earlier decades, when organized medicine was under far less public scrutiny.
                                                  23
rule out the possibility that there is some trend that is driving both board characteristics and

physician discipline. In none of these regressions are the coefficients on the board

characteristics variables statistically significant, which help establish that we have correctly

identified the effect of board characteristics on rates of physician discipline.

       Third, we incorporated non-linearity in the effects of board size and/or board staff by

including squared terms for each of these variables. We included these terms to allow for

economies of scale in enforcement. Qualitatively similar results were found when these

additional variables were included.

       Fourth, we re-estimated the regressions incorporating a first order serially correlated

error structure (AR(1)) in a Prais-Winsten regression framework. The signs and statistical

significance levels of the independent variables are robust to the inclusion of AR(1) error

terms. Accordingly, our findings are not driven by the failure to account for serial correlation.

       Fifth, we estimated the regressions using negative binomial regression techniques. In

this framework, the dependent variable is the number of disciplinary actions of a given type

(rather than the number of disciplinary actions per 1,000 physicians) and we control directly

for total physician population as a regressor. The signs and significance levels of the right-

hand-side variable were similar in these regressions. Total disciplinary actions and the

number of licenses removed are positively related to board organizational independence.

Additionally, all forms of physician discipline are increasing in board size and/or board staff.

Accordingly, our findings are robust to this alternative estimation strategy. In addition, we re-

estimated each of our regressions using natural logarithmic transformations of the dependent

variables and found qualitatively similar results.

       Finally, we restricted the sample by eliminating all licensing boards that only regulate

DO physicians. DO licensing boards, because they regulate a smaller number of physicians,


                                                24
may behave differently than other licensing boards. Including DO licensing boards in the

sample may therefore introduce measurement error that biases our results. Again, we

obtained qualitatively similar results when these boards were excluded from the sample.

Based on all these robustness check results, we are confident that our results correctly

identify the effects of board structure on physician discipline.



V. Conclusion and Discussion

       In this study we take advantage of variation in the characteristics of medical boards

across the United States to determine the effects of board characteristics on rates of physician

discipline. This analysis allows us to shed some light on the empirical determinants of

regulatory behavior and provides a test of different hypotheses about how regulators behavior

in response to different constraints and incentives.

        Our basic findings are threefold. First, the overall resources available to the regulator

are a key factor determining the degree of physician discipline imposed by licensing boards.

Larger medical licensing boards and boards with more staff support discipline doctors more

frequently. Second, organizational autonomy from political influence also affects physician

discipline. Licensing boards that are organizationally independent from state government

discipline physicians more frequently. This finding is supportive of bureaucratic autonomy

theories of regulatory behavior, which argue that freedom from political influence plays an

important role in helping regulators enforce regulation more effectively. Finally, other factors

such as how boards are funded and board composition do not affect rates of physician

discipline. Taken together, these findings provide partial support for the bureaucratic

autonomy approach to understanding regulatory behavior.




                                               25
       Our results are broadly consistent with the view that changes in health care markets

during the 1980s and 1990s have refocused the objectives of medical boards, physicians, and

state medical societies. From the 1950s through late 1970s, when the medical profession

enjoyed its “golden age” of power and prestige, there was little incentive for medical boards

to discipline physician conduct. Accordingly, rates of physician discipline were low, and

boards were primarily concerned with limiting entry into the medical profession and

curtailing competition from other health care providers (e.g. chiropractors). However, as a

result of the rise of managed care, increased public scrutiny and skepticism of the medical

profession, the growth of medical malpractice suits, and other fundamental changes in the

health care environment, medical boards and physician groups became more concerned with

protecting the reputation of the medical profession and the quality of medical decisions.

Accordingly, the medical establishment found it in its own self-interest to monitor doctors

more carefully. Rates of physician discipline by medical boards therefore rose dramatically,

especially among more independent boards and boards with greater resources to police

physician conduct. From a public policy perspective, these findings suggest that reforms that

increase the degree of political or public oversight of medical board decisions may not result

in stricter regulatory enforcement of physician conduct. In an environment where the quality

of medical decisions is under intense scrutiny from patients, insurers, and other health care

providers, self-regulating professions like medicine already have a strong incentive to police

their own members.



References

Ameringer, Carl (1999). State Medical Boards and the Politics of Public Protection.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Baker, Tom (2005). The Medical Malpractice Myth. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

                                             26
Carpenter, Daniel P. (2001). The Forging of Bureaucratic Autonomy: Reputation, Networks,
and Policy Innovation in Executive Agencies, 18632-1928. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.

Carpenter, Daniel P. (2004). “Protection Without Capture: Product Approval by a Political
Responsive, Learning Regulator.” American Political Science Review 98: 613-31.

Clay, Stephen .W., and Robert R. Conatser (2003). “Characteristics of Physicians Disciplined
by the State Medical Board of Ohio.” Journal of the American Osteopathic Association 103
(2): 81-88.

Currie, Janet and John Fahr (2005). “Medicaid Managed Care: Effects on Children’s
Medicaid Coverage and Utilization.” Journal of Public Economics 89 (1): 85-108.

Dehlendorf, Christine, and Sidney Wolfe (1998). “Physicians Disciplined for Sex-Related
Offenses.” Journal of the American Medical Association 279 (23): 1883-87.

Derbyshire, Robert C. (1983). “How Effective is Medical Self-Regulation?” Law and Human
Behavior 213 (7): 193-202.

Dolan, Andrew K. and Nicole D. Urban (1983). “The Determinants of the Effectiveness of
Medical Disciplinary Boards: 1960-1977.” Law and Human Behavior 213 (7): 203-17.

Feldstein, Paul J (2003). Health Policy and Issues: An Economic Perspective. Chicago:
Health Administration Press.

Graddy, Elizabeth and Michael B. Nichol (1989). “Public Members on Occupational
Licensing Boards: Effects on Legislative Regulatory Reforms.” Southern Economic Journal
55 (3): 610-25.

Grant, Darren and Kelly Alfred (2007). “Sanctions and Recidivism: An Evaluation of
Physician Discipline by State Medical Boards.” Journal of Health Policy, Politics, and Law
32 (5): 867-885.

Klein, Robert W. (1995). “Insurance Regulation in Transition.” Journal of Risk and
Insurance 62 (3): 363-404.

Kleiner, Morris M. (2000). “Occupational Licensing.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 14
(4): 189-202.

Law, Marc T. (2005). “How Do Regulators Regulate? Enforcement of the Pure Food and
Drugs Act, 1907-38.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 22 (2): 459-89.

Localio, A. R., A. Lawthers,T. Brennan, N. Laird, L. Hebert, L. Peterson, J. Newhouse, P.
Weiler, and H. Hiatt (1991). “Relation between Malpractice Claims and Adverse Events Due
to Negligence.” The New England Journal of Medicine 325 (25 July): 245-51.


                                            27
Magat, Wesley A., Alan J. Krupnick and Winston Harrington (1986). Rules in the Making: A
Statistical Analysis of Regulatory Agency Behavior. Washington, DC: Resources for the
Future.

McCubbins, Mathew D., Roger G. Noll and Barry R. Weingast (1987). “Administrative
Procedures as Instruments of Political Control.” Journal of Law, Economics, and
Organization 3 (2): 243-77.

Meier, Kenneth J. (1988). The Political Economy of Regulation: The Case of Insurance.
Albany: State University of New York Press.

Meier, Kenneth J. (1991). “The Politics of Insurance Regulation.” Journal of Risk and
Insurance 58 (4): 700-713.

Miller, Gary J. (2000). “Above Politics: Credible Commitment and Efficiency in the Design
of Public Agencies.” Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory 10 (2): 289-328.

Moe, Terry J. (1985). “Control and Feedback in Economic Regulation: The Case of the
NLRB.” American Political Science Review 79: 1094-116.

Morrison, James and Theodore Morrison (2001). “Psychiatrists Disciplined by a State
Medical Board.” American Journal of Psychiatry 158 (3): 474-8.

Morrison, James and Peter Wickersham (1998). “Physicians Disciplined by a State Medical
Board.” Journal of the American Medical Association 279 (23): 1889-93.

Olson, Mary K. (1995). “Regulatory Agency Discretion Among Competing Industries; Inside
the FDA.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 11 (2): 379-401

Olson, Mary K. (1996a) “Explaining Regulatory Behavior at the FDA: Political Control vs.
Agency Discretion.” In Gary D. Libecap (ed.). Advances in the Study of Entrepreneurship,
Innovation, and Economic Growth. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

Olson, Mary K. (1996b). “Substitution in Regulatory Agencies: FDA Enforcement
Alternatives.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 12 (2): 376-407.

Stigler, George J. (1971). “The Theory of Economic Regulation.” Bell Journal of Economics
and Management Science 1: 3-21.

Svorny, Shirley and Eugene Toma (1998). “Entry Barriers and Medical Board Funding
Autonomy.” Public Choice 97 (1): 93-106.

Tonon, Joseph M. (2008). “The Costs of Speaking Truth to Power: How Professionalism
Facilitates Credible Communication.” Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory
18 (2): 275-295




                                           28
Weingast, Barry R. and Mark J. Moran (1983). “Bureaucratic Discretion or Congressional
Control? Regulatory Policymaking by the Federal Trade Commission.” Journal of Political
Economy 91 (5): 765-800

Weingast, Barry R. (1984). “The Congressional-Bureaucratic System: A Principal-Agent
Perspective.” Public Choice 44 (1): 147-88

Willenborg, Michael (2000). “Regulatory Separation as a Mechanism to Curb Capture: A
Study of the Decision to Act Against Distressed Insurers.” Journal of Risk and Insurance 67
(4): 593-616.




                                            29
Table 1. Medical board independence, 1993-2003.

                               1993               1996          1999     2003
Number of                       45                 48            44       46
“independent” boards

Number of “semi-                14                 13            17          15
independent” boards

Number of “advisory”             4                 4                4         4
boards

Total number of boards          63                65             65       65

Source: See text.


Table 2: Board size per 1,000 licensed physicians, 1993-2003

                                     1993         1996         1999     2003
Number of boards for which             5            6            6        8
size < 0.5

Number of boards for which            11           10           9        8
0.5 < size < 1

Number of boards for which            9             7           12       9
1 < size < 1.5

Number of boards for which            7             9           7        7
1.5 < size < 2

Number of boards for which            12           10           11       11
2 < size < 4

Number of boards for which            7             7           5        6
4 < size < 6

Number of boards for which            11           14           14       12
size > 6

Total number of boards               62            63          64       61

Source: See text. Calculations by authors.




                                             30
Table 3. Full time equivalent (FTE) staff per 1,000 licensed physicians, 1993-2003.

                                   1993             1996            1999          2003
Number of boards for which          14                6              11            6
FTE < 1

Number of boards for which          12               20             12            11
1 < FTE < 2

Number of boards for which          18               15             15            13
2 < FTE < 3

Number of boards for which           7                   6          11             9
3 < FTE < 4

Number of boards for which           8               12             12            13
FTE > 4

Total number of boards              59               59             61            52

Source: See text. Calculations by authors.


Table 4. Budgetary status of medical boards, 1993-2003

                                                1993         1996          1999    2003
Budgetary
autonomy?
                    Boards that receive             19       15            12       11
                    state funds (Yes = 1)

                    Boards that are self-           46       50            53       54
                    funded (No = 0)

                    Total                           65       65            65       65
State gov’t taxes
board revenues?
                    Boards that are taxed           13       18            24       22
                    by state gov’t (Yes = 1)

                    Boards that are not             52       47            41       43
                    taxed (No = 0)

                    Total                           65       65            65       65

Source: See text.



                                               31
Table 5. Share of outside membership on medical licensing boards, 1993-2003.

                               1993           1996          1999               2003
Number of boards for             6              4             3                  2
which share = 0.

Number of boards for             3                5           4                 3
which 0 < share ≤ 0.1

Number of boards for            26                21          21                21
which 0.1 < share ≤ 0.2

Number of boards for            20                23          24                21
which 0.2 < share ≤ 0.3

Number of boards for             7                11          11                14
which 0.3 < share ≤ 0.4

Number of boards for             1                1           2                 4
which 0.4 < share ≤ 0.5

Number of boards for             0                0           0                 0
which share > 0.5

Total number of boards          63                65          65               65

Source: See text. Calculations by authors.




                                             32
Table 6. Correlations among board characteristics


                     Board       Board        Full time   Share of      Board      Board is
                 independence   members      equivalent    outside    receives     taxed by
                                per 1,000     staff per   members    state gov’t     state
                                 doctors        1,000     on board     funding       gov’t
                                               doctors
Board                1.0
independence

Board               -0.11           1.0
members per
1,000 doctors

Full time           -0.09          0.64           1.0
equivalent
staff per
1,000 doctors

Share of             0.01          0.17        -0.11        1.0
outside
members on
board

Board               -0.18         -0.01        0.11         0.03        1.0
receives state
gov’t funding

Board is             0.05          0.05        0.00         0.08       -0.27         1.0
taxed by state
gov’t


Source: See text. Calculations by authors.




                                             33
Table 7. Correlates of board characteristics

                      (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)                   (5)           (6)
                     Board     Board   Full time Share of                Board       Board is
                 independence members equivalent outside               receives      taxed by
                                per    staff per members              state gov’t   state gov’t
                               1,000     1,000   on board               funding
                              doctors   doctors

∆(Total             -0.028        -3.10        -2.94        0.01         0.02          0.01
disciplinary        (0.04)        (2.39)       (2.29)      (0.01)       (0.03)        (0.04)
actions per
1,000
doctors)

∆(Real per           0.47         -6.47         9.75      -0.73**       -0.30          1.38
capita              (1.44)       (35.78)       (33.28)     (0.34)       (1.51)        (1.82)
income)

∆(State gov’t       -0.90         17.26         13.10      -0.19        -0.07          3.16
spending            (0.59)       (17.24)       (19.19)     (0.24)       (0.64)        (0.95)
share of state
GDP)

∆(Managed           -0.001         2.07         0.06       -0.04         0.01         -0.13
care share)         (0.08)        (2.67)       (0.06)      (0.03)       (0.09)        (0.12)

∆(Democratic        -0.27          3.12        -4.57       -0.03        -0.13          0.42
vote share)         (0.18)        (5.87)       (6.62)      (0.06)       (0.23)        (0.29)

Democratic          -0.03         -2.74        -2.11        0.01        -0.03          0.09
governor            (0.05)        (1.90)       (1.61)      (0.01)       (0.04)        (0.05)
indicator

N                    239           236          229         239          239           239

Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. State-board and year fixed effects are
included. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. * denotes statistical significance
at the 10 percent level.




                                               34
Table 8. Descriptive statistics

Variable                                 Mean            N
                                  (standard deviation)
Total disciplinary actions                7.05           248
per 1,000 doctors                        (5.90)

Licenses removed per 1,000               2.85            248
doctors                                 (2.58)

Licenses restricted per                  2.24            248
1,000 doctors                           (2.63)

Other disciplinary actions               1.95            248
per 1,000 doctors                       (2.39)

Board independence                       0.70            258
(independent = 1)                       (0.46)

Board members per 1,000                   5.83           250
doctors                                 (14.53)

Full time equivalent staff                4.59           231
per 1,000 doctors                       (13.16)

Share of outside members                 0.22            258
on board                                (0.11)

Board receives funding                   0.22            260
from state gov’t                        (0.42)
(yes = 1, no = 0)

Board is taxed by state                  0.30            260
gov’t                                   (0.46)
(yes = 1, no = 0)

Managed care share                       0.46            260
                                        (0.31)

Board reporting                          7.48            252
requirements                            (3.99)
(index from 0 to 16)


Sources: See text.




                                            35
Table 9. Effects of medical board characteristics on total disciplinary actions per 1,000
physicians

                        (1)                 (2)               (3)                (4)
                    Pooled OLS         Year FE only      Board FE only     Year and Board
                                                                                 FE
Board                   1.86***            1.71**             2.00*            1.66*
independence             (0.71)            (0.71)             (1.06)           (0.90)

Board members           0.24*               0.24              1.10**             1.14***
per 1,000               (0.14)             (0.15)             (0.40)              (0.36)
doctors

FTE per 1,000           0.11**             0.11**              0.26              0.28*
doctors                 (0.05)             (0.05)             (0.18)             (0.16)

Share of                 0.48               3.01               5.45               4.96
outside                 (3.06)             (3.51)             (5.78)             (5.56)
members on
board

Board received          -0.13              -0.03              -0.48              -0.06
gov’t funding           (0.76)             (0.78)             (1.33)             (1.40)

Board is taxed           1.16               1.17              -1.98              -2.13
by state                (0.89)             (0.89)             (1.38)             (1.56)
government

Reporting               0.22*              0.21*               0.01              -0.04
requirements            (0.13)             (0.13)             (0.17)             (0.19)

Managed care             1.32               0.85               0.94              -1.16
share                   (1.43)             (1.64)             (1.51)             (1.77)

Year FE                   No                Yes                No                 Yes
Board FE                  No                No                 Yes                Yes
N                 229                229                229                229

Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses. Other state-level covariates include real personal income per capita, state
government spending as a share of state GDP, Democratic governor indicator variable, and
the Democratic vote share in the nearest presidential election. *, ** and *** denote statistical
significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                              36
Table 10. Effects of medical board characteristics on number of licenses removed per 1,000
physicians

                        (1)                 (2)               (3)                (4)
                    Pooled OLS         Year FE only      Board FE only     Year and Board
                                                                                 FE
Board                   0.60*              0.40               0.67              0.52
independence            (0.34)            (0.36)             (0.52)            (0.54)

Board members           0.12*              0.11              0.30**            0.33***
per 1,000               (0.07)            (0.07)             (0.12)             (0.12)
doctors

FTE per 1,000           0.05*             0.05*               0.04               0.05
doctors                 (0.03)            (0.03)             (0.06)             (0.06)

Share of                -0.43             -0.06               1.48               1.27
outside                 (1.34)            (1.38)             (2.53)             (2.26)
members on
board

Board received           0.11              0.25              -0.76              -0.51
gov’t funding           (0.42)            (0.43)             (0.68)             (0.72)

Board is taxed          -0.27             -0.31              -0.97              -1.05
by state                (0.37)            (0.37)             (0.69)             (0.78)
government

Reporting                0.08              0.07               0.03              -0.001
requirements            (0.05)            (0.05)             (0.07)             (0.76)

Managed care             0.53             -0.14               0.51              -0.66
share                   (0.64)            (0.68)             (0.69)             (0.77)

Year FE                  No                 Yes               No                 Yes
Board FE                 No                 No                Yes                Yes
N                        229                229               229                229

Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses. Other state-level covariates include real personal income per capita, state
government spending as a share of state GDP, Democratic governor indicator variable, and
the Democratic vote share in the nearest presidential election. *, ** and *** denote statistical
significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                              37
Table 11. Effects of medical board characteristics on the number of licenses restricted per
1,000 physicians

                        (1)                 (2)               (3)                (4)
                    Pooled OLS         Year FE only      Board FE only     Year and Board
                                                                                 FE
Board                 0.82***            0.95***             0.93**            0.81**
independence           (0.28)             (0.29)             (0.37)            (0.37)

Board members            0.10              0.10              0.37**             0.38**
per 1,000               (0.07)            (0.07)             (0.18)             (0.17)
doctors

FTE per 1,000            0.03              0.03               0.07               0.09
doctors                 (0.02)            (0.02)             (0.08)             (0.07)

Share of                -0.83             -1.09               1.08               0.96
outside                 (1.34)            (1.36)             (1.94)             (1.96)
members on
board

Board received          -0.26             -0.33              -0.38              -0.27
gov’t funding           (0.34)            (0.34)             (0.52)             (0.54)

Board is taxed           0.62              0.67              -0.84              -0.94
by state                (0.42)            (0.42)             (0.61)             (0.69)
government

Reporting                0.07              0.07               0.08               0.05
requirements            (0.06)            (0.06)             (0.07)             (0.07)

Managed care             0.79             1.17*               0.37              -0.29
share                   (0.61)            (0.07)             (0.65)             (0.74)

Year FE                  No                 Yes               No                 Yes
Board FE                 No                 No                Yes                Yes
N                        229                229               229                229

Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses. Other state-level covariates include real personal income per capita, state
government spending as a share of state GDP, Democratic governor indicator variable, and
the Democratic vote share in the nearest presidential election. *, ** and *** denote statistical
significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                              38
Table 12. Effects of medical board characteristics on other disciplinary actions per 1,000
physicians

                        (1)                 (2)               (3)                (4)
                    Pooled OLS         Year FE only      Board FE only     Year and Board
                                                                                 FE
Board                    0.43              0.34               0.40              0.32
independence            (0.32)            (0.32)             (0.46)            (0.46)

Board members            0.03              0.03              0.43**             0.43**
per 1,000               (0.03)            (0.03)             (0.21)             (0.22)
doctors

FTE per 1,000            0.03              0.03              0.14*              0.15*
doctors                 (0.02)            (0.02)             (0.08)             (0.08)

Share of                 1.72              1.87               2.89               2.74
outside                 (1.14)            (1.22)             (2.54)             (2.59)
members on
board

Board received           0.01              0.05               0.65               0.72
gov’t funding           (0.36)            (0.37)             (0.48)             (0.52)

Board is taxed         -0.81**            -0.81**            -0.20              -0.16
by state                (0.40)             (0.40)            (0.34)             (0.34)
government

Reporting                0.07              0.07              -0.09              -0.09
requirements            (0.05)            (0.05)             (0.07)             (0.07)

Managed care            -0.02             -0.21              -0.05              -0.24
share                   (0.68)            (0.91)             (0.52)             (0.79)

Year FE                  No                 Yes               No                 Yes
Board FE                 No                 No                Yes                Yes
N                        229                229               229                229


Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses. Other state-level covariates include real personal income per capita, state
government spending as a share of state GDP, Democratic governor indicator variable, and
the Democratic vote share in the nearest presidential election. *, ** and *** denote statistical
significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                              39
Table 13. Including board specific trend terms

                          (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)
                        Total            Licenses          Licenses             Other
                     disciplinary      removed per       restricted per      disciplinary
                     actions per       1,000 doctors     1,000 doctors       actions per
                    1,000 doctors                                           1,000 doctors

Board                  3.65**              1.41*             1.21*              1.02*
independence           (1.67)             (0.75)             (0.64)             (0.58)
Board members          1.64**             0.66**             0.56*               0.41
per 1,000              (0.82)             (0.33)             (0.32)             (0.37)
doctors
Full time                2.28              0.75               0.86               0.67
equivalent staff        (1.67)            (0.55)             (0.67)             (0.52)
per 1,000
doctors
Share of                 6.89              0.38               1.02               5.53
outside                 (9.21)            (4.19)             (2.80)             (4.40)
members on
board
Board receives          2.02*              1.01               0.29               0.70
state gov’t             (1.11)            (0.72)             (0.48)             (0.66)
funding
Board is taxed          -0.73             -0.12               0.02              -0.67*
by state                (1.12)            (0.53)             (0.44)             (0.37)
government
Reporting                0.31              0.19               0.15              -0.03
requirements            (0.31)            (0.12)             (0.13)             (0.12)
Managed care             0.45             -0.23              -0.05               0.27
share                   (1.83)            (0.79)             (0.75)             (0.93)
Year fixed               Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes
effects
Board fixed              Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes
effects
Board-specific           Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes
trend
N                        229                229               229                229

Notes: Each column represents a separate regression. Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses. Other state-level covariates include real personal income per capita, state
government spending as a share of state GDP, Democratic governor indicator variable, and
the Democratic vote share in the nearest presidential election. *, ** and *** denote statistical
significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                              40
