                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                PRICING AND LOCATION OF PHYSICIAN
                    SERVICES IN MENTAL HEALTH




                        Richard G. Frank




                     Working Paper No. 151)4




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC BESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                         December 198)4




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Health Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper #1514
                                        December 1984




               Pricing and Location of Physician
                  Services in Mental Health


                          ABSTRACT


          Puzzling results of a positive association between the

number of physicians per capita and the level of fees for physician

services have been reported in the literature. These results may be

due to misspecification of econometric models and use of data aggre-

gated across medical specialties. It is hypothesized that the

unusual results would not persist with a carefully specified econo-

metric model for a single medical specialty. A general model of

pricing and location of physician's services is applied to the market

for psychiatrist's services. The results imply that the market for

psychiatrist's services operates in a manner consistent with the

predictions of the competitive model.


                              Richard C. Frank
                              Assistant Professor of
                              Health Policy and Management
                              The Johns Hopkins University
                              624 North Broadway
                              Baltimore, Maryland 21205
                              (301) 955-6565
                                                                          1



                                  Introduction

      Economic theory begins with the assumption that buyers will demand less of

 a good, and sellers will supply more, as price increases. Given these behav-

 ioral assumptions, if there is an increase in the number of sellers in the

market, more will be supplied at any price, causing the market clearing price

to fall. This leads economic theory to predict that, in the market for physi-

cian services, ceterus paribus, price will vary inversely with the number of

physicians avaliable.

     Econometric studies of physician pricing and location decisions, however,

have repeatedly shown that a higher physician—to—population ratio is associated

with higher, rather than lower, fees. The results of such studies have led

economists to abandon traditional assumptions about the manner in which markets

for physicians' services function. It has in fact been posited that physicians

may be able to create their own demand or that they price in such a way as to

maintain a target level of income.   In the light of such information, many

policymakers have begun to rethink the wisdom" of increasing the number of

physicians as a policy for decreasing the cost of medical care. Several

government officials have even recommended that the number of places in medical

schools be limited in order to lower fees for physician services.

     In the research discussed in this paper, we examined the pricing and

location of private psychiatric services in a market model in which the supply

of providers was allowed to adjust slowly to changes in demand. One of the

primary advantages of selecting psychiatry is the relatively homogeneous nature

of mental health services. In addition, psychiatrists are one of the few

specialists subject to meaningful competition from non-medical providers.

          Methodological Issues in Studies of Physician Fee Setting

     The studies of Newhouse (1980) and Feldstein (1970) were the first serious

attempts to test models of physician fee determination empirically. In both it
                                                                           2


 was found that increasing the physician—to-population ratio would result in

 increased fee levels, ceterus paribus. These studies were critized on

 empirical and theoretical grounds, and their results led to one of the most

 heated controversies in health economics.
                                             However, subsequent investigations
 obtained similar findings (see Fuchs and Kramer 1972, Dyckman 1978 and Fuchs

 1978).

      Over the past ten years, analysis of the theoretical models proposed to

 reconcile the empirical findings of these studies with predictions of economic

 theory led to questions about the existing methods of modeling fee deterinina—

 tion in the physicians' services market. Most empirical studies of physician

 fees are based on market models in which short-run
                                                      equilibrium is presumed to
exist. The predictions of the neo-classical model are then tested according to

how well parameter estimates coincide with traditional assumptions. A number

of studies have attempted such tests. Three major points regarding estimation

of such models have emerged from the literature.

     First, data should be disaggregated by medical specialty.2 Data aggre-

gated across specialties may indicate a relationship between the average fee

level and the physician—to-populatjon ratio that is spurious. Differences in

average fees between locations when aggregated across specialties may not

result from differences in the model's explanatory variables but rather from

the specialty mix.3

     In addition, it is likely that there exist interrelationships between

medical specialties. While it is probable that a number of specialties compete

(i.e., for patients), it may be that some specialties act as complements to

others. This also may produce a spurious correlation between the average fee

and the physician—to—population ratio. For instance, increasing the number of

general practitioners may lead to lower fees for the services of general
                                                                             3


  practitioners but also to increased demand for the services of internists,

 which will exert upward pressure on their fees.

      Aggregation across specialties may lead to difficulties in the interpre-

 tation of empirical results also because input time of the physician varies

 between specialties. For example, a visit to the office of a general practi-

 tioner for a routine physical examination often involves rather extensive use

 of a nurse's time and relatively little
                                           use of physician time. A visit to the
 office of a psychiatrist for psychotherapy
                                              involves, almost exclusively
 psychiatrist time. Fee or quantity variables based
                                                      upon aggregate data will

 vary considerably, depending on the procedure mix in each locality.

      A second empirical issue which emerges from the literature is that the

physician_to_population ratio may be endogenous to the short-run fee-setting
model , and the treatment of the physician stock
                                                 as exogenous may lead to biased

and inconsistent parameter estimates,. Difficulties associated with fully

specifying the demand equation in the physician services market may lead to

specification error. Thus, the inclusion of a long-run location model within a

model of physician pricing may minimize the chance that biased parameter

estimates of the relationship will occur between the physician_to—population

ratio and the level of fees.

     Problems of misspecificatjon in constructing empirical tests in models of

physician fee setting have plagued earlier studies.   Reirihardt (1978) takes a
dim view of criticism of studies which have obtained results inconsistent with

traditional predictions of the competitive model due to misspecifjcatjon. He

suggests that any study is vulnerable to such accusations, and such criticism

can always be levied at an attempt to reject the competitive model's predic-

tions in the physician services market. While there is considerable truth in

Reinhardt's position, the concerns with misspecificatjon are not limited to
                                                                         4



 trivial omissions of obscure variables.4 To a large extent, specification

 problems may be the very basis for puzzling empirical results.

      These methodological pitfalls (aggregated data, treatment of physician

 stock as exogenous, and specification error) make it difficult to interpret the

empirical results on physician fee determination reported in the literature.

Differentiating between the competitive model and alternatives such as the

model of physician-induced demand is difficult on theoretical grounds.

Reinhardt (1978) and Sloan & Feldman (1978) point out that both physician—

induced-demand and competitive models can yield predictions that are consistent

with all empirical estimates of the relation between the physician-to-popula-

tion ratio and the fee level. They show, however, that a negative relationship

suggests that competitive forces are dominant. In neither case can one model

be unambiguously rejected. Even a limited test of the competitive model

requires that a carefully specified model of physician fees be applied to a

single medical specialty.

      A Model of Pricing and Location of Psychiatrists' Services

     No definitive test on the nature of market structures for the physician

services market has yet been developed. In addition, empirical results from

econometric models do not clearly support one formulation of market structure

over others. In this study of the market for psychiatrist's services, we began

by using the competitive model as the starting point. We assumed that the

individual psychiatrist is a price taker. From this assumption, we derived a

market supply function


      (1) QS = QS(PQ, PS,X)

where Qs is the quantity, of services supplied to the market
     Po is the psychiatrists own fee for a unit of service
     X is a vector of variables representing the psychiatrist's cost function
     PS is the psychiatrist-to-population ratio
                                                                           5



        The specific shape of the supply function given in equation (1) is an

 empirical question. Feldstein's (1970) finding that the supply curve had a

 negative price elasticity might mean that the supply curve for physician

 services with respect to fees is backward bending. We do not rule out this

 possibility.

        The demand function is assumed to be a traditional negatively inclined

 function with respect to fee. It is important to recognize explicitly the

 existence of other medical and nonmedical providers of psychotherapy and the

effect of their actions on the market for psychiatrists' services; for
                                                                          example,

McGuire (1980) points out that the effect of psychologists on the market for

psychiatrists' services may be of particular importance. Thus, we enter the

cross-price effects of other providers of psychotherapy into our demand

equation, allowing for a test of some of the less obvious relations among

providers where our theory does not make clear predictions.5 It has been

hypothesized, for example, that the cross-price elasticity of an increase in

psychologists' fees on the demand for psychiatrists' services will be positive,

i.e., that psychiatrists and psychologists are substitutes in demand. The

extent to which general practitioners and internists are substitutes for

psychiatrists in that they provide similar services or complements, in that

they provide referrals, is not clear.6

       Another important issue in the demand function specification is the manner

in which insurance coverage is treated. The literature typically assumes that

insurance simply shifts the demand curve in some fashion, and that a standard

short-run supply curve exists. Thus prices respond to the shift in demand in

such a way as to establish a new short-run equilibrium.   Representing insurance
in   terms of the total value of health insurance benefits paid or the number

individuals with some insurance coverage in a particular geographic area

describes only one dimension of the effect of insurance coverage. It is
                                                                          6



important to establish how much coverage exists and for which medical proce-

dures

        Coverage for mental disorders under major medical plans may be character-

ized as significantly less extensive than coverage for physical ailments.1

Thus, specification of the effect of insurance on the demand for psychiatric

services must be more complex than what can be measured by merely including a

single—demand shift variable. A number of state legislatures have responded to

the paucity of insurance coverage for mental disorders by requiring insurance

companies to offer mental health coverage as part of their basic benefit

packages (McGure and Montgomery 1982); the guidelines set up by the states

vary widely in the breadth of coverage they require insurers to offer. Since

this study focuses on the market for psychiatrists' services delivered in their

offices, a variable describing whether each state has mandated a minimum level

of outpatient mental health coverage of $500 will be included in our demand

function specification. In this manner we will be able to estimate the effect

of general, as well as specifically psychiatric, insurance on the demand for

psychiatrists' services. A significant limitation of this specification is

that the marginal price of services to the population is not measured directly.

Instead, we use aggregate measures of the amount of coverage existing within

the population. Newhouse, Phelps and Marquis (1980) discuss this problem in

considerable detail.8 With these specific issues in mind, then, the demand

function can be expressed as follows:



     (2) Qd = Qd (P0, m' nm' ''       I,   K)

where Qd     = The   market demand for psychiatrists' services

    P0        Fees for psychiatrists' services

           = Fees of medical providers


           = Fees for nonmedical providers
                                                                           7


      V      = Mean population income in the market

      I      =   Insurance variables
      K      =   Vector of demand shift variables

      The physician—induced demand model and the target income model raise

 serious challenges to the standard neoclassical model presented thus far.

 Because the ability to create demand is unobservable, as is the target income,

 most empirical tests of these models are indirect.9 The test used most often

 in the past has been the estimation of the coefficient corresponding to the

 psychiatrist-to-population ratio in the supply function. If the SUiy and

demand curves have their usual shapes, then a positive coefficient will be

consistent with the traditional model as well as with the inducement model; the

result will reject the prediction of the traditional model if the coefficient

is negative. In this study we test the competitive model by inclusion of the

psychiatrist—to-population ratio.

     A second test of competitive forces (used in this study) involves the

location decisions of psychiatrists. If the ability to create demand can

significantly insulate a psychiatrist from market forces, then one would expect

little responsiveness on the part of psychiatrists to distribute themselves

geographically, according to demand. If, on the other hand, psychiatrists do

respond to market forces, one might expect the opposite. The significance of

specifying a model of physician location as part of the price determination

model extends beyond statistical considerations: embedding a location model

offers a theoretically derived test of competing models of physician behavior'°

     Since psychiatrists' fees, quantity of services supplied, and the psy-

chiatrist stock may he jointly determined, a model of psychiatrist location in

this Study is integrated with a short-run market model of psychiatrist behav-

ior. The stock of psychiatrists may adjust slowly over time; this possibility

is explicitly recognized and specified as part of the econometric model.
                                                                            8


       Psychiatrists are assumed to be utility maximizers and to locate in areas

 that offer the greatest combination of personal and professional advantages.

 The individual psychiatrist maximizes a utility function which has income,

 workload, and the quality of life as arguments. If there is free entry into

 local markets, the long-run equilibrium would imply equal levels of utility

 across all locations, i.e., each location will offer an entering psychiatrist a

 combination of monetary and nonmonetary advantages that are equivalent.

      In long-run equilibrium, the stock of psychiatrists may then be expressed

 in the following fashion:


      (3) Psi =       f(P,   Z )

 where PS —      is the psychiatrist stock at the th location
      P —   is   the fee for 1 unit of psychiatrists' services
      Z -   is   a vector of locational characteristics

The stock of psychiatrists may not adjust immediately. Psychiatrists in

private practice sell their services directly to the public and must therefore

invest considerable resources in
                                     establishing goodwill. Therefore, finding new
patients and gaining their trust and confidence in a new market may involve

significant costs. In addition, there exist financial impediments to mobility

in the form of sizable investments in
                                          establishing an office; these costs must
be contrasted with the advantages offered at other locations. The decision

rule for the utility—maximizing psychiatrist is that he or she will move if the

utility offered by other locations is greater than the costs of moving, ceterus

paribus, and migration will occur until no net gains from migration can be

realized. Under these circumstances, the rate of adjustment of the psychia-

trist stock depends on the cost of moving relative to the benefits arising from

disequilibrium. The rate of adjustment to disequilibrium in the market can be

described by a lagged adjustment model as described by Griliches (1967):
                                                                                  9


      I)\
      (A     flC'
                    - tiC1
                      rJtl   —   (tie'1
                                 Xrj    - tie'
                                          rJtl
     where          X is the coefficient of adjustment
                      PSi is the equilibrium stock of psychiatrists
                      PSI is the actual stock of psychiatrists

Equation (4) describes the rate of adjustment in one time period of the actual

level of the psychiatrist stock to the desired or equilibrium level. By

substituting equation (3) into equation (4), the stock of psychiatrists can be

expressed in a form that can be incorporated into an econometric model. The

location equation will be of the form:

     (5) PS: =x(f(P, Z)) + (1          _X   p51
Estimation of will allow for the empirical identification of the rate of

adjustment of the psychiatrist stock to long-run disequilibrium. An estimate

of X close to zero indicates little responsiveness to market forces, which

would provide support for the inducement model, whereas an estimate sub-

stantially greater than zero would indicate responsiveness to market pressures

and would be consistent with the competitive model .            Thus far, a 3-equation

model of the psychiatrists' services market has been developed, based on the

assumptions of the competitive model (equations 1, 2, and 5).

                                 Specification and Estimation

     The general functional form of the 3-equation model is a hybrid of the

log—linear and linear. Monetary variables such as prices, incomes, and insur-

ance benefits are specified in the usual log linear form, while variables

describing the socio-demographic characteristics are entered in linear form.

In the present study, the structural model was estimated using pooled time

series and cross-section data. The data on 50 states for a number of years

were pooled to make up the data set. Combining time series and cross-section

data made estimation more difficult than with either time-series or cross-

section data individually. The least square dummy variables (LSDV) approach to

estimation was used (see Mundlak 1978) in this study because there is reason to
                                                                         10



believe that there may be non-zero correlations between the time-series and

cross-section effects and the independent variables. To retain degrees of

freedom, the model was estimated using cross-sectional dummy variables

representing geographic regions of the country rather than individual states.

An F test was used to compare estimates using regional dummies, to those

obtained from using state dummy variables. The model was estimated by three

stage least squares (3SLS).

                         Data and Variable Definitions

     The data used to estimate the model of the market for psychiatrists1

services are a cross section of time series of the 50 states of the United

States. Data from several sources were merged in order to assemble this data

set. Variables included in the study and the sources from which they were

collected are reported in Table 1. The data set, which consisted of a time

series of cross sections (states) for the years 1970 to 1978 was subdivided

into two smaller data sets because several critical variables were unavailable

for some years. Data on psychiatrists1 fees were available for the years 1970,

1971, 1973, 1977, and 1978. Allowing for the construction of two data sets.

One was based on five years of data which contained 250 cases; the other was

based on three years of data, which resulted in a data set of 150 cases. Mean

and standard deviations for selected variables are present in Table 2. A

detailed description of the data can be obtained from the author.

     Two versions of the structural model described above are estimted below.

Model I is estimated for three years of data across 50 states. The fee data for

each of these three years is based on observations from within each state,

aggregated to obtain a state-wide average fee.   Fee data for these years are

also available on visits to the office of general practitioners and internists.

Thus data allowed for estimation of explicitly cross-price elasticities between

medical providers.
                                                                        11



      Model II is based on five years of data across 50 states. Two years (1970

and 1971) of fee data are based on averages for the geographic region in which

the state is located. Fee data for other medical providers are not available.

Therefore, a variable representing the number of non—psychiatrist physicians

per capita (MDPOP) is entered into the demand equation in place of the fees for

internists and general practitioners.11

                            Demand Equation Estimates

      The estimates of Structural Models I and II are reported in Table 3•12

Since the endogenous variables FEE and PLVIS, as well as all monetary-indepen-

dent variables, are in log form, estimates of those parameters can be inter-

preted as elasticities.

      The estimated own price elasticities of demand (LFEE) are both negative

and significantly different from zero. The values of the estimated elastici-

ties for the two models differ substantially (according to a t-test).13 Model

I (—0.918), and Model II reported an estimate of (-2.199). These estimates are

significantly different from one another using a t test. A previous estimate

(McGuire 1981) of the price elasticity of demand for psychiatrists' services,

based on survey data using individuals as the unit of observation, obtained

estimates for the effects on the quantity demanded for changes in coinsurance.

McGuire's "conservative" estimate of the total effect on demand of a fall in

the marginal fee paid by the consumer was (—1.00), closer to our Model I

estimate. Our estimates may differ, due to the fact that the variables which

represent the influence of other providers are not equally measured in the two

model s.

     The cross-price elasticities of demand in Model I (LPIN and LGP) were

estimated to be (-0.665) and (0.485), respectively. The estimate for the

cross-price elasticity of demand for the price of internists' services (LPIN)

was significantly different from zero at the (0.10) level. The negative sign
                                                                        12


indicating   that internists are complements in demands means that as fees of

internists increase, ceterus paribus, the demand for psychiatrists' services

will decline. Such a finding suggests that internists may be a source of

referrals to psychiatrists. The magnitude of the coefficient (-0.665) implies

that a 1 percent increase in fees of internists will lead to a .6 of one

percent decrease in the demand for psychiatrists' services, considerably larger

than what was expected: most estimates of own price elasticities for primary

care physicians have been about 0.30. This may, in part, reflect the impre-

cision of the estimates. The sign of the coefficient, however, provides

evidence of complementarity.

       The coefficient representing the cross-price elasticity of demand for psy-

chiatrists' services with respect to general practitioners was estimated to be

(0.485). This cross-price elasticity was only significant at the (0.10)

level.   The positive coefficient would indicate that the two services are
substitutes; a 1 percent increase in the fees of general practitioners will
lead to a .485 of 1 percent increase in the quantity of psychiatrists' services
demanded. Given the rather large volume of psychiatric patients seen by

general practitioners (GP's), it is not surprising to find that a considerable

amount of substitution may occur between the services of GP's and psychi-

atrists.14 Again, the magnitude of the coefficient is larger than expected.

The size of standard error indicates a lack of precision in the estimate.

       The variable REMB takes on a value of 1 for states that have enacted

legislation requiring direct recognition of psychologists as independent health

care   providers by third party payors, and zero for states that have not. This
variable   represents the cross—price effect of psychologists' services on the

demand for psychiatrists' services. The estimated coefficient for REMB was

(-0.138) for Model I and (-0.168) for Model II. Both these estimates were

significant at the 0.10 level; once again, the rather low level of significance
                                                                           13


 means that the interpretations of the coefficients must be made with a good

 deal of caution. Both coefficients are negative, which can be interpreted as

 suggesting that psychologists' services are substitutes in demand for those of

 psychiatrists. The estimated coefficient for REMB indicates the difference in

 the number of visits made to psychiatrists between states that have
                                                                       differing
 policies vis a vis reimbursement of psychologists. Since the dependent

 variable in the demand equation is measured as the log visits to psychiatrists

 per capita, the estimated coefficients of -0.138 and -0.168 imply that states

that require direct recognition of psychologists as health care providers by

third party payors have between 14 and 16.8 percent fewer visits per capita to

psychiatrists, all things equal, than states that do not require direct

recognition. These estimates provide some evidence that psychiatrists' and

psychologists' services are important substitutes in demand.

     The estimated coefficient for LINS was 0.057 for Model I and 0.115 for

Model II; neither estimate was significantly different from zero. The estimated

coefficient of the variable 0U15 was estimated to be 0.222 for Model I and

0.119 for Model II; both were significant at the 0.10 level. These estimates

imply that in states where insurance plans must offer 500 dollars of outpatient

mental health benefits, demand for psychiatrists' services will be signifi-

cantly greater than in states without such mandates (McGuire and Montgomery

1982). Thus, it is likely that expansion of outpatient coverage for mental

disorders would expand the demand for psychiatrists' services substantially.

OUT5 and the own price elasticity of demand both measure aspects of the

responsiveness of consumers to the out-of-pocket price for mental health

service. OUT5 also measures the extent of outpatient insurance benefits for

the treatment of mental disorders, and LFEE the gross price of psychiatrists'

services. It was expected that the coefficient estimates for the two variables
                                                                           14


 would be consistent with each other; i.e., when fees for psychiatric services

 are lowered, consumers are very responsive in their consumption of more

 psychiatric services. This expectation was borne out by our results.

                             Supply Equation Results

      The own price elasticity of supply (LFEE) was estimated to be 0.127 in

 Model I and 0.233 in Model II. Model I's estimate was significant at the

 (0.10) level and Model Ii's estimates at the (0.05) level.   The supply

 function is rather inelastic in the short-run, which may be expected if psy-

chiatrists relocated slowly. The results are consistent with the fact that

psychiatry is time—intensive for the psychiatrist, and since the basic unit of

service is the 50-minute psychotherapy visit, the possibilities for expanding

output by input substitution are quite limited.

     Perhaps the most controversial findings in the literature have focused on

the reaction of the market to an increase in the stock of physicians (psychi-

atrists, in this case). The estimated coefficients for the variable LPSP in

the supply equations were 0.962 for Model I and 0.964 for Model II, and both

were significantly different from zero at the 0.05 level. This result means

that increasing the stock of psychiatrists in a state by one percent will

increase the quantity of services by about .96 of one percent15 and is con-

sistent with the predictions of the competitive model. That is, an increase in

the number of providers per capita should shift the supply curve to the right,

thereby increasing the quantity supplied at each fEe level. These estimates

are stable across the two models, and the standard errors are small. When the

coefficient LPSP is included in a partial reduced form equation with LFEE as

the left-hand side variable, the estimated coefficient is negative.   Moreover,
the simple correlation between LFEE and LPSP was 0.113, suggesting that our

approach to model specification removes the observed positive correlation
                                                                           15


 between physician fees arid the physician stock. These results indicate

 behavior in the market for psychiatrists' services that is in line with the

 competitive model.

                       Psychiatrist Stock Equation Results

      The stock equation, unlike the demand equation, has the same specification

 in both models. The use of proxy variables was not necessary for the larger

 data set. Therefore, the increased sample size made for statistically more

 robust estimates. Table 4 reports the long—run elasticities of selected

 variables from the location equation. 16

      Perhaps the most surprising result from the psychiatrist stock equation is

 the contradictory and statistically insignificant results associated with the

 fee variable indicating market conditions. Coefficients were estimated to be

 -0.625 for Model I and 0.163 for Model II.    In neither case were the estimates

significantly different from zero. As was mentioned earlier, the longer time

frame of Model II makes us slightly more confident of those results. The

estimates indicate that a 10 percent increase in fee would lead to either a 6.2

percent decrease in the psychiatrist stock or a 1.7 percent increase. The

negative sign on Model I's coefficient is rather implausible; thus, we are more

inclined to accept Model II's estimate. Both results do suggest that price as

measured by LFEE is not an important determinant of the current distribution of

the stock of psychiatrists across locations.

     The variable LYP, which represents the per capita level of income in each

state, was found to be significantly related to the stock of psychiatrists

across states. The estimated long-run elasticity for LYP was 1.18 for Model I

and 0.850 for Model II. Model tI's elasticity was derived from an estimate

that was significant at the 0.05 level; Model I's estimate was significant at

the 0.05 level. Thus an increase in per-capita income of 10 percent will

increase the stock of psychiatrists by between 8.5 and 10.1 percent. These
                                                                          16


 results are similar to those reported by Benham et al. (1968), who concluded

 that physicians tend to locate in high income areas because of the greater

 purchasing power in those markets. This finding to some extent contrasts with

 the LFEE results. The LFEE variables should summarize the supply and demand

 conditions of the market, and therefore differences in purchasing power should

 be reflected in market price. An alternative interpretation is that the income

 variable LYP represents some aspects of the quality of life in a state, e.g.,

 the type of people one will have as neighbors and the distractions that will be

 present for the high-income professional. This interpretation of the LYP

coefficient runs counter to the simple competitive model and says, in essence,

that psychiatrists will choose location on the basis of non—economic factors.

     The estimated coefficient on the psychiatrist-to-population ratio
                                                                          lagged
one period can be used to calculate the rate of adjustment in the psychiatrist

stock over time. The estimated coefficients were 0.792 for Model I and 0.598

for Model II. Both estimates were significantly different from zero at the

0.05 level. The adjustment coefficient can be expressed in terms of the

estimated coefficient in the following manner:

                     A =



Our estimate for A in Model I is 0.196 and for Model II, 0.402. This
                                                                     means

that from 20—40% of the gap between the long—run equilibrium level and the

actual level of the psychiatrist stock will he filled in any single year. The

stock of psychiatrists, therefore, appears to adjust rather slowly.

                                  Concl usions

     The most important conclusion of this study is that the market for

psychiatrists' services appears to respond to the forces of competition to an

extent greater than previously thought. Competitive pressures appear to effect
                                                                            17


 the demand and supply functions in ways that are consistent with the competi -

 tive   model. In particular, increasing the stock of psychiatrists shifts the

 supply function rightward along a downward sloping demand function, which leads

 to lower fees for the services of psychiatrists.   This finding takes on

 particular significance when it is viewed in the context of comments by federal

 policy makers who advocate decreasing the stock of physicians as a means of

 lowering fees.

            the structural model coefficient estimates of the physician-to-
        Since

 population ratio in supply and reduced-form equations do not serve to dif-
ferentiate unambiguously the competitive model from competing models, one must

rely upon indirect tests. The indirect test is based on the responsiveness of

the stock of psychiatrists' to market conditions (our X
                                                          coefficient).   Evidence
from the indirect tests performed in our analysis suggests that psychiatrists

do react to long—run spatial disequilibrium, albeit slowly. That is, in any

one year, psychiatrists move so as to fill approximately 20 to 40 percent of

the gap between the desired level of the long—run equilibrium stock of psychia-

trists and the actual stock. Thus, psychiatrists are not insulated from market

forces; instead, they may he utility maximizers facing significant moving

costs, which makes the adjustment occur slowly.

     The estimates of the effects of other medical specialities on the demand

for psychiatrists' services illustrates the importance of disaggregating data

regarding physician visits and fees by specialty. The existence of both

complementary and substitute relationships between psychiatrists, internists,

and general practitioners indicates that puzzling results reported by studies

of physician pricing using aggregate data may have, at least in part, been the

result of interrelationships among specialities.
                                                                         18


       We recognize that while there are significant differences between the

circumstances facing the specialty of psychiatry and other medical specialties,

there are important similarities that make our findings suggestive of ap-

proaches   by which to study and interpret of pricing and location of physician
services. We conclude that the controversial results reported in the litera-
ture are   likely to be the result of specification error and bias resulting from

aggregation of fee data across specialties. Our results provide evidence that

the   market for physician services may very well conform to the standards of the
rrmn1- i   uô mrAt1
               Li LA . I S
                                                                           19


                                   E ND N OTE S


 1. Assistant Professor of Health Policy and Management, The Johns Hopkins

    University, Th.e author appreciates valuable comments from

    Thomas McGuire, Barbara Good, Oidrych Kyn, Robert Wolf, W.P. Welch, John

    Chant, Mona Hersch and an anonymous referee and gratefully
                                                                 acknowledges
    financial support from the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association and

   the Foundation's Fund for Research in Psychiatry. This paper is adapted

   from the author's unpublished Ph.D. dissertation (1981).

2. Studies that have used aggregate data to study fee setting in the physician

   services market include: Feldstein (1970), Dyckman (1978), and Pauly and

   Satterthwajte (1980).

3. For example, perhaps two locations have exactly the same values for all

   explanatory variables except that the physician_to_population ratio is

   greater in location 1. Location 1 also has a mix of specialists in which

   radiologists are overrepresented relative to location 2. One might

   reasonably expect to find a positive relation between the physician—to-

   population ratioand the level of fees. This would occur, but not because

   physicians price to maintain a target income or because they possess the

   ability to induce demand for their own services. Radiologists offer more

   costly services than do other physicians and that would weigh the results.

4. Evans (1974), for instance, omits the entire demand side in his model of

  physician billing. Dyckman (1978) omits variables representing geographic

  regions of the United States and obtains "statistically significant" re—

  suits that are consistent with the model of physician-induced demand but

  which reject the neoclassical predictions. That is, he estimates the

  partial correlation between fees and the phys.icianto_population ratio to

  be positive in a reduced-form price equation.   However, when regional

  dummy variables are included in his estimated model, the statistical
                                                                        20


   significance of his results disappears and the estimated coefficient

   shrinks by 33 percent.

5. One indicator of the extent of competition in a market is the number of

  providers offering services that are substitutes for the Service in

  question. The market for psychiatric services is particularly interesting
                                                                      21


   in this respect. The number of visits to physician offices for psycho-

   therapy has been estimated for a number of medical specialties by the

   National Center for Health Statistics (1980). That office reports that

   general practitioners had over 6.2 million visits for psychotherapy in

   1977, while internists had 3.6 million. Psychiatrists in 1977 had 15.9

   million visits for psychotherapy. These figures give the impression that

   there are considerable numbers of similar services available from alter-

   nate providers who are physicians.

6. Medical specialists may be complements for each other. If one specialty,

   e.g., internists, often diagnoses conditions that require surgery and then

   refers patients for the appropriate treatment, internists and surgeons may

   be complements. In that case, an increase in the price of diagnostic

   visits to an internist would decrease the number of patients making visits

   to internists; the number of patients referred by internists to surgeons

   might also decline. This would satisfy the conditions necessary for the

   two specialists' services to be considered gross complements.

7. It was estimated by Reed (1975) that approximately 43 percent of the

   population had coverage for some type of physician office visits; 37

   percent of the population had some coverage for outpatient mental health

   care. More important than the raw total of how many people had coverage

   for each class of disorders is the nature of the coverage offered each

   group. Reed also eports that in only 47 of 148 insurance plans that he

   surveyed was there greater or equal coverage for mental disorders than for

   physical illness treated in an outpatient setting.

8. Relying upon the mandated mental health benefits dummy variable (OUT5) and

  the per—capita coverage by health insurance (LINS) makes obtaining precise

   estimates of the effect of insurance difficult. Mewhouse, Phelps, and

  Marquis (1980) discuss the use of a dummy variable to indicate whether or
                                                                                22


      not an individual has insurance coverage. They point out the possibility

      of    specification errors arising from this approach. In this    study our

      market    area is   the state; this forces us to aggregate across individuals

      with   different coverage. We will be able to estimate effects of policy
      changes such as adoption of a mandate which in the      case of mental health

      insurance is likely to dominate other forms of      coverage in most states.
      For changes that effect the level of insurance benefits in a state, we

      must implicitly assume that the individual consumer responses are

      uni   forrn
 9.   For    example, the empirical studies of Dyckrnan (1978) and Fuchs (1978)
      estimate      the coefficient representing the relationship between the

      physician-to-population ratio and the fee level. Reinhardt has pointed

      out that any empirical result on this relationship is consistent with the

      inducement model, while only a negative parameter estimate is consistent

      with the traditional model, This makes rejection of the target income

      model and the inducement model difficult. However, it is possible to test

      the importance of the ability to induce demand in insulating the

      psychiatrist from market forces.

10. Indirect tests are necessary because, as Sloan and Feldman (1978) point

      out, a positive relationship between quantity demanded and the physician—

      to-population ratio is consistent with a number of theoretical formula-

      tions. Increased physician density may lower time prices (e.g., travel

      and waiting time); this can result in a positive relation between demand

      and density. Thus, the common practice of including physician density in

      the demand equation is ad hoc and leads to ambiguous results.

11. Eight regional dummy variable are included to control for unmeasured

      cross—section effects in the disturbance term. Regions are used instead

      of states, largely in order to gain degree of freedom for our estimates.
                                                                               23


      However, we tested the homogeneity of the slope coefficients between the

      two dummy variable specification (states and regions) and found that no

      significant     difference existed. Table 2 presents variable mean and
      standard deviations. Using the F test for differential sloped vectors
      (Johnston 1972, P. 199), we obtained a coefficient of F78,108 = 1.04.
      Therefore,     we conclude that our estimates will not be altered by the use

      of the regional dummies.

12. Several reduced form price equations were estimated and obtained negative

      partial correlations between the psychiatrist-to-population ratio and fee.

      These   are   available from the author.

12.   t = (.05).       t=      —



                                                  1       2
                        andS                /2        +
                                   —2                     62
                                         _V/S6l




13. NAMCS reports the 4.4 million psychiatric visits were seen by the GP's.

14. Using a standard t test and testing for a difference between 0.96 and

      1.00, we could not reject the null hypothesis that 8LPSP = 1, which is

      what strict competitive theorists would predict.

15. This result of BLPSP = 1 is not entirely surprising, given the manner Th

      which the LPVIS variable is measured. The two equation partial reduced

      form (LPSP endogenous) is available from the author.

16. Since our estimating equation is PS x(f (P,z)) + (1—x)
                                                                   PS1
      the variable P in those in the vector Z must be adjusted by      X   in order

      to   obtain the long run elasticities.
                                                                        24




                                      Table 1

                             Variable Definitions

Variable                 Definition                       Source

POP        Population of state (000's)              Statistic Abstract (SAB)

CPI        Consumer price index by                  Bureau of Labor
           geographic region                        Statistics (BLS)

PSPOP      Number psychiatrists in                  American Medical
           patient care per 1000 popula-            Association (AMA)
           tion

LPSP       In (PSPOP)

OPSY       Number office based psychi-                    AMA
           atrists in each state

HRWK       Average number hours spent in            AMA/American Psycia-
           private practice by psychiatrists        tric Association (APA)

PVISIT     Visits per capita = HRWK x OPSY)K)/            AMA
           POP, where K = Aggregate visits/hours
           ratio

PLVIS      In (PVISIT)

PAGE       Psychiatrist mean age in years                 APA

AGSQ       Psychiatrist mean age squared

OUT5       1 if the State has mandated Out—         GLS Associates
           patient insurance benefits for
           treatment of mental disorders of
           at least $500, 0 other,ise

PBED       Number psychiatric beds per              American Hospital
           capita                                   Association (AHA)


MDPOP      Number non-psychiatrist                        AMA
           physicians per 1000 population

LINS       In (real health insurance ben—           Health Insurance
           efits paid per capita) health            Association of
           insurance benefits are measured          America (HIAA)
                                                                 25


        by the total value of payments
        for services covered by health
        insurance policies in each state

RYP     In (real per capita income of the       SAB
        population of a state)

PCWHT   Percent of population that is
        white (white pop/POP)

PCAG    Percent of population over 18           SAB
        years of age

PCHS    Percent of population having            SAB
        finished high school x 10

PCGOV   Portion of workforce employed           SAB
        by government.     Government
        employees/total    employed

PCMAN   Portion of workforce employed           SAB
        by manufacturing. Manufacturing
        empl oyees/total employed

PSKXP   In (real public school expendi—         SAB
        tures per capita)

REMB    1 if states have enacted a "Freedom     GLS Associates
        of choice" law, 0 otherwise

HBEDS   Number general hospital beds            AHA
        per    1000 population
PCMT    Percent of a state's population         SAB
        living in an SMSA x 10

UNEM    Percent of labor force unemployed BLS
        x 10

PCPL    Applicants passing medical license      AMA
        examination/total applicants

NP'SP   Number of medical schools               AMA
        per 1000 population

LFEE    In (real average fee for 50             HCFA/AMA
        minutes of psychotherapy by
        a psychiatrist)

In      Denotes natural logarithm
                                                              26




                                  Table 2

                       Means and Standard Deviations

                          for Selected Variables

Variable      Mean              Variable             Mean

              (S.D.)              PCWT                86

RFEE          4.405               PCAG                68

              (9.06)                                 (20)

PSPOP          0.07               PCHS               66.8

              (0.06)                                (8.94)

PAGE          46.70              PCGOV              20.39

              (5.01)                                (5.91)

HRWK          47.33

              (2.63)             PCMAN               21.51

POP           4,025                                 (9.50)

             (4,185)             HBEDS              26,457

PBEDS       4,967.53                               (27,797)

           (6,841.72)            PCMT               57.01

RGP           .979                                  (27.46)

             (1.74)              UNENI               5.71

RPIN         1.251                                   (1.74)

             (2.61)                                    300

INSUR       168.50                                   (100)

             (59.50)             PCVIS              0.00373

RYP          7,000                                 (0.0056)

            (1,000)
                                                                               Table 3
                                                              Structural   Model Estimation   Resultsa,b,c,d,e

Equation

Supply               LFEE        LPSP       PAGE       AGSQ          CPI         PBEDS         HBEDS      LINS     RSKXP     PCMAN     PCGOV

Model    I           O.l27       0962       o.ooi4    -0.15e5      _o.oo24
                    (0.102)     (0.024)    (0.00i1    (0.1e5       (0.0017)
Model II             O.233f      0.966g     0.OO23t    0.5e6       O.OOO2O
                    (0.117)     (0.028)    (0.0013)   (0.3e6)      (0.0014)
Demand

Model    I          O.9l8                                                                     0.074      0.057    -0.038    0.149      4.259
                    (0.541)                                                                   (0.064)   (0.298)   (0.078)   (0.741)   (1.741
Model II            —2.1999                                                                   0.012      0.115    —0.023     0.055    4.982
                    (0.920)                                                                   (0.066)   (0.361)   (0.081)   (0.088)   (2.230)
Stock

Model    I          -0.124                                                                                        —0.013
                    (0.129)                                                                                       (0.019)             (0.382)
Model II            0.067                                                                                         -0.023               1.8559
                    (0.047)                                                                                       (0.031)             (0.797)



Notes:       a.   Dependent variable   LPVIS
             b.   Time and region dummies are not reported but included in estimation.
             c.   Dependent variable = LPVIS
             d.   Dependent variable = LPSP
             e.   SE# in parentheses
             f.   Significant at 0.10 level (1—Tailed Test)
             q.   Significant at 0.05 level
                                                                    Table 3 (continued)
Equation

              PCAG      PCHS        PCWfIT   LYP       OUTS      REMB            UNEM      POP       LOP      LPIN       MDPOP
Supply
Model I

Model II

Demand

Model    i    s.366     00015g     0.69J     0.606     0.222     _o.i38          0.0008    0.24e4    o.485
              (3.073)   (0.003)    (0.584)   (0.587)                             0.0036    (0.18e4) (0.414)   (0.516)
                         0.00109   —0.5939    0.691    (0.163
                                                        0.119    (0.107
                                                                  0.168          0.0003     0.3e                        0.0003
Model    II    3.072
              (3.622)   (0.0004)   (0.256)   (0.584)   (0.086)   (0.120)        (0.0055)   (O.7e4)                      (0.0009)
Stock

Model    I                         o.isof    o.236
                                   (0.0851   (0.140)
Model II                           _O.1261   0.3409
                                   (0.1i9)   (0,175)




                                                                                                                                   I\)
                                                              29




                    Table 3 (continued)


Equation        PCPL       PCMT           NMSP      LPSPI
Supply

Model      I


Model II

Demand

Model      I

RA,-J.-1
IIuue I    IT
           II
Stock

Model      I    -0.053      0.l4e3         1.640     0•792g
                (0.064)    (0.9-4)        (1.539)   (0.031)
Model II         0.055      O.69           4•602g    0•598g
                (0.082)    (O.i)          (1.988)   (0.036)
                                                           30



                          Table 4

          Location Equation Long Run Coefficients


Variable                   Model I           Model II

                           (x =     .20)       =
                                                    .40)
LFEE                       — .0625             0.168

LYP                        1.18                0.85

PCPL                      —0.265               0.137

PCMT                       0.0007              0.0015

PC GO V                    3.435               4.637

NMS P                      8.2                11. 505

RS K XP                   -0.065              -0.057
                                                                             31




                                         REFERENCES




Benham, L., Maurizi, A. and Reder, M.W., "Location and Migration Medics:

     Physicians and f)entists,H Review of Economics and Statistics, August

     1968, 50, 332—347.

Dyckman, Zachary Y., A Study of Physicians' Fees,     Staff   report prepared by the

     Council of Wage and Price Stability, Executive Office of the President,

     vfaIIIrI9LurI, I' - I.._L
                 N u...;       1(17(
                           ldFLIi iIo.
Evans, Robert G., Price Formation in the Market for Physicians' Services      in

     Canada, 1957—1969. Study prepared for the Prices and Incomes Commission,

     Canada, 1972. Information Canada, Ottawa, Canada 1973.

Evans, Robert G., "Supplier-Induced Demand: Some Empirical Evidence and

     Implications," in The Economics of Health and Medical Care, ed., M.

     Penman, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1974, 164-173.

Feldstein, Martin S., "The Rising Price of Physicians' Services," The Review of

     Economics and Statistics, May 1970, U, 121-133.

Frank, R.G. Pricing and Location of Physician Services in Mental Health,

     unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Boston University, 1981.

Fuchs, V.R., "The Supply of Surgeons and the Demand for Operations," Journal

     of Human_Resources, 1978 Supplement, 13, 35-55.

Fuchs, Victor R. and Kramer, Marcia J., Determinants of Expenditures for

     Physicians' Services in the United States, National Center for Health

     Services Research and Development. Washington, D.C., 1972.

Griliches, Z., "Disturbed Lags: A Survey," Econometrica January 1967, 35,

     p. 16—49.
                                                                        32



Johnston, J., Econometric Methods, McGraw Hill, Inc., New York, 1972.

Leibenstein, H., "Bandwagon, Snob and Veblen Effects in the Theory of Consumer

     Demand," Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1950, 64 (2), 183—207.

McGuire, T.G. and Montgomery, J.T., "Mandated Mental Health Benefits in Private

     Health Insurance Policies: A Legal and Economic Analysis, Journal of

     Health Politics Policy and Law, 1982, 7 (2), 380-406.

McGuire, Thomas G., "Markets for Psychotherapy," in Psychotherapy: Practice,

     Research, Policy, ed., G. Vandenbos, Sage Publishing, Beverly Hills,

     t.r, iflOri
     ('A
          iuu.
McGuire, Thomas G., Financing Psychotherapy: Costs Effects and Public

     Policy, Ballinger; Cambridge, 1981.



Mundlak, Y., "On the Pooling of Time Series and Cross Section Data," Eco—

     nometrica, January 1978, 46, 69—85.

Musgrave, G.L., "A Market Model of the Distribution of Dentists," in The Target

     Income_Hypothesis, OHEW, HRA 80—27, 1980, 60-82.

National Center for Health Statistics, "The National Ambulatory Medical Care

     Survey: 1977 Summary," Vital and Health Statistics. Series 13 No. 44,

    April 1980.

Newhouse, J.P. "A Model of Physician Pricing," Southern Economic Journal

     (October 1970) 174-183.

Newhouse, J.P. and Phelps, C.E., "New Estimates of Price and Income Elastici-

    ties of Medical Care Services," in The Role of Health Insurance in the

    Health Services Sector, ed., R.N. Rosett, National Bureau of Economic

    Research, New York, 1976. 261-313.

Newhouse, J.P., Phelps, C.E. and Marquis, M.S., "On Having Your Cake and Eating

     It Too: Econometric Problems in Estimating the Demand for Health Services,"

    Journal of Econometrics, 1980, 13, 365-390.
                                                                              33


Pauly, M.V. and Satterthwaite, M.A. "The Effects of Provider Supply on Price,"

     in The Target Income Hypothesis, DHEW, HRA 80-27, 1980, 26-35.

Reed, L.S., Meyer, E.S. and Scheidemandel, P.D., Health Insurance and

     atric Care: Utilitation and Cost, American Psychiatric Association,

     Washington, 1972.

Reed, L.S., Coverage and Utilization of Care for Mental Conditions tinder Health

     Insurance —   Various Studies 1973—1974, American Psychiatric Association,

     Washington, 1975.

Reinhardt, U.E., "Comment on Monopolistic Elements in the Market for Physician

     Services," in Competition in the Health Care Sector, ed., W. Greenberg,

     Aspen Publications, Germantown, 1978, 121-148.

Sloan, F.A., "Physician Fee Inflation: Evidence from the late 1960's," in The

     Role   of Health Insurance   in the Health Services Sector, ed., R. N.

     Rossett, National Bureau of Economic Research, New York City, 1976,

     321-354.

Sloan, F.A. and Feldman, R., "Competition Among Physicians" in Competition in

     the Health Care Sector, ed., W. Greenberg, Aspen Publications, German-

     town, 1978, 45—102.

Steinwald, Bruce and Sloan, Frank A., "Determinants of Physicians' Fee,"

     Journal of Business, October 1974,    —,   493—511.

Trevelyan, J. and Eastwood, M.R., "The Relationship Between Physical and

     Psychiatric Disorder," Psychological Medicine, 1972, 2, 363—372.

U.S. Supreme Court, Blue Shield of Virginia vs. Virginia Academy of Clinical

     Psychologists, No. 80-930.

U.S. Court of Appeals 4th District, Virginia Academy of Clinical Psychologists

     vs. Blue Shield of Virginia, No. 29—1345.
