                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE ROLE OF ADVISORY SERVICES IN PROXY VOTING

                                         Cindy R. Alexander
                                           Mark A. Chen
                                           Duane J. Seppi
                                          Chester S. Spatt

                                        Working Paper 15143
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15143


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                        Cambridge, MA 02138
The authors thank, without implicating, MarthaJuly  2009
                                                 Carter, Martijn Cremers, Joel Hasbrouck, Greg Matvos,
Elizabeth Murphy, Nicholas Panos, Jay Ritter, Ed Rock, Roberta Romano, and seminar participants
at American University, Cornell, Georgia State, Penn State, Singapore Management University, University
of Arizona, University of Calgary, University of Florida, University of Michigan, University of South
Florida, University of Southern California, University of Texas at Austin, University of Texas at Dallas,
University of Washington, Vanderbilt University, Virginia Tech, Yale Law School, Yale School of
Management, Institutional Shareholder Services, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the 2007
EFA annual meetings in Ljubljana, Slovenia, the 2007 All-Georgia Conference, the 2007 CELS Conference
at NYU, the 2008 American Finance Association annual meetings in New Orleans, the 2008 ALEA
annual meetings at Columbia University, and the 2009 EFM/Cambridge University Symposium on
Corporate Governance and Control for helpful comments. We also thank RiskMetrics for assistance
with data on ISS recommendations. Some of this research was undertaken while the authors were
affiliated the Office of Economic Analysis, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. The Securities
and Exchange Commission, as a matter of policy, disclaims responsibility for any private publication
or statement by any of its employees. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the Commission, the Commissioners, members of the staff, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Cindy R. Alexander, Mark A. Chen, Duane J. Seppi, and Chester S. Spatt. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Role of Advisory Services in Proxy Voting
Cindy R. Alexander, Mark A. Chen, Duane J. Seppi, and Chester S. Spatt
NBER Working Paper No. 15143
July 2009
JEL No. G20,G24,G30,G34

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper studies the information content and consequences of third-party voting advice issued during
proxy contests. We document significant abnormal stock returns around proxy vote recommendations
and develop an estimation procedure for disentangling stock price effects due to changes in outcome
probabilities from those due to changes in outcome-contingent valuations. We find that voting advice
is a good predictor of contest outcomes and that vote recommendations appear to certify the extent
to which dissidents can add value. Thus, proxy advice seems to play a dual informational role in financial
markets.


Cindy R. Alexander                                  Duane J. Seppi
Securities and Exchange Commission                  Carnegie Mellon University
alexanderc@sec.gov                                  Tepper School of Business
                                                    5000 Forbes Avenue
Mark A. Chen                                        Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890
Georgia State University                            ds64@andrew.cmu.edu
Robinson College of Business
Dept. of Finance, 35 Broad Street                   Chester S. Spatt
Atlanta, GA 30303                                   Tepper School of Business
machen@gsu.edu                                      Carnegie Mellon University
                                                    5000 Forbes Avenue
                                                    Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890
                                                    and NBER
                                                    cspatt@andrew.cmu.edu
                         THE ROLE OF ADVISORY SERVICES IN PROXY VOTING


1. INTRODUCTION


    Proxy voting is a major corporate activity. During the 2005 U.S. proxy season, over 299
billion shares were voted to elect 35,283 individual directors, ratify 3,300 auditors, adopt 2,293
compensation plans, and approve 340 M&A transactions and a large number of internal
governance proposals.2 Most proxy votes are cast by mutual funds and other institutional
investors, which collectively hold over two-thirds of the voting shares in the United States.
Given the prominent role played by institutional investors in proxy voting, the overall
effectiveness of the proxy mechanism clearly depends on whether it provides institutions the
right incentives to vote in an informed, objective manner.3
    A striking development in recent years has been the rapid growth in institutional investors’
use of voting services provided by proxy advisors. These third-party advisors supply clients with
background research, explicit voting recommendations, and other services on a range of
corporate voting issues. The perceived importance of proxy advice is illustrated by the $19
billion merger between Hewlett-Packard Co. (HP) and Compaq Computer Corp. in 2002. After
an acrimonious, extended proxy fight waged by board member Walter Hewlett in opposition to
the merger, shareholders of HP narrowly approved the merger by 51.4% to 48.6%. Observers
largely credited the favorable recommendation of Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS), a
leading proxy advisory service, with turning the tide in favor of the controversial merger
proposal. As one analyst said of the ISS decision, “If it had gone the other way, the deal would
have been dead. Now, it’s a horse race.”4
    Despite anecdotal evidence that third-party advisors wield considerable influence in specific
cases, there is little formal research on proxy advice. This is particularly true for non-routine,


2
  2005 Proxy Season: Key Statistics & Performance Ratings, ADP Investor Communication Services.
3
  Prior research has identified a number of potential factors that can prevent institutions from voting for shareholder
value maximization. For example, when corporate ownership is widely dispersed, the private cost to a shareholder
of informed voting is likely to be large relative to the private benefit. Also, investors who are dissatisfied with a
firm’s management may sell their shares—i.e., follow the “Wall Street Rule”—rather than holding and voting them
(Parrino, Sias, and Starks (2003)). Finally, mutual funds that manage the pension plans of corporate clients in which
they invest may face potential conflicts of interest in voting their shares (Davis and Kim (2007)).
4
  BusinessWeek, March 18, 2002, p. 62.


                                                          2
contested elections, where the information that vote recommendations bring to the market and
the influence that they have on voting outcomes are potentially greatest.5 Understanding the role
of vote recommendations in contested votes is relevant to the broader issue of whether proxy
advice represents an efficient market solution to agency and coordination problems in voting or
whether, instead, it is a source of additional agency costs and inefficiencies to be borne by
investors.6
    In this paper, we examine empirically the economic role of third-party proxy advice in
contested proxy voting. Our investigation uses vote recommendations issued by the leading
advisory firm, Institutional Shareholder Services, during 1992-2005. We focus specifically on
contested director elections7 – episodes in which a dissident actively and formally solicits votes
for a slate of directors in opposition to incumbent management – because these are situations in
which the informational content of proxy advice is likely to be substantial. Indeed, while most
corporate proxy votes are routine with little or no direct effect on company management and
little uncertainty about the outcome, proxy contests for board seats usually involve issues of
material importance where voting outcomes are far from certain.
    We find that the direction of vote recommendations does appear to bring new information to
the market.      Specifically, recommendations that endorse dissidents are accompanied by an
average nine-day cumulative abnormal return of 3.76 percent, while pro-management
recommendations lead to an insignificant average nine-day cumulative abnormal return of −0.56
percent. The differential between the two returns is statistically significant, indicating that news



5
  A handful of papers examine the effects of recommendations in non-contested voting situations, i.e., voting
episodes in which a dissident does not actively solicit votes in opposition to management. For example, Morgan and
Poulsen (2001) and Bethel and Gillan (2002) document that ISS vote recommendations are associated with voting
percentages in favor of non-contested proposals. Likewise, Maug and Rydqvist (2009) find that, for non-contested
management-sponsored proposals, ISS recommendations are significantly related to the probability of passage. Cai,
Garner, and Walkling (2009) report that directors in uncontested elections who receive negative ISS
recommendations receive significantly fewer votes. Choi, Fisch, and Kahan (2009) examine the economic
determinants of ISS proxy advice in non-contested elections and find that firm performance and corporate
governance factors affect the likelihood of an ISS “withhold” recommendation.
6
  Berman and Lublin (2006) highlight the substantial value associated with proxy advice in the context of the recent
acquisition of ISS. In September 2006, ISS placed itself on the market with an asking price of $500 million. The
move elicited 19 bids and resulted in an eventual sale of ISS to RiskMetrics for approximately $550 million.
7
  Although the term “proxy contest” is not formally defined in the federal securities laws, regulations under those
laws define a “solicitation in opposition” of the incumbent management and require special disclosures by the
dissident and the incumbent whenever such a solicitation occurs. For our purposes, a “proxy contest” is taken to be
an instance in which a dissident distributes its own proxy statement to investors to solicit votes rather than simply
campaigning in favor of a shareholder proposal that has been added to the company’s proxy materials.


                                                         3
of proxy advice generally has a more favorable effect on stock prices when the advice favors the
dissident rather than the incumbent.
   To better understand the informational role of proxy advice, we formulate and test two basic
hypotheses. The first, which we call the prediction hypothesis, posits that recommendations
impact stock prices by causing revisions in probability beliefs about who will win a proxy
contest. Such belief revisions could arise either because vote recommendations have a direct
causal influence on voting (e.g., by providing voters with persuasive evidence or by serving as a
default decision or coordination device), or because recommendations are non-causal leading
indicators of eventual contest outcomes. Our second hypothesis, which we call the certification
hypothesis, holds that vote recommendations are informative about the value that a dissident or
incumbent team would bring to a firm if victorious. Under this view, recommendations help
investors to learn about conditional expected valuations associated with different contest
outcomes. Note that prediction and certification are not mutually exclusive. Indeed, if proxy
advice does convey information about contingent firm valuations, we would also expect it to
influence voting behavior and probability beliefs to some degree. The two hypotheses do,
however, highlight distinct channels by which proxy advice can bring information to market
participants.
   We test the prediction hypothesis by directly examining the association between proxy
advice and contest outcomes. We find strong evidence that vote recommendations have
predictive power. Specifically, a multivariate probit analysis of contest outcomes reveals that the
direction of a vote recommendation is useful in forecasting the winner of a contest. This finding
is robust to controlling for a variety of other observable factors that could plausibly explain
contest outcomes, such as contest characteristics, voting rules, and ownership levels of
incumbents and dissidents.
   We also develop a novel estimation approach for testing the certification hypothesis. In
general, testing for certification is not as straightforward as testing for prediction because the
market’s ex ante valuation assessments for dissident and management victories are not directly
observable. Instead, the conditional valuations are implicit in the stock price, which reflects a
combination of the valuations along with their associated outcome probabilities. Our estimation
approach uses estimated outcome probabilities and observed stock returns to distinguish between
the price effects of changes in outcome-contingent valuation assessments and the price effects of



                                                4
changes in outcome probability beliefs. Using this approach, we obtain parameter estimates in a
simple structural model that allows for two different types of certification: Changes in the stock
price due to reassessments of dissident value and/or reassessments of management value. The
parameter estimates support a dissident-based certification effect. On average, a pro-dissident
vote recommendation seems to convey nontrivial information to market participants about how
much value a dissident team would bring to the firm if elected. However, there is little evidence
that recommendations certify incumbent management, suggesting perhaps that incumbents are
more of a known quantity because they already have a track record with the firm.
    While our certification analysis focuses specifically on proxy advice, the underlying
statistical inference problem is considerably more general. The arrival of proxy advice in a
proxy contest is an example of what can be called interim news; that is, news about an
intermediate stage of a larger multi-stage game or process.8 Given the public arrival of interim
news, it is often of interest to distinguish the price effects due to revisions in probabilities from
price effects due to revisions in outcome-contingent valuations. In this regard, our empirical
methodology is of independent interest and has potential applicability to other types of interim
news and corporate events beyond the specific setting of contested proxy voting.
    Our work relates to a number of strands of the prior literature. First, several papers study the
shareholder value implications of proxy contests (see, e.g., DeAngelo and DeAngelo (1989),
Dodd and Warner (1983), Pound (1989), Ikenberry and Lakonishok (1993), and Mulherin and
Poulsen (1998)). The focus in these studies is largely on shareholder returns either around the
time of contest initiation, over the entire contest period, or during the post-contest period. In
contrast, our analysis focuses on the interim impact of proxy voting advice. Second, the prior
literature has identified various economic determinants of proxy voting outcomes in contested or
non-contested situations (see, e.g., Brickley, Lease, and Smith (1988), Pound (1988), Gordon and
Pound (1993), Morgan and Poulsen (2001), Bethel and Gillan (2002), Cremers and Romano
(2007), Cai, Garner and Walkling (2009), Gillan and Starks (2000), Maug and Rydqvist (2009),
and Matvos and Ostrovsky (2008)). Our findings indicate that third-party voting advice is a
significant predictor of contest outcomes in addition to other previously-studied factors. Third,
Bhagat and Jefferis (1991) and Betton and Eckbo (2000) also use estimated outcome


8
  Other examples of interim news include news of takeover defenses adopted in response to tender offers or
announcements of strategic initiatives following management shake-ups.


                                                    5
probabilities to identify valuation effects (in proxy voting and takeover bidding, respectively).
Our empirical approach differs from theirs, however, in a number of respects. We study multiple
related events (i.e., dissident versus incumbent recommendations) rather than a single event (e.g.,
launching of a takeover bid). Furthermore, since proxy advice is interim news that arrives in
medias res during proxy contests, we must control both for concurrent changes in outcome
probabilities and for pre-recommendation cross-sectional heterogeneity in valuation assessments
when testing for certification. We use generalized method of moments (GMM) estimation to
account for econometric issues that arise from the use of estimated outcome probabilities in place
of the market’s actual probability beliefs.
   Our findings on the informational role of vote recommendations have implications for the
effectiveness of proxy advice and the efficiency of proxy voting. A well-established literature
argues that agency and free-rider problems inherent in corporate voting can lead to inefficient
voting outcomes (e.g., Manne (1964), Easterbrook and Fischel (1983), Grossman and Hart
(1980, 1988) and Harris and Raviv (1988)). At the same time, recent empirical work shows how
market institutions, such as the equity loan market, can mitigate voting inefficiencies by reducing
informational frictions (Christoffersen et al. (2007)). Our findings suggest that proxy advice is
another market development that facilitates informed proxy voting, perhaps leading to voting
outcomes more in line with shareholder value maximization.           The results also provide a
perspective on recent concerns voiced in the popular press (see, e.g., Krasne (2004) and
Starkman (2006)) that proxy advisors’ affiliated business lines could give rise to a pro-
management bias and a loss of objectivity in vote recommendations. Our evidence on the price
impact and certification effects of vote recommendations does not support the view that conflicts
of interest critically undermine the informativeness of third-party proxy advice for market
participants.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows.         Section 2 provides some institutional
background on the historical development and role of proxy advice. To clarify the intuition
behind our empirical hypotheses and tests, Section 3 presents a simple economic model of stock
price formation around the arrival of a vote recommendation.            Section 4 describes the
construction of our dataset of proxy contests and vote recommendations. Section 5 presents our
results on the stock price reaction to recommendations. In Section 6, we test the prediction and
certification hypotheses. Section 7 concludes.



                                                 6
2. INSTITUTIONAL BACKGROUND: ADVISORY SERVICES IN PROXY VOTING


    New securities rules adopted in 2003 by the Securities and Exchange Commission
underscore the fiduciary duty of U.S. institutional investors with respect to proxy voting. These
rules require funds to disclose publicly how they vote on corporate ballots, and also to adopt
written policies and procedures ensuring that proxies are voted in the best interests of clients.9
For large, highly diversified mutual funds, the costs of directly collecting information in-house
and voting appropriately for every company in their portfolio can be substantial. Thus, it is not
surprising that many of the largest and most prominent institutional investors in the U.S.,
including Fidelity, T. Rowe Price, Janus, TIAA-CREF, and CalPERS, retain third-party proxy
advisory firms.
    While recent regulatory developments may have strengthened the demand for proxy advisory
services, the market for such services is not new. The history of advisory services dates back to
the founding of the nonprofit Investor Responsibility Research Center (IRRC) in the early 1970s.
IRRC provided independent analysis (but not recommendations), focusing on social issues such
as the offshore operation of U.S. businesses.                 With the passage of ERISA in 1974, the
Department of Labor (DOL) began enforcing a requirement that pension fund fiduciaries act
solely in the interest of pension plan participants and beneficiaries. As was made clear by
interpretative guidance that the DOL issued in 1988 and refined through subsequent releases, this
fiduciary duty applied to the voting of stock held by pension funds.10
    Demand for third-party voting advice grew markedly in the 1980’s. Over time, proxy vote
recommendation services began to be offered commercially. Among the early providers of


9
  See “Final Rule: Proxy Voting by Investment Advisers” (File No. s7-38-02). The new rule, along with the SEC’s
No-Action Letter to Egan-Jones Proxy Services on May 27, 2004, explicitly recognizes the role that third-party
proxy advice can play in mitigating conflicts of interest in fund voting. In particular, the rule provides that an
investment adviser can demonstrate that a vote was not the product of a conflict of interest if, in accordance with a
pre-determined policy, the vote was made based upon the recommendations of an independent third party. These
rules were adopted under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 and reflect an understanding that mutual funds and
other institutional investors are fiduciaries with respect to all services conducted on behalf of clients, including
proxy voting.
10
   See Letter from Deputy Assistant Secretary of Labor Alan Lebowitz to Helmuth Fandl, Avon Products, Inc.,
February 23, 1988. This “Avon Letter” indicated that shareholder voting rights are plan assets under ERISA and
that related fiduciary duties thus apply to share voting.


                                                         7
proxy vote advisory services were Proxy Monitor, Inc., founded in 1984, and Institutional
Shareholder Services (ISS), founded in 1985. Research reports issued by these firms covered a
wide range of corporate election items, including routine management proposals, shareholder
proposals, and contested director elections. The two businesses grew rapidly throughout the
1990s as they expanded their institutional clienteles. In July 2001, ISS merged with its smaller
rival, leading to a single set of widely-used proxy recommendations (Sidel (2001)). More
recently, a handful of other providers of proxy advice have entered the market, giving
institutional investors alternatives to ISS. Egan-Jones Proxy Services and Glass Lewis & Co.
began offering proxy recommendations commercially in 2003, and Proxy Governance Inc.
entered the market in 2005.
     The core business of ISS and other proxy advisors is to supply institutional investors with
vote recommendations on a subscription basis. A vote recommendation is issued as part of a
written research report distributed privately to institutional clients one to two weeks before a
scheduled vote. In contested elections, one or both of the contestants typically issue public press
releases (within a few days of the original report) either responding to or touting a vote
recommendation.
     The various proxy advisors do differ along some dimensions. For example, ISS and Glass
Lewis often host public conference calls at which opposing sides in proxy contests can present
their arguments. Also, whereas the largest advisors typically adhere to pre-specified voting
policy guidelines when recommending on non-contest items, Proxy Governance purports to
evaluate even non-contest items on a case-by-case basis. The different providers also have
different overall business models. ISS also provides advice and related services to corporations
to help them assess and improve their corporate governance practices.11 Egan-Jones is affiliated
with Egan-Jones Ratings Co., a credit rating agency that issues for-profit debt ratings. Glass
Lewis and Proxy Governance do not sell consulting or credit rating services to corporations.12




11
   To help reduce potential conflicts of interest between the two businesses that could compromise the objectivity of
vote recommendations, ISS maintains separate staffs, office equipment, and databases for the two operations. In
June 2006, to further address potential conflicts of interest, ISS spun off its corporate services into a new, separately-
incorporated subsidiary.
12
   Choi, Fisch and Kahan (2009) find that, for non-contested elections, different advisors emphasize different factors
in making their recommendations. These factors include a firm’s corporate governance, compensation, and audit
policies.


                                                            8
     Historically, the largest and most prominent proxy advisor has been ISS. According to the
company’s website13, as of July 2006 ISS maintained research coverage on 35,196 companies
(including all constituents of the Russell 3000 index) for the benefit of 1,667 institutional
subscribers that control assets totaling over $25 trillion.14 Given the size and prominence of ISS
over our sample period, it is natural to investigate the economics of proxy advice by studying the
recommendations of this market leader. Although ISS was acquired by RiskMetrics at the end of
2006 and was re-branded as “RiskMetrics,” we refer to the company throughout as “ISS” since
that was its name throughout our sample period.




3. A MODEL OF STOCK PRICES AND INTERIM NEWS


     In this section, we develop a simple model of the price impact of proxy vote
recommendations. Although the model focuses on proxy contests and vote recommendations, it
can be generalized, along with the accompanying estimation approach developed in Section 6.2,
to other situations in which there is existing uncertainty about the occurrence of a future event
and interim news arrives that changes investor beliefs about outcome probabilities and/or
outcome-contingent valuations. By “interim news” we mean early and incomplete information
about a future possible event. For example, a firm that is the target of a takeover bid might
announce the adoption of a takeover defense, which could change investors’ views about both
the probability that the takeover will succeed and about the expected take-over premium.
Alternatively, status reports by a pharmaceutical company about clinical trials may alter market
beliefs about the success likelihood and profitability of a new medicine.
     Consider a firm that is the target of a proxy contest launched by a dissident shareholder group
in opposition to the incumbent management team. The contest outcome will be determined by
the votes of one or more shareholders whom we call pivotal voters. We distinguish these pivotal
voters from the marginal investor, who determines the market-clearing stock price in the
financial market. For simplicity, we assume the marginal investor is risk-neutral with respect to


13
  http://www.issproxy.com, accessed September 2006.
14
   While exact market-share figures for the newer entrants are less readily available, anecdotal evidence suggests
that they have grown rapidly. For instance, Glass Lewis, the second-largest proxy advisor, was reported in June
2006 to have about 200 clients (Hershey (2006)).


                                                        9
uncertainty about the final outcome of the contest.               Under the simplifying assumption that the
discount rate is zero, the equilibrium share price at a generic date t is


(1)                 Pt = π t Dt + (1 − π t ) M t


where π t is the marginal investor’s date- t belief about the probability of a dissident victory and

Dt and M t are the marginal investor’s date- t expectations of the per-share values that would

result from victory by the dissident and the incumbent, respectively.15
      We assume that a third-party vote recommendation, denoted by REC D , becomes known to
the public at date t = A . The advice takes on one of two values: It either favors the dissident
( REC D = 1 ), or the incumbent management ( REC D = 0 ). The advice potentially affects both
the marginal investor’s probability beliefs about how the pivotal voters will vote as well as his
assessments of outcome-conditional values. Letting t = A − 1 denote a date after the contest has
begun but before proxy advice has been publicly announced, the price change between dates A-1
and A is given by


(2)        PA − PA−1 = π A−1 ( D A − D A−1 ) + (1 − π A−1 )( M A − M A−1 ) + (π A − π A−1 )( D A − M A ).


      Beliefs about the dissident-win probability are assumed to evolve between dates A − 1 and A
according to


(3)                 π A = π A−1 + g π ( REC D ) + η πA




15
     More formally, Dt is the date-t expectation of the future stock value in states in which the dissident wins, and
M t denotes the corresponding expectation in states where incumbent management wins. Note that contest
outcomes will generally be uncertain to the marginal investor if information collection is costly and voters are
heterogeneously informed; or if possible conflicts of interest exist that could distort the pivotal voter’s decision
away from value maximization.


                                                          10
where the function g π (⋅) captures the effect of the proxy advice on probability beliefs and η πA is

a mean-zero random shock to probability beliefs that is unrelated to REC D .16 The corresponding
revisions in per-share outcome-contingent valuations are


(4)              D A = D A−1 + g D ( REC D ) + η AD

                 M A = M A−1 + g M ( REC D ) + η AM


where the “certification” functions g D (⋅) and g M (⋅) represent the impact of REC D on the

marginal investor’s valuation assessments and η AD and η AM are other mean-zero valuation shocks
that arrive between dates A − 1 and A. Given the revisions in the marginal investor’s beliefs, the
observed stock price change between A − 1 and A is


                 PA − PA−1 = π A−1 [ g D ( REC D ) + η AD ] + (1 − π A−1 )[ g M ( REC D ) + η AM ]
(5)
                               + [ g π ( REC D ) + η πA ]( D A − M A ).


      Two distinct hypotheses emerge from this simple framework about the impact of proxy vote
recommendations on stock prices. According to the prediction hypothesis, a recommendation for
the dissident (incumbent) increases the perceived probability of a dissident (incumbent) win.
Such an effect could arise if the advisor’s recommendation directly influences the pivotal voters’
behavior or, alternatively, if the recommendation simply reveals information to the marginal
investor which was already known to the pivotal voter. In either instance, a pro-dissident
recommendation should have a more positive impact on the probability π A than a pro-
management recommendation. In terms of the above model, the prediction hypothesis posits that
g π (1) > 0 and g π (0) < 0.
      According to the certification hypothesis, a pro-dissident recommendation causes the
marginal investor to revise upward his assessment of the stock valuation associated with a
dissident win. Likewise, a pro-management recommendation causes an upward revision in the
16
   Here and throughout the analysis, we abstract from information that might be contained in the timing of
recommendations. In practice, ISS recommendations exhibit only modest variation in timing with respect to
scheduled votes at annual shareholder meetings. Most ISS recommendations are issued between one to two weeks
prior to the annual meetings.


                                                          11
marginal investor’s valuation assessment for an incumbent victory.                               Under the most
straightforward version of this hypothesis, we have g D (1) > 0 > g D (0) (dissident certification)

and g M (0) > 0 > g M (1) (management certification).               If certification effects are absent, then

g D (1) = g M (1) = g D (0) = g M (0) = 0 .
     The prediction and certification hypotheses are not mutually exclusive. A recommendation
favoring the dissident could, for example, cause investors to anticipate a higher value of the firm
under dissident control, thus inducing some votes to switch to the dissident. To the extent that
investors recognized such a link between value assessments and voting behavior, then news of
the recommendation would affect investors’ beliefs about outcome probabilities as well as
conditional values.         Nonetheless, the certification and prediction effects represent two
conceptually distinct ways in which proxy advice can affect stock prices. Our empirical tests in
Section 6 investigate both of these possible effects.




4. DATA


     The data on contested director elections and proxy vote recommendations in this study were
hand-collected from multiple sources. We first assembled an initial sample consisting of all
proxy voting episodes in the SEC’s EDGAR database that resulted in a Form DEFC14A filing
(definitive proxy statement for contested solicitation) during 1992-2005.17 We then eliminated
duplicate filings, amended filings, and filings for firms that were not listed in the Center for
Research on Securities Prices (CRSP) database as of the filing date. Also, when filings occurred
for multiple voting episodes at a single company in the same year, we retained only the earliest
one. Altogether, there were 377 proxy voting episodes with DEFC14A filings involving CRSP-
listed firms during 1992-2005.
     Next, we read the individual DEFC14A filings and eliminated 66 contests in which the
dissident was not seeking board representation.18                  In addition, we excluded the following

17
   Under U.S. securities laws, when a dissident initiates a contested proxy solicitation, both the dissident and the
company are required to indicate that the vote is contested by filing DEFC14A forms (rather than ordinary DEF 14A
proxy statements).
18
   We focus on board contests for two reasons. First, ex ante uncertainty about the direction of proxy advice is likely
to be greater for board contests than for other votes because ISS typically recommends according to default rules for


                                                         12
episodes in which proxy advice was unlikely to have played a substantive informational role: 4
cases in which management filed a DEFC14A but the dissident did not; 8 cases where the
dissident filed proxy statements less than one week before the scheduled vote; and 6 cases where
the DEFC14A was in fact a mislabeled news release or a mislabeled DEF 14A (uncontested)
proxy statement. Imposing these screens resulted in an overall sample of 293 proxy contests in
which the dissident was seeking board representation.
    For each contested election in our overall sample, we sought to ascertain the nature of the
vote recommendation, if any, issued by ISS. Our first source for this information was ISS itself,
which provided us with reports for voting situations designated as contested in their records.
These reports, like others reviewed for this study, contain issue-by-issue summaries of ISS’s vote
recommendations as well as descriptions of the contest background and detailed analyses of the
targeted firm’s corporate governance characteristics, including ownership levels, compensation,
board structure, and antitakeover provisions. The reports provided to us by ISS cover 84 out of
the 293 contests in our sample.
    Because ISS’s definition of a contest differs from the broader definition that we use in this
study, we searched for additional information about ISS proxy vote recommendations from other
sources. First, we obtained electronic copies of an additional 52 reports from LexisNexis and
Investext Plus. Second, for each contest in our sample, we performed a comprehensive search in
the Dow Jones Factiva and LexisNexis News databases for company releases, news stories, and
newswires publicly announcing ISS recommendations. Specifically, we used keyword searches
to identify all news items published within a year of the DEFC14A filing date that mentioned
“Institutional Shareholder Services” or “ISS” in conjunction with the name of the firm targeted
by the contest. From these news items, we were able to determine ISS vote recommendations for
a total of 158 contests in our contest sample.19
    Our final sample consists of recommendations for 198 distinct contests. Of these, we have a
news announcement but no ISS research report for 62; an ISS report but no news announcement


non-board votes, whereas it recommends on a case-by-case basis in board contests. Second, board seat contests often
involve major corporate decisions and thus may be expected to have larger valuation consequences.
19
   We also searched the Dow Jones Factiva and LexisNexis News databases for vote recommendations issued by
competing proxy advisory services, including Glass, Lewis, & Co., Egan-Jones Proxy Services, and Proxy
Governance, Inc. As discussed in Section 2, these competitors did not enter the industry until 2003 or later. Our
search yielded only 22 contests over the sample period for which a news article mentioned a vote recommendation
from one or more of these three proxy advisors. For the purposes of the present study, we focus on
recommendations made by ISS.


                                                        13
for 40; and both an ISS report and a news announcement for 96. We are missing both reports
and news announcements for 95 contests.               However, a reading of additional news stories
revealed that a substantial number of these contests with “missing recommendations” were
resolved, prior to a vote, via negotiated settlements between the parties that were announced well
in advance of the time when ISS typically issues its reports. Therefore, for many of these
negotiated outcomes, ISS recommendations would not have played a substantive informational
role. We also note that the median value of total assets for firms with no recommendations
($1.23 billion) is only about half that of firms for which we do have recommendations ($2.40
billion). Hence, it seems likely that ISS never issued recommendations for some of the smaller
firms, particularly during the earlier part of sample in which its coverage was less
comprehensive.       Based on this reasoning, we conclude that our sample is sufficiently
comprehensive to permit valid inferences about the role of proxy advice in contest situations.
     We read news articles, ISS reports, and dissident proxy filings for each proxy contest in our
sample to determine relevant background details, including any non-board election items being
proposed and whether there was an outstanding dissident takeover bid at the start of the contest.
We supplemented this information with stock price data from CRSP, institutional holdings data
from CDA/Spectrum 13f, and SIC industry codes from EDGAR. Other data, including dissident
and management ownership, voting rules, internal governance arrangements, and miscellaneous
contest characteristics, were obtained from proxy filings and other SEC filings.
     Our empirical research design requires meaningful binary classifications of vote
recommendations and contest outcomes. Since vote contests and recommendations usually
involve multiple election items, we employ the following scheme: 1) a recommendation is
considered pro-dissident if ISS endorses at least one of the dissident director nominees;20 2) an
outcome is deemed to be a dissident victory if the dissident team wins at least one seat on the
board; and 3) privately-negotiated settlements are classified as dissident victories. The rationale
for classifying settlements as dissident wins is that, invariably, such settlements involve
concessions made by incumbent management teams to dissident groups.21


20
   Fewer than three percent of the contests in our final sample entailed a “split” recommendation in which ISS
favored some but not all of the dissident nominees.
21
   For example, in early March 2001, Carl Icahn launched a proxy contest at VISX Inc., citing management’s
unwillingness to contemplate a sale of the company. The company subsequently amended its shareholder rights
plan and agreed to let Icahn conduct due diligence pursuant to a sale. In May 2001, Icahn withdrew his slate of


                                                      14
    Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for the sample of 198 vote recommendations used in our
empirical analysis as well as for the broader universe of 293 contests. Panel A shows that, in our
sample, the overall frequency of contests does not exhibit any strong trend over time, yet the
percentage of contests with associated ISS recommendations has risen fairly steadily to a high of
86.5% in 2004-2005. The size distribution of firms is clearly skewed in each period, suggesting,
not surprisingly, that ISS sometimes issues recommendations for very large firms.
    Panel B of Table 1 reports recommendation frequencies by various contest types. (Note that
a given contest can be classified under more than one type.) Contest types include, for example,
whether the contest involves a concurrent takeover bid by the dissident, whether the target of the
proxy contest is an investment company, or whether the dissident is explicitly seeking reforms of
the firm’s internal governance policies. As shown, it is not uncommon in the overall sample for
a dissident to be seeking the sale or liquidation of the company (28.3%) or to be proposing
formal amendments to the firm’s internal governance (23.2%).
    In Panel C, the sample of 198 recommendations is broken down according to the type of the
soliciting dissident. Many of the soliciting dissidents are investment companies (35.4%) or
nonfinancial corporations (21.2%). Only rarely is the dissident a current officer of the company
(2.0%) or a labor union (1.0%). In the overall sample, recommendations are fairly evenly
divided between those favoring dissidents (44.9%) and those favoring incumbent management
(55.1%). Across most of the contest and dissident types, both pro-dissident and pro-management
recommendations are well-represented.




5. EVIDENCE ON THE MARKET REACTION TO VOTE RECOMMENDATIONS


    In this section, we investigate whether proxy advice contains market-relevant information.
We assess the information content of recommendations in two ways. First, we examine event-
study returns around the time vote recommendations become public. Second, we test whether
stock prices exhibit abnormal volatility around recommendations. The results of these tests form




nominees, stating that there was no longer a need for a contest given management’s “significant shift” toward his
position. (Dow Jones News Service, May 1, 2001).


                                                       15
the backdrop for Section 6, in which we attempt to determine the precise channel (i.e., prediction
or certification) through which information in vote recommendations might affect stock prices.




5.1. Stock Price Reactions


     Table 2 reports results from an event study of abnormal returns around vote
recommendations.22 We use a market model approach to compute cumulative abnormal returns
(CARs); market model parameters are estimated over the 250 trading days preceding the relevant
event window. Our main focus is on price responses to vote recommendations, but we also
report CARs around other key dates during the contest period to facilitate comparisons with the
prior literature.       To avoid spurious inferences about the information content of vote
recommendations, we include only contests for which at least three trading days separated the
public arrival of a recommendation and the public resolution of the contest.
     The evidence in Table 2 underscores the economic significance of the proxy contests in our
sample. The two rightmost columns of Table 2 show average CARs and associated t-statistics
over the entire contest period. The pre-contest reference date is taken to be 26 trading days prior
to the earliest filing date of a DEFC14A proxy or a PREC14A “preliminary” proxy (if one was
made) disclosing the dissident campaign. The resolution date is taken to be the date of the
earliest news story announcing either a) a pre-vote negotiated settlement or b) the preliminary
voting result. The average cumulative abnormal return over the contest period for the full
sample is 17.26 percent, which is highly statistically significant (t-statistic: 6.27). The contest-
period return is also significantly positive in each of the subsamples that we consider. It is
noteworthy that, even for contests won by management, there is a sizable positive average CAR
of 19.24 percent (t-statistic: 5.38). This suggests that even contests that fail to increase dissident
board representation can have a beneficial impact on firm valuations. For example, the arrival of
a dissident may force incumbent management to commit to changes that are good substitutes for
what the dissident is proposing.23


22
   Sample sizes in these and other tests are sometimes smaller than the full sample size of 198 due to unavailability of
data on explanatory variables or daily stock returns.
23
    See Mulherin and Poulsen (1998) for evidence on how the shareholder value effects of proxy contests depend on
post-contest events (e.g., whether incumbent management is replaced and whether the firm is acquired).


                                                          16
     In addition to reporting CARs around the recommendation date (we discuss these in more
detail below), Table 2 also shows announcement effects around the contest filing date and
around the contest resolution date. As in previous studies of proxy contests (see, e.g., Dodd and
Warner (1983), DeAngelo and DeAngelo (1989), and Mulherin and Poulsen (1998)), the
abnormal returns around the initiation of proxy contests are positive, large, and statistically
significant. The average CAR over a [-25, +1] window surrounding the initial filing is 10.48
percent (significant at 1%) for the full sample. The filing-date return is significantly positive for
each subsample of contests, including contests subsequently won by dissidents or by incumbent
management, contests occurring prior to Regulation FD (effective October 23, 2000), contests
occurring after the N-PX vote disclosure rules (effective April 14, 2003), and those taking place
during the interim period in between. Around the conclusion of a contest, the market appears to
regard a dissident (management) win as good (neutral or bad) news, as indicated by average
CARs of 2.02 percent (t-statistic: 2.89) for the dissident-win subsample and -1.07 percent (t-
statistic: -1.56) for the management-win subsample. A somewhat more nuanced interpretation is
that it is perceived to be good news when the dissident campaign is compelling enough to win,
but a disappointment when the dissident is too weak to win.
     We now turn to abnormal returns around the recommendation date. Our event study design
reflects the fact that the exact time at which vote recommendations become public is uncertain
given the sequential process through which recommendations are first delivered to institutional
clients (the “report release date”) and then possibly reported later by the public news media (the
“news publication date”).           When we have a publication date for the earliest Factiva or
LexisNexis news story covering a recommendation, we measure the recommendation date
announcement return over an event window of [-7, +1] around the news publication date. When
no news publication date is available, we use an effective window of [-1,+7] around the report
release date. Our intent in using a relatively wide event window is to ensure that we capture the
price response to a vote recommendation whenever it might be occurring – whether at the initial
release of the report to institutional clients, through gradual diffusion of information via trading
and word-of-mouth, or upon the arrival of a public news story.24



24
  The time between the report release date and the first news publication date is 6 days or less for 95 percent of the
contests for which we know both dates.


                                                         17
     Since it is public knowledge that ISS routinely issues vote recommendations, we would
expect the unconditional mean price response to vote recommendations to be close to zero if
markets are efficient.          Table 2 shows that the average abnormal return around the
recommendation date is 1.35 percent across all contests, which is not statistically different from
zero at conventional levels. However, when we split the sample according to the direction of
proxy advice, we see a stark difference between the subsample CARs: recommendations for
dissidents are associated with positive abnormal returns of 3.76 percent (significant at the 1%
level), while recommendations for management are associated with insignificant, negative
abnormal returns of -0.56 percent. A t-test reveals that the difference is statistically significant
(p-value: 0.009). Thus, it seems that the market receives vote recommendations more favorably
when they endorse the dissident team.
     In Table 3, we further explore the price impact of vote recommendations by comparing,
across various subsamples, the average CAR around pro-dissident recommendations to the
average CAR around pro-incumbent recommendations.25 For instance, we examine whether firm
size affects the extent to which directionality matters for abnormal returns. If small companies
disclose less information than large companies and tend to enjoy less overall analyst and media
coverage, then one might expect the direction of proxy advice to be particularly informative
when the target of a proxy contest is small. In line with this view, we find that, for contests
involving small companies (i.e., companies with asset values below the sample median), the
average CAR around endorsements of dissidents is 6.09 percent, which is significantly higher
than the −0.82 percent average CAR around endorsements of incumbents. We also examine
whether enactment of Regulation Fair Disclosure (“Reg FD”) in late October 2000 altered the
information content of proxy advice.              Reg FD prohibits firms from selectively disclosing
material information to investment advisors and other market professionals. Since ISS was an
investment advisor over our sample period,26 it was subject to the restrictions established by Reg
FD. Hence, to the extent that Reg FD eliminated real or perceived information disclosures to ISS
from incumbent management teams, we would expect investors to ascribe less information
content to recommendations in the post-FD period. Consistent with this interpretation, we find
that average CARs were significantly more positive for pro-dissident recommendations than for

25
   For convenience, the first row of Table 3 repeats the sample-wide averages from Table 2 so that they can be easily
compared with the other cross-tabulated results.
26
   See the Form ADV filed by Institutional Shareholder Services in 2006.


                                                        18
pro-incumbent recommendations in the pre-FD era but not in the post-FD era. Finally, the
directionality of proxy advice also seems to matter significantly for the stock price reaction when
the initial filing-date return is above the sample median, perhaps suggesting that these contests
involve more credible dissident campaigns. Overall, the findings in Table 3 support the notion
that market-relevant information is contained in the direction of proxy vote recommendations.




5.2. Stock Price Volatility


   The returns-based event study evidence in Section 5.1 highlights the differential price
responses to pro-dissident versus pro-incumbent recommendations. We also consider abnormal
stock price volatility as an alternative measure of information flows. If proxy advice brings new,
price-relevant information to market participants, then stock prices should exhibit abnormally
high short-term volatility. The advantage of using volatility to measure the informational impact
of recommendations is that we do not need to specify the precise form of the information (e.g.,
which rival team was endorsed or whether the return should be positive or negative).
   Table 4 reports cross-sectional medians of absolute market-adjusted abnormal returns for
each day in the event window. The question of interest is whether volatility increases when vote
recommendations become public.        To test this hypothesis, we employ a test methodology
developed in Corrado (1989). A limitation of this approach is that it is based on daily volatility
estimates. Hence, uncertainty about the precise day on which recommendations become public
will reduce the power of the test. To partially mitigate this problem, we restrict the sample to
contests for which we have a Factiva or LexisNexis news announcement date. Despite the
reduced sample size, we still find significant evidence — not only in the full sample of news
announcements, but also in the pro-dissident and pro-management subsamples — that
recommendations do convey information to the market. In particular, compared to volatility on
a typical day during the contest period, volatility is abnormally high on day 0 and day +1 relative
to the news announcement.




                                                19
6. TESTS FOR PREDICTION AND CERTIFICATION


     Having found evidence that stock prices respond to vote recommendations, we turn to our
second main question: What is the nature of the information in proxy vote recommendations?
As discussed in Section 3, vote recommendations can affect stock prices through two distinct yet
related channels.      First, vote recommendations can alter beliefs about the probabilities of
dissident and incumbent wins (prediction).                  Second, vote recommendations can change
assessments of the merits of dissidents and incumbent management and, hence, lead to revisions
in outcome-contingent firm valuations (certification).
     We test the prediction and certification hypotheses in two stages. First, in Section 6.1, we
test the prediction hypothesis using a multivariate probit analysis to examine whether vote
recommendations help forecast contest outcomes beyond what can be forecasted given an
extensive set of contest and firm characteristics publicly known at the recommendation date. In
Section 6.2, we test the certification hypothesis using a novel estimation approach that identifies
certification effects in stock returns after adjusting for the price impact of changes in outcome
probabilities.


6.1 PREDICTION EFFECTS


     Under the prediction hypothesis, proxy advice causes investors to update their probability
beliefs about contest outcomes. Operationally, we test the prediction hypothesis by examining
whether vote recommendations are good statistical predictors of contest outcomes after
conditioning on other known predictors.27
     Table 5 reports some preliminary univariate evidence on the correlation between contest
outcomes and vote recommendations. The table shows that dissident victories are somewhat
more frequent after pro-dissident recommendations. The dissident win rate is 55.06% after a
pro-dissident recommendation but only 41.28% after a pro-management recommendation. A
Pearson chi-squared statistic shows that the difference is significant at the 10% level.

27
  Our prediction tests do not need to identify the exact mechanism by which proxy advice causes investors to update
their probability beliefs. In other words, a vote recommendation could have a predictive effect whether the
recommendation actually influences the voting behavior of pivotal voters or whether it merely conveys new
information that helps the marginal investor to predict contest outcomes.



                                                       20
     A limitation of this univariate test is that it ignores possible correlations with other factors.
Outcomes and recommendations could exhibit a univariate association even if proxy advice
simply    repackages      already    publicly    available     information.        To    examine     whether
recommendations constitute a distinct source of outcome-relevant information to investors, we
therefore turn to a multivariate probit analysis of contest outcomes in which we control for
observable dissident, firm, and contest characteristics.


6.1.1. CONTROL VARIABLES


     All of our control variables reflect information widely known or publicly available to
investors around the date of the recommendation. Many of these variables have been found to be
useful in predicting vote outcomes in the prior literature (see, e.g., Brickley, Lease, and Smith
(1988), Pound (1988), Bethel and Gillan (2002)). Table 6 reports summary statistics.
     Most of our control variables measure the ease with which one rival party or the other can
secure votes. First, we control for holdings of voting shares by the dissident and incumbent
groups (as percentages of total voting shares outstanding). Holdings data are gathered from
proxy statements and computed as close to the record date as possible. In computing dissident
vote holdings, we include all shares held by dissident director nominees and members of the
dissident shareholders’ committee. Management holdings are measured as total holdings of all
executive officers and company directors, less any holdings of dissidents who are currently
serving as company directors.28
     Procedural voting rules can also affect the ability to collect votes. Companies with majority-
vote director election rules may present a greater challenge to dissidents because directors in
these cases need to win more than just a plurality to be elected. We include a dummy variable
equal to one if a targeted company has a majority-vote rule in place. At the same time,
cumulative voting, which permits shareholders to cast votes unequally in favor of a particular
director nominee, could make it easier for dissidents to win.29 Accordingly, we include a dummy
variable equal to one if a company permits cumulative voting.


28
   We include voting preferred stock and adjust for multiple classes of shares with differential voting rights.
However, we exclude any shares underlying unexercised options because such shares would not confer voting
power as of the record date for the scheduled vote.
29
   Recall that we classify an election in which the dissident gains at least one seat as a dissident win.


                                                      21
   The type of shareholder meeting might also be related to the ease of collecting a winning
number of votes. For example, to be elected at annual shareholder meetings, dissident director
nominees only need to obtain more voting support than incumbent directors who are also
standing for election. At special meetings of shareholders, in contrast, dissidents may face a
higher hurdle in that they must first win enough support to dislodge incumbent directors and
then, in a separate tally, collect enough voting support to be elected. In a similar vein, consent
solicitations usually are associated with higher voting thresholds (e.g., to be elected, a dissident
needs voting support from a majority of all outstanding shares and not simply a majority of
shares cast as at an annual meeting). To control for these differences, we include indicators for
whether a proxy fight was waged in the context of a special meeting or a consent solicitation.
   Dissidents and incumbents often retain professional proxy solicitors (e.g., Georgeson, Inc.) to
contact uncommitted shareholders for the purpose of publicizing a proxy campaign. We use
dummy variables to indicate the employment of an outside proxy soliciting firm by the dissident
or the incumbent management team. Also, following Pound (1988), we include the log of the
number of days between the contest initiation and the scheduled vote date. Longer contests
afford a dissident more time to publicize a business plan and garner shareholder support.
Finally, we include the number of shareholders of record to account for variable costs of
soliciting proxies.
   We also consider variables that capture shareholders’ perceptions of the merits of the two
competing teams. First, we use a dummy variable equal to one if a formal takeover offer by the
dissident is already outstanding at the time of contest initiation. Shareholders might be more
inclined to elect a dissident group’s nominees if they believe this will lead to the dismantling of
takeover barriers and the eventual realization of a substantial takeover premium. Second, we use
two characteristics of the incumbent CEO that might affect beliefs about the extent to which the
CEO is responsible for past firm performance: the log of CEO tenure and a dummy variable
equal to one if the CEO is Chairman (or if there is no Chairman). Third, we include a dummy
variable equal to one if an individual dissident is an “activist,” as indicated by whether the
dissident appeared more than once in our sample. Activist dissidents, who carry out broad
reform agendas across multiple firms, may be perceived to be more or less committed to firm-
specific value maximization.       Finally, we include context variables for the economic
environment in which a contest takes place. These include the size of the company (total book



                                                22
value of assets), industry, time period, institutional ownership, and the targeted company’s stock
price volatility and adjusted stock performance over the year preceding contest initiation.
   We cannot entirely rule out the possibility that the above list of control variables omits some
key factor that is relevant to outcome probabilities. However, we are unaware of any major
omitted factor that 1) has been studied in the previous literature on proxy contests; 2) was
identifiable from public proxy filings or widely known by investors prior to a vote
recommendation; and 3) serves as a strong incremental predictor of the outcomes of contested
director elections.




6.1.2. MULTIVARIATE ANALYSIS OF CONTEST OUTCOMES


   Table 7 shows the results of our multivariate probit analysis of the relation between proxy
vote recommendations and contest outcomes. The dependent variable equals 1 if a contest is
won by the dissident and equals 0 otherwise. Column 1, which contains our base specification,
provides some first evidence that the probability of a dissident win is positively related to the
pro-dissident recommendation dummy, RECD. The regression includes the natural logarithm of
total assets, an annual time trend, pre-FD and post-N-PX dummy variables, and dummies for
each 1-digit SIC industry that contains at least 10 firms in our sample. The marginal effect of
RECD is significant at the 6 percent level (z-statistic: 1.89), and the estimated magnitude is
meaningful: a recommendation in favor of the dissident is associated with an increase in the
probability of a dissident win by about 14.1 percentage points, or about one-third of the overall
dissident-win probability.
   Column 2 adds in controls for voting power, voting rules, and meeting type. The key control
variables, including dissident ownership, management ownership, and the presence of
cumulative voting, are each significant. Furthermore, their coefficient estimates have signs that
are consistent with our a priori intuition. The coefficient on the consent solicitation dummy is
positive and weakly significant, indicating that the written consent solicitation process may
disadvantage dissidents. Notably, the coefficient on RECD is positive and statistically significant
at the 5 percent level. Thus, while structural and procedural sources of voting advantage do help




                                                23
predict contest outcomes, such factors do not subsume the predictive power of proxy
recommendations.
     In Column 3, we include variables to control for other sources of voting support and for the
perceived merits of the rival parties. The coefficient estimate for RECD becomes slightly more
positive and is still significant at the 5 percent level. Among the additional control variables,
CEO duality is significant. When the CEO and Chairman is the same individual, dissidents are
less likely to win, ceteris paribus.           Two other added controls have statistically significant
coefficients whose signs accord with economic intuition: the log of CEO tenure and the presence
of an incumbent-hired proxy solicitor.
     Finally, Column 4 adds in controls for institutional ownership and the general informational
environment. Once again, our finding of a positive relation between the contest outcome and the
vote recommendation is robust. Indeed, the marginal effect of the recommendation on the
outcome probability increases to 29.5% and is significant at the 1 percent level (z-statistic: 2.75).
Among the new control variables, Ln(institutional ownership) has a positive and significant
coefficient. None of the other controls introduced in this specification is significant at the 5
percent level.30
     The clear message that emerges from our probit analysis is that vote recommendations are
good statistical predictors of outcomes – even after controlling for a variety of contest, firm,
dissident, and management characteristics. The fact that the coefficient on the recommendation
variable remains significant across several nested regression specifications allows us to reject the
null hypothesis of no prediction in favor of the view that proxy advice contains probability
information beyond what is otherwise available to market participants.




30
  We have also estimated three additional probit regressions (not reported in a table) to test whether the incremental
predictive power of proxy advice varies across different environments. Each regression is similar to that in
specification (4) of Table 7, except that REC iD is replaced by two interactive variables formed from REC iD and one
of the following pairs: 1) binary variables indicating whether institutional ownership is above or below the sample
median; 2) binary variables indicating whether prior-year stock price volatility is above or below the sample median;
and 3) binary variables indicating whether a contest occurred before or after the effective date of Regulation Fair
Disclosure (October 23, 2000). In each of the three regressions, the two interaction terms involving REC Di are
individually positive and significant, but they are not significantly different from each other. Thus, the predictive
power of vote recommendations does not appear to differ substantially along these three dimensions of the contest
environment.


                                                         24
6.2 CERTIFICATION EFFECTS


   Under the certification hypothesis, proxy advice causes investors to update their valuation
beliefs about contest outcomes. We test for certification by examining whether returns around a
vote recommendation are systematically related to the direction of the recommendation after
netting out the prediction effect. This requires disentangling the stock-price effects of changes in
valuation assessments from the stock-price effects of changes in probability beliefs. We proceed
in two ways.     First, in Section 6.2.1, we test the certification hypothesis against the null
hypothesis of no certification by exploiting a simple statistical relationship that must hold in the
absence of certification effects. Second, in Section 6.2.2, we formulate a parsimonious structural
model that allows us to estimate underlying certification parameters and to test specific
hypotheses regarding the nature of certification.


6.2.1   Certification and Stock Prices


   We begin by extending the model in Section 3 to derive a test of the certification hypothesis
against a null of no certification. From the discussion of Equation (5), price changes around a
recommendation announcement will depend, possibly nonlinearly, on changes in the marginal
investor’s probability beliefs as well as on changes in his assessments of dissident and
management quality. The key idea in our testing approach is to utilize stock price changes
around two different return intervals to “substitute out” unobserved pre-announcement valuation
assessments. This leads to a simple mathematical relationship—one involving only observable
or estimable quantities—that must hold under the null hypothesis of no certification.
   First, consider how the marginal investor’s assessments of management and dissident quality
evolve around the arrival of proxy advice. As before, let t = A − 1 be a date after the start of the
contest but before REC D is announced, and let t = A be the earliest date on which REC D
becomes publicly known. Under the null hypothesis of no-certification, REC D does not convey
any information to market participants about dissident or management quality. Formally, the
null implies that, in Equations (4), g D ( REC D ) = g M ( REC D ) = 0 for REC D = 0, 1 . Thus, the
price change between dates A-1 and A in Equation (5) simplifies to




                                                25
(6)               PA − PA−1 = (π A − π A−1 )(D A − M A ) + π A−1η AD + (1 − π A−1 )η AM .



      In view of (6), one might be inclined to test the null by simply regressing the price change
PA − PA−1 on the recommendation REC D . Since REC D does not appear on the right-hand side
of Equation (6), it should not have any explanatory power. However, the difficulty in using such
an approach to test the null of no certification is twofold: First, the valuation differential DA – MA
in Equation (6) is not directly observable. Second, even under the null, REC D can be correlated
with the differential DA – MA = DA-1 – MA-1 + η AD −η AM if the vote recommendation is based, at
least in part, on past public information which could be correlated with the pre-recommendation
differential DA-1 – MA-1.
      To eliminate the unobserved term D A − M A from (6), we proceed as follows. Let t = C be
the date on which the winner of the contest is publicly revealed. Between dates A and C , the
market’s outcome-contingent valuations given dissident and management wins evolve as


(7)       DC − D A = η CD

          M C − M A = η CM


where η CD and η CM are mean-zero innovations relative to date A information. We can then write
the price change between dates A and C as


(8)               PC − PA = (π C − π A )(D A − M A ) + π Cη CD + (1 − π C )η CM .


We rearrange Equation (8) to derive an expression for D A − M A and then substitute out
D A − M A in Equation (6). Dividing through by PA−1 (so as to express valuation effects in relative
terms rather than as absolute dollar amounts), we obtain the following simple equation that holds
under the null hypothesis:


                 ⎛ π − π A−1 ⎞
(9)       R A − ⎜⎜ A         ⎟⎟ RC = η
                 ⎝ π C − π A  ⎠



                                                        26
where     R A ≡ ( PA − PA−1 ) / PA−1               is   the    return    around     the    recommendation   arrival,
RC ≡ ( PC − PA ) / PA−1 is the price change around the contest resolution also normalized by PA-1,

and η is a noise term with the following form:


                    η AD                    η AM       ⎛ π − π A−1 ⎞ ⎡ η CD             ηM ⎤
(10)    η = π A−1          + (1 − π A−1 )           − ⎜⎜ A         ⎟⎟ ⎢π C  + (1 − π C ) C ⎥ .
                    PA−1                    PA−1       ⎝ π C − π A ⎠ ⎣ PA−1             PA−1 ⎦



   Observe that η is a combination of the valuation shocks η AD ,η AM ,η CD , and η CM , which are all

mean-zero and uncorrelated with REC D under the null of no certification. Furthermore, π C is
(trivially) equal to 1 or 0, depending on whether the dissident is observed to win the contest.
Hence, we can use regressions based on Equation (9) to test the null hypothesis, provided that
valid empirical proxies for R A , RC , π A , and π A−1 are available. Toward this end, we carry out a
basic empirical test for certification by estimating an OLS cross-sectional regression of the form


(11)    PDIFFi = γ 0 + γ 1 RECiD + ε i


where i indexes the different contests, and where the dependent variable, PDIFF i , is the
empirical analogue of the left-hand side of Equation (9):

                                         ⎛ πˆ i − πˆ Ai −1 ⎞ ⎛ P i REC +1 ⎞
(12)    PDIFFi ≡ CAR[iREC −7 ,REC +1] − ⎜⎜ Ai              ⎟×⎜ i
                                                        i ⎟ ⎜
                                                                          ⎟⎟ × CAR[iREC + 2,OUTCOME +1] .
                                         ⎝ π C − πˆ A ⎠ ⎝ P REC −8 ⎠




                                                                 27
The construction of PDIFF i relies only on observed prices and estimated probabilities. In

particular, π Ci is an observable binary variable equal to 1 if the dissident wins the contest and 0 if

not; and πˆ Ai and πˆ Ai −1 are fitted probabilities of dissident victory derived from logit regressions

(similar to specification (2) in Table 7) that include and exclude, respectively, RECiD as an

explanatory variable;31 CAR[iREC −7, REC +1] and CAR[iREC+2,OUTCOME+1] are cumulative abnormal returns

over event windows around the recommendation and contest conclusion dates, respectively; and
  i
PREC −8
        and PREC
              i
                 +1
                    are daily closing prices 8 days before the recommendation announcement date
(i.e., the starting price         for the abnormal return for day REC-7) and 1 day after the
recommendation date, respectively. Note that the use of cumulative abnormal returns rather than
total returns leads to more precise measurement of firm-specific valuation changes. Also note
that the scaling factor ( PREC
                            i
                               +1 / PREC −8
                                      i
                                            ) ensures that, in accordance with Equation (9), valuation
changes over the two return intervals are effectively measured relative to the same pre-
announcement stock price, PREC
                            i
                               −8
                                  .

         Assuming the disturbance ε i in (11) is mean-zero and uncorrelated with RECiD ,32 OLS

should yield consistent estimates of γ 0 and γ 1 . Our basic test for certification centers on γ 1 .

Under the null of no certification, the estimate of γ 1 should not be significantly different from 0

since RECiD , being absent from (9), should not have any explanatory power in (11). On the

other hand, an estimate of γ 1 significantly different from zero would be evidence against (9) and,
hence, against the no-certification null.




31
  Using a logit regression based on Specification (2) of Table 7 (rather than one of the other specifications) is a
compromise between having a good model fit for the estimated probabilities and having a large sample size.
32
     Zero correlation between RECi and the disturbance term ε i under the null is likely given that a) RECi does
                                   D                                                                                      D


not provide any new information related to   η AD   and   η AM   and given that b) by definition,   η CD   and   η CM   are future
innovations that occur after RECi is issued. Thus, the only reason ε i and RECi might be correlated is if the
                                   D                                                       D


causality flows in the other direction and ISS incorporates some of the public information represented by                η AD   and
η    M
     into its recommendation. However, since in practice there is a lead time required to prepare recommendation
     A
reports, this possibility is unlikely if only a short amount of time elapses between dates A-1 and A.



                                                            28
   We also estimate a variant of this test which accounts for the possibility that certification
effects might be amplified or reduced according to the marginal investor’s ex ante beliefs about
the probability of dissident victory. Indeed, a revision in the assessment of dissident quality
should have a small impact on stock prices if the perceived probability of a dissident win is
small. This motivates a cross-sectional regression in which RECiD is interacted with the pre-
recommendation dissident-win probability:


(13)    PDIFFi = γ 0 + γ 1 (πˆ Ai −1 × RECiD ) + ε i .


An estimate of γ 1 in (13) significantly different from zero would again suggest that, contrary to
the null hypothesis, the marginal investor revises his valuation assessments in response to vote
recommendations.
   One potential concern with OLS estimation of (11) or (13) is that the dependent variable
PDIFF i (and, in the case of (13), the regressor πˆ A−1 × RECi ) is constructed from fitted
                                                              i       D



probabilities rather than from the true (unobserved) probabilities.           While OLS will yield
consistent coefficient estimates so long as πˆ Ai −1 and πˆ Ai are consistent estimates of the true

probabilities π Ai −1 and π Ai , the OLS standard errors will generally be inconsistent due to

sampling variation in πˆ Ai −1 and πˆ Ai (see, e.g., Newey (1984), Pagan (1984), Newey and
McFadden (1994), and Wooldridge (2002)). In order to address this issue, we supplement our
benchmark OLS estimation by using generalized method of moments (GMM) to estimate a
system of three simultaneous equations: the logit equation for πˆ Ai −1 , the logit equation for πˆ Ai ,
and the return Equation (11) (or Equation (13)). Under our modeling assumptions, each of the
explanatory variables in the system is orthogonal to the residual for the equation in which the
variable appears. Hence, we can consider the three equations as a just-identified system (see the
Appendix for the specific moment conditions in the estimation). Because parameters in the three
equations are estimated simultaneously, the standard errors from the GMM estimation account
for the fact that PDIFF i (and πˆ Ai −1 × RECiD in Equation (13)) are calculated from generated
probabilities rather than from the true probabilities.




                                                         29
     Table 8 reports coefficient estimates and standard errors for equations (11) and (13). For
brevity, we do not report the logit coefficients. Note that while the standard errors of the
coefficients should differ according to which estimation approach is used (i.e., two-stage OLS
estimation versus GMM simultaneous equations estimation), the coefficient estimates themselves
will be identical under both approaches.33 Below each coefficient estimate, we report OLS
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors (in parentheses) and GMM standard errors (in square
brackets). The coefficient estimate for RECD in Model 1 is 0.041 and is significantly different
from zero at the 5 percent level using OLS heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors and at the 10
percent level using the GMM standard errors. In Model 2, the estimated coefficient on the
interaction term is 0.082, which is significantly different from zero at the 5 percent level with
both the OLS heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors and the GMM standard errors, suggesting
that our inferences are robust to sampling variation in the fitted probabilities πˆ Ai −1 and πˆ Ai .
Overall, the results show that outcome-contingent value changes around a vote recommendation
are systematically related to the direction of the recommendation, thus leading us to reject the
no-certification hypothesis embodied in Equations (11) and (13).




6.2.2 Additional Tests for Certification


     For a more detailed examination of certification, we next impose some basic structure on
how vote recommendations can lead to revisions in outcome-contingent valuations. We assume
that vote recommendations impact valuations in proportion to the pre-recommendation stock
price PA−1 . Specifically, we assume that the certification functions in Equations (4) take the form


(14)     g D ( REC D ) = [δ D REC D + δ M (1 − REC D )] PA−1

         g M ( REC D ) = [ μ D REC D + μ M (1 − REC D )] PA−1



33
  That the coefficient estimates will be the same under OLS (the two-stage approach) and GMM (the simultaneous
equations approach) follows from the recursive nature of the system: PDIFF i depends on πˆ A−1 and πˆ A , but
                                                                                             i          i


neither πˆ A−1 or πˆ A depends on PDIFF i . Hence, the moment conditions from GMM estimation of the just-
           i         i

identified system coincide exactly with the conditions that define equation-by-equation estimation (see Appendix).


                                                       30
where δ D , δ M , μ D , and μ M are constants that capture the various certification effects of the

recommendation.34 For example, a pro-dissident vote recommendation ( REC D = 1 ) could be
perceived as good news about dissident quality ( δ D > 0 ), while a pro-management
recommendation ( REC D = 0 ) could reflect negatively on the dissident ( δ M < 0 ).
     By an argument similar to the one used in Section 6.2.1, Equations (14) imply the following
simple structural equation involving the underlying certification parameters:


                         ⎛ π − π A−1 ⎞
                  R A − ⎜⎜ A         ⎟⎟ RC = μ M + (δ M − μ M )π A−1
                         ⎝ Cπ − π A ⎠

(15)                                       + ( μ D − μ M ) REC D
                                          + (δ D − δ M − μ D + μ M )(π A−1 × REC D ) + η



where, as before, R A ≡ ( PA − PA−1 ) / PA−1 is the return around the recommendation announcement,
RC ≡ ( PC − PA ) / PA−1 is the (normalized) price change around the contest resolution, and η is

given by Equation (10). Furthermore, it is straightforward to show that η is uncorrelated with
all of the other terms on the right-hand side of (15).
     To estimate the model, we run cross-sectional regressions of the following form:


(16)     PDIFFi = α + β 1πˆ Ai −1 + β 2 RECiD + β 3 (πˆ Ai −1 × RECiD ) + ε i


where πˆ Ai −1 , RECiD , and PDIFFi are as defined in section 6.2.1 above. The regression yields

estimates for the four reduced-form parameters α , β1 , β 2 , and β 3 that can be linearly rearranged

in light of (15) to obtain estimates of the four structural parameters δ D , δ M , μ D , and μ M .




34
   Although we assume for simplicity that proxy advice has constant certification effects across firms, this
assumption can be relaxed to allow for firm-specific certification effects. We maintain the simpler setup here since
we are primarily interested in average certification effects across firms.


                                                        31
   As with the unstructured model in Section 6.2.1., we again use two different approaches to
test for certification. Our first approach, based on OLS, ignores the fact that the probabilities
πˆ Ai −1 and πˆ Ai used in the regression Equation (16) are not true subjective probabilities, but rather
fitted values obtained from a pair of first-stage logit regressions. In general, sampling variation
will cause this two-stage approach to yield inconsistent standard errors. Therefore, our second
approach uses GMM to estimate standard errors based on treating (16) and the two logit
equations as a system of three simultaneous equations.             We again implement the GMM
estimation as a just-identified system involving one moment condition per explanatory variable
(see the Appendix).      Since all parameters in the three equations are estimated jointly, the
standard errors properly reflect the presence of the generated regressand and regressors.
   Observe from Equation (16) that, as a practical matter, a high degree of multicollinearity is
likely to be present in the unrestricted model since both the binary variable RECiD as well as the

interaction variable πˆ Ai −1 × RECiD are included as regressors. The resulting loss of precision in
the parameter estimates could obscure any certification effects that might be present. Thus, in
addition to estimating the full model, we also estimate two restricted models in which RECiD
does not appear as a stand-alone regressor. In the first restricted model, we assume there are no
management certification effects. This assumption is captured by the parameter restriction
μ D = μ M . In the second restricted model, we assume that dissident certification effects are
absent, which corresponds to the parameter restriction δ D = δ M .




                                                   32
    Table 9 presents the results of structural estimation of the unrestricted and restricted models.
Panel A reports the R2, residual standard error, and sample size for each version of the model,
along with estimates and standard errors for the four underlying structural certification
parameters.     Once again, OLS heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses, and GMM standard errors are in square brackets. The OLS estimates for the
unrestricted model provide some evidence of certification: The estimate of δ D is positive and
significant at 5%, and the estimate of δ M is negative and significant at 5%. These point
estimates indicate that, ceteris paribus, a pro-dissident recommendation increases the dissident-
win contingent stock valuation by about 8.4 percent of the pre-recommendation stock price,
whereas a pro-management recommendation causes a corresponding decrease in the dissident-
win valuation of about 5.6 percent. We note, however, that when the presence of the generated
regressand and regressors in Equation (16) are accounted for via GMM, the parameter estimates
of δ D and δ M are no longer individually significant. In the restricted model with μ D = μ M ,

the OLS estimate of δ D is positive and mildly significant, but the other individual parameter
estimates are, once again, not individually significant.
    Certification can take on different forms, depending on how the market interprets
information from recommendation announcements. Thus, we turn to hypothesis tests regarding
various relationships among the structural certification parameters δ D , δ M , μ D , and μ M .
Panel B of Table 9 reports p-values corresponding to three Wald hypothesis tests conducted
under each of the three models. First, we consider whether investors learn about dissidents based
on the directionality of advice (“dissident certification”). A Wald test based on the OLS results
leads us to reject the null of no dissident certification ( δ D = δ M ) in both the unrestricted model
(p-value: 0.003) and the no-management-certification model (p-value: 0.007). Likewise, in both
of these models the GMM standard errors point to rejection of the no-dissident-certification null
at the 5 percent level.




                                                 33
    Next, we consider the possibility of “management certification.” In both the unrestricted and
restricted models, we cannot reject the null hypothesis ( μ D = μ M ) that vote recommendations
have no effect on investors’ assessments of incumbent management quality. The asymmetry
between the evidence on dissident certification and the evidence on management certification
suggests that investors generally know less about dissidents than about incumbent management.
Indeed, dissidents, unlike incumbents, typically do not have established track records at the firms
that they target. Thus, considerable uncertainty is likely to exist concerning the viability of
dissidents’ business plans and how much shareholder value the dissident nominees would deliver
if elected to the board.
    Lastly, we consider whether directionality in proxy advice helps investors to learn about the
difference in quality between the two opposing teams (“differential certification”). In other
words, does the direction of a recommendation matter for the differential between assessed
dissident quality and assessed management quality? The OLS estimates allow us to reject the
hypothesis that pro-dissident advice and pro-management advice have equal effects on the
quality differential (p-value: 0.019). However, the GMM estimates do not lead to rejection at
conventional levels (p-value: 0.128).
    Overall, we conclude that, although there is at best only weak evidence of management or
differential certification, proxy advice does appear to have a dissident certification effect. In
other words, the directionality of vote recommendations seems to convey substantive
information to investors about the quality of dissidents.




7. CONCLUSION


    This paper provides a systematic empirical investigation of the role of third-party voting
advisory services in contested proxy elections. We focus on vote recommendations made by
Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS), a large and prominent proxy advisory firm.           Our
analysis examines whether vote recommendations bring new information to the market and, if
so, whether the information impacts stock prices via a prediction effect and/or a certification
effect. We establish three main findings. First, recommendations do appear to be a source of
new, market-relevant information. We document positive abnormal stock returns at the arrival


                                                34
of pro-dissident recommendations, and nonparametric tests reveal that public news of
recommendations is accompanied by elevated abnormal stock return volatility. Second, vote
recommendations are good statistical predictors of contest outcomes even after controlling for a
variety of other predictors such as voting rules, dissident and management ownership, and
contest characteristics. Third, proxy advice seems to play a certification role. The results from
our empirical tests suggest that investors do revise their valuation assessments of dissidents in
response to vote recommendations. While our method for testing for certification effects has
been developed in the context of proxy contests, we note that the approach can be applied more
generally to other settings in which investors receive interim news that resolves uncertainty
about a final outcome. Future work could more fully explore the usefulness of this approach and
shed more light on the implications of proxy advice for investor welfare, information
aggregation, and the overall functioning of the proxy voting mechanism.




                                               35
REFERENCES


ADP Investor Communications Services, 2005, 2005 proxy season: Key statistics &
       performance ratings.


Berman, Dennis and Joann Lublin, 2006, Adviser ISS puts itself on sale, could fetch up
       to $500 million, Wall Street Journal, September 6, p. C4.


Bethel, Jennifer and Stuart Gillan, 2002, The impact of the institutional and regulatory
       environment on shareholder voting, Financial Management, 31(4), 29-54.


Betton, Sandra and B. Espen Eckbo, 2000, Toeholds, bid jumps, and expected payoffs in
       takeovers, Review of Financial Studies, 13, 841-882.


Bhagat, Sanjai and Richard Jefferis, 1991, Voting power in the proxy voting process,
       Journal of Financial Economics, 30, 193-225.


Brickley, James, Ronald Lease, and Clifford Smith, 1988, Ownership structure and voting on
       antitakeover amendments, Journal of Financial Economics, 20, 267-291.


BusinessWeek, Compaq and HP: What’s an investor to do? March 18, 2002, p. 62.


Cai, Jie, Jacqueline L. Garner and Ralph A. Walkling, November 2009, Electing directors,
       Journal of Finance, forthcoming.


Choi, Stephen, Jill Fisch and Marcel Kahan, 200d, Director elections and the influence of proxy
       advisors, Southern California Law Review, 82, forthcoming.


Christoffersen, Susan, Christopher Geczy, David Musto, and Adam Reed, 2007, Vote trading
       and information aggregation, Journal of Finance, 62, 2897-2929.




                                                36
Corrado, Charles, 1989, A nonparametric test for abnormal security-price performance in event
       studies, Journal of Financial Economics, 23, 385-395.


Cremers, Martijn, and Roberta Romano, 2007, Institutional investors and proxy voting: The
       impact of the 2003 mutual fund voting disclosure regulation, Yale Law and Economics
       Research Paper No. 349, August 23.


Davis, Gerald, and E. Han Kim, 2007, Would mutual funds bite the hand that feeds them?
       Business ties and proxy voting, Journal of Financial Economics, 85, 552-570.


DeAngelo, Harry and Linda DeAngelo, 1989, Proxy contests and the governance of
       publicly-held corporations, Journal of Financial Economics, 23, 29-59.


Dodd, Peter and Jerold Warner, 1983, On corporate governance: A study of proxy
       contests, Journal of Financial Economics, 11, 401-438.


Easterbrook, Frank and Daniel Fischel, 1983, Voting in corporate law, Journal of Law and
       Economics, 26, 375-390.


Gillan, Stuart, and Laura Starks, 2000, Corporate governance proposals and shareholder
       activism: The role of institutional investors, Journal of Financial Economics, 57, 275-
       305.


Gordon, Lilli and John Pound, 1993, Information, ownership structure, and shareholder     voting:
       Evidence from shareholder-sponsored corporate governance proposals, Journal of
       Finance, 48, 697-718.


Grossman, Sanford and Oliver Hart, 1980, Takeover bids, the free-rider problem, and the theory
       of the corporation, Bell Journal of Economics, 11, 42-64.


Grossman, Sanford and Oliver Hart, 1988, One share-one vote and the market for corporate



                                               37
       control, Journal of Financial Economics, 20, 175-202.


Harris, Milton and Artur Raviv, 1988, Corporate governance: Voting rights and majority rules,
       Journal of Financial Economics, 20, 203-235.


Hershey, Robert D., Jr., 2006, A little industry with a lot of sway on proxy votes, New York
       Times, June 18, 2006, p. 6.


Ikenberry, David and Josef Lakonishok, 1993, Corporate governance through the proxy
       contest: Evidence and implications, Journal of Business, 66, 405-435.


Krasne, Robert M., 2004, Proxy-voting concern; ISS wields extraordinary clout in
       recommendations to investors, yet it also provides services to corporations,
       Pensions and Investments, May 31.


Manne, Henry, 1964, Some theoretical aspects of share voting, Columbia Law Review, 64, 1427-
       1445.


Matvos, G. and M. Ostrovsky, 2008, Cross-ownership, returns, and voting in mergers,
       Journal of Financial Economics, 89, 391-403.


Maug, E. and K. Rydqvist, 2009, Do shareholders vote strategically? Voting behavior,
       proposal screening, and majority rules, Review of Finance, 13, 47-79.


Morgan, A. and A. Poulsen, 2001, Linking pay to performance—compensation proposals
       in the S&P 500, Journal of Financial Economics, 62, 489-523.


Mulherin, J. Harold and Annette Poulsen, 1998, Proxy contests and corporate change:
       Implications for shareholder wealth, Journal of Financial Economics, 47, 279-313.


Newey, W. K., 1984, A method of moments interpretation of sequential estimators,



                                               38
       Economics Letters, 14, 201-206.


Newey, W. and D. McFadden, 1994, Large Sample Estimation and Hypothesis Testing, in
       Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. 4, Engle and McFadden, eds., Elsevier, Amsterdam, the
       Netherlands.


Pagan, A., 1984, Econometric issues in the analysis of regressions with generated
       regressors, International Economic Review, 25, 221-247.


Parrino, Robert, Richard Sias and Laura Starks, 2003, Voting with their feet: Institutional
       ownership changes around forced CEO turnover, Journal of Financial Economics, 68, 3-46.


Pound, John, 1988, Proxy contests and the efficiency of shareholder oversight, Journal
       of Financial Economics, 20, 237-265


Pound, John, 1989, Shareholder activism and share values: The causes and consequences of
       countersolicitations against management anti-takeover proposals, Journal of Law and
       Economics, 32, 357-379.


Sidel, Robin, 2001, After this deal, is anyone left to give advice? Wall Street Journal, July 26,
       2001, p. C1.


Starkman, Dean, 2006, A proxy adviser’s two sides, Washington Post, January 23.


Wooldridge, Jeffrey, 2002, Econometric analysis of cross-section and panel data, MIT
       Press, Cambridge, MA.




                                                39
                                                            Table 1
                  Descriptive Statistics for Contests and Vote Recommendations
This table presents descriptive statistics for a sample of 293 board-related proxy contests during the 1992 to 2005
period and 198 associated vote recommendations issued by Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS). Proxy contests
are identified from DEFC14A filings via the SEC EDGAR database. Vote recommendations are identified from the
Dow Jones Factiva, Lexis-Nexis, and Investext databases and from information provided by ISS. A vote
recommendation is said to favor the dissident group if it endorses at least one dissident director. Panel A reports
statistics on the frequencies of contests and recommendations over time and on the size distribution of firms with
vote recommendations. Panels B and C provide breakdowns of the sample according to contest type and dissident
type, respectively. In Panel B, frequencies and percentages do not total to the entire sample since a contest can
appear in more than one category. Contest and dissident type classifications are based on information reported in
news articles and DEFC14A filings.

 Panel A: Contest and Recommendation Frequencies over Time

                                Contests (Initial Sample)                          Recommendations

                                          # with       % with           Avg. (Median)        Rec’s.      Rec’s.
                             Number        Vote         Vote            Firm Size, $M         for         for
 Time Period                              Rec’s.       Rec’s.              Assets            Diss.       Mgmt.

 1992-1995                      31            12          38.7          2,763.6 (484.4)         4           8
 1996-1997                      37            19          51.4          3,203.3 (320.7)         5          14
 1998-1999                      57            27          47.4           766.9 (131.5)         13          14
 2000-2001                      75            61          81.3          1,220.5 (255.5)        31          30
 2002-2003                      56            47          83.9          2,629.8 (196.5)        17          30
 2004-2005                      37            32          86.5          1,155.2 (390.8)        19          13

 Total (1992-2005)              293           198         67.6          1,766.5 (240.5)        89          109

 Panel B: Recommendation Frequency, by Type of Contest
                                                                              Rec’s. for             Rec’s. for
                                                      All Rec’s.
                                                                              Dissident             Management
                                                               % of                  % of                  % of
 Contest Characteristics                            Freq.                  Freq.                Freq.
                                                              sample                sample                sample

 Concurrent takeover bid by dissident                37          18.7       18        9.1           19     9.6
 Dissident seeks sale or liquidation of co.          56          28.3       24       12.1           32     16.2
 Targeted firm is a fund company                     21          10.6        9        4.5           12     6.1
 Dissident objects to firm’s financial               19          9.6         8        4.0           11     5.6
      policy
 Dissident proposes amendment to                     46          23.2       17        8.6           29     14.6
      internal governance
 Dissident proposes removal of a                     33          16.7       12        6.1           21     10.6
      takeover defense


                                                                                                 (continued)



                                                            40
Table 1, Continued

Panel C: Recommendation Frequency, by Dissident Type
                                                          Rec’s. for       Rec’s. for
                                         All Rec’s.
                                                          Dissident       Management
                                                % of             % of             % of
Dissident Type                         Freq.            Freq.            Freq.
                                               Sample           Sample           Sample

Investment company                      70      35.4     33      16.7     37      18.7

Corporation (excl. investment co’s.)    42      21.2     23      11.6     19      9.6

Individual shareholder activist         29      14.6     14      7.1      15      7.6

Labor union                             2        1.0     1       0.5      1       0.5

Current officer or director             4        2.0     4       2.0      0       0.0

Former officer or director              18       9.1     3       1.5      15      7.6

Individual activist & former officer    4        2.0     2       1.0      2       1.0
    or director
Other shareholder group                 29      14.6     9       4.5      20      10.1

Total                                  198      100.0    89      44.9    109      55.1




                                               41
                                                   Table 2: Abnormal Returns Around Key Contest Dates
This table reports average cumulative abnormal returns around key event dates for the sample of 170 board-related proxy contests during 1992-2005 with available
stock price data from CRSP and with a vote recommendation issued by Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS). Contests are identified from DEFC14A filings via the
SEC EDGAR database. Vote recommendations are identified from the Dow Jones Factiva, Lexis-Nexis, and Investext databases and from information provided by
ISS. Abnormal returns are calculated using a standard one-factor market model in which market returns are measured using the return on an equal-weighted CRSP
index. The initial filing date is the first date on which the dissident group filed a definitive (DEFC14A) or preliminary (PREC14A) proxy statement with the SEC. The
proxy contest resolution date is the earliest news report in the Factiva or LexisNexis database of either 1) a negotiated settlement in which the dissident withdraws the
contest; or 2) a resolution of the contest by vote, based on a preliminary vote count. The recommendation announcement date is defined as follows: when a public
news story is available, the announcement date equals the date of the earliest such story; when no news story is available, the announcement date is imputed to be the
earlier of a) three days prior to the contest resolution date and b) six days after the ISS report date. Only contests in which there are at least three trading days between
the announcement date and the resolution date are included. ***, ** and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                           [-25,+1] around               [-7,+1] around            [-1,+1] around date of         25 days before earliest
                                                         earliest filing date of        recommendation               public resolution of        filing date through 1 day
                                                            dissident proxy            announcement date                proxy contest              after public resolution

                                               N           Mean         T-stat          Mean        T-stat           Mean          T-stat           Mean          T-stat

 All contests                                 170        10.48***        7.29             1.35       1.60             0.35         0.71           17.26***         6.27
 By company size
      Large (Assets > median)                  87         9.53***        5.66             0.63       0.63             0.66         1.13           16.43***         5.00
      Small (Assets <= median)                 83        11.48***        4.86             2.09       1.53             0.02         0.03           18.12***         4.06
 By time period
      Pre-FD (1/1992-10/2000)                  69        13.88***        6.39          2.64**        2.04             0.03         0.04           24.43***         5.89
      Interim period (11/2000-3/2003)          52          7.32**        2.50             2.76       1.64             0.28         0.28            14.21**         2.55
      Post N-PX rules (4/2003-12/2005)         49         9.05***        3.73           -1.98        -1.39            0.87         1.08            10.39**         2.22
 By outcome
      Dissident win                            78        10.09***        4.75             1.26       1.04           2.02***        2.89           14.91***         3.50
     Management win                            92        10.82***        5.53             1.42       1.21             -1.07        -1.56          19.24***         5.38
 By ISS recommendation
     For dissident                             75         8.54***        4.18         3.76***         3.16           1.43**        2.05           17.37***         4.50
     For management                            95        12.01***        5.98          -0.56         -0.47            -0.50        -0.74          17.16***         4.44




                                                                                     42
 Table 3: Stock Price Reaction to Proxy Advice, by Direction of Vote Recommendation
This table reports, for various subsamples, average cumulative abnormal returns over a [-7,+1] window
surrounding the announcement of vote recommendations issued by Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS). The
sample consists of 170 vote recommendations issued during board-related proxy contests over the 1992-2005
period for which stock price data are available from CRSP. Vote recommendations are identified from SEC
filings, ISS archives, and the Dow Jones Factiva, Lexis-Nexis, and Investext databases. Abnormal returns are
calculated using a standard one-factor market model in which market returns are measured using the return on an
equal-weighted CRSP index. The proxy contest resolution date is the earliest news report in the Factiva or
LexisNexis news database of either 1) a negotiated settlement in which the dissident withdraws the contest; or 2)
a resolution of the contest by vote, based on a preliminary vote count. The recommendation announcement date
is defined as follows: when a public news story is available, the announcement date equals the date of the earliest
such story; when no news story is available, the announcement date is imputed to be the earlier of a) three days
prior to the contest resolution date and b) six days after the ISS report date. Sample sizes and t-statistics (in
parentheses) are reported below means. Only contests in which there are at least three trading days between the
announcement date and the resolution date are included. The rightmost column reports p-values from t-tests for
differences in means. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                             (1)                (2)               (3)              P-value of
                                         All Recs.           Rec. for          Rec. for             Test for
 Contest Subsamples
                                                             Mgmt.             Dissident          Diff., (2)−(3)

 All contests                               1.35                -0.56           3.76***               0.009
                                           (1.60)              (-0.47)           (3.17)
                                            170                  95                75
 Tender offer by the dissident              -0.68               -2.73              1.50               0.081
                                           (-0.36)             (-1.03)           (0.57)
                                             31                   16                15
 Management win                             1.42                 0.09            3.48**               0.161
                                           (1.21)              (0.06)            (2.01)
                                             92                   56                36
 Dissident win                              1.26                -1.49           4.02***               0.015
                                           (1.04)              (-0.83)           (2.46)
                                             78                   39                39
 Large firms                                0.63                -0.29              1.72               0.327
 (assets above sample median)              (0.63)              (-0.21)           (1.17)
                                             87                   47                40
 Small firms                                2.09                -0.82           6.09***               0.008
 (assets below sample median)              (1.53)              (-0.43)           (3.18)
                                             83                   48                35
 Pre-FD                                    2.64**               -0.30           6.69***               0.018
 (Jan. 1992 to Oct. 2000)                  (2.04)              (-0.17)           (3.57)
                                             69                   40                29
 Interim Period                             2.76                 1.50             4.12*               0.427
 (Nov. 2000 to Mar. 2003)                  (1.64)              (0.61)            (1.80)
                                             52                   27                25
 Post N-PX                                  -1.98               -2.92             -0.72               0.164
 (Apr. 2003 to Dec. 2005)                  (-1.39)             (-1.45)           (-0.37)
                                             49                   28                21
 Filing date return above                   0.78                -1.58           4.49***               0.009
 sample median                             (0.59)              (-0.89)           (2.36)
                                             85                   52                33
 Filing date return below                   1.92*                0.68           3.19**                0.293
 sample median                             (1.83)              (0.47)            (2.12)
                                             85                   43                42



                                                        43
      Table 4: Abnormal Stock Price Volatility Surrounding Vote Recommendations Covered by the Media
This table reports median absolute abnormal returns on event days surrounding news reports of vote recommendations made by
Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS) during board-related proxy contests over 1992-2005. The sample consists of recommendation
announcements identified from the Dow Jones Factiva and Lexis-Nexis databases. Abnormal returns are calculated using a market-
adjusted methodology (using the return on an equal-weighted CRSP index). The recommendation announcement date is defined as the
date of the earliest news story reporting a recommendation. We use the nonparametric rank test procedure described in Corrado (1989) to
test the one-sided null hypotheses that the absolute abnormal return on a given day is greater than the absolute abnormal returns during
the entire [FILING+2,REC+1] period. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively under the
Corrado (1989) one-sided test.



              All Contests            Recs. For Mgmt.             Recs. For Diss.            Small Firms                 Pre-FD
               N = 149                    N = 77                     N = 72                    N = 77                    N = 64
 Event
 Day
           Median      t-stat        Median      t-stat          Median     t-stat        Median      t-stat       Median       t-stat

 -7        0.0188      0.806         0.0208      1.384*          0.0126    -0.271         0.0221      0.631         0.0205     1.128
 -6        0.0163      0.827         0.0137      -0.684          0.0199    1.898**        0.0263     1.763**        0.0137     0.475
 -5        0.0163      1.169         0.0164      0.136           0.0163     1.54*         0.0162     -0.798         0.0171     1.169
 -4        0.0157      0.597         0.0166      0.796           0.0151     0.036         0.0187     -0.233         0.0140     0.295
 -3        0.0124      -1.772        0.0122      -1.722          0.0126    -0.769         0.0151     -1.033         0.0114     -1.297
 -2        0.0119      -1.632        0.0130      -0.775          0.0114    -1.541         0.0126     -1.459         0.0116     -1.945
 -1        0.0135      -0.535        0.0119      -0.698          0.0141    -0.047         0.0121     -1.000         0.0128     -0.823
 0         0.0173     1.399*         0.0184     1.840**          0.0163     0.084         0.0206      0.887         0.0192     1.162
 1         0.0141     1.821**        0.0134      0.316           0.0159   2.310***        0.0151      0.621         0.0129     0.844




                                                            44
                                                Table 5
              Contest Outcome Frequencies, by Direction of Recommendation
This contingency table shows relative frequencies of proxy contest outcomes following proxy advice
that endorsed either the dissident group or the incumbent group. The sample consists of 198 vote
recommendations issued by Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS) during proxy contests for board
seats over 1992-2005. Vote recommendations are identified from DEFC14A filings, Dow Jones
Factiva, Lexis-Nexis, Investext, and information supplied by ISS. A vote recommendation is said to
favor the dissident group if it endorses at least one dissident director. The dissident is said to win the
contest if dissidents win at least one board seat from a shareholder vote or consent solicitation. Beside
each cell frequency in parentheses is the percentage of total column outcomes represented by that
frequency. The p-value is reported for a Pearson Chi-Squared test of independence.


                             Rec. Favors                 Rec. Favors
                                                                                    Total
                              Dissident                  Incumbent


      Dissident
                              49 (55.06%)                 45 (41.28%)           94 (47.47%)
        Wins



    Management
                              40 (44.94%)                 64 (58.72%)           104 (52.53%)
      Wins



        Total                      89                         109                    198


    Pearson Chi-
                              p-value = 0.054
    Squared Test




                                                    45
                                                          Table 6
                        Characteristics of Contests, Recommendations, and Firms
This table presents summary statistics for various characteristics of our sample of 198 vote recommendations issued by
Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS) during proxy contests for board seats over 1992-2005. RECD is a binary variable
indicating that a vote recommendation endorses at least one dissident director. Dissident ownership is the percentage of
total voting equity held by the dissident group as of the record date; it excludes any unexercised options held by current
officers or board members who belong to the dissident committee. Management ownership is the percentage of total
voting equity held by officers and directors as of the record date, minus any unexercised options and any shares held by
dissidents currently on the board. Cumulative voting is a binary variable equal to one if and only if voting for directors is
cumulative according to state law and the firm’s articles or bylaws. Majority needed to elect is a binary variable equal to
one if and only if a majority affirmative vote is required to elect directors under state law and the firm’s articles or bylaws.
Special meeting is a binary variable equal to one if the proxy solicitation pertains to a special meeting of shareholders (as
opposed to an annual meeting); consent solicitation is a binary variable equal to one if the dissident is soliciting written
consents, and equal to zero otherwise. Dissident hires proxy solicitor (incumbent hires proxy solicitor) is a binary variable
equal to 1 if and only if the dissident team (incumbent team) employs a proxy solicitor during the contest. Contest length
is equal to the number of days elapsed between the first filing of a DEFC14A and the resolution of a contest (either by
vote or settlement). Shareholders of record is the number of shareholders of record as reported in the firm’s most recent
annual report. Takeover bid by dissident is a binary variable indicating whether or not there was an outstanding takeover
offer by the dissident at the time of contest initiation. CEO tenure is the amount of time (years) the CEO has been in
office. CEO is Chairman equals 1 if the CEO is the same individual as the chairman or if there is no chairman; it equals 0
otherwise. Dissident is activist equals 1 if the dissident targeted more than one company in the sample, and equal to zero
otherwise. Firm size is total assets in millions of U.S. dollars, at the end of the last fiscal year preceding the record date.
Institutional ownership is the percentage of outstanding equity held by institutions at the end of the latest quarter
preceding the record date. Adjusted return, prior year is the raw percentage return minus the percentage return on the
CRSP Equal-weighted index over the year ending 26 days before the first contest filing. Volatility, prior year is the
annualized standard deviation of daily stock returns over the year ending 26 days before the first contest filing. All
variables are constructed from SEC filings, news articles, Thomson CDA/Spectrum, or CRSP.




                                                             46
Table 6, Continued
                                                            Std.
                    Variable            Mean      Median              Obs.
                                                            Dev.

RECD (= recommendation favors diss.)     0.45       0        0.50     198
Dissident ownership (%)                  8.97      7.89      8.23     197
Management ownership (%)                 8.73      5.30     10.17     198
Cumulative voting                        0.08       0        0.27     198
Majority needed to elect                 0.22       0        0.41     198
Special meeting                          0.06       0        0.24     198
Consent solicitation                     0.06       0        0.24     198
Dissident hires proxy solicitor          0.84       1        0.37     196
Incumbent hires proxy solicitor          0.97       1        0.17     196
Contest length (days)                   34.78       29      28.51     198
Shareholders of record                 3,693.67   1,042    7,472.51   168
Takeover bid by dissident                0.19       0        0.39     198
CEO tenure (yrs.)                        6.34       4        7.67     198
CEO is chairman                          0.63       1        0.49     198
Dissident is activist                    0.15       0        0.35     198
Firm size, assets ($M)                 1,766.46   240.48   5,771.4    198
Institutional ownership (%)             34.37     28.72     26.47     197
Adjusted return, prior year (%)         -28.99    -27.80    41.69     190
Volatility, prior year (%)              53.31     44.01     30.24     190




                                         47
              Table 7: Proxy Contest Outcomes, Vote Recommendations, and Prediction
This table reports estimated marginal effects from multivariate probit regressions explaining proxy contest outcomes (1
= dissident win, 0 = incumbent management win) in terms of the direction of proxy advice and other explanatory
variables. The sample consists of 198 proxy contests for board seats during 1992-2005 in which a recommendation was
issued by Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS). The main explanatory variable of interest is RECD, a binary variable
equal to 1 if and only if the recommendation endorses at least one dissident director. Other independent variables
include Pre-FD period, a dummy variable equal to 1 if a contest filing occurred before October 23, 2000; Post-N-PX
period, a dummy variable equal to 1 if and only if a contest filing occurred after April 14, 2003; and Filing-date
abnormal return, the cumulative abnormal return over days [-25,1] surrounding the first PREC14A or DEFC14A
contest filing, calculated using a standard one-factor market model with the return on an equal-weighted CRSP index
as the market return. All other independent variables are as described in Table 6. Each specification includes a contest-
year time trend and dummy variables for 1-digit SIC industries that contain at least 10 firms in the sample. Z-statistics
appear in parentheses below estimated marginal effects. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels.

    Independent Variable                                  (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)

          D                                              0.141*         0.179**          0.213**        0.295***
    REC       (1 = rec. for dissident)
                                                         (1.89)          (2.17)           (2.16)          (2.75)

    Ln(assets)                                           0.005           0.044*           0.036          -0.010
                                                         (0.22)          (1.74)           (1.03)         (-0.22)

    Ln(Dissident ownership)                                             0.144***          0.108*          0.084
                                                                          (3.12)          (1.86)          (1.31)

    Ln(Management ownership)                                            -0.094**        -0.177***       -0.250***
                                                                         (-2.31)          (-3.21)         (-3.83)

    Cumulative voting                                                   0.427***         0.359**         0.427**
                                                                          (2.74)          (2.27)          (2.43)

    Majority needed to elect                                             0.030            0.018           0.065
                                                                         (0.28)           (0.15)          (0.46)

    Special meeting                                                      0.244            0.230           0.255
                                                                         (1.52)           (1.08)          (1.05)

    Written consent solicitation                                         0.321*          0.383**         0.436**
                                                                         (1.90)           (2.34)          (2.47)

    Ln(Institutional ownership)                                                                          0.135**
                                                                                                          (2.10)
    Ln(volatility)                                                                                        1.503
                                                                                                          (0.41)
    Ln(contest length)                                                                    0.002           0.002
                                                                                          (1.24)          (1.40)
    Ln(shareholders)                                                                      -0.018         -0.026
                                                                                          (-0.44)        (-0.60)

                                                                                                 (continued)




                                                          48
Table 7, Continued

  Independent Variable           (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)

  Dissident hires solicitor                          0.248      0.306*
                                                     (1.62)     (1.87)

  Incumbent hires solicitor                         -0.413**   -0.454***
                                                     (-2.57)     (-2.76)

  Activist dissident                                 -0.066     -0.100
                                                     (-0.49)    (-0.64)

  Takeover bid by dissident                          -0.060     -0.103
                                                     (-0.48)    (-0.74)
  CEO = chairman                                    -0.244**   -0.330***
                                                     (-2.37)     (-2.90)

  Ln(CEO tenure)                                    0.214***   0.280***
                                                      (2.99)     (3.02)

  Filing-date abnormal return                                   -0.074
                                                                (-0.29)

  Adjusted return, prior year                                   0.198
                                                                (1.37)

  Contest year                  -0.017    -0.005     -0.044     -0.030
                                (-0.64)   (-0.15)    (-1.22)    (-0.79)

  Pre-FD period                 -0.140    -0.162    -0.327*     -0.228
                                (-1.12)   (-1.17)   (-1.95)     (-1.21)

  Post N-PX period              -0.021    -0.113     0.027      0.046
                                (-0.18)   (-0.89)    (0.19)     (0.31)

  1-digit SIC dummies            Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes

  Number of observations         198       197        168        160

  Pseudo-R2                     0.081     0.181      0.291       0.370




                                 49
                                        Table 8: Testing for Certification
This table presents regression-based tests of the certification hypothesis for our sample of proxy vote
recommendations issued by Institutional Shareholder Services. The sample consists of 172 vote
recommendations issued during proxy contests for board seats occurring over the 1992-2005 period. The
tests are based on two separate cross-sectional OLS regressions:
                        I.    PDIFFi = γ 0 + γ 1 RECiD + ε i
                       II.    PDIFFi = γ 0 + γ 1 (πˆ Ai −1 × RECiD ) + ε i .
In the regressions, REC iD is a binary variable equal to 1 if and only if the vote recommendation in contest
i favors the dissident. The dependent variable, PDIFF i , is constructed from observed stock prices and
estimated probabilities as

                                                        ⎛ πˆ Ai − πˆ Ai −1 ⎞ ⎛ PREC
                                                                                i
                                                                                     ⎞
              PDIFFi ≡ CAR         i
                                  [ REC −7 , REC +1]
                                                        ⎜
                                                       −⎜ i                ⎟
                                                                        i ⎟ ⎜
                                                                             × i +1 ⎟⎟ × CAR[iREC + 2,OUTCOME +1]
                                                                              ⎜
                                                        ⎝ π C − πˆ A ⎠ ⎝ PREC −8 ⎠
          i                        i
where CAR[ REC −7, REC +1] and CAR[ REC + 2,OUTCOME+1] are cumulative abnormal returns over the indicated
event windows surrounding the recommendation announcement date and contest resolution date,
respectively; PREC
               i
                   +1
                      and PREC
                           i
                               −8
                                  are daily closing prices 1 day after and 8 days before the recommendation
announcement date, respectively; π Ci is a binary variable equal to 1 if and only if the dissident wins the
contest; and πˆ Ai and πˆ Ai −1 are fitted probabilities of dissident victory derived from logit regressions
(similar to specification (2) in Table 7) that include and exclude, respectively, REC iD as an explanatory
variable. To ensure the abnormal return event windows are well-defined and non-overlapping, only
contests in which there are at least three trading days between the recommendation date and the resolution
date are included. Numbers in parentheses are heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors derived from first
obtaining fitted probabilities πˆ Ai and πˆ Ai −1 from logit regressions and then using OLS to estimate
regression I (or regression II). Numbers in square brackets are standard errors obtained from using
Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) to estimate regression I (or regression II) along with the two
logit regressions as a just-identified system of simultaneous equations (see Appendix for details). ***, **,
and * denote coefficient estimates significantly different from zero (two-sided) at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels, respectively.

                             Variable                             Model 1            Model 2

                             Intercept                              -0.002             -0.003
                                                                   (0.010)            (0.010)
                                                                   [0.013]            [0.019]


                             REC iD                                0.041
                                                                 (0.020)**
                                                                  [0.024]*


                             πˆ Ai −1 × REC iD                                         0.082
                                                                                     (0.034)**
                                                                                     [0.041]**


                             Observations                            172                172
                             R2                                     0.027              0.036

                                                                 50
                                               Table 9
                                   Additional Tests for Certification

This table presents additional tests of the certification hypothesis for our sample of proxy vote
recommendations issued by Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS). The sample consists of 172 vote
recommendations issued during proxy contests for board seats during 1992-2005. The tests are based on
the model, outlined in the text, that relates innovations in perceived dissident and management quality to
the underlying parameters δ D , δ M , μ D , μ M and to the direction of the ISS recommendation. The
model is estimated using cross-sectional regressions of the following form:
                         PDIFFi = μ M + (δ M − μ M )πˆ Ai −1
                                    + ( μ D − μ M ) REC Di
                                    + (δ D − δ M − μ D + μ M )(πˆ Ai −1 × RECiD ) + ε i .
In the regressions, REC iD is a binary variable equal to 1 if and only if the vote recommendation in
contest i favors the dissident. The dependent variable, PDIFF i , is constructed from observed stock
prices and estimated probabilities as

                                                      ⎛ πˆ Ai − πˆ Ai −1 ⎞ ⎛ PREC
                                                                               i
                                                                                     ⎞
              PDIFFi ≡ CAR     i
                              [ REC −7 , REC +1]   − ⎜⎜ i                ⎟ × ⎜ i +1 ⎟⎟ × CAR[iREC + 2,OUTCOME +1]
                                                                      i ⎟ ⎜
                                                      ⎝ π C − πˆ A ⎠ ⎝ PREC −8 ⎠
          i                        i
where CAR[ REC −7, REC +1] and CAR[ REC + 2,OUTCOME+1] are cumulative abnormal returns over the indicated
event windows surrounding the recommendation announcement date and contest resolution date,
respectively; PREC
                i
                   +1
                      and PREC
                           i
                               −8
                                  are daily closing prices 1 day after and 8 days before the
recommendation announcement date, respectively; π Ci is a binary variable equal to 1 if and only if the
dissident wins the contest; and πˆ Ai and πˆ Ai −1 are fitted probabilities of dissident victory derived from
logit regressions (similar to Specification (2) in Table 7) that include and exclude, respectively, REC iD
as an explanatory variable. To ensure the abnormal return event windows are well-defined and non-
overlapping, only contests in which there are at least three trading days between the recommendation
date and the resolution date are included. Three versions of the model are estimated: the unrestricted
model, a restricted model with μ D = μ M (no “management certification”), and a restricted model with
δ D = δ M (no “dissident certification”). Panel A reports regression diagnostics, parameter estimates, and
standard errors associated with each parameter estimate. Numbers in parentheses are heteroskedasticity-
robust standard errors derived from first obtaining fitted probabilities πˆ Ai and πˆ Ai −1 from logit
regressions and then using OLS to estimate the cross-sectional regression for PDIFF i . Numbers in
square brackets are GMM standard errors obtained from estimating the regression for PDIFF i and the
logit regressions for π Ai and π Ai −1 as a just-identified system of simultaneous equations (see Appendix
for details). ***, **, and * denote parameter estimates significantly different from zero at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively. Panel B reports, for each model and each estimation approach, p-values
associated with two-sided Wald hypothesis tests.




                                                              51
Table 9, Continued
Panel A
                                           Unrestricted         Restricted Model       Restricted Model
                                             Model                (μD = μM )             (δ D = δ M )

Regressions:
   R2                                             0.053                 0.045                  0.009
   Standard error                                 0.121                 0.122                  0.124
   # of observations                              172                    172                   172

Certification Parameters:

      δD                                       0.084                     0.059                0.007
                                             (0.038)**                 (0.034)*              (0.023)
                                              [0.058]                   [0.050]              [0.039]


      δM                                       -0.056                  -0.036                 0.007
                                             (0.027)**                 (0.022)               (0.023)
                                              [0.044]                  [0.036]               [0.039]


      μD                                      -0.010                    0.027                 0.051
                                              (0.035)                  (0.025)               (0.032)
                                              [0.056]                  [0.043]               [0.052]


      μM                                       0.055                    0.027                 0.007
                                              (0.035)                  (0.025)               (0.031)
                                              [0.057]                  [0.043]               [0.056]


Panel B
                                          Unrestricted          Restricted Model       Restricted Model
                                            Model                 (μD = μM )             (δ D = δ M )

                                          OLS        GMM         OLS           GMM     OLS        GMM

Hypothesis Tests:
   Dissident Certification
    H0:   δ D =δ M ;    H1:     δ D ≠δM   0.003         0.045   0.007          0.024    --             --

   Management Certification
   H0:    μD = μM ;    H1:    μD ≠ μM     0.186         0.379     --              --   0.246         0.505

   Differential Certification
   H0: δ D − μD =δ M − μM
                                          0.019         0.128     --              --    --             --
   H1: δ D − μ D ≠ δ M − μ M




                                              52
                                                          APPENDIX

    We provide a brief outline of our approach to estimating Model 1 of Table 8 via GMM; the
other models in Section 6.2 are estimated with GMM in a similar fashion. Under the assumptions
of the model, the following three equations hold for a given contest:
                                                                                e X 'α +α K +1REC
                                                                                                    D


(A1)                            π A ≡ Pr(π C = 1 | X , REC ) =      D

                                                                            1 + e X 'α +α K +1REC
                                                                                                        D



                                                                    e X 'β
                                π A−1 ≡ Pr(π C = 1 | X ) =
                                                                  1 + e X 'β

                                PDIFF = γ 0 + γ 1 REC D + ε
where PDIFF ≡ CAR[ REC −7 , REC +1] − ((π A − π A−1 ) /(π C − π A )) × ( PREC +1 PREC −8 ) × CAR[ REC + 2,OUTCOME +1] , X
is a K × 1 vector of explanatory variables, α K +1 is a coefficient, and α and β are K × 1 vectors of
coefficients.
     By our assumptions in the text, each explanatory variable in system (A1) is orthogonal to the
residual for its corresponding equation. Thus, letting w denote the vector of all observables and
letting θ denote the coefficient vector comprising α , α K +1 , β , γ 0 , and γ 1 , we have 2 K + 3
moment restrictions given by E[h( w, θ )] = 0 , where

                                           ⎡ ⎛            e  X 'α +α K +1REC D    ⎞    ⎤
                                           ⎢ ⎜⎜ π C −                             ⎟X ⎥
                                                        1 + e X 'α +α K +1REC ⎟⎠
                                                                                D
                                           ⎢ ⎝                                         ⎥
                                           ⎢⎛            X 'α +α K +1REC   D
                                                                               ⎞       ⎥
                                           ⎢ ⎜π C − e                          ⎟ REC D ⎥

                                           ⎢ ⎜⎝     1  +    X 'α +α K +1 REC D ⎟
                                                                               ⎠       ⎥
(A2)                            h( w,θ ) ≡ ⎢             e
                                                                                       ⎥.
                                                                     X 'β
                                           ⎢       ⎛              e          ⎞         ⎥
                                                   ⎜⎜ π C −                  ⎟X
                                                                        X 'β ⎟
                                           ⎢        ⎝          1  +  e       ⎠         ⎥
                                           ⎢                                           ⎥
                                           ⎢ ( PDIFF − γ 0 − γ 1 REC ) ⎥
                                                                                   D

                                           ⎢⎣( PDIFF − γ 0 − γ 1 REC D ) REC D ⎥⎦


    Since we have 2 K + 3 parameters, the system is just-identified, implying a unique solution θˆ
to the sample moments (note that θˆ will coincide with equation-by-equation estimation of the
system). A consistent variance estimate for this just-identified system is Vˆ = N −1G −1S (G ' ) −1 where
                                               1    N
                                                          ∂hi ( wi , θ )
(A3)                                     G=
                                               N
                                                   ∑
                                                   i =1       ∂θ ' θˆ
and where
                                               1   N
(A4)                                     S=
                                               N
                                                   ∑ h (w ,θˆ)h (w ,θˆ)' .
                                                   i =1
                                                          i   i         i   i




                                                              53
