                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     REVENUE OR RECIPROCITY? FOUNDING FEUDS OVER EARLY U.S. TRADE
                               POLICY

                                         Douglas A. Irwin

                                       Working Paper 15144
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15144


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2009




This paper was prepared for the NBER Conference "Founding Choices: American Economic Policy
in the 1790s," May 8-9, 2009. I wish to thank Richard Sylla, Farley Grubb, Max Edling, and conference
participants for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Douglas A. Irwin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Revenue or Reciprocity? Founding Feuds over Early U.S. Trade Policy
Douglas A. Irwin
NBER Working Paper No. 15144
July 2009
JEL No. F13,N11,N71

                                              ABSTRACT

The Constitution of 1787 was designed to give Congress powers over trade policy that it lacked under
the Articles of Confederation. The Washington administration was split over whether to use these
powers to raise revenue or to retaliate against Britain’s discriminatory trade policies. Obsessed with
funding the national debt, Alexander Hamilton sought to avoid any conflict with Britain that might
disrupt imports and diminish the customs revenue flowing into the Treasury coffers. By contrast, Thomas
Jefferson and James Madison advocated a policy of “aggressive reciprocity” to force Britain to open
its home and colonial markets to American goods and shipping services. This paper examines how
the nation’s founding policymakers confronted this dilemma and evaluates the merits of different trade
policy options. The main conclusion is that the Federalist policy of moderate tariffs, non-discrimination,
and conflict avoidance provided much needed stability during the critical first decade of the new government.


Douglas A. Irwin
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
douglas.irwin@dartmouth.edu
                                     Revenue or Reciprocity?

                         Founding Feuds over Early U.S. Trade Policy


                                       Douglas A. Irwin
                                  Dartmouth College and NBER



“Our treasury still thinks that these new encroachments of Gt. Brit. on our carrying trade must be
met with passive obedience and non-resistance, lest any misunderstanding with them should
affect our credit, or the prices of our public paper.” – Thomas Jefferson, 1791

“Every gust that arises in the political sky is the signal for measures tending to destroy [our]
ability to pay or to obstruct the course of payment.” – Alexander Hamilton, 1794


1. Introduction

       An important motivation for the Constitutional convention of 1787 was to permit the

national government to impose import tariffs and regulate foreign commerce, something that it

was not empowered to do under the Articles of Confederation. Once Congress was granted this

authority, the use of these powers became the subject of immediate controversy. Should import

duties be imposed simply to collect revenue, or should they be used to strike back against

countries that imposed barriers against U.S. commerce?

       Debate over precisely this issue – using import tariffs for revenue purposes alone or to

achieve reciprocity as well – divided President George Washington’s administration in the early

1790s. The debate pitted Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton against Secretary of State

Thomas Jefferson and his congressional ally James Madison. Seeing imports as the critical tax

base on which he planned to finance government expenditures and fund the public debt,

Hamilton advocated modest, non-discriminatory import duties to ensure a steady stream of

revenue into the Treasury coffers. He also wanted a stable commercial relationship with Britain
                                                -2-

to avoid any conflict that might disrupt imports and diminish customs revenue. By contrast,

Jefferson and Madison saw trade policy as an instrument for achieving reciprocity, a weapon to

be wielded against what they perceived to be Britain’s grossly unfair discrimination against U.S.

commerce. They sought to impose countervailing restrictions in an effort to force Britain to

improve its treatment of U.S. goods and shipping in its home and colonial markets.

       To some degree, these objectives were conflicting and mutually exclusive. Revenue

considerations meant that nothing should be done to interfere with or jeopardize the revenue

coming from a large volume of imports, suggesting that Britain’s discriminatory trade practices

should be tolerated so that the public debt could be funded. Reciprocity considerations

suggested that retaliatory barriers should be imposed against British goods even at the risk of

jeopardizing the government’s most important source of revenue because it held out the promise

of freer trade in the longer term.

       Thus, early U.S. policymakers faced a dilemma: were tariff more important as a means of

raising revenue, or as a tool for achieving reciprocal market access? Put this way, the choices

hardly seem fundamental. But in fact the stakes were considerable and had ramifications for the

funding of the public debt and the role that overseas commerce would play in America’s

economy. This chapter examines how the nation’s founding policymakers confronted this

dilemma and evaluates the merits of different trade policy options. The main conclusion is that

the Federalist policy of moderate tariffs, non-discrimination, and conflict avoidance provided

much needed stability during the first decade of the new government. Some of the potential

pitfalls that were avoided during this crucial period can be illustrated by examining, briefly, how

policy changed when the Republicans took over in 1800 and initiated a more aggressive
                                                 -3-

approach to trade relations with Britain.



2. From the Articles of Confederation to the Constitution

       As a philosophical matter, America’s political leaders were largely favorably to the idea

of free trade after the nation achieved its independence. As students of the enlightenment and

rebels against British mercantilism, the founding fathers wanted to have free and open commerce

among nations. This did not mean the absence of import tariffs, because such duties were

recognized as essential for revenue purposes. Instead, “free trade” mean something along the

lines of unconditional most-favored nation (MFN) status in which discriminatory restraints and

exclusive preferences that inhibited trade would be abolished.1

       But the newly independent United States found itself in a decidedly mercantilist world.

No longer part of the British Empire, Americans faced a host of restrictions on their goods in

Britain and its West Indies colonies. Other European powers similarly protected their home

market and sought to keep trade with their colonies for themselves.2 This harsh reality tempered

the initially high hopes that the United States could enjoy the fruits of unrestricted international

commerce. In 1785, for example, Thomas Jefferson wrote the United States should embrace free



       1
          As McCoy (1980, 86-87) explains, “Many republicans eagerly embraced an eighteenth
century ideology of free trade, whose leading spokesmen included Montesquieu, Hume, Adam
Smith, and the French physiocrats. According to these writers, foreign as well as domestic
commerce should be freed from all restraints to that it might flourish and, in the process,
humanize men by refining their manners and morals. . . . Given their hostility to Britain and the
mercantilist model, it is not surprising that many Americans in the early years of independence
embraced this outlook and tied it directly to the spirit of their revolution.”
       2
           Shepherd and Walton (1976) examine the reorientation of U.S. trade and shipping as a
result of achieving independence.
                                                 -4-

trade “by throwing open all the doors of commerce and knocking off all its shackles.” Yet he

immediately qualified this hope: “But as this cannot be done for others, unless they do it for us,

and there is no probability that Europe will do this, I suppose we may be obliged to adopt a

system which may shackle them in our ports, as they do us in theirs.” James Madison expressed

a similar view: “Much indeed is it to be wished, as I conceive, that no regulations of trade - that

is to say, no restriction or imposts whatever - were necessary. A perfect freedom is the System

which would be my choice.” But, he added, “before such a system will be eligible perhaps for

the U.S. they must be out of debt; before it will be attainable, all other nations must concur in

it.”3

        Madison’s observation, that before the United States could adopt free trade it had to be

free of debt and have access to other markets, underscored two key weaknesses of the Articles of

Confederation. Under the Articles, the national government lacked the ability to impose taxes or

regulate foreign commerce. These two weaknesses created two enormous problems: the

government could not fund its operations, finance its debt, or pay for national defense, and it

could not credibly negotiate treaties of commerce with foreign powers. These closely

intertwined problems had long been recognized. In 1782, Alexander Hamilton wrote that “the

vesting of Congress with the power of regulating trade ought to have been a principal object of

the Confederation for a variety of reasons. It is as necessary for the purposes of commerce as of

revenue.”4 Yet the states, jealous of their sovereignty and fearful of creating a dominant national

government, designed the Articles with such weakness in mind.


        3
            PTJ 8: 633; PJM 8:333-34.
        4
            PAH 3: 75-76.
                                                -5-

       With respect to revenue, Congress’s inability to impose any taxes left it entirely

dependent on requesting funds from the states, without any ability to compel them to pay. And

through the 1780s the states proved increasingly reluctant to respond to Congress’s repeated

requests for funds. In October 1781, just after the victory at Yorktown, Congress requisitioned

$8 million from the states in 1782. Later requisitions fared no better. By January 1783,

Congress had only received $420,000 of that amount (Baack 1991). By March 1787, states had

paid two-thirds of the October 1781 and April 1784 requisitions, one-fifth of the September 1785

requisition, and two percent of the August 1786 requisition. “By the end of 1786,” Brown

(1993, 25) notes, “Congress literally was receiving no money from the states for current federal

needs and expenses.” An attempt by Congress to float a loan in October 1786 failed completely,

without having attracted a single subscriber. This forced Madison to conclude: “Experience has

sufficiently demonstrated that a punctual and unfailing compliance by 13 separate and

independent Governments with periodical demands of money from Congress, can never be

reckoned upon with the certainty requisite to satisfy our present creditors, or to tempt others to

become our creditors in future.”5

       Attempts to remedy this shortcoming by modifying the Articles of Confederation failed

repeatedly during the decade. The Articles could be amended only by the unanimous consent of

the states. In February 1781, Congress requested that the states amend the Articles and empower

the Congress to levy an import duty of 5 percent. To allay the fears of the states that this would

create an overly powerful central government and threaten their sovereignty, the proceeds of this

tariff would be devoted exclusively to paying the interest and principal on the national debt and


       5
           PJM 6:144-45.
                                                 -6-

the duties would be abolished when the debt had been retired. Enactment of the measure looked

promising: the proposal was approved by eleven states within a year, but then it stalled in the

Rhode Island legislature. In November 1782, the Rhode Island legislature unanimously rejected

the proposal, choosing to finance its state government with import duties rather than direct taxes

and desiring to keep all the revenue from any import taxes for itself.

       Undeterred, in early 1783 James Madison proposed a similar revenue plan that called for

limited 25 year authorization for Congress to impose specific duties on enumerated items and a 5

percent duty on all other imports; the duties would be administered in part by state authorities.

Congress approved the measure in April 1783, but the unanimous approval of the states again

proved to be out of reach. Although this time Rhode Island agreed to it, Connecticut rejected it

twice until finally accepting it in early 1784. By July 1786, every state had approved the

proposal except for New York. The state had rejected the revenue plan in 1785, after upstate

agricultural interests realized that their taxes would go up if the state gave up its claim on the

collection of import duties in the port of New York City. Then New York passed it in 1786 with

the requirement that the state oversee the collection of the import duties, determine how much

would be given to the national government, and make payments to Congress in New York

currency. These conditions were unacceptable to Congress, which required gold and silver coin

to repay foreign creditors, leaving the matter at an impasse.6

       Writing in 1787, James Madison concluded:


       6
          “The failure of constitutional revision in 1786 reflected less a division of opinion – all
the states had endorsed a federal impost in principle – than the inherent difficulty of securing
unanimous agreement to any proposal,” notes Ferguson (1961, 337). “It appeared that the
Articles of Confederation could not by constitutional procedure be amended to give Congress the
limited accretion of power which majority opinion already sanctioned.”
                                                     -7-

       “the present System neither has nor deserves advocates; and if some very strong props
       are not applied will quickly tumble to the ground. No money is paid into the public
       Treasury; no respect is paid to the federal authority. Not a single State complies with the
       requisitions, several pass over them in silence, and some positively reject them. The
       payments ever since the peace have been decreasing, and of late fall short even of the
       pittance necessary for the Civil list of the Confederacy. It is not possible that a
       Government can last long under these circumstances” (Brown 1993, 27).

       The situation was no better when it came to regulating foreign commerce in an attempt to

negotiate better terms for U.S. goods in foreign markets. After it achieved independence, the

critical foreign-trade problem facing the United States was the loss of preferential access to the

markets of the British Empire. The nation’s economy depended upon exports, which amounted

to 12 percent of GDP around 1790, and the loss of access to British-controlled markets was

keenly felt. Not only did American producers now face higher duties on their goods in Britain,

but, in July 1783, the British government banned American ships from ports in the British West

Indies and outlawed the importation of selected American goods as well. This action sharply

curtailed demand for America’s shipping services and severely harmed New England shipowners

and fishermen, fish being one of the products excluded from the West Indies. Some American

products, such as lumber, flour, and livestock, could be brought to the British West Indies, but

only in British vessels. Prior to independence, more than a quarter of U.S. merchandise exports

were destined for the West Indies and the trade employed a sizeable share of America’s

merchant marine. Britain’s actions also created difficulties for the U.S. balance of payments

because, in the pre-revolutionary period, the nation’s trade surplus on the West Indies trade

helped finance trade deficits with Britain itself.

       Under the Articles of Confederation, the thirteen states could not formulate a unified

national response to Britain discriminatory trade policies. Article IX of the Articles expressly
                                                -8-

stated that “no treaty of commerce shall be made whereby the legislative power of the respective

States shall be restrained from imposing such imposts and duties on foreigners, as their own

people are subjected to, or from prohibiting the exportation or importation of any species of

goods or commodities whatsoever.” As a result, there was no national trade policy at all, but

rather thirteen state trade policies.7

        The national government tried to negotiate commercial agreements with Britain and other

European trading partners, but the negotiations failed because the American diplomats had

nothing to offer. They could not commit the states to any particular policy. By making demands

on others without the ability to give something in return, the U.S. diplomatic overtures were

doomed from the start. “The commerce of America will have no relief at present, nor, in my

opinion, ever, until the United States shall have generally passed navigation acts,” Adams wrote

to John Jay (10.21.85). “If this measure is not adopted we shall be derided; the more we suffer,

the more will our calamities be laughed at.”8



        7
          Eleven of the thirteen colonies passed their own tariff laws during the 1780s. New
Jersey and Delaware, the only two states that did not pass tariff legislation, lacked the large
seaports of Massachusetts, New York, and Pennsylvania, and wanted to provide every
encouragement to trade they could. Most of the import duties in the state tariffs were relatively
low, at about five percent, and the structure of duties was quite similar across the states
(Shepherd 1993). This decentralized tariff system produced many problems, but trade wars
between the states were not among them. By the end of the 1780s, the tariffs of the states were
converging with one another.
        8
          John Adams was impatient for action: “Patience, under all the unequal burthens they
impose upon our commerce, will do us no good; it will contribute in no degree to preserve the
peace with this country. On the contrary, nothing but retaliations, reciprocal prohibitions, and
imposts, and putting ourselves in a posture of defense, will have any effect. . . . Confining our
exports to our own ships, and laying on heavy duties upon all foreign luxuries, and encouraging
our own manufactures, appear to me to be our only resource, although I am very sensible to the
many difficulties on the way” (Davis 1977, 99).
                                                 -9-

       Some states tried to retaliate against Britain’s exclusionary policies, but the lack of

coordination undermined those efforts. In response to the West Indies prohibition, for example,

Massachusetts prohibited British ships from loading American goods in its ports. But when

Connecticut refused to follow this example, British ships merely shifted their destination from

Boston to New Haven, and Massachusetts was forced to suspend its action a year later (Marks

1973, 82). Indeed, the neighboring states of New York and New Jersey, Pennsylvania and

Delaware, could not enact strict shipping legislation unilaterally without simply diverting trade

to its bordering neighbor. Some states were persistent: in 1787, New York attempted to lay

duties on goods coming from Connecticut, and New Jersey as well, to punish them for not

levying additional duties on British goods or tonnage. Still, that effort failed and the duties were

soon abolished because no other states cared to join New York: smaller states tended to free ride

off of the retaliatory actions of larger states and thus undermine the effort. The British easily

evaded the differing state-by-state policies on navigation and simply went to the most

welcoming ports.9

       As was the case with taxation, efforts to amend the Articles of Confederation to remedy

this shortcoming came to naught. In December 1784, Congress appointed a committee to change

Article IX of the Articles and give Congress “the powers to regulate the commercial intercourse

of the States with other powers.” The committee recommended that Article IX of the Articles be



       9
          The national government had no power to formulate a collective solution to this
problem. A British magazine recognized this: “By the latest letters from the American States,
the restraint laid upon their trade with the British West Indies has thrown them into the utmost
perplexity; and by way of retaliation they are passing laws inimical to their own interest; and
what is still worse, inconsistent with each other . . . . Hence the dissensions that universally
prevail throughout what may be called the thirteen Dis-United States” (Marks 1973, 83).
                                               -10-

altered so that Congress would have the “sole and exclusive” authority of “regulating the trade of

the States, as well with foreign nations, as with each other, and of laying such imposts and duties

upon imports and exports as might be necessary for the purpose.” New England states, with

their mercantile base, were desperate to give Congress the power to deal with the foreign trade

situation, and the Mid-Atlantic states were supportive as well. But the proposal floundered due

to the sectional jealousies. Southern states were much less adversely affected by British

shipping regulations in the West Indies and elsewhere and objected out of fear that the power

would be used to exclude British competition for the shipment of U.S. exports, putting the South

at the mercy of New England merchants. In essence, the South feared that it would face a

northern monopoly on the shipping of its staple exports, raising transport costs and diminishing

its export sales.

        New England merchants and politicians were incensed at the South’s reluctance to act.

In their view, the South was refusing to act out of its own interest without considering the

economic distress felt in other parts of the country. “They may get their goods to market cheaper

if our ships have nothing to do,” one correspondent complained to John Adams (Davis 1977, 85).

New England wanted some preferences for American shipping, such as a tax on goods arriving

or departing on British vessels, to strengthen the American shipbuilding and shipping industry.

        The commercial distress was so acute in New England that there was even talk of

seceding from the union if the South continued to block commercial reform.10 Madison worried


        10
          In August 1785, Madison reported to Jefferson: “The machinations of G.B. with
regard to Commerce have produced much distress and noise in the Northern States, particularly
in Boston, from whence the alarm has spread to New York and Philada. . . . the sufferers are
every where calling for such augmentation of the power of Congress as may effect relief. . . . If
any thing should reconcile Virga. to the idea of giving Congress a power over her trade, it will be
                                                -11-

that the problem might dissolve the fragile nation. Madison, who thought that the advantages of

giving Congress the power to regulate trade “appears to me not to admit of a doubt,” repeated

these fears to others:

       “I conceive it to be of great importance that the defects of the federal system should be
       amended, not only because such amendments will make it better answer the purpose for
       which it was instituted, but because I apprehend danger to its very existence from a
       continuance of defects which expose a part if not the whole of the empire to severe
       distress. The suffering part, even when the minor part, can not long respect a
       Government which is too feeble to protect their interest; but when the suffering part come
       to be the majority part, and the despair of seeing a protecting energy given to the General
       Government, from what motives is their allegiance to be any longer expected. Should G.
       B. persist in the machinations which distress us; and sever or eight of the States be
       hindered by the others from obtaining relief by federal means, I own, I tremble at the
       anti-federal expedience into which the former may be tempted.”11

       By the mid-1780s, there was a growing consensus among national political leaders that

the current system of government was unworkable and should be reformed to strengthen the

national government. The nation’s unsatisfactory experience with the Articles of Confederation

in the 1780s gave a compelling economic and foreign policy rationale for creating a stronger

national government. Although many other factors were involved, the belief that the federal




that this power is likely to annoy G.B. against whom the animosities of our Citizens are still
strong. They seem to have less sensibility to their commercial interests; which they very little
understand, and which the mercantile class here have not the same motives if they had the same
capacity to lay open to the public, as that class have in the States North of us. The [high] price
of our Staple since the peace is another cause of inattention in the planters to the dark side of our
commercial affairs. Should these or any other causes prevail in frustrating the scheme of the
Eastern and Middle States of a general retaliation on G.B., I tremble for the event. A majority of
the States deprived of a regular remedy for the distresses by the want of a federal spirit in the
minority must feel the strongest motives to some irregular experiments. The danger of such a
crisis makes me surmise that the policy of Great Britain results as much from the hope of
effecting a breach in our confederacy as of monopolising our trade.” PJM 8: 344.

       11
            PJM 8: 334-35.
                                                -12-

government should have an independent source of revenue and credible authority to negotiate

with foreign powers over navigation rights and market access were both important motivations

for the constitutional convention of 1787.12

        At the convention, delegates had no difficulty in agreeing to give Congress the power to

impose import duties. Article I, section 8, clause 1 of the new Constitution contained the key

provision relating to trade policy, which stated:

       “The Congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts and excises, to
       pay the debts and provide for the common defense and general welfare of the United
       States; but all duties, imposts and excises shall be uniform throughout the United States.”


This uncontroversial provision was adopted without significant debate or apparent dissent. Few

disagreed with John Rutledge’s observation that “taxes on imports [were] the only sure source of

revenue” for the government (Farrand 1911, 3: 126, 327).

       The proposal to grant Congress the general power to regulate foreign commerce, such as

shipping regulations, was more contentious. The shipping states of New England desperately

wanted to give the federal government the authority to regulate commerce so that American

navigation laws could be enacted. In their view, enacting preferential duties for American ships

in U.S. ports through differential tonnage duties would not only promote the domestic shipping

industry but would put the government in a better position to negotiate a elimination of foreign

regulations that blocked U.S. access to foreign markets.13


       12
          Brown (1993) stresses the finance motive while Marks (1973) and Edling (2003) stress
the foreign policy motives, although they were all intertwined.
       13
          From the standpoint of his region, Nathaniel Gorham of Massachusetts argued that
there was little other reason for drafting a new constitution because “the eastern states had no
motive to union but a commercial one” (Farrand 1911, 2: 374).
                                               -13-

        As before, Southern states feared giving Congress the power to regulate commerce. With

their prosperity dependent upon large exports of agricultural staples, they wanted maximal

competition to ensure inexpensive shipping services. If competition from British ships was

seriously handicapped by American navigation laws, the South believed that it would be

exploited by New England shipping interests and charged exorbitant freight rates that would

reduce the price and volume of its exports. The South wanted to deny Congress the power to

regulate commerce, or at least require a two-thirds vote in Congress to enact such regulations, to

prevent hostile legislation that would leave it completely dependent upon New England shipping

interests.

        How were the sharply opposing views of the North and South reconciled? The ability to

regulate commerce became bound up with the slave trade and formed part of the “dirty

compromise” that played out over a few days in late August.14 The essence of the “dirty

compromise” was that “the South Carolina delegation would support the commerce clause if

New England would support protection for the slave trade and a prohibition on export taxes”

(Finkelman 1987, 214). This inter-regional agreement allowed the convention to get around

these contentious issues, but each part of the compromise was controversial.

        Thus, the desire to vest Congress with the power to tax and regulate foreign commerce

was one of the major forces behind the chain of events that led to the new constitution. As

Madison later recalled,

        “It was well known that the incapacity [of the States to regulate foreign commerce
        separately] gave a primary and powerful impulse to the transfer of the power to a
        common authority capable of exercising it with effect. . . . . In expounding the


        14
             See Finkelman (1987) and Goldstone (2005).
                                                -14-

        Constitution and deducing the intention of its framers, it should never be forgotten, that
        the great object of the Convention was to provide, by a new Constitution, a remedy for
        the defects of the existing one; that among these defects was that of a power to regulate
        foreign commerce.”15

        Alexander Hamilton, who was briefly a member of the Continental Congress when it

sought unsuccessfully to gain the power to impose import duties, was also impressed by the

experience of the 1780s. In the Federalist papers, Hamilton made two arguments for granting

Congress powers over trade. First, if there was to be a national government, it was imperative

that it be able to raise revenue and not depend upon contributions from the states. “A nation

cannot long exist without revenue,” Hamilton argued in Federalist 12. “Destitute of this

essential support, it must resign its independence and sink into the degraded condition of a

province. . . . Revenue therefore must be had at all events.” Hamilton observed that the United

States would at first depend largely upon import duties as the means of raising revenue, but

suggested that “unless all the sources of revenue are open to its demands, the finances of the

community under such embarrassments, cannot be put into a situation consistent with its

respectability, or its security.”

        Second, Hamilton made the case for a national trade policy to achieve reciprocity, so that

“we may oblige foreign countries to bid against each other, for the privileges of our markets.” In

Federalist 11, Hamilton argued that imposing trade restrictions against Britain “would provide a

relaxation in her present system” that hindered U.S. commerce, and such a relaxation would be

beneficial “from which our trade would derive the most substantial benefits.” Hamilton

emphasized the bargaining advantages of federal powers over commerce:



        15
             Letters of James Madison 4:251.
                                                -15-

       “By prohibitory regulations, extending, at the same time, throughout the States, we may
       oblige foreign countries to bid against each other, for the privileges of our markets. . . . .
       Suppose, for instance, we had a government in America, capable of excluding Great
       Britain (with whom we have at present no treaty of commerce) from all our ports; what
       would be the probable operation of this step upon her politics? Would it not enable us to
       negotiate, with the fairest prospect of success, for commercial privileges of the most
       valuable and extensive kind, in the dominions of that kingdom?”

Thus, Hamilton held out the hope that American navigation laws would “produce a relaxation in

her system” and enable the United States to enjoy the commerce of the West Indies once again.

Furthermore, such an agreement “would be likely to have a correspondent effect on the conduct

of other nations.”

       As the first Treasury Secretary, Hamilton vigorously sought revenue, but - as we shall see

- shied away from reciprocity.



3. Trade Policy in Practice: Revenue

       The first order of business for the new Congress under the new constitution was raising

revenue to fund the government’s operations and service the public debt. On April 8, 1789, two

days after the Congress first achieved a quorum, Madison introduced a bill in the House of

Representatives to levy duties on imports. Citing the urgent revenue requirements of the new

government, Madison argued that a tariff should be imposed without delay so that the spring

importations from Europe could be taxed. As a temporary expedient, Madison proposed a tariff

structure based on that approved by the Continental Congress in 1783. The 1783 proposal called

for a general 5 percent ad valorem tax on all imports and higher specific duties on such

commodities as wine and spirits, tea and coffee. Madison suggested that a more permanent tariff

structure be crafted at a later date, but that Congress should act quickly to avoid missing the
                                                 -16-

spring imports and to start the revenue flowing into the Treasury coffers.16

        Madison’s proposal sparked a debate as to whether revenue should be the sole objective

of the tariffs on imports. Several members argued that import duties should be levied to promote

domestic manufactures as well as raise revenue. As Thomas Hartley of Pennsylvania put it, “No

argument . . . can operate to discourage the committee from taking such measures as will tend to

protect and promote our domestic manufactures . . . I think it both politic and just that the

fostering hand of the General Government should extend to all those manufactures which will

tend to national utility.”17

        Knowing that this highly controversial issue would produce an extended and contentious

debate, thereby delaying the imposition of import duties and exacerbating the government’s

financial problems, Madison sought, and succeeded, in postponing a debate over protective

duties. Indeed, at this early stage, the United States did not seriously consider “protectionist”

policies, in the sense of high tariffs designed exclusively to protect domestic producers from

foreign competition without any revenue motive. The simple political economy explanation for

the lack of interest in protectionist trade policies is that the nation, from the merchant shipping

interests in New England and New York to the staple exporters in the South, was completely

dominated by pro-trade interests. There were very few import-competing manufacturers, mainly

around Philadelphia, and they lacked the political strength to press for a high tariff policy. Partly




        16
           Madison argued that “the deficiency in our Treasury has been too notorious to make it
necessary for me to animadvert upon that subject.” “Let us content ourselves with endeavoring
to remedy the evil. To do this a national revenue must be obtained; but the system must be such
a one that, while it secures the object of revenue, it shall not be oppressive to our constituents.”
        17
             Annals of Congress, Vol. 1, April 9, 1789, p. 114.
                                                   -17-

for this reason, Alexander Hamilton’s controversial proposals for federal aid to fledgling

industries in the Report on Manufactures (1791) were not seriously considered by Congress.18

Hence, there was no great debate over protectionism as a trade policy in the first decade under

1787 Constitution; such policies did not emerge until after the War of 1812 when the country

had begun to acquire a manufacturing industrial base that demanded protection from foreign

competition. At least initially, the greater concern was that the nation so disliked taxes that

Congress had to be careful about raising import tariffs to such an extent as to promote smuggling

or provoke a popular backlash.

          Madison’s tariff proposal became the second piece of legislation passed by Congress and

was signed by President Washington on July 4, 1789. The preamble of the law stated that import

duties were necessary “for the support of government, for the discharge of the debts of the

United States, and the encouragement and protection of manufactures.” By the standards of later

tariff legislation, the first tariff bill was not fiercely contested.19 The first tariff schedule

consisted of three parts: specific duties on select commodities, ad valorem duties on most other

goods, and duty free treatment for a small number of items.20 The specific duties were largely

levied on alcoholic beverages, although some of these duties provided incidental protection to

some producers. For example, although domestic spirits were subject to an excise tax, it was

          18
               On Hamilton’s report, see Cooke (1975), Nelson (1979), Peskin (2003), and Irwin
(2004).
          19
         Peskin (2003, 91) notes that the tariff rates were generally lower than those in
Pennsylvania and Massachusetts.
          20
           The list of goods subject to specific duties were initially imposed on 36 goods,
including beer, wine, and spirits, molasses, salt, and sugar, tobacco, tea, and coffee. The specific
duties were viewed as a tax on luxuries consumed mainly by the wealthy; their main purpose
was to raise revenue.
                                               -18-

much less than the import tariff. Other specific duties were imposed explicitly for the benefit of

domestic producers, such as those on boots and shoes, nails and spikes, fish and hemp. Almost

all other imports were subject to ad valorem duties. Four levels of ad valorem duties were

established: 15 percent (on carriages and parts), 10 percent (on china, stone, and glassware,

among others), 7.5 percent (on cotton and woollen clothing, hats, hammered or rolled iron and

other metal manufactures, and leather manufactures, among others), and 5 percent on all other

articles not specified.

        In September 1789, Alexander Hamilton became Secretary of the Treasury and emerged

as the chief architect of economic policy in the Washington administration. Hamilton almost

singlehandedly reorganized the nation’s finances, managing debts and establishing the public

credit, as Richard Sylla’s chapter discusses. He also performed the vital task of setting up the

customs service that was charged with collecting import duties at the principal U.S. sea ports.

By all accounts, he managed the customs service with efficiency and great attention to detail,

ensuring that it operated smoothly and functioned free of corruption.21

        The revenue collected from customs duties increased sharply after the federal

government took over the customs service. The returns from the ports of New York,


        21
           Dalzell (1993, 142) writes that “putting customs collection on a sound footing
represented a crucial first step in Hamilton’s program, and the Secretary of the Treasury kept as
close a watch on the customs houses as he could manage from the capitol. Through a steady
stream of circulars, instructions and advice to the collectors, Hamilton vigorously exerted his
authority over the customs collectors. He assumed control over major customhouse
expenditures; asked to be apprised of all seizures and attempts to defraud the revenue; and most
importantly dispense general interpretations of the revenue laws to govern their implementation
in the ports. Energetic and determined to implement an efficient, uniform system of operation,
Hamilton more than any other single figure left an enduring stamp on the experiment of federal
customs collection, marking it with his distinctive ideas of federal style, financial policy, and
political economy.”
                                                -19-

Philadelphia, Baltimore, and Charleston jumped from $1.975 million over the period 1785-88 to

$11.845 million during the period 1792-95, an increase of 600 percent (Edling and Kaplanoff

2004). The revenue growth was partly due to a revival of foreign trade after the adoption of the

constitution, but also an increase in the rates of duty (which were roughly double those of New

York in the 1780s) and the efficiency of the customs service in collecting them.

       This administrative achievement was critical because the federal government was almost

completely dependent upon customs revenues for its revenue. In 1792, for example, customs

duties (on imported merchandise and shipping tonnage) accounted for $3.4 million of the $3.7

million of total government receipts. In that year government expenditures amounted to about

$5.1 million, resulting in a substantial revenue shortfall. Hamilton recognized the precarious

fiscal situation of the federal government and sought to raise these early tariffs to generate

additional revenue. Indeed, given that virtually all government revenue was derived from

customs receipts, and that the revenue generated by the initial tariffs was uncertain, the specific

duties were fine tuned almost immediately in order to provide additional revenue.

       In January 1790, in his first report on public credit, Hamilton proposed that Congress

increase the duty on Madeira wine, Hyson tea, coffee, and chinaware, as well as other

adjustments to the tariff code. The highest revenue-raising duties were imposed on wine, spirits,

tea, and coffee because they were goods for which demand was relatively inelastic: “Experience

has shown, that luxuries of every kind lay the strongest hold on the attachments of mankind,

which, especially when confirmed by habit, are not easily alienated from them.” Hence,

Hamilton concluded: “it will be sound policy to carry the duties, upon articles of this kind, as

high as will be consistent with the practicability of a safe collection. This will lessen the
                                                -20-

necessity, both of having recourse to direct taxation, and of accumulating duties, where they

would be more inconvenient to trade, and upon objects which are more to be regarded as

necessaries of life.” Congress enacted most of these recommendations in August 1790.

       Still more increases followed. Acting again on Hamilton’s advice, Congress increased

the duties on spirits in March 1791. At this point, Hamilton believed that “the duties on the great

mass of imported articles have reached a point, which it would not be expedient to exceed” for

fear of offending the merchant class and diminishing the revenue.22 Therefore, he advocated a

excise tax on domestically-produced spirits to diversify the government’s sources of revenue: “it

is clear that less dependence can be placed on one species of funds [import duties], and that, too,

liable to the vicissitude of the continuance, or interruption of foreign intercourse, than upon a

variety of different funds, formed by the union of internal with external objects.. . . .the attempt

to extract wholly, both deceptive and pernicious - incompatible with the interests not less of

revenue than of commerce; that resources of a different kind must, of necessity be explored.”

       Yet the revenue requirements of the government continued to grow. In 1792, in order to

finance expenditures related to the protection of the western frontier, Congress advanced the ad

valorem tariff schedule by 2.5 percentage points, pushing the base rate from 5 percent to 7.5

percent. In 1794, the basic schedule was raised another 2.5 percentage points, bringing the base

rate to 10 percent, and duties on sugar and wine were increased to start retiring the public debt.

In 1797, Congress imposed higher specific duties on sugar, molasses, tea, cocoa, and other

products, along with an increase in the base rate to 12.5 percent. In each of these cases, the

primary purpose of the adjustment was to raise revenue to finance government operations and


       22
            Second Report on Credit, December 1790. PAH, 7: 232.
                                                -21-

the payment of the debt.

       Figure 1 shows the evolution of the average tariff during this period. Although import

tariffs were relatively low in 1790 and 1791, at around 12 percent, on average, subsequent

revisions to the initial duties quickly brought the average tariff up to about 20 percent by the

mid-1790s. Each of the early tariff spikes – in 1794, 1797, and 1804 – is proximately related to

legislation that raised import duties. These revisions were motivated almost exclusively by

revenue considerations and were relatively free from political controversy.

       These estimates indicate the relative height of import duties over time, but reveal nothing

about the structure of those duties. As a rough approximation, the specific duties were levied on

consumption items for revenue purposes while the ad valorem duties were levied for the

protection of some domestic producers. The higher average tariff was largely due to increases in

specific duties, which ranged between 40 percent and 60 percent, on average (Irwin 2003). The

ad valorem duties on manufactured and other goods remained relatively low through the 1790s,

rising from 5 percent to just over 13 percent by 1800, by which time the base rate was 12.5

percent.

       Levying taxes on imports proved to be an economically and politically efficient method

of raising revenue. Imports arrived at just a few large seaports on the coast and required

relatively few officials to collect the taxes upon landing. The administrative cost of enforcing

import duties was just 4 percent of the gross revenue collected, while the cost of collecting

domestic excise taxes was 20 percent of the gross revenue (Balinsky 1958, 57).

       An equally important consideration was the fact that import duties were a politically

efficient way of raising revenue. Tariffs were automatically built into the price of imported
                                                 -22-

goods and avoided the “political minefield” of domestic taxes (Brown 1993, 238-239). In the

aftermath of the fight over the constitution and the fragile nature of support for the federal

government, Hamilton and others were cautious about domestic taxes might trigger a domestic

political backlash, as indeed they did with the Whiskey Rebellion in 1794. Hamilton’s fiscal and

revenue program brought about a large and welcome shift in the nation’s tax system. Edling and

Kaplanoff (2004) note that leading states had to rely on direct taxes (poll and land taxes) to a

much greater extent than on customs duties. These intrusive and burdensome taxes sparked a

political backlash. By reducing the burden of debt on the states – allowing states to reduce those

direct taxes by a significant margin, as much as 75 percent in many states – and substituting

trade taxes for direct taxes, the perceived tax burden fell sharply. The protests over state taxes

that had been frequent in the 1780s disappeared in the 1790s.

       Still, Hamilton sought to supplement and diversify revenue sources away from customs

duties, which were subject to vicissitudes of trade, to more dependable forms of internal revenue,

such as excise taxes. Confronting the argument that the government should rely solely on import

duties without any internal taxes, Hamilton warned that it would “deprive the government of

resources which are indispensible to a due provision for the public safety and welfare. . . . if the

government cannot then resort to internal means for the additional supplies, which the exigencies

of every nation call for, it will be unable to perform its duty or even to preserve its existence.

The community must be unprotected, and the social compact be dissolved.”23 Yet domestic taxes




       23
            PAH 11, 85-86.
                                                -23-

were highly unpopular and Congress was reluctant to enact them.24 As a result, as Figure 2

shows, Hamilton only managed to diversify the source of government revenue to a modest

extent.

          Despite the growth in customs revenues that came with expanding trade in the early

1790s, the fiscal position of the federal government remained precarious. In 1792, the interest

alone on U.S. debt soaked up 87 percent of total tax revenue. The United States only covered

the revenue shortfalls only through a large loan from the Netherlands, which helped pay off

previous foreign loans and allowed for the redemption of significant amounts of domestic debt

(Riley 1978). Still, this refinancing meant that the nominal value of the national debt did not fall

during the 1790. (It was not until 1796 that the government’s tax revenue would cover federal

debt and non-debt expenditures.) This left Hamilton open to charges from the Jeffersonian

Republicans that he was not serious about retiring the debt. But as we have noted, there were

political and economic constraints on further increasing either import duties or excise taxes. As

Edling (2007, 306) notes, “Faced with a choice between raising taxes to pay off the debt rapidly

or accepting indebtedness for at least the foreseeable future, Hamilton opted for the latter

alterative.”

          These revenue constraints made Hamilton extremely cautious about husbanding the

government’s meager financial resources and maintaining the country’s creditworthiness. For

this reason, he desperately wanted the United States to remain neutral in any European military

conflict, fearing that U.S. involvement would destroy the nation’s finances. Becoming entangled


          24
          The stability of excises as a source of revenue was at least partly balanced by the
unrest they caused. The Whiskey Rebellion in western Pennsylvania was triggered when
Congress, acting on Hamilton’s advice, boosted the excise tax on spirits in 1791.
                                                 -24-

in a war for which it was unprepared would ruin the nation’s finances: government expenditures

would soar and its revenues would collapse. This fear deeply colored Hamilton’s approach to

the issue of trade reciprocity.



4. Trade Policy in Practice: Reciprocity

          In Federalist 11, Hamilton argued that threats to close the U.S. market to British goods,

or to impose discriminatory restrictions against British shipping, could force that country to

improve its treatment of American goods in its home and colonial markets. Yet, as Secretary of

Treasury, Hamilton aggressively fought every effort to implement such a policy. Instead, he put

overwhelming emphasis on the economic goal of maintaining and increasing customs revenue.

Given the fragility of the nation’s finances, the overriding priority of the Washington

administration, in Hamilton’s view, should be to ensure that the government could finance the

interest on the public debt: “Nothing can more interest the National Credit and prosperity, than a

constant and systematic attention to husband all means previously possessed for extinguishing

the present debt, and to avoid, as much as possible, the incurring of any new debt.”25 Given the

revenue constraints facing the government, the United States, in his view, had to avoid any

significant drop in imports or the customs revenues that they generated, and also had to avoid

any sudden, unexpected rise in spending. Both events would occur should the country become

embroiled in a war and nothing, in his view, could destroy the nation’s finances and credit rating

faster.

          Thus, economic policy dictated foreign policy: the nation had to maintain political


          25
               PAH 11, 141.
                                               -25-

neutrality between Britain and France in order to avoid conflict. Neutrality in turn required that

import duties be imposed on a non-discriminatory basis so as not to offend British officials. Yet

the public continued to harbor bitter feelings against Britain, whose postwar policies with respect

to American commerce did not improve matters. Many Americans resented the country’s

continuing commercial dependence on Great Britain; the overwhelming majority of U.S.

imports came from Britain, many exports were sent to Britain or her colonies, and trade finance

was still largely British. Britain did not treat the commerce of the United States as favorably as

it had when it was a colony, and had begun to interfere with U.S. shipping with the outbreak of

the war with France in 1793.

       Despite the public sentiment, Hamilton wanted to stifle the temptation to strike back at

Britain. Hamilton vigorously opposed commercial discrimination aimed at Britain because he

feared it could start a trade war. (Indeed, a representative from Britain warned him that any

discriminatory measure would bring about not a relaxation of British mercantile regulations, but

retaliation instead.) A trade war would dry up the flow of customs revenues arising from British

imports and jeopardize Hamilton’s entire fiscal program. American was in a much weaker

position than Britain, in Hamilton’s judgement, and therefore had much more to lose as a result

of a commercial or military conflict.

       By contrast, James Madison (in the House) and Thomas Jefferson (as Secretary of State)

desperately sought commercial discrimination against Britain. Although the United States had

won its political independence, they believed that it had not achieved economic independence

and was much too reliant on commercial and financial ties with Britain. At the same time, they

attacked mercantilist regulations that kept American goods and ships out of Britain’s home and
                                               -26-

colonial markets. They advocated adopting the retaliatory policies endorsed by Hamilton in

Federalist 11.26 In their view, discriminatory measures against Britain would force it to open up

the West Indies market to American shipping and improve its treatment of U.S. goods in its

market. (Ironically, if these measures succeeded in changing Britain’s policies, American would

only become further dependent on commerce with Britain and its colonies.)

       The basis for Jefferson and Madison’s confidence that trade measures could force Britain

to change its policy came from the colonial period. After the passage of the Stamp Act in 1765

and the Townshend Duties in 1770, some American colonists organized a boycott of British

goods. In the case of the Stamp Act, British merchants who saw their exports to the colonies fall

flooded Parliament with petitions demanding accommodation to end the non-importation. The

British government complied and repealed the act. In the case of the Townshend duties, British

merchants did not protest the lost exports because there was a domestic economic boom, but a

change in the British government resulted in a repeal of the duties. From this pattern of

American resistance through non-importation followed by British retreat, the colonists drew the

conclusion - correctly in the case of the Stamp Act but incorrectly in the case of the Townshend

duties - that British policy could be manipulated with American trade embargos.

       Between 1789 and 1794, Madison and Jefferson tried repeatedly to implement

discriminatory trade measures against Britain.27 Each time they failed as the politically adroit




       26
          But Hamilton saw the Madison-Jefferson approach as threatening his conception of
U.S. trade and revenue policy. Although Hamilton had been closely allied with James Madison
in securing the creation and implementation of the Constitution, they diverged sharply in their
view of trade policy, as well as many other matters of economic policy. Schwartz (2005).
       27
            See Peterson (1965), McCoy (1974), and Ben-Atar (1993).
                                                -27-

Hamilton maneuvered to defeat them.

       The first attempt came in the summer of 1789 as the new Congress was debating the first

tariff bill. Along with the tariff on imported merchandise, Congress imposed duties on the

tonnage of ships entering U.S. ports. These duties favored U.S.-owned ships: the duty was six

cents per ton on American vessels versus fifty cents per ton on foreign vessels. But Madison

wanted further discrimination among foreign ships, distinguishing between those from countries

that had a commercial agreement with the United States (such as France) and those which did

not (such as Britain). Madison and Jefferson believed that the United States possessed enough

economic leverage to harm Britain’s trade and force the country to relax its restrictions on

American commerce. In their view, Britain depended more on commerce with America than the

other way around because the United States sent essential food and raw materials – necessities,

in their view – to Britain in exchange for manufactures and luxuries, which could be safely done

without. In a trade war, Britain’s commercial interests would be “wounded almost mortally,

while ours are invulnerable,” Madison explained. “I have, therefore, no fears of entering into a

commercial warfare with that nation; if fears are to be entertained, they lie on the other side.”28

       Although Madison’s proposal easily passed the House, it failed in the Senate, due to what

proponents attributed to the British influence coming from the city of New York. President

Washington lamented the Senate’s action, calling it “adverse to my ideas of justice & policy.”

But apparently he did not recognize that, behind the scenes, his soon-to-be Treasury Secretary,




       28
            PJM, May 4, 1789, p. 248.
                                                -28-

Alexander Hamilton, helped energize Senate opposition to the measure.29

        In early 1790, Madison used a petition from merchants demanding higher tonnage duties

on foreign vessels to reopen the debate over tonnage discrimination. A House committee

recommended doubling the tonnage duties on foreign ships from 50 cents per ton to $1 per ton.

Madison proposed that the doubling only applied to countries without a commercial treaty with

the United States, so that it would apply to Britain but not France. The House passed the

measure and Jefferson praised the “salutary effect” it would have on Britain’s behavior.

However, once again, the bill languished and died in the Senate, where Hamilton apparently

worked hard to ensure its demise.

       A third opportunity to introduce discrimination came in January 1791, when France

argued that it was exempt from the tonnage laws under the 1778 Treaty of Commerce. Jefferson

disagreed with the French construction of the treaty, but wanted to grant France an exemption as

a gesture of good will.30 Hamilton agreed with Jefferson’s interpretation of the treaty, that the

United States was not obligated to grant an exemption, but set forth a series of polite but firmly-

stated objections to Jefferson’s proposal. In Hamilton’s view, one problem was the “want of

reciprocity in the thing itself,” i.e., French ships would be given the same treatment as American

ships in U.S. ports, but American ships would only get most-favored nation treatment in French



       29
          In Washington’s view, “The opposition of the Senate to the discrimination in the
Tonnage Bill, was so adverse to my ideas of justice & policy, that, I should have suffered it to
have passed into Law without my signature, had I not been assured by some members of that
body, that they were preparing another Bill which would answer the purpose more effectually
without being liable to the objections, & to the consequences which they feared would have
attended the discrimination which was proposed in the Tonnage Law.” PGW 3: 323-24.
       30
            PAH, 7: 408.
                                               -29-

ports. Hamilton believed that such a policy would have little practical effect, but the concession

would set a dangerous precedent: “The introduction of such a principle without immediate

reciprocity, would be a high price for the advantage which it is intended to compensate.”31

       Hamilton also pointed out that the tonnage duties were earmarked for paying down the

public debt. “I do not mention this as an insuperable objection but it would be essential that the

same act which should destroy this source of revenue should provide an equivalent,” he argued.

“This I consider as a rule which ought to be sacred, as it affects public Credit.” He summed up

his position in this way:

       “My commercial system turns very much on giving a free course to Trade and cultivating
       good humour with all the world. And I feel a particular reluctance to hazard anything in
       the present state of our affairs which may lead to commercial warfare with any power;
       which as far as my knowledge of examples extends is commonly productive of the worse
       kind of warfare. Exemptions & preferences which are not the effect of Treaty are apt to
       be regarded by those who do not partake in them as proofs of an unfriendly temper
       towards them.”32

       Although President Washington forwarded Jefferson’s brief on the issue to Congress, the

Senate defeated any concessions for France for a third time. Jefferson was outraged: “Our

treasury still thinks that these new encroachments of Gt. Brit. on our carrying trade must be met

with passive obedience and non-resistance, lest any misunderstanding with them should affect

our credit, or the prices of our public paper.”33 As Jefferson complained bitterly to Washington:

       “My system was to give some satisfactory distinctions to the French, of little cost to us,

       31
           Hamilton suggested that a new treaty of commerce with France could formalize
reciprocity as a permanent principle. This “would perhaps be less likely than apparently
gratuitous and voluntary exemptions to beget discontents elsewhere” – referring to the dim view
that Britain would take of such a grant.
       32
            PAH, 7: 426.
       33
            PTJ, 20: 236.
                                                -30-

       in return for the solid advantages yielded us by them; and to have met the English with
       some restrictions, which might induce them to abate their severities against our
       commerce. I have always supposed this coincided with your sentiments; yet the
       Secretary of the Treasury, by his cabals with members of the legislature and by high-
       toned declamations on other occasions, has forced own his own system, which was
       exactly the reverse.”34

       Hamilton had his own complaints, writing that Jefferson was “an avowed enemy to a

funded debt.” In his view, Jefferson was consistently proposing policies that could undermine

his financial plans: “Jefferson with very little reserve manifests his dislike of the funding system

generally, calling in question the expediency of funding a debt at all. . . . I do not mean that he

advocates directly the undoing of what has been done, but he censures the whole on principles

which, if they should become general, could not but end in the subversion of the system.”

Foremost among these risks were Jefferson’s overtures to France, which he thought could create

a hostile wedge with Britain and adversely affect his plans to fund the national debt. Hamilton

believed that the foreign-policy views of Madison and Jefferson were “unsound and dangerous.”

“Attempts were made by these Gentlemen in different ways to produce a Commercial Warfare

with Great Britain. . . .Various circumstances prove to me that if these Gentlemen were left to

pursue their own course there would be in less than six months an open War between the U

States & Great Britain.” Such a war would destroy Hamilton’s fiscal policies. Therefore, “the

Neutral & the Pacific Policy appear to me to mark the true path” that the country should follow.35

       To Washington, Jefferson complained that the charge of his having a “desire of not

paying the public debt” was completely untrue:




       34
            PTJ, 24, 353-354.
       35
            PAH 11: 429-430.
                                                 -31-

       “every word, and act on the subject . . . prove that no man is more ardently intent to see
       the public debt soon and sacredly paid off than I am. This marks the difference between
       Colo. Hamilton's views and mine, that I would wish the debt paid tomorrow; he wishes it
       never to be paid, but always to be a thing wherewith to corrupt and manage the
       legislature.”36

Jefferson accused Hamilton taking on so much debt such that the country was “obliged to strain

the impost till it produces a clamour, and will produce evasion, and a war on our own citizens to

collect it: and even to resort to an Excise law, of odious character with the people, partial in its

operation, unproductive unless enforced by arbitrary and vexatious means, and committing the

authority of the government, in parts where resistance is most probable, and coercion least

practicable.”37

       This conflict over U.S. trade policy came to a head in early 1794, when the threat to

Hamilton’s fiscal system was perhaps the greatest. The outbreak of war between Britain and

France in February 1793 triggered a debate about whether the United States should back France,

its ally during the revolutionary war, and thereby risk war with Britain, or remain neutral. With

the European powers attempting to destroy the trade of the other, they - but primarily Britain -

began intercepting American shipping and confiscating the cargoes, actions that fueled anti-

British sentiment. Washington took Hamilton’s advice and issued the neutrality proclamation in

April 1793, but Jefferson and Madison, who strongly supported a tilt toward France, made one

last bid for economic non-neutrality.

       In December 1793, the outgoing Secretary of State sent Congress a report on commercial

discrimination. Jefferson’s report documented the manifold foreign barriers placed on U.S.


       36
            PTJ, 24: 355.
       37
            PTJ 23: 536.
                                                 -32-

goods and shipping in foreign markets, particularly those controlled by Britain. Jefferson’s

preferred course of action was “friendly arrangements” – trade agreements – with foreign

countries to remove the impediments to trade. However, Jefferson argued at length that

       “should any nation, contrary to our wishes, suppose it may better find its advantage by
       continuing its system of prohibitions, duties, and regulations, it behooves us to protect
       our citizens, their commerce, and navigation, by counter prohibitions, duties, and
       regulations, also. Free commerce and navigation are not to be given in exchange for
       restrictions and vexations, nor are they likely to produce a relaxation of them.”

He then outlined a policy of strict reciprocity, in which high duties would be met with high

duties and prohibitions with prohibitions, all in an effort to free trade from such impediments.38

The thinly veiled message was that the United States should strike back at British restrictions on

U.S. commerce.

       Jefferson’s report prompted Madison to raise the issue of discrimination once again.

Madison proposed to implement Jefferson’s reciprocity policy by imposing higher duties on

good and shipping from countries without a commercial treaty with the United States. Clearly

aimed at Britain, without mentioning the country’s name, Madison argued that “what we receive

from other nations are but luxuries to us, which, if we choose to throw aside . . . . if we are force,

in a contest of self-denial.” Therefore, the United States could “make her enemies feel the extent

of her power.” Discrimination would also diversify trade away from Britain: “They would


       38
           Jefferson discounted the risk of foreign retaliation: “It is true, we must expect some
inconvenience and practice from the establishment of discriminating duties. But in this, as in so
many other cases, we are left to choose between two evils. These inconveniences are nothing,
when weighed against the loss of wealth and loss of force, which will follow our perseverance in
the plan of indiscrimination. When once it shall be perceived that we are either in the system or
in the habit of giving equal advantages to those who extinguish our commerce and navigation by
duties or prohibitions, as to those who treat both with liberality and justice, liberality and justice
will be converted by all, into duties and prohibitions.” American State Papers, Foreign
Relations, 1: 300ff. See also Peterson (1965).
                                                 -33-

produce, respecting many articles imported, a competition which would enable countries who do

not now supply us with those articles, to do it, and would increase the encouragements on such

as we can produce within ourselves.”39

        Hamilton worked feverishly in Congress and within the Administration to defeat these

proposals and avoid a potential conflict with Britain.40 Hamilton argued that “The folly is too

great to be seriously entertained by the discerning part of those who affect to believe the position

- that Great Britain . . . will submit to our demands urged with the face of coercion and preceded

by acts of reprisal . . . . it is morally certain that she will not do it.” Hamilton mobilized his

Congressional allies to speak out strongly against any reciprocity measure that involved

discrimination against Britain. Indeed, Hamilton wrote the main speech against Madison’s

proposals, delivered by William Loughton Smith of South Carolina.41

        39
             PJM 15: 182ff.
        40
          In 1792, Hamilton drafted a reply to Jefferson’s impending report, which began by
noting: “The commercial system of Great Britain makes no discriminations to the prejudice of
the UStates as compared with other foreign powers” and “There is therefore no ground for a
complaint on the part of the UStates that the system of G Britain is particularly injurious or
unfriendly to them.” PAH 13:412.
        41
           The speech argued that setting up such trade barriers would hurt the United States
more than Britain and that it was completely unrealistic to expect British policy to change as a
result of such actions. Hamilton through Smith ridiculed “a Government attempting to aid
commerce by throwing it into confusion; by obstructing the most precious channels in which it
flows, under the pretense of making it flow more freely.” He warned of “the impracticability
and Quixotism of an attempt by violence, on the part of this young country, to break through the
fetters which the universal policy of nations imposes on their intercourse with each other.” “The
main argument for the chance of success, is, that our supplies to Great Britain are more
important to her than hers to us. But this is a position which our self-love gives more credit to
than facts will altogether authorize. . . while a commercial warfare with Great Britain would
disturb the course of about one-sixth of her trade, it would disturb the course of more than one-
half ours.” Annals of Congress, January 13, 1794, pp. 196, 203, 202. As Jefferson wrote to
Madison, “I am at no loss to ascribe Smith’s speech to its true father. Every tittle of it is
Hamilton’s except the introduction. There is scarcely any thing there which I have not heard
                                                 -34-

       Sensing that he did not have sufficient political support for his proposals, Madison sought

to delay any vote by the House. Still, anti-British sentiment was running high in Congress

because of attacks on American neutral shipping. In March, Congress imposed a one-month

embargo on trade with Britain. In April, Congress considered measures to sequester payments to

British creditors and to prohibit trade indefinitely. Hamilton wrote to Washington that these

actions - stopping debt repayment or enacting an embargo - “cannot but have a malignant

influence upon our public and mercantile credit. . . . Every gust that arises in the political sky is

the signal for measures tending to destroy [our] ability to pay or to obstruct the course of

payment.” In particular, an embargo would lead to the “derangement of our revenue and credit.”

Such a precipitous act would

       “give a sudden and violent blow to our revenue which cannot easily if at all be repaired
       from other sources. It will give so great an interruption to commerce as may very
       possibly interfere with the payment of the duties which have heretofore accrued and
       bring the Treasury to an absolute stoppage of payment – an event which would cut up
       credit by the roots.”

Hamilton responded to Madison’s claim that the United States possessed great commercial

strength:

       “Tis as great an error for a nation to overrate as to underrate itself . . . . Tis our error to
       overrate ourselves and to underrate Great Britain. We forget how little we can annoy
       how much we may be annoyed. . . . To precipitate a great conflict of any sort is utterly
       unsuited to our condition to our strength or to our resources.”

       Which view was a more accurate appraisal of the situation? In terms of economic

leverage, the figures on bilateral trade shown on Table 1 seem to confirm Hamilton’s view.

While Britain sent nearly a fifth of its exports to the United States, only six percent of its imports



from him in our various private tho’ official discussions. The very turn of arguments is the
same, and others will see as well as myself that the style is Hamilton’s. PTJ 28: 49.
                                                -35-

came from the United States. On the other hand, the United States was much more dependent on

Britain for its exports and imports. Of course, Madison argued that these percentages were

misleading: the United States exported essential food and materials to Britain, whereas it

imported trifles from that country. Therefore, he concluded, the United States had much more

economic leverage than these shares indicated. Yet later attempts to coerce British policy

through economic means demonstrated that other countries could, in fact, supply Britain with

similar goods. When they had the opportunity to give their policies a trial, Jefferson and

Madison were repeatedly surprised and frustrated by the ineffectiveness of trade sanctions to

bring about the desired change in Britain’s policy.

       In terms of the dependence of U.S. commerce on British shipping, the European war

rendered the debate over tonnage discrimination completely moot. The war diverted the British

merchant marine into the navy, allowed American ships to take over the carrying trade left in the

British wake. As Figure 3 shows, the British share of the tonnage entering U.S. ports fell sharply

after 1792. American ships began to dominate the Atlantic carrying trade and U.S. commerce

experienced a boom in re-export trade (Goldin and Lewis 1980).

       Finally, Hamilton’s fears about the financial market reaction to these events are borne out

by the price of U.S. government debt in New York. Figure 4 illustrates Hamilton’s remark that

“Every gust that arises in the political sky is the signal for measures tending to destroy our

ability to pay or to obstruct the course of payment” by showing that the price of U.S. government

debt in New York appears to have been highly sensitive to political events during 1793-94. The

market reacted negatively to Congressional attacks on Hamilton (Giles resolutions), the

European war, Jefferson’s report on commerce, and reacted positively to Washington’s neutrality
                                                -36-

proclamation and the Jay peace mission.

       Hamilton again won the debate in Congress and within the Washington administration.

Hamilton convinced Washington to defuse the immediate crisis by sending John Jay to negotiate

a treaty with Britain concerning neutral shipping rights.42 With the Jay mission underway,

Congress easily defeated the proposal to impose discriminatory tonnage duties on Britain (see

Table 2). Madison’s proposal for discrimination was a minority position even among

representatives from the South.

       The resulting Jay treaty was one of the most controversial foreign policy debates in

American history. Under the terms of the treaty, the United States agreed not to discriminate

against Britain in its commercial policy in exchange for a British opening of the West Indies

market. After heated national debate, the Senate endorsed the treaty by the slimmest possible

margin.

       By putting the issue of discrimination to rest, the Jay treaty secured Hamilton’s system.

With commercial peace with Britain secure and the re-export trade booming, the government

was finally able to begin paying down the debt. While the nominal value of the national debt

was little changed over the 1790s, Hamilton did make an effort to begin paying down the debt




       42
           PAH, 18: 451-452. In an analysis of the Jay Treaty written for Washington after
Hamilton had left office, Hamilton noted that “the greatest interest of the Country in its external
relations is that of peace.” Any commercial advantages from particular treaties was much less
important. Peace would allow the country to buy time to strengthen. “War at this time would
give a serious wound to our growth and prosperity. Can we escape it for ten or twelve years
more, we may then meet it without much inquieture and may advance and support with energy
and effect any just pretensions to greater commercial advantages than we may enjoy.”
                                                 -37-

after 1794, although this was partly masked by borrowing during the quasi-war with France.43

However, Hamilton’s policy of commercial peace did allow a sharp reduction in the debt to GDP

ratio, even if the nominal value of the debt did not decline. In his Farewell Address (drafted by

Hamilton), Washington stated that the public credit was “a very important sources of strength

and security” which should be used “as sparingly as possible, avoiding occasions of expense by

cultivating peace.” The Adams administration continued the Federalist policies of neutrality,

non-discrimination, and moderate tariffs until the end of the decade.



5. The Jefferson Administration

       A detailed discussion of the Jefferson administration’s economic policies is beyond the

scope of this chapter, but the period gives us a glimpse at the possible consequences of the

Republican alternative to Federalist policies.

       Thomas Jefferson’s election as president in 1800 portended significant changes to

Federalist economic policy. Jefferson appointed Albert Gallatin as Treasury Secretary. Gallatin

had written a strong attack on Hamilton’s policies in 1796, the thrust of which was that

Hamilton’s complex financial management lacked transparency and that very little effort had

been made to retire the debt. Yet once in office, Gallatin and the Republicans made relatively

few changes to Hamilton’s fiscal system: a functional revenue system was in place and the Jay

Treaty prevented any major changes to trade policy. Over Gallatin’s objections, internal taxes

were abolished, which left the government completely dependent upon customs duties for fiscal



       43
         On Hamilton’s financial program, see Garber (1991), Swanson and Trout (1992a,
1992b) and Edling (2007).
                                                -38-

revenues, as Figure 3 shows. They matched increases in spending with increases in import

duties, levying higher rates in 1804 to pay for military action against the Barbary pirates and

began paying down the national debt at an accelerated pace.

       After the Jay treaty expired in 1805, however, the Jefferson administration took a much

less accommodating stance with respect to Britain. The renegotiation of a successor agreement

failed over the British impressment of U.S. sailors. Without a formal agreement establishing an

understanding about neutral shipping rights, the risk of a conflict between the two countries

became more pronounced. Such an event occurred in June 1807, when the British navy attacked

the U.S.S. Chesapeake.

       Rather than declare war, Jefferson proposed an embargo on all overseas shipping during

1808 to safeguard American merchants and punish Britain for its cavalier treatment of American

ships and sailors. This experiment in “peaceable coercion” failed to change Britain’s policy, but,

in bringing the nation’s foreign commerce to a halt, severely disrupted the U.S. economy. As the

economic pain and political unrest caused by the embargo increased through 1808, pressures

mounted for its abolition. Federalists vociferously opposed the embargo as harming the nation’s

prosperity and debilitating the government’s finances, arguing that the measure was futile and

would ultimately fail to coerce Britain into changing its policies. Even Jefferson’s Treasury

Secretary, Albert Gallatin, thought that it was “entirely groundless” to hope that the 1807

embargo would win concessions from Britain.44 The embargo was lifted in early 1809 and was


       44
          Irwin (2005) calculates that the welfare loss from the year-long embargo was roughly
5 percent of GDP in one year. “Despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary,” Ben-Atar
(1993, 171) argues, Jefferson “continued until the end of his public life, to hold on to an inflated
assessment of the strength of the United States and its commerce.” In 1794, Hamilton predicted
that any embargo would be short-lived because it would fail to affect Britain and the domestic
                                                -39-

replaced with selective non-importation measures.

       Although the embargo was a failure, it created surprisingly few fiscal problems for the

United States. The fiscal impact came when customs revenues plunged to $7 million in 1809

from $16 million the previous year. This forced Gallatin to confront a significant budget deficit,

but the Treasury could absorb the shortfall by using large existing balances built up from

previous fiscal surpluses. Unlike the experience of 1794, the market price of U.S. government

debt was virtually unaffected during this period. The federal government was able to continue

paying down the debt and U.S. credit remained strong until the War of 1812.



6. Alternative Paths and Roads Not Taken

       This chapter has broadly described the economic policy debate concerning trade and

revenue policy in the 1790s. This debate was relatively narrow in the sense that there existed a

broad consensus that import duties should be the principal source of revenue. There was no

debate about whether there should be import duties or whether the public debt should be funded.

Given this consensus, there were relatively few policy options that could have taken the country

in a different direction. The disputes about the role of excise taxes, and the gains from

discriminating against British shipping, were relatively minor in comparison to a decision to

repudiate the public debt or rely on inflationary finance.45



consequences “may occasion the most dangerous dissatisfaction & disorders in the community
and may drive the government to a disgraceful retreat – independent of foreign causes” (PAH 16:
275).
       45
           Of course, the country had already experienced the debilitating effects of inflation
during the Revolutionary war and did not want to repeat the experience. Bordo and Végh (2002)
contrast the early U.S. experience with that of Argentina.
                                                -40-

       The most obvious counterfactual to consider is: what if Washington had taken the advice

of Jefferson and Madison instead of Hamilton with regard to commercial discrimination? In

some sense, the issue was of greater symbolic importance than the underlying economic stakes

might suggest. For example, the direct financial price of discriminatory tonnage duties would

have been small. In 1791, the Treasury collected $3,171,474 in duties on imported merchandise

and only $145,347 on tonnage.46 Thus, the effect of discrimination on the government’s fiscal

balance would have been relatively small - in the absence of any British retaliation. Of course,

the presumed absence of British retaliation is a key qualification. It is very difficult today to

judge Britain’s reaction if such a policy had been attempted.

       Without much doubt, a Republican program of “aggressive reciprocity” would have been

much more disruptive to trade than the Federalist approach. A fair trial was given in the

Jefferson and Madison administrations. This would have proven a risky strategy earlier on,

given the government’s dependence on import duties for revenue. Although the fiscal impact of

the Jeffersonian embargo was relatively mild because of accumulated Treasury surpluses, the

government did not have had this financial cushion in the early 1790s.

       Two other alternative paths also would have changed the course of history. If the

Articles of Confederation had been amended to allow Congress to lay duties on imports, the

Articles could have been perpetuated as a governing framework because the revenue issue would

have been at least partly solved. While solving the government’s financial problem, the United

States still would have been saddled with a weak governmental framework that would probably

have caused greater political problems down the road.


       46
            American State Papers, Commerce and Navigation, pp. 140-141.
                                                -41-

       Another path would have been trade protectionism through excessively high duties. The

economic costs of such a policy would likely have been smaller than the political threat such a

policy would have posed to the union. The United States was not the “united” states yet; the

union was still fragile and many sections would have strongly opposed trade restrictions for

infant industries. In later years, such extreme trade policies threatened the nation’s unity.

During the War of 1812, sentiment in New England ran in favor of breaking away from the

Union because of the anti-shipping, anti-trade policies of the Jeffersonian Republican dominated

the federal government’s approach. If the United States could not err too much in terms of anti-

shipping policy without alienating New England, it also risked erring on the side of too much

anti-import, pro-protection for manufacturers policy that would have offended the South. One of

the most serious antebellum threats to the union was the Nullification Crisis of 1832-33. After

the passage of the Tariff of Abominations in 1828, South Carolina vowed not to enforce the

federal tariff and even threatened to secede from the union.

       Thus, approached without the spirit of compromise, the issue of trade policy had to

potential to tear the country apart. That such extreme measures were avoided in the 1790s

helped cement the union of states.



Conclusion

       The Washington administration, blending George Washington’s sound judgement and

Alexander Hamilton fiscal acumen, successfully navigated the tricky economic transition from

the difficult days under the Articles of Confederation in the 1780s to the new government under

the Constitution of 1787. The financial foundation of the new federal government depended on
                                                -42-

its conduct of trade policy, which at the time was largely revenue policy. By avoiding many

pitfalls, at a time when the political union and its finances were exceedingly fragile, the

Washington administration helped put the nation on a sound economic basis.
                                             -43-

References


Baack, Ben. 2001. “Forging a Nation State: The Continental Congress and the Financing of the
War of American Independence.” Economic History Review 54, 639-56.

Balinky, Alexander. 1958. Albert Gallatin: Fiscal Theories and Policies. New Brunswick:
Rutgers University Press.

Ben-Atar, Doron S. 1993. The Origins of Jeffersonian Commercial Policy and Diplomacy.
New York: St. Martin’s Press.

Bordo, Michael D., and Carlos A. Vegh. 2002. “What if Alexander Hamilton Had Been
Argentinean? A Comparison of the Early Monetary Experience of Argentina and the United
States.” Journal of Monetary Economics (April 2002)

Brown, Roger H. 1993. Redeeming the Republic: Federalists, Taxation, and the Origins of the
Constitution. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Combs, Jerald A. 1970. The Jay Treaty: Political Battleground of the Founding Fathers.
Berkeley: University of California Press.

Cooke, Jacob E. 1975. “Tench Coxe, Alexander Hamilton, and the Encouragement of American
Manufactures.” William and Mary Quarterly 32, 369-392.

Dalzell, Frederick A. B. 1993. “Taxation with Representation: Federal Revenue in the Early
Republic.” Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University.

Davis, Joseph L. 1977. Sectionalism in American Politics, 1774-1787. Madison: University of
Wisconsin Press.

Edling, Max M. 2003. A Revolution in Favor of Government: Origins of the U.S. Constitution
and the Making of the American State. New York: Oxford University Press.

Edling, Max M. 2007. “‘So Immense a Power in the Affairs of War’: Alexander Hamilton and
the Restoration of Public Credit.” William and Mary Quarterly 54, 287-326.

Edling, Max M. and Mark D. Kaplanoff. 2004. “Alexander Hamilton’s Fiscal Reform:
Transforming the Structure of Taxation in the Early Republic.” William and Mary Quarterly 61,
713-744.

Farrand, Max. 1911. Records of the Federal Convention of 1787. New Haven: Yale University
Press.
                                             -44-

Ferguson, E. James. 1961. The Power of the Purse: A History of American Public Finance,
1776-1790. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

Finkelman, Paul. 1987. “Slavery and the Constitutional Convention: Making a Covenant with
Death.” In Beyond Confederation: Origins of the Constitution and American National Identity,
edited by Richard Beeman, Stephen Botein, and Edward C. Carter II. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press.

Garber, Peter M. 1991. “Alexander Hamilton's Market-Based Debt Reduction Plan.”
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 35, 79-104.

Goldin, Claudia, and Frank D. Lewis. 1980. “The Role of Exports in American Economic
Growth during the Napoleonic Wars, 1793-1807.” Explorations in Economic History 17, 6-25.

Goldstone, Lawrence. 2005. Dark Bargain: Slavery, Profits, and the Struggle for the
Constitution. New York: Walker & Co.

Irwin, Douglas A. 2003. “New Estimates of the Average Tariff of the United States, 1790-
1820.” Journal of Economic History 63, 506-513.

Irwin, Douglas A. 2004. “The Aftermath of Hamilton’s Report on Manufactures.” Journal of
Economic History 64, 800-821.

Irwin, Douglas A. 2005. “The Welfare Costs of Autarky: Evidence from the Jeffersonian
Embargo, 1807-1809.” Review of International Economics 13, 631-645.

Johnston, Louis, and Samuel H. Williamson, “The Annual Real and Nominal GDP for the United
States, 1789 - Present.” Economic History Services, March 2003, URL:
http://www.eh.net/hmit/gdp/

Marks, Frederick W. 1973. Independence on Trial: Foreign Affairs and the Making of the
Constitution. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press.

McCoy, Drew R. 1974. “Republicanism and American Foreign Policy: James Madison and the
Political Economy of Commercial Discrimination, 1789-1794.” William and Mary Quarterly 31,
633-646.

McCoy, Drew R. 1980. The Elusive Republic: Political Economy in Jeffersonian America.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

Mitchell, B. R. 1988. British Historical Statistics. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Nelson, John R., Jr. 1979. “Alexander Hamilton and American Manufacturing: A
Reexamination.” Journal of American History 65, 971-995.
                                             -45-

Peskin, Lawrence A. 2003. Manufacturing Revolution: The Intellectual Origins of Early
American Industry. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Peterson, Merrill D. 1965. “Thomas Jefferson and Commercial Policy, 1783-1793.” William
and Mary Quarterly 22, 584-610.

Riley, James C. 1978. “Foreign Credit and Fiscal Stability: Dutch Investment in the United
States, 1781-1794.” Journal of American History 65, 654-678.

Schwartz, Michael. 2007. “The Great Divergence Reconsidered: Hamilton, Madison, and U.S.-
British Relations, 1783-89.” Journal of the Early Republic 27, 403-436.

Shepherd, James F. 1993. “State Tariff Policies in the Era of Confederation.” Unpublished
paper, presented at Western Economic Association, Lake Tahoe, Nevada.

Shepherd, James F., and Gary M. Walton. 1976. “Economic Change After the American
Revolution: Pre- and Post-War Comparisons of Maritime Shipping and Trade.” Explorations in
Economic History 12, 397-422.

Swanson, Donald F., and Andrew P. Trout. 1992a. “Alexander Hamilton’s Hidden Sinking
Fund.” William and Mary Quarterly 49, 108-116.

Swanson, Donald F., and Andrew P. Trout. 1992b. “Alexander Hamilton, Conversion, and Debt
Reduction.” Explorations in Economic History 29, 417-29.

Sylla, Richard, Jack Wilson, and Robert E. Wright. “Early U.S. Securities Prices, 1790-1860.”
Electronic database available at: http://eh.net/databases/early-us-securities-prices.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. 1975. Historical Statistics of the
United States, Bicentennial Edition. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
                                            -46-


Table 1: Trade Dependence, circa 1792

                                        United States                  Great Britain
 Share of Exports to other                  24%                            19%
 Share of Imports from other                88%                            6%

Sources: American State Papers, Commerce and Navigation, Vol. 1, p. 194. Mitchell (1988), p.
494.




Table 2: House of Representatives Vote on Doubling Tonnage Duties on British Vessels,
May 10, 1794

                                            Yea                            Nay
 New England                                 2                              19
 Mid-Atlantic                                3                              24
 South                                       19                             24
 Total                                       24                             55
                                             -47-

Figure 1: Measures of Average Tariff, 1790-1820

Note: calculated as customs duties divided by value of imports for consumption

Source: Irwin (2003, Table 1).




               50


               40


               30
     percent




               20


               10


               0
               1790    1795       1800       1805       1810        1815         1820

                                      Gross Customs Revenue
                                      Net Customs Revenue
                                                  -48-

Figure 2: Sources of Federal Government Revenue

Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census (1975), series Y-352-353.


                         20


                         16
   millions of dollars




                         12


                          8


                          4


                          0
                              1790   1795     1800       1805    1810       1815

                                       Customs Revenue      Other Sources
                                         -49-

Figure 3: Tonnage of Shipping Entering U.S. Ports, by Ship Owner, 1789-1797

Source:


          1000000


          800000


          600000


          400000


          200000


               0
                          1790          1792          1794       1796

                              Britain           United States       Other
                                                      -50-

      Figure 4: Price of U.S. Securities in New York, January 1793 - October 1794

      Source: Sylla, Wilson and Wright. US 350, U.S. 6s. National Bond.




104

100

96

92

88

84

80
1793:01                    1793:07                     1794:01            1794:07

      Available at http://eh.net/databases/early-us-securities-prices
                                             -51-

Figure 5: U.S. Federal Government Public Debt to Nominal GDP Ratio, 1791-1815



Sources: Public Debt: U.S. Department of Commerce (1975), Series Y 493. Nominal GDP:
Johnston and Williamson (2003).



                       35

                       30

                       25
   percentage of GDP




                       20

                       15

                       10

                        5

                        0
                            1790   1795   1800      1805       1810         1815
