                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          PRODUCTIVITY DIFFERENCES BETWEEN AND WITHIN COUNTRIES

                                           Daron Acemoglu
                                            Melissa Dell

                                         Working Paper 15155
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15155


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2009




We thank conference participants at the 2009 American Economic Association meetings, an anonymous
referee, and Steven Davis for useful suggestions. We also gratefully acknowledge financial support
from the Air Force Office of Scientific Research and the National Science Foundation. A number of
individuals provided invaluable assistance in locating and accessing the many data sources used in
this paper. We thank in particular Luis Bértola, Rafael Moreira Claro, Sebastian Galiani, Brett Huneycutt,
Ana María Ibañéz, Oscar Landerretche, Jose Antonio Mejia-Guerra, Ezequiel Molina, Glenn Graham
Hyman, Daniel Ortega, Carmen Pages, Pablo Querubin, Marcos Robles, Oscar Roba Stuart, Carmen
Taveras, José Tesada, Jimmy Vasquez, and Gaston Yalonetzky. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Daron Acemoglu and Melissa Dell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Productivity Differences Between and Within Countries
Daron Acemoglu and Melissa Dell
NBER Working Paper No. 15155
July 2009
JEL No. O18,O40,R11

                                              ABSTRACT

We document substantial within-country (cross-municipality) differences in incomes for a large number
of countries in the Americas. A significant fraction of the within-country differences cannot be explained
by observed human capital. We conjecture that the sources of within-country and between-country
differences are related. As a first step towards a united framework, we propose a simple model incorporating
both differences in technological know-how across countries and differences in productive efficiency
within countries.


Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-380B
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
daron@mit.edu

Melissa Dell
Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge MA 02142
mdell@mit.edu
    Spatial differences in income per capita motivate much of growth theory and development
economics. While income differences across countries and across regions within some coun-
tries have been documented extensively, there is little systematic evidence on how interregional
income differences (within countries) compare and relate to inequality across countries. The
relative magnitudes of cross-country, cross-municipality, and within-municipality differences are
important for at least two related reasons. First, they shed light on the extent to which sources
of major economic differences in income and productivity are national, local, and idiosyncratic
in nature, documenting patterns that comprehensive explanations of growth and development
should strive to match. Second, they signal the possible presence of important interlinkages
between local and national determinants of productivity, which would necessitate a unified the-
oretical framework for analysis.
    This paper documents the magnitudes of cross-country, cross-municipality, and within-
municipality inequality in labor incomes and household expenditure for the Americas (Canada,
Latin America, and the United States), a large geographic region containing almost one billion
people and around 30% of global GDP. Our contribution is twofold. First, we document sub-
stantial within-country (and cross-municipality) differences in output and standards of living
for a large number of countries. For example, among eleven Latin American countries for which
we have municipality level data, the between-municipality differences in individual labor income
are about twice the size of between-country differences (when the United States is included, this
ratio is reversed). About half of both between-country and between-municipality differences are
explained by observed human capital, the remainder being due to “residual” factors. Disparities
in physical capital across regions are unlikely to be the primary factor explaining these differ-
ences, because of the relatively free mobility of capital within national boundaries. Therefore,
similar to the residual in cross-country exercises, these regional residual differences can be at
least partially ascribed to differences in the efficiency of production across sub-national units.
    The dominant empirical approach for understanding differences in income per capita starts
with the neoclassical (Solow) growth model. The neoclassical framework explains growth and
output levels by human capital, physical capital and technology. Since technology is exogenous
in the neoclassical model, the emphasis in empirical studies starting with this model is often
on the dynamics of the capital stock. Our view is that, given the mobility of physical capital
inside national boundaries, the neoclassical model offers limited insight into efficiency differences
across regions within countries. Thus, the second contribution of our paper is to take a first
step towards developing a unified theoretical framework for the analysis of cross-country and
within-country differences. Our framework emphasizes the importance of local differences in
the efficiency of production, likely shaped by institutions (defined as the rules determining
how collective decisions are made). More specifically, within countries, productive efficiency
is determined, amongst other things, by local institutions. Local institutions influence how
local and regional collective decisions are made, how lower levels of government interact with
the national government, and how political power is distributed at the local level.1 Through
  1
      Examples of national institutions include the structures imposed by the national constitution and laws.



                                                      1
these channels, local institutions impact important determinants of the efficiency of production,
such as the provision of local public goods and the security of local property rights. At the
country level, productive efficiency is determined by the average of local institutions, by national
institutions, and by the technology adoption and use decisions of profit-maximizing firms. A
country where local institutions in several regions create inefficiencies will exhibit not only
within-country differences, but also lower national income. Aggregate output is lowered directly,
due to the presence of these low income regions, and indirectly, because low demand from poorer
regions will lead to a smaller market size for new technologies, discouraging technology adoption
at the national level.
    It is sometimes (explicitly or implicitly) assumed that even though institutional differences
may be important for understanding cross-country differences in economic outcomes, they do
not play a major role in explaining interregional differences (e.g., Guido Tabellini (2006)). This
view is predicated on the notion that institutions are national and cannot explain within-country
differences. However, both de jure and de facto institutions vary greatly within countries. In
countries with federal systems, such as Mexico and Brazil, states have considerable authority in
changing laws and de jure institutions, and de facto institutions—e.g., the degree of enforcement
of national laws, the extent to which local and regional elections are free and fair, the degree
of de facto control by local elites, and the functioning of the judiciary—often vary substantially
within national boundaries.2 Moreover, national institutions and policies may have differential
effects in different regions (e.g., a tariff policy promoting industrial development will likely affect
urban and rural areas differently).
    As preliminary evidence on the importance of local public goods and institutions, we docu-
ment large disparities in access to paved roads—a specific and important public good—within
countries in the Americas. We show that differences in access to paved roads are highly cor-
related with individual incomes (after controlling for various geographic and other observable
factors). Finally, we also discuss several existing empirical studies that connect public goods
and economic prosperity to specific local institutions.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we discuss existing
approaches to cross-country and cross-regional income differences. Section 2 describes the micro
data sets we use for investigating within-country differences. Section 3 provides various decom-
positions of cross-country and within-country differences in the Americas. Section 4 summarizes
evidence on the extent of within-country differences in institutional quality and availability of
public goods. Section 5 introduces our theoretical framework, and Section 6 concludes. The
online appendix contains additional details on data sources and further results.
Examples of local institutions include the degree to which regional and local elections are free and fair, the de
facto control of some regions by local economic and political elites and organized criminals, and in federal systems,
state constitutions that may give regional lawmakers substantial powers to determine local laws and policies.
   2
     See, among others, Edward L Gibson (2005) and Guillermo O’Donnell (1993). See also Daron Acemoglu and
James A. Robinson (2008) for a model of de jure and de facto institutional differences, with a discussion of the
importance of de facto institutional differences in the development of the US South.




                                                         2
1    Approaches to Cross-Country and Cross-Region Differences
The dominant empirical approach for examining differences in income and growth rates between
countries, and between regions within countries, begins with the neoclassical (Solow) growth
model. As is well known, the neoclassical model has no theory of technology differences and a
minimal theory of differences in human capital. Much of its focus is on the dynamics of physical
capital. At the cross-country level, N. Gregory Mankiw, David Romer and David N. Weil (1992)
have argued in a seminal contribution that the neoclassical growth model provides a good account
for cross-country differences in income per capita without significant technology differences. In
another prominent series of contributions, Robert Barro and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (1995) suggest
that convergence across OECD countries, convergence across US regions, and cross-country
growth dynamics can be understood through the closed-economy neoclassical growth model.
    While influential, this emphasis on physical and human capital has been called into question
by, amongst others, Peter J. Klenow and Andres Rodriguez-Clare (1997) and Robert E. Hall
and Charles I. Jones (1999). These authors document that, with reasonable assumptions on
aggregate production functions, large technology differences are necessary to account for the
significant cross-country differences in income per capita and output per worker, and to account
for growth dynamics. Moreover, it is difficult to see how the closed-economy neoclassical growth
model could provide an informative framework for understanding within-country differences,
given the absence of barriers to physical capital mobility within countries.
    After documenting the large within-country differences in the Americas, we develop a theoret-
ical framework emphasizing (broadly construed) technology differences at both the cross-country
and cross-municipality levels. Our approach emphasizes the following potential determinants of
income per capita in national and local economies:
    1. Technological know-how will potentially vary at the national level, thus influencing cross-
national income differences.
    2. Efficiency of production will vary both at the national and the subnational levels. We
emphasize variation due to institutions (i.e., enforcement of property rights, entry barriers,
and freeness and fairness of elections for varying levels of government) and the implied policy
outcomes (i.e., the availability of public goods necessary for production and market transactions).
Our framework is sufficiently flexible that it can also be used to think about non-institutional
determinants of local productivity, some of which are discussed in Section 4.
    3. Human capital of the workforce will differ both across countries and within countries, in
part because of differences in institutions and policies that affect access to schooling and the
costs and benefits of acquiring a marginal unit of education.
    In this theoretical framework, national factors, in particular, national institutions and their
impact on technology adoption, influence local outcomes, while, in turn, local institutions affect
not only local outcomes but also the overall demand for new technologies and the rate at which
they are adopted at the national level.
    This framework motivates (and is motivated by) our empirics in Section 3. We start with
micro data on individual earnings from 17 countries in the Americas. Micro data enable us

                                                3
to decompose labor income inequality into between-country and within-country components
and provide us with a simple methodology for separating the effect of human capital from
other factors by controlling for individual-level education and experience. This exercise enables
a preliminary decomposition of municipality-level economic differences between those due to
education (proxying for factors embedded in workers) and those related to the locality itself.
    Our work is related to a large literature on spatial inequality, most of which is focused on
variation in incomes within a single country. Notably, for the United States, Antonio Ciccone
and Hall (1996) estimate that doubling county employment density (county labor input divided
by county landmass area) increases average labor productivity by 6 percent. This estimated
degree of locally increasing returns would account for more than half of the variation in labor
productivity across US states. In light of this evidence, Section 4 provides a preliminary upper
bound estimate of the role of density in explaining spatial inequality in the Americas. Another
set of relevant contributions are collected in Ravi Kanbur and Anthony J. Venables (2005), which
in particular includes two studies for Latin America: Chris Elbers et. al combine non-income
census data and household survey data on income for Ecuador to produce a measure of well-
being, finding that across-census tract inequality in well-being explains around 25% of inequality
in well-being within Ecuador, and Javier Escobal and Maximo Torero use household expenditure
data to investigate the determinants of spatial inequality in Peru, estimating a predominant role
for variation in private and public assets, such as roads.
    Several studies examine within-country inequality among various countries. Most notably,
Leondardo Gasparini (2004) and Juan Luis Londoño and Miguel Székely (2000) document the
extent of income inequality over time within a large number of Latin American countries and
provide cross-country comparisons.3 Several features distinguish our paper from these previ-
ous studies on Latin American inequality. Through our use of population censuses and living
standards measurement surveys, we have access to larger samples and higher-quality labor in-
come estimates than the existing literature, which tends to use lower quality sources in order to
produce an income panel. Thus, we are able to provide a more systematic and accurate snap-
shot of inequality patterns. We also confirm our findings using carefully constructed household
expenditure data, which are more reliable than labor income data for several countries in our
sample because a high fraction of the population works in the informal sector. Finally, we are
not aware of other studies conducting comparative decompositions of within municipality and
cross-municipality inequality into human capital-related and residual components.


2     Data
We use data on labor income, geo-referenced to the municipality, for 11 countries in the Amer-
icas (see Appendix Table A1 for the list of countries). We also examine labor income data
geo-referenced at the regional level for an additional six countries. Our data are drawn from a
   3
     There is also a literature on inequality across versus within countries at the global level. While interesting and
important, due to severe data limitations this literature makes a large number of assumptions when constructing
within-country incomes from highly aggregative data.


                                                          4
number of recent censuses and living standards measurement surveys, all conducted since 2000.
A list of sources is provided in Appendix Table A1. We limit our attention to labor income, which
is typically better reported than total income.4 Our sample includes all individuals with positive
incomes, and for some calculations we limit the sample to males between the ages of 18 and 55 to
reduce selection based on labor force participation. To increase comparability across countries,
we adjust each country’s income data so that it averages to GDP per worker in constant inter-
national dollars, taken from the 2003 Penn World Tables. Population weights are constructed
using 2000 GIS population data (Center for International Earth Science Information Network,
2004). Summary statistics are provided in Appendix Table A2.
    Our baseline results do not deflate incomes for differences in regional purchasing power.
Differences in costs of living are important for comparisons of living standards across regions, but
given our focus on productivity differences (rather than welfare), nationally-deflated incomes are
more informative. We nonetheless confirm the robustness of our general conclusions to deflating
incomes using the state median of a household-specific Paasche index constructed from a number
of household expenditure surveys.
    To examine variation in local public goods, we use geospatial data on intercity roads compiled
by the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT, 2008a), supplemented with more
recent (2006) data on road infrastructure from the Earth Science Research Institute (Mexico)
and the Peruvian Ministry of Transport (Peru). These data identify the geographic location of
roads as well as their surface type (paved, gravel, or dirt).


3       Within-Country and Between-Country Differences
In this section, we perform two exercises. First, we decompose inequality in labor income into
three components: inequality between countries, inequality between municipalities or regions
(within countries), and inequality within municipalities/regions. Second, we decompose labor
income inequality at each level of geographic aggregation into two components: that explained
by observable human capital variables and the residual.
    As is well known, the set of additively decomposable inequality indices corresponds to the
General Entropy class of measures. We focus on two commonly used measures within the General
Entropy class: the Mean Log Deviation (MLD) index and the Theil index. The MLD index of
overall inequality in the Americas is:

                                                       J Mj Ljm
                                                     1XXX
                                   M LD = ln y −                ln yjmi                                      (1)
                                                     L
                                                        j=1 m=1 i=1

where yjmi is the labor income of individual i in municipality m in country j, y is mean labor
income in the Americas, and L is total population in the Americas.5 Similarly, the Theil index
    4
     For Latin America, the data provide information on monthly labor income, so for these countries there may
be greater transitory variability than annual labor income numbers for the United States and Canada.
   5
     Since our focus is on labor income inequality, we would have preferred to weight the data by the size of the



                                                       5
of overall inequality in the Americas is:
                                                  Mj Ljm
                                                J X
                                                X    X yjmi                µ          ¶
                                                                               yjmi
                                        T =                           ln                                        (2)
                                                                 Ly             y
                                                j=1 m=1 i=1

   Let us further define yjm as mean labor income in municipality m in country j, Ljm as the
number of individuals in municipality m in country j, yj as mean labor income in country j,
and Lj as the number of individuals in country j. Then the MLD and Theil indices can be
decomposed into our three desired components of inequality as follows (see the Appendix):

                                                                                                 
                          J                     J                 Mj                  Mj
                          X Lj                  X Lj              X   L jm
                                                                                      X   L jm
      M LD = ln y −                ln yj  +           ln yj −          ln yjm  +          M LDjm          (3)
                          j=1
                                L               j=1
                                                      L           m=1
                                                                       L j            m=1
                                                                                           L j


                             PLjm
where M LDjm = ln yjm − i=1        ln yjmi /Ljm is the MLD index for inequality in municipality
m in country j. The first term in (3) measures between-country inequality. The second and
third terms are between-municipality (within-country) and within-municipality inequality in-
dices, respectively, weighted by country j’s population share. Similarly, the Theil index can be
decomposed as
                                                                                       
             XJ        µ     ¶ X   J          Mj                 Mj              µ     ¶
                 Lj yj ln yj          Lj yj  X Ljm yjm         X   Ljm yjm        yjm 
        T =                    +                         Tjm +                ln             (4)
                 L y      y            L y         Lj yj             Lj yj          yj
              j=1                        j=1             m=1                          m=1

               PLjm yjmi         ³      ´
                                   yjmi
where Tjm =       i=1 Ljm yjm ln   yjm    is the Theil index for inequality in municipality m in
country j. These expressions show that the MLD index weights by population shares, whereas
the Theil index weights by income shares.
    We begin in Table 1 by examining the ratio between the 90th and 10th percentiles of the labor
income distribution, as well as the MLD and Theil indices, for all individuals in our sample. We
decompose overall inequality in the Americas into its three component parts: inequality across
countries, inequality between municipalities/regions (within countries), and inequality within
municipalities/regions. When decomposing Western Hemisphere inequality, we consider two
population weighting schemes. The first uses actual population, whereas the second assumes
equal population in all countries, and thus reduces the influence of large countries such as
Brazil, Colombia, Mexico, and the United States. This latter scheme is similar in spirit to
the convention in the growth literature where different countries are given equal weight. For
comparison purposes, we decompose overall inequality separately for the eleven countries geo-
referenced to municipalities and for the six geo-referenced to regions.6 At the bottom of the table,
we decompose inequality for all countries included in our sample. We also report cross-country
labor force rather than the size of the overall population. Unfortunately, data on labor force participation are not
readily available for much of the Americas at the municipality level.
   6
     Bolivia, Brazil, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, United States, and
Venezuela have data geo-referenced to the municipality. For Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, and
Uruguay, the data are geo-referenced to larger regions.


                                                             6
inequality of 2000 GDP per worker and 2000 GDP per capita from the Penn World Tables for
all countries in the Americas for which data are available. This increases the sample size to
33 for GDP per worker and 37 for GDP per capita, primarily by adding Caribbean nations for
which we do not have labor income data. The GDP data show that the cross-country inequality
pattern in our sample is similar to that for the entire Americas, confirming that cross-country
inequality in the subset of countries we examine is similar to that in the Americas as a whole.
Appendix Table A3 provides additional documentation of inequality patterns and shows the
decomposition of between-municipality and within-municipality inequality separately for each
country.
    Table 1 documents that for our entire sample, inequality in labor income across countries
is about one half to one third of the magnitude of inequality within municipalities/regions and
between two to four times as large as inequality across municipalities/regions, depending on the
precise sample and weighting scheme. For example, using the MLD index, equal population
weights and focusing on countries with municipality data, overall between-country inequality
is 0.23, while within-country inequality is 0.66, 0.11 of which is due to between-municipality
inequality. The contribution of the between-municipality component is smaller with the Theil
index, which gives greater weight to the top of the distribution, that is, to the United States
(recall that the Theil index weights by income shares whereas MLD uses population shares).
The larger magnitude of the between-country relative to the between-municipality inequality is
driven by the presence of the United States (and Canada when we include countries with data
geo-referenced to regions), which are much richer than the remaining countries in our sample.
For this reason, decompositions without these two countries might be more informative. These
are reported in the third and eighth rows. For example, the third row shows that, again focusing
on the data with municipality referencing, between-country differences are now about half of
the between-municipality differences both with the MLD and Theil indices (0.05 vs. 0.12 with
MLD and 0.05 vs. 0.11 with Theil). Appendix Table A4 shows a similar pattern when the data
are deflated using regional price indices.
    One important concern with the above inequality decompositions is that measurement error
and transitory income shocks may be inflating the magnitude of within-municipality inequality.
To investigate this concern, we followed the methodology proposed by Angus Deaton and Salman
Zaidi (2002) to carefully construct, item-by-item, a comparable measure of household expendi-
ture for a number of countries in the Americas. Inequality decompositions for household expen-
diture, similar to those reported for labor income in Table 1, are presented in Appendix Table
A5. As expected given concerns about measurement error, the magnitude of within-municipality
inequality in household expenditure is less than that in labor income. Nevertheless, the over-
all comparative patterns are similar, as within country inequality in household expenditure is
substantially greater than inequality between countries.7
   7
    Results (available upon request) documenting educational inequality for 19 countries in the Americas, 11 of
which have micro level census data, show that inequality in education attainment across municipalities in Latin
America is about twice as large as inequality in educational attainment across countries, and this pattern is
reversed when the U.S. is included.


                                                      7
    Table 2 limits our sample to males between the ages of 18 and 55 to compare incomes across
a more homogenous population (particularly in terms of hours worked). Using this subsample,
we perform the decomposition between predicted and residual incomes. Recall that yjmi is
labor income of individual i in municipality m in country j. Let Xjmi denote a vector of
detailed education categories (in particular, zero to four years of schooling, four to eight years of
schooling, some high school, high school graduate, and one or more years of higher education).
Let experjmi denote potential experience (defined as usual as age-schooling completed-6). We
then decompose labor income into predicted and residual components by running the following
flexible regression, which allows for a full set of interactions between education categories and a
quartic in potential experience, separately for each country j:
                                        4
                                        X
                            ln yjmi =         X0jmi (experjmi )k βjk + δj + ²jmi ,                      (5)
                                        k=1

where δj is a country-specific constant and ²jmi has zero mean and country-specific variance.
    Given estimates from (5), we examine inequality in overall labor income (yjmi ), inequality
                                   P
in predicted labor income (exp( 4k=1 X0jmi (experjmi )k β̂jk )), and inequality in residual income
(exp(δ̂j + ²̂jmi )). Notice that country-specific constants, which are unrelated to differences in
human capital, are part of residual income.
    Table 2 uses the Theil index to decompose each of the components of income (overall, pre-
dicted, and residual) into inequality between countries, inequality between municipalities/regions
(of countries), and inequality within municipalities, reporting results by country only for the six
countries with micro census data (and hence large within-municipality samples).8 Inequality in
overall labor income is similar to that reported in Table 1, where we do not restrict the sample
to prime-aged males. The decomposition shows sizable between-country predicted labor income
differences, which become much smaller when the United States is excluded. The magnitude of
between-country residual inequality is somewhat smaller (when comparing across all countries
in the sample).9 The magnitudes of between municipality inequalities in predicted and residual
labor income are similar. Table 2 also shows that the bulk of the within-municipality differences
are due to residual factors. This may reflect a greater dispersion in unobserved skills, labor
market imperfections and discrimination, measurement error, or some combination thereof.
    Overall, our evidence suggests that years of schooling and the experience of the labor force
can explain a significant fraction of income disparities across and within countries, but residual
factors are also significant and generally of comparable magnitude. Although these residuals
undoubtedly include a component of unmeasured human capital differences within countries,
they also likely reflect the effects of local factors impacting productive efficiency.
  8
   Results using the MLD index are similar and available upon request.
  9
   Notice that the decomposition between predicted and residual incomes is not additive, since we are taking
exponential transformations of predicted and residual log incomes before the decomposition.




                                                       8
4        Determinants of Interregional Differences
The large differences in labor incomes and residual incomes documented in the previous section
are unlikely to be entirely due to differences in the physical capital intensity of production,
given the absence of barriers to capital mobility within countries. Instead, they likely reflect the
influence of certain local factors, the nature of which will be discussed further in this section. We
focus on determinants of cross-municipality differences. While within-municipality differences
are also clearly ineresting and important, space constraints preclude their treatment here.
    One possibly relevant local characteristics is the density of economic activity across regions,
as emphasized, for example, by Ciccone and Hall (1996).10 To examine this issue, Appendix
Table A6 repeats the decomposition of predicted and residual inequality, adding a control for
municipal-level population density to equation (5).11 The patterns when population density
is included in the predicted component of income are very similar to those in Table 2. This
exercise therefore suggests that the bulk of the between-municipality differences in income in
the Americas is not accounted for by differences in population density (or more generally, in the
density of employment, which is likely to be strongly correlated with population density).12
    Our argument is that, in the same way that technology differences play an important role in
shaping cross-national economic differences, they also likely play a major role in within-country
differentials. We now investigate why there may be significant within-country differences in
technology, broadly construed. We would ideally document the correlation between various
aspects of local institutions and incomes, but unfortunately there do not yet exist uniformly
constructed, municipality-level measures of institutions in the Americas. We instead use a
novel dataset on road infrastructure to measure the within-country inequality in proximity to
paved roads, an important form of public infrastructure, and the correlation between proximity
to roads and labor income. Local institutions affect investments in road infrastructure and
other public goods by influencing the incentives of government officials to provide public goods
(related to corruption and accountability), the capacity of the local government to raise revenues
to finance public investment (from local taxes or transfers from the central government), and
the incentives and opportunities of citizens to effectively demand public goods from local and
national politicians.
    10
     Other factors that have been emphasized for explaining cross-country differences include geography and
culture. Regarding natural resources, Francesco Caselli and Guy Michaels (2008) find that the in Brazil, discovery
of oil in a municipality increases municipal public expenditures but has little impact on measured citizen well-
being. Melissa Dell, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken (2009) document a statistically significant
cross-sectional correlation between climate and income within a number of countries examined in this study using
the same economic dataset. The quantitative magnitudes they report, though not trivial, suggest that climate
cannot explain the full spatial variation in the data. This leaves significant scope for the institutional factors that
we examine.
The effects of culture (belief systems) have also been emphasized recently (e.g.Tabellini, 2006).
  11
     Ideally we would control for employment density, but this information is not available at the municipal level
for much of the Americas.
  12
     Results (available upon request) are also similar when we estimate inequality separately for urban and rural
areas.




                                                          9
    Table 3 documents substantial differences across municipalities in proximity to paved roads.13
We calculate each municipality’s proximity to intercity paved roads by overlaying a 1 km x 1
km grid on the Americas, calculating the distance (allowing for changes in elevation) from
each grid cell’s centroid to the closest paved road, and then averaging this distance over all
grid cells contained within the municipality.14 In Table 3, we conserve space by reporting the
numbers by country only for the five countries with census income data geo-referenced to the
municipality. The numbers for all countries in our sample are given in Appendix Table A7 and
the overall inequality decompositions in the final three rows of Table 3 is for this full sample
of Latin American countries and the United States. The first and second columns of Table 3
report the mean and standard deviation of municipal-level proximity to paved road networks
for Brazil, Mexico, Panama, the United States, Venezuela, and the Americas overall; column
(3) presents the 90-50 percentile ratio; and columns (4) through (7) decompose inequality in
proximity to paved roads into inequality across countries and inequality across municipalities
within countries.15
    Not surprisingly, the United States is on average the most proximate to paved roads, and
of the five countries reported in Table 3, Brazil is the least. Inequality in proximity to paved
road networks across municipalities in Latin America is about 2.5 times as large as inequality
across countries and remains higher than inequality across countries even when the United
States is included. Nevertheless, these patterns may reflect geographic factors (e.g., building
roads is both easier and more useful on the coasts than in the Amazon), and may thus be
unrelated to productivity and income differences. We undertake a preliminary investigation of
this issue in columns (8) and (9), by computing the partial correlations between proximity to
paved roads and the log of individual incomes, for males between the ages of 18 and 55 in the
five countries with census income data geo-referenced to the municipality.16 Column (8) includes
state fixed effects. States (of which there are 27 in Brazil, 32 in Mexico, 9 in Panama, and 23
in Venezuela) are geographically small, and thus including state fixed effects ensures that we
are comparing municipalities in close geographic proximity. To further control for geographic
characteristics that may affect the density of road networks, column (9) also includes municipal
level controls for elevation, slope, and mean annual temperature and precipitation between 1950
and 2000 (see the data appendix for sources), as well as a full set of age dummies. The correlation
between distance to roads and incomes is negative and highly significant for all countries (except
Venezuela in column (9)). Translating these correlations into elasticities suggests that increasing
a municipality’s average distance from paved roads by 1% reduces labor income of prime-aged
males by 0.06% in Brazil, by 0.09% in Mexico, and by 0.14% in Panama.
    Naturally, these elasticities do not reflect the causal effect of proximity to roads on income.
  13
     Results (available upon request) are similar when we consider both paved and gravel roads.
  14
     The correlations between individual incomes and roads are similar when we instead calculate road network
density, the municipality’s total kilometers of paved roads divided by the surface area of the municipality.
  15
     Note that in contrast to the previous tables, there is no within municipality variation in road networks since
proximity is measured at the municipal level.
  16
     We limit the sample to prime-aged males to decrease selection on labor force participation. Results (available
upon request) are similar when all individuals with positive incomes are included in the sample.


                                                        10
First, proximity to roads is likely correlated with the availability of other public goods, and we
thus interpret it as a proxy for a bundle of public goods. Second, there are several other reasons,
unrelated to the availability of public goods and local institutions, why proximity to roads may
be correlated with incomes (even after we control for observable factors). Estimating the causal
impact of roads (or local public goods more generally) on incomes is beyond the scope of this
paper. Instead, we summarize several recent studies that provide detailed empirical evidence
relating institutions to local public goods and economic prosperity within particular countries.
    Melissa Dell (2008) utilizes a regression discontinuity approach to examine the long-run im-
pacts of the mita, an extensive forced mining labor system in effect in Peru and Bolivia during
the colonial era. She estimates that a mita effect lowers household consumption today by around
one third in subjected districts. Mita districts historically had fewer large landowners and lower
educational attainment, today they are less integrated into road networks, and their residents,
who face difficulties in transporting crops to markets due to poor road infrastructure, are sub-
stantially more likely to be subsistence farmers. Outside of Latin America, Abhijit Banerjee and
Lakshmi Iyer (2005) similarly show that colonial land revenue systems in India have long-run
effects on investments in health and education infrastructure. Daron Acemoglu et al. (2008) find
a robust association between political inequality in the 19th century in Cundinamarca, Colom-
bia (measured by the lack of turnover of mayors in the municipalities) and economic outcomes
today. They also provide evidence, consistent with Dell’s (2008) findings, that the availability of
local public goods might be a particularly important intervening channel. Similar correlations
are obtained for Brazil by Joana Naritomi, Rodrigo B. Soares, and Juliano Assunção (2007).17
    Our findings are also broadly consistent with a large literature on the impact of infrastructure
on economic outcomes. In a series of studies on Peru (summarized in the Escobal and Torrero
chapter in Kanbur and Venables (2005)), Javier Escobal and co-authors empirically connect poor
local road infrastructure to higher transaction costs, lower market participation, and reduced
household income. Other studies of the effects of local public goods include, among others,
Esther Duflo and Rohini Pande (2007), which examines the effects of dams in India, and Dave
Donaldson (2008), which analyzes the impact of railroads in colonial India.


5        Towards a Framework
In this section, we provide a simple framework to interpret cross-country and cross-municipality
income differences and their dynamics, and to highlight the two-way interaction between local
and national outcomes.18 The framework builds on endogenous technological change models
    17
      Also relevant is the political science literature on subnational institutional variation in Latin America. Gib-
son (2005) has developed a theoretical framework for examining “subnational authoritarianism”, defined as the
persistence of authoritarian regional governments in a nationally democratic society, and has emphasized large
differences across Argentine provinces and Mexican states in the extent to which elections are fair and competi-
tive, elected local authorities are protected from arbitrary removal by regional authorities, and the judicial system
is accessible and independent. Similarly, O’Donnell (1993) has classified regions of Latin America based on the
functioning of rule of the law, documenting substantial differences within countries.
   18
      While the within-municipality differences are important, they are not our focus here.



                                                         11
(e.g., Philippe Aghion and Peter Howitt, 1992, Gene M. Grossman and Elhanan Helpman, 1991,
and Paul M. Romer, 1990) and on the model of international technological diffusion presented
in Acemoglu (2009, ch. 18). Motivated by the empirical results in Section 3 and the discussion
in Section 4, we consider a model that explicitly distinguishes countries as well as regions within
countries. In addition, we delineate productivity differentials resulting from technology, human
capital embedded in workers, and local differences in public goods and institutions. Physical
capital differences, which are the main factor emphasized by the neoclassical growth model, are
omitted from this framework.
    We consider an infinite-horizon world economy in continuous time. There are J countries
indexed by j = 1, 2, ..., J, and Mj regions (municipalities) in country j indexed by m = 1, ..., Mj .
Population in each country is normalized to 1 and there is no population growth. We assume
that all countries and regions produce a single final good denoted by Y , and the aggregate
production function of region m in economy j at time t is
                                          ÃZ                          !
                                 (γj,m )β     Nj (t)
                     Yj,m (t) =                      xj,m (ν, t)1−β dv (hj,m Lj,m )β ,           (6)
                                  1−β       0

where Lj,m is labor input, which varies across regions; hj,m is the efficiency of labor, determined
by education, public goods and other institutional factors, which can vary across regions and
countries; and γj,m is a region-specific productivity term. While the γj,m s could incorporate
a number of characteristics affecting regional productivity, in accordance with the empirical
evidence in Section 4, we focus on one interpreation of the γj,m s: efficiency terms reflecting local
institutions and policies (e.g., the provision of local public goods or security of property rights).
In equation (6), the variable γ is raised to the power β in order to simplify the expressions that
follow. This is without any loss of generality, since γ has no natural scale. Our population
                               PMj
normalization implies that m=1       Lj,m = 1. For now, we also ignore migration across regions.
    The functional form in (6) is similar to the standard Dixit-Stiglitz aggregator used in en-
dogenous growth models. Similarly, Nj (t) denotes the number of machine varieties available to
country j at time t. This variable captures the technological know-how of country j. Technology
diffuses slowly across countries and producers can only use the technologies available in their
country. This implies that Nj —thus the available technology—varies across countries. However,
once a country has a particular level of technology, it can be used in all regions in the country.19
Finally, xj,m (ν, t) is the total amount of machine variety ν used in region m in country j at time
t. To simplify the analysis, let us suppose that the xs depreciate fully after use.
    Each machine variety in economy j is owned by a technology monopolist, which will sell
machines embodying this technology at the profit-maximizing (rental) price pxj (ν, t) in all regions
within the country. We assume that there are no regional taxes on machines or differences in
transport costs, thus machine prices will be the same across regions.20 The monopolist can
  19
     Thus there is no slow diffusion of technology across regions within a country, though differences in region-
specific productivity embedded in the γj,m s can capture such slow diffusion.
  20
     Again any such differences can be incorporated into the γj,m s.



                                                       12
produce each unit of the machine at a marginal cost of ψ in terms of the final good, and without
any loss of generality, we normalize ψ ≡ 1 − β.
    We assume that each country admits a representative household with constant relative risk
aversion (CRRA) preferences, with the same degree of risk aversion (intertemporal elasticity of
substitution) and the same discount
                            h³       rate across
                                            ´ countries.
                                                      i    In particular, preferences at time t = 0
              R∞
are given by 0 exp (−ρt) Cj (t)1−θ − 1 / (1 − θ) dt, with ρ > 0 and θ ≥ 0. Although our
empirical investigation so far has emphasized income inequality, our focus here is on differences
in productivity across regions. Thus differences in the saving and consumption behavior of
households within a country are not central to our framework and the representative household
assumption enables us to suppress these. In addition, there is no international trade in goods (all
countries produce the same final good) or in assets (thus no international borrowing or lending).
This implies that the following resource constraint must hold for each country j at each time t:

                               Cj (t) + Xj (t) + ζj Zj (t) ≤ Yj (t) ,                          (7)

where Xj (t) is spending on inputs at time t and Zj (t) is expenditure on technology adoption
at time t, which may take the form of R&D or other technology expenditures. The parameter
ζj measures country-level distortions or institutional and policy differences, and will be a key
driver of potential technology differences.
    Technology in country j evolves as a result of the technology adoption decisions of profit-
maximizing firms. In particular, the innovation possibilities frontier takes the form
                                                 µ            ¶φ
                                                     N (t)
                                  Ṅj (t) = ηj                     Zj (t) ,                    (8)
                                                     Nj (t)

where N (t) is an index of the world technology frontier, ηj > 0 for all j, and φ > 0 and
common to all economies. This form of the innovation possibilities frontier implies that the
technological know-how of country j advances as a result of the R&D and other technology-
related expenditures of firms in the country. The effectiveness of these investments depends on
a country-specific constant, ηj > 0, and more importantly, on how advanced the world technology
frontier is relative to country j’s technological know-how (captured by the term N (t) /Nj (t)).
Each economy starts with some initial technology stock Nj (0) > 0 and there is free entry into
research, so that any firm can invest in R&D (denoted by Zj (t)) and adopt new technologies
according to the innovation possibilities frontier (8).
    Since world growth is not the focus here, suppose that the world technology frontier advances
(or frontier varieties grow) at an exogenous rate g > 0, that is,

                                         Ṅ (t) = gN (t) .                                     (9)

    Finally, we also assume that factor markets are competitive. The interest rate and the wage
rate per unit of human capital in country j are denoted, respectively, by rj (t) and wj (t).
    An equilibrium consists of sequences of technology levels, R&D levels, machine prices, interest
rates and wage rates for each country and machine demands and output levels for each region,

                                                     13
such that final good firms and technology monopolists maximize profits, there is free entry into
technology adoption, and the representative household in each country maximizes its discounted
utility. A balanced growth path equilibrium (BGP) refers to an equilibrium path in which
each country grows at a constant rate. In thinking about the cross-country and cross-region
differences, comparisons of economies in BGP are a natural starting point.
    It is straightforward to verify that in any equilibrium, technology monopolists, who face
iso-elastic demand curves for their machines, will set a constant markup over marginal cost
ψ ≡ 1 − β, and the equilibrium price of every machine in each country at each point in time
will be pxj (ν, t) = 1. Given (6), this also implies that the demand for machines in each region of
each country that will maximize the profits of the final good producers will be

                                            xj,m (ν, t) = γj,m hj,m Lj,m .                       (10)

This implies the intuitive result that there will be more intensive use of technologies when
workers have greater human capital and when local conditions are more favorable for business.
Consequently, a technology monopolist (for machine variety ν) in country j will make the fol-
                                                                 PMj
lowing level of profits at every point in time: πj (ν, t) = β m=1     γj,m hj,m Lj,m , where β is the
difference between price and marginal cost (1 and ψ ≡ 1 − β), while the summation gives the
total machine sales of this monopolist, which follows from (10).
    Let us start with the BGP. It is straightforward to verify that, given (8), all countries must
grow at the same rate g as given in (9). The CRRA preferences of the representative household
imply the standard Euler equation, which gives the growth rate of consumption of each country
at each point in time as Ċ (t) /C (t) = (rj (t) − ρ) /θ. In the BGP, output and thus consumption
in each country grow at the rate g, so the interest rates must also be constant and equal to

                                                        r∗ = ρ + θg.                             (11)

Consequently, the value of a technology monopolist in BGP in country j is
                                                        PMj
                                                    β     m=1 γj,m hj,m Lj,m
                                          Vj∗   =                            .
                                                               r∗
Combining this expression with the innovation possibilities frontier in (8), we obtain that country
j’s relative technology µj ≡ Nj (t) /N (t) in BGP will be
                                            Ã          PMj                    !1/φ
                                                ηj β     m=1 γj,m hj,m Lj,m
                                    µ∗j =                                            ,           (12)
                                                           ζj r∗

with r∗ given by (11). In addition, it can also be proved that this BGP allocation is globally
saddle-path stable, in the sense that starting with any strictly positive vector of initial technology
levels {Nj (0)}Jj=1 , there exists a unique equilibrium path converging to this BGP.21
 21
      The proof of this result follows the similar derivation in Acemoglu (2009, ch. 18).




                                                              14
   What does this BGP allocation imply for cross-country and cross-region inequality? The
above derivation immediately establishes that the level of income per capita in region m in
country j in the BGP is
                                      Ã         PMj                       !1/φ
                     ∗       β 1/φ         ηj      m=1 γj,m hj,m Lj,m
                    yj,m   =                                                     (γj,m hj,m ) N (0) .     (13)
                             1−β                       ζj r∗

Then, summing across regions, total income in country j in the BGP is
                                                                                (1+φ)/φ
                                      µ           ¶1/φ       Mj
                                                             X
                              β 1/φ        ηj            
                      yj∗ =                                       γj,m hj,m Lj,m           N (0) .       (14)
                              1−β         ζj r∗
                                                         m=1


These expressions give the theoretical counterparts of the regional (municipal) and national labor
incomes we computed and compared in Section 3 and can be used to develop more structural links
between our theoretical framework and between- and within-country differences. They highlight
that countries that have better possibilities for adopting world technologies (higher ηj s), where
firms face less severe barriers to adopting technologies (lower ζj s) and have on average better
local institutions (higher γj,m s) and workers with greater human capital (higher hj,m s) will tend
to be richer. Within a country, all regions share the same technology Nj , so it will be those
regions that have better local institutions (higher γj,m s) and those that have workers with higher
human capital (higher hj,m s) that will be richer. This framework also emphasizes the two-way
interaction between national and local factors. First, two regions (j, m) and (j 0 , m0 ) that have
identical characteristics but are situated in different countries will have different income levels,
because they will have access to different country-level technologies. Second, a country with a
number of regions with low γj,m s and hj,m s will generate a lower demand for machines embodying
new technologies (as shown by equation (10)), and this will reduce the profitability of adopting
technologies from the world frontier at the national level and will tend to reduce national income.
This channel also suggests that if within-country inequalities are caused by the failure of some
regions to offer good business conditions, public goods and a workforce with the requisite skills,
then this will tend reduce income in the country both directly (because some regions are poorer)
and indirectly (because technology adoption at the national level becomes less profitable).22
    The framework presented above does not allow for migration across municipalities. A natural
question is whether migration would affect cross-municipality differences in income and output.
One may conjecture that differences due to local institutions and policies (the γs in the model)
would be arbitraged away when migration is possible. This is not necessarily the case, however,
as a variety of factors make movement across municipalities costly. First, in parts of Latin
  22
     The magnitude of the indirect channel in practice will depend on the extent to which firms produce for the
domestic market. Openness, defined as imports plus export as a share of GDP (Heston et al., 2006) ranges
considerably across the countries we consider in our empirical analysis, from around 20% in Argentina, 25% in
Brazil and the United States, and 40% in Boliiva, Colombia and Venzuela to around two thirds in Mexico, Chile,
and El Salvador.




                                                              15
America, there are explicit barriers to migration.23 Second and more importantly, migration
will arbitrage all differences due to the γs only when there are no differences in the costs of
living and housing across municipalities. In practice, both housing costs and the prices of other
goods and services differ significantly across regions.
    Recognizing that migration, even if it could take place without any impediments, would
not lead to an equalization of non-human capital incomes (when not deflated fully) implies that
regional differences will have two components; those due to human capital differences (and other
factors mobile with workers) and those due to differences in local conditions. These correspond
to the influences of the hs and γs in the model. We can then map the differences due to the hs to
those related to education and the differences due to the γs to the residual differences obtained
in Section 3 after we removed the influence of education and experience. In particular, our
decomposition suggests that the cross-municipality variation accounted for by these two sources
are broadly similar.


6        Concluding Remarks
This study used a novel data set of labor incomes to document within-country (cross-
municipality) income differences for a large number of countries in the Americas. Within Latin
America, between-municipality differences in incomes are greater than cross-country differences.
We documented that about half of the between-country and between-municipality differences
can be accounted for by differences in human capital, the remainder being due to residual
factors. We also proposed a simple unified framework for the analysis of cross-country and
within-country income differences, which emphasizes the importance of the efficiency of pro-
duction. Productive efficiency is determined at the country level by the technology adoption
decisions of profit-maximizing firms and by national institutions, and within countries by local
institutions, such as the availability of local public goods and the security of property rights.
    Future research could follow a number of promising paths for identifying the underlying
determinants of local productivity differences. The empirical and qualitative evidence suggests
that differences in local public goods—determined in part by institutions at the local and regional
level—are one source of within-country differences. Such patterns call for more systematic
measurement and empirical investigation of specific institutional features at the subnational
level, as well as new theoretical work modeling the impact and endogenous determination of
these local forces.




    23
    Notably, in regions where a substantial portion of the land is held by indigenous communities, there are
legal and traditional impediments to selling land to outsiders, making larger cities, which often have significant
dis-amenities, the main viable destinations for migration.


                                                       16
A. Online Appendices—Not for Publication
A1. Decomposing Inequality Measures
In this section, we derive the decompositions of the general entropy indices used in the main
text of this paper: the Mean Log Deviation (MLD) index and the Theil index.
    The mean log deviation index for total inequality in country j is given by:
                                                   Mj Ljm
                                                1 XX
                              M LDj = ln yj −             ln yjmi ,                       (A-1)
                                                Lj
                                                     m=1 i=1

where yjmi is the income of individual i in municipality m in country j, yj is mean national
income and Lj is total national population in country j.
                                 PMj Ljm
    Now adding and subtracting m=1      Lj ln yjm to both sides (where yjm is mean income in
municipality m and Ljm is the number of individuals in municipality m), we obtain:
                                                    
                                      Mj                 Mj
                                      X   Ljm            X    Ljm
                             
                   M LDj = ln yj −                   
                                               ln yjm +           M LDjm ,
                                           Lj                  Lj
                                       m=1                     m=1

where
                                                      Ljm
                                                   1 X
                              M LDjm   = ln yjm −         ln yjmi
                                                  Ljm
                                                         i=1
is the MLD index for inequality in municipality m in country j. The first term is the MLD
measure of cross-municipality inequality, and the second term is a weighted average of the
MLDs within each municipality, where the weights are municipality population shares.
    Now let us repeat the same exercise for decomposing the MLD index into inequality between
versus within countries. The Western Hemisphere MLD index is then:
                                             J Mj Ljm
                                           1XXX
                             M LD = ln y −            ln yjmi ,
                                           L
                                                j=1 m=1 i=1

where yjmi is the income of individual i in municipality m in country j, y is mean income in the
Western Hemisphere, and L is total population in the Western Hemisphere.
                           P      L
   Now add and subtract Jj=1 Lj ln yj , where yj is mean income in country j and Lj is the
number of individuals in country j. Again, basic algebra yields:
                                                      
                                          X J              J
                                                           X
                                              Lj              Lj
                       M LD = ln y −            ln yj  +       M LDj ,
                                              L                L
                                         j=1               j=1

where
                                                 Mj Ljm
                                              1 XX
                              M LDj = ln yj −           ln yjmi
                                              Lj
                                                     m=1 i=1
is the MLD index for inequality in country j.

                                                17
  Plugging in from our decomposition of M LDj above yields:
                                                                                
                 J               J                 Mj                  Mj
                 X  Lj           X Lj            X  Ljm              X  Ljm
M LD = ln y −         ln yj  +      ×    ln yj −          ln yjm  +        M LDjm  ,
                    L              L                   Lj                  Lj
                  j=1                j=1                          m=1                      m=1

                                           1 PLjm
where, from above, M LDjm = ln yjm − Ljm        i=1 ln yjmi is the MLD index for inequality in
municipality m in country j. The first term gives between country inequality, and the second
and third terms are between municipality (within country) and within-municipality inequality,
respectively, weighted by country j’s population share.
    A similar exercise can be used to decompose the Theil index for country j, given by:

                                          X yjmi µ yjmi ¶
                                       Mj Ljm
                                       X
                                  Tj =              ln    ,                                                (A-2)
                                              Lj yj    yj
                                           m=1 i=1
                                                                                           PMj   Ljm yjm
where yjmi , yj and Lj are defined as above. Again, adding and subtracting                   m=1 Lj yj     ln yjm
both sides, we obtain
                             Mj
                             X                Mj
                                              X             µ     ¶
                                Ljm yjm          Ljm yjm      yjm
                        Tj =            Tjm +            ln         ,
                                 Lj yj            Lj yj        yj
                            m=1                       m=1

where
                                            Ljm
                                            X                  µ          ¶
                                                   yjmi            yjmi
                                  Tjm =                   ln
                                                  Ljm yjm          yjm
                                            i=1
is the Theil index for inequality in municipality m in country j.
    Now we decompose the Theil index for overall Western Hemisphere inequality, given by:
                                        Mj Ljm
                                      J X
                                      X    X yjmi                 µ          ¶
                                                                      yjmi
                               T =                           ln                  ,                         (A-3)
                                                        Ly             y
                                      j=1 m=1 i=1

where yjmi is the income of individual i in municipality m in country j, y is mean income in
the Western Hemisphere, and N is the total population in the Western Hemisphere. With the
same steps as before, we can also write
                                 XJ             J
                                                X        µ    ¶
                                     Lj yj        Lj yj ln yj
                            T =            Tj +                 ,
                                      L y          L y     y
                                  j=1                 j=1

where
                                          X yjmi µ ln yjmi ¶
                                       Mj Ljm
                                       X
                                  Tj =
                                              Lj yj   yj
                                           m=1 i=1
is the Theil index for inequality in country j. Note that this is equal to (A-2). Plugging in the
decomposition from above yields:
                                                                                        
          X J        µ     ¶ X   J            XMj             µ     ¶ X  Mj
               Lj yj ln yj          Lj yj        Ljm yjm       yjm          Ljm yjm
      T =                    +            ×                ln         +              Tjm  ,
               L y       y           L y           Lj yj         yj           Lj yj
          j=1                  j=1                m=1                                m=1


                                                     18
                     PLjm yjmi        ³      ´
                                        yjmi
where again Tjm = i=1      Ljm yjm ln   yjm    is the Theil index for inequality in municipality m
in country j. The first component is cross-country inequality, the second component is between
municipality inequality, and the third component is within-municipality inequality.

A2. Data Methodology
We discussed the construction of our nationally (but not regionally) deflated labor income data
in the text, so here our main focus is on the methodology used to create our household expen-
diture aggregate (examined in Appendix Table A5). We construct our measure of household
expenditure by aggregating expenditures on food and non-food items, durable goods, and hous-
ing. Marriages, births, and funerals, which are lumpy and relatively infrequent expenditures,
are excluded. We include expenditures on health, but patterns of household expenditure are
very similar when these are instead excluded. Gifts and transfers made by the household are
not included, as these will be counted as they are spent by their recipients.
     The method we use to calculate the flow expenditure on durable goods varies according to the
data available in each household survey. Household surveys for Bolivia, Ecuador, Guatemala,
Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, and Peru include the current value and age of durable
goods held by each household. Following the recommendations of Deaton and Zaidi (2002), we
calculate the average age for each durable good t̄ using data on the purchase dates of the good
recorded in the survey. Then, we estimate the average lifetime of each good as 2t̄, under the
assumption that purchases are uniformly distributed through time. The remaining life of each
good is then calculated as 2t̄ − t, where t is the current age of the good. A rough estimate of
the flow of services is derived by dividing the current value by the good’s expected remaining
life. The interest component in the flow of services is ignored.
     In contrast, the household survey for Brazil includes a list of durable goods held by the
household and their ages, but does not contain estimates of their current values. We estimate
the purchase value of the good as the state median price for that good using data on purchase
values from the expenditure section of the survey. Then we calculate the average life of the
good as 2t̄. To complete the estimate, we calculate the average user cost of the good as the
median purchase value divided by the average lifetime of the good. Finally, some household
surveys (Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Mexico, and Uruguay) do not include any
information about the stock of durables held by households. In these cases, we calculate the
durables sub-aggregate as expenditures by the household in the previous year on durable goods.
     Some surveys ask multiple questions on the same expenditures with different reference
periods—i.e., “the last two weeks” versus a “typical month”. Following recommendations by
Deaton and Zaidi, we use the latter. We calculate both per capita household expenditure and
expenditure per equivalent adult (in local prices, national prices, and 2005 international $). Fol-
lowing Deaton (1997), we assume that children aged 0 to 4 are equal to 0.4 adults, and children
aged 5 to 14 are equal to 0.5 adults.
     Adjusting for differences in purchasing power is important for making regional and interna-
tional comparisons of household welfare using expenditure data. Consider a Paasche price index


                                                19
comparing the price vector faced by the household, ph , and the reference price vector, p0 :

                                                    ph q h
                                            Pph =          ,                                    (A-4)
                                                    p0 q h

where q h is the consumption vector and ph · q h denotes the inner product of these two vectors.
   Rearranging yields:
                                               ph · q h  xh
                                    p0 · q h =          = h                                (A-5)
                                                 Pph     Pp
where the value of the household’s consumption defined at reference prices, ym    h = p0 · q h , is

our object of interest and xh is household expenditure. Note the convenient link with national
income accounting practice, in which real national product is the lefthand side of (A-5) summed
over all households.
                  h from our expenditure data, we rewrite (A-4) as:
    To calculate ym
                                                      1
                                          Pph = P          p0
                                                                                                (A-6)
                                                       h k
                                                    k wk ph
                                                               k


where wkh is the share of household h’s budget devoted to good k and phk (and p0k ) denotes the
kth component of the corresponding vector. Pph involves not only the prices faced by house-
hold h in relation to the reference prices, but also household h’s expenditure pattern. Using
a Paasche price index with household specific weights allows us to account for differences in
expenditure patterns—prevalent across regions—when adjusting prices. We calculate Pph from
the information about food quantities and expenditures available in our household surveys. We
take the reference vector p0 to be the median of prices observed from individual households in
the survey.To reduce the influence of outliers, we replace the individual phk by their medians over
households in the same municipality.
    Calculating prices from our survey data requires converting all quantities (i.e., pieces, bottles,
bundles) to constant units (kilograms or liters) for each commodity, and then dividing total
expenditure by quantity purchased. In some cases, national statistics offices performed these
calculations before releasing the data. In other cases, the survey documentation contains the
necessary conversion factors—by commodity—to convert to constant units. In a couple of cases
(most notably, Bolivia), surveys report some quantities in “pieces” but do not provide conversion
factors. In these instances, we use the conversion factors for similar goods provided by other
surveys.
    Constructing a meaningful consumption aggregate also required checking the survey data
for obvious data entry errors and irregularities, most common in reporting food quantities. In
some—but not all—surveys, national statistical offices did a thorough job of error checking. After
carefully examining individual data points, we used the following procedure to correct data that
were clearly recorded incorrectly. If the household’s annual expenditure on a good was more
than four standard deviations above the mean expenditure on that good in the household’s
municipality (or state if the municipality is not identified or had very few observations), the

                                                 20
observation was replaced by the municipality median. Less than 1% of the sample meets this
cutoff. The procedure is used for all surveys in our dataset. The distribution of aggregate
consumption is robust to instead dropping these items, or requiring the value to be more than
five standard deviations above the municipality mean. Results are also robust to using deviations
in logs rather than levels. We apply a similar procedure in calculating prices for the Paasche
index, dropping quantities that are more than four standard deviations from the municipality
mean.
     After deflating regional prices to national prices, we further adjust for differences in inter-
national purchasing power by normalizing the data so that household expenditure within each
country aggregates to 2005 national per capita consumption in international dollars from the
World Development Indicators.
     Income data are drawn from either population censuses or household surveys. The census
data give a single measure of labor income, whereas labor income from household surveys is
constructed from responses to various questions about earned income (i.e. from primary occu-
pation, secondary occupation, etc.) The methodology we use to construct the income aggregate
is similar to that used to construct the consumption aggregate. We compare per capita income
from the census or household survey with the value of PPP adjusted GDP per worker in 2003,
taken from the Penn World Tables. This allows us to calculate a factor to adjust income so that
it averages to GDP per worker in constant international dollars. To produce the decompositions
in Appendix Table A2, we also deflate by the state median of the household specific Paasche
index discussed above. When a Paasche index is unavailable, we use data on regional purchasing
power provided by National Statistics Offices.
     The climate and geography variables were constructed as follows. Municipal-level temper-
ature and precipitation variables were calculated using 30 arc second resolution (1 kilometer)
mean temperature and precipitation over the 1950-2000 period, as compiled by climatologists
at U.C. Berkeley (Hijmans, Robert et al., 2005). We also use 30 arc second resolution terrain
data (NASA and NGIA, 2000), collected by the Shuttle Radar Topography Mission, to construct
municipal-level mean elevation and slope. The GIS municipality boundaries were produced by
the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT, 2008b).

A3. Further Results
Table A1 lists the data sources used in this paper, and Table A2 provides summary statis-
tics. Table A3 examines labor income inequality, where labor incomes are not deflated for
regional purchasing power. The overall decompositions of inequality into cross-country, cross-
municipality, and within-municipality inequality are thus identical to those presented in Table 1
of the main text, with Table A3 presenting the inequality measures, country-by-country, for the
full set of countries for which we have data. Table A3 shows that the extent of inequality across
countries depends on the measure being used, though Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela are among
the most unequal countries with all three measures. Table A4 examines labor income inequality
where incomes have been deflated by the state level median of the Paasche price index described


                                                21
above. The results are very similar to those shown in Tables 1 and A3.
    Table A5 examines inequality in equivalent household expenditure, constructed according
to the methodology described above. Not surprisingly, the extent of inequality in household
expenditure is less than that in labor income. Nevertheless, the overall comparative patterns
are similar. In particular, the within-country MLD and Theil indices are substantially greater
than the between country ones.24 The ranking of countries in terms of inequality in Table A5 is
sometimes quite different than that in Table A3. For example, Peru appears to have relatively
less within-municipality inequality. This likely reflects differences in the variability of monthly
labor income relative to household expenditure and in the precise nature and quality of the
various household questionnaires.25
    Table A6 investigates the implications of controlling for population density (as a proxy for
the density of economic activity). It uses the Theil index to decompose each of the components
of income (overall, predicted, and residual) into inequality between countries, inequality be-
tween municipalities/regions (of countries), and inequality within municipalities, where income
is predicted using information on individual education, predicted individual experience, and mu-
nicipal level population density. Table A7 presents the inequality decompositions for proximity
to paved roads country-by-country. Note that when considering proximity to paved roads, we
have municipal level data for all countries presented.26
    Finally, Figures A1 through A3 provide maps showing mean (non-deflated) labor income by
municipality (or region) for North America, Mexico and Central America, and South America,
respectively.27 Note the difference in scale between the North America map and the Latin
America maps.




  24
     Note that because of the small sample sizes of existing consumption datasets for the United States and
Canada, these countries are not included in the consumption inequality decompositions. Hence, the overall
inequality numbers in Table A5 should be compared to those without the United States and Canada in Table 1.
  25
     For example, the Peruvian consumption data provides somewhat larger samples than most of the other
consumption data sets and contains many carefully detailed questions on expenditure and home production. To
the extent that it is one of the highest quality data sets, it may have little measurement error in the within-
municipality inequality component, relative to the within components from the other expenditure and income
data sets.
  26
     Canada is omitted because its administrative division involves extremely large swathes of territory grouped
into single administrative units. This absence of municipality level data make it difficult to compare the decom-
positions for Canada to those for the rest of the Americas.
  27
     Particularly for the countries where data are drawn from household surveys, labor income is not available for
every municipality. In order to provide an approximate overall picture of spatial patterns in income, we replace
missing municipality values by the median labor income in the municipality’s first administrative unit (i.e. state
or department).


                                                       22
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Introduction to Modern Economic Growth, Princeton University Press, 2009.

   and James A. Robinson, “Persistence of power, elites, and institutions,” American Economic
  Review, 2008, 98 (1), 267–293.

  , Maria Angelica Bautista, Pablo Qeurubin, and James A. Robinson, “Economic and polı́tical
  Inequality in Development: The Case of Cundinamarca, Colombia,” NBER Working Paper, 2008.

Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt, “A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction,” Econo-
 metrica, 1992, 60 (2), 323–351.

Banerjee, Abhijit and Lakshmi Iyer, “History, Institutions, and Economic Performance: The Legacy
 of Colonial Land Tenure Systems in India,” American Economic Review, 2005, 95 (4), 1190–1213.

Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, Economic Growth, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1995.

Caselli, Francesco and Guy Michaels, “Resource Abundance, Development, and Living Standards:
 the Case of Brazil,” mimeo, 2008.

Center for International Earth Science Information Network, Global Rural-Urban Mapping
  Project, Alpha Version: Population Grids, Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center (SEDAC),
  Columbia University, http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/gpw (May 10th, 2007), 2004.

CIAT, Latin America and the Caribbean Roads Database, Center for Tropical Agriculture, 2008.

  , Sub National Boundaries of South and Central America, Center for Tropical Agriculture, 2008.

Ciccone, Antonio and Robert E. Hall, “Productivity and the density of economic activity,” The
  American Economic Review, 1996, pp. 54–70.

Deaton, Angus, The Analysis of Household Surveys: A Microeconometric Approach to Development
 Policy, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997.

  and Salman Zaidi, Guidelines for Constructing Consumption Aggregates for Welfare Analysis, World
  Bank Publications, 2002.

Dell, Melissa, “The Persistent Effects of Peru’s Mining Mita,” manuscript, MIT Department of Eco-
 nomics: http://econ-www.mit.edu/grad/mdell/papers, 2008.

  , Benjamin Jones, and Benjamin Olken, “Temperature and Income: Reconciling New Cross-
  Sectional and Panel Estimates,” American Economic Association Papers and Proceedings, 2009, 99
  (2).

Donaldson, Dave, “Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation Infrastructure,”
 manuscript, London Schol of Economics: http://personal.lse.ac.uk/DONALD1S/, 2008.

Duflo, Esther and Rohini Pande, “Dams,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (2),
 601–646.

Gasparini, Leonardo, “Different Lives: Inequality in Latin America and the Caribbean,” in De Ferranti
 et al., ed., Inequality in Latin America: Breaking with History, IBRD, 2003.

Gibson, Edward L., “Boundary Control,” World Politics, 2005, 58, 101–132.

Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy, MIT
 Press, 1991.


                                                 23
Hall, Robert and Charles Jones, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output Per
 Worker Than Others?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 114 (1), 83–116.

Heston, Alan, Robert Summers, and Bettina Aten, “Penn World Table Version 6.2,” Center for
 International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the University of Pennsylvania, 2006.

Hijmans, Robert et al., “Very high resolution interpolated climate surfaces for global land area,”
  International Journal of Climatology, 2005, 25, 1965–1978.

Kanbur, S.M. Ravi and Anthony Venables, Spatial inequality and development, Oxford University
 Press, USA, 2005.

Klenow, Peter and Andres Rodriguez-Clare, “The Neoclassical Revival in Growth Economics: Has
  It Gone Too Far?,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, 1997, pp. 73–103.

Londoño, Juan Luis and Miguel Székely, “Persistent Poverty and Excess Inequality,” Journal of
  Applied Economics, 2000, 3 (1), 93–134.

Mankiw, N.Gregory, David Romer, and David N. Weil, “A Contribution to the Empirics of
 Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1992, 107 (2), 407–437.

Naritomi, Joana, Rodrigo R. Soares, and Juliano J. Assunção, “Rent Seeking and the Unveiling
 of’De Facto’Institutions: Development and Colonial Heritage Within Brazil,” NBER Working Paper,
 2007.

NASA and NGIA, Shuttle Radar Topography Mission 30 Arc Second Finished Data, National Aero-
 nautics and Space Administration and the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency, 2000.

O’Donnell, Guillermo, “On the state, democratization and some conceptual problems: A Latin Ameri-
  can view with glances at some postcommunist countries,” World Development, 1993, 21 (8), 1355–1369.

Romer, Paul M., “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy, 1990, 98 (S5),
 71–102.

Tabellini, Guido, “Culture and Growth in the Regions of Europe,” manuscript, 2006.




                                                 24
                                     Table 1: Labor Income Inequality (All Individuals)
                                                        Mean Log Deviation Index                                            Theil Index
                                      90/10     Between Within     Between       Within                  Between      Within      Between           Within
                                      Ratio     Country Country Munic/Reg Munic/Reg                      Country      Country Munic/Reg            Munic/Reg
                                        (1)        (2)         (3)            (4)             (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)              (9)
   Ref. to Munic.
   Actual pop. weights                 34.2      0.292        0.607          0.087           0.520         0.250        0.544         0.058           0.486

   Equal pop. weights                  28.6      0.231        0.663          0.113           0.550         0.285        0.622         0.088           0.534

   No U.S. (equal)                     20.2       0.054       0.675          0.120           0.555         0.048        0.706         0.114           0.592


   Ref. to Region
   Actual pop. weights                 36.7      0.206        0.651          0.028           0.623         0.203        0.529         0.016           0.513

   Equal pop. weights                  32.7      0.138        0.677          0.037           0.639         0.139        0.615         0.026           0.589


   Full Sample
   Actual pop. weights                 35.0      0.289        0.613          0.079           0.534         0.253        0.542         0.054           0.488

   Equal pop. weights                  32.1      0.210        0.668          0.086           0.582         0.235        0.619         0.061           0.558

   No US/CA (equal)                    21.6      0.075        0.685          0.095           0.590         0.071        0.726         0.081           0.645


   GDP pwkr/pc - actual pop.                        0.263/0.326                                               0.237/0.287

   GDP pwkr/pc - equal pop.                         0.178/0.247                                               0.183/0.257
See Appendix Table A1 for sources. Column (1) gives the ratio of the 90th percentile of the labor income distribution to the 10th percentile, and columns (2)
through (9) decompose inequality. “Actual” refers to weighting by actual population, whereas “equal” normalizes each country’s population to be of equal size.
                            Table 2: Inequality Decomposition, Theil Index (Males 18-55)
                                         Labor Income                         Predicted Labor Income                       Residual Labor Income
                            Between       Between     Within             Between    Between       Within              Between   Between       Within
                            Country      Munic/Reg Munic/Reg             Country Munic/Reg Munic/Reg                  Country Munic/Reg Munic/Reg
                               (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)           (8)             (9)
   Ref. to Mun.
   Brazil                                   0.125            0.708                        0.043           0.261                        0.044           0.461
   Mexico                                   0.115            0.629                        0.018           0.124                        0.081           0.561
   Panama                                   0.078            0.452                        0.020           0.152                        0.025           0.305
   United States                            0.050            0.365                        0.005           0.104                        0.020           0.291
   Venezuela                                0.030            0.913                        0.002           0.024                        0.024           0.879

   Mun. (actual)              0.265         0.067            0.424         0.170          0.015           0.131         0.033          0.040           0.389

   Mun. (equal)               0.301         0.105            0.474         0.166          0.040           0.142         0.041          0.053           0.404

   No US (equal)              0.042         0.136            0.535         0.031          0.053           0.157         0.040          0.057           0.421


   Ref. to Region
   Canada                                   0.005            0.295                        0.000           0.090                        0.004           0.242

   Reg. (actual)              0.234         0.019            0.485         0.105          0.004           0.122         0.043          0.013           0.422

   Reg. (equal)               0.174         0.030            0.592         0.077          0.007           0.138         0.033          0.016           0.511


   All (actual)               0.271         0.062            0.430         0.163          0.014           0.130         0.040          0.037           0.392

   All (equal)                0.264         0.076            0.519         0.158          0.026           0.140         0.045          0.043           0.433

   No US/CA (equal)           0.065         0.104            0.636         0.081          0.035           0.158         0.042          0.050           0.467
See Appendix Table A1 for sources. Columns (1) through (3) decompose the Theil index for labor income inequality, and columns (4) through (9) do the same for
predicted labor income inequality and residual labor income inequality, respectively. “Actual” refers to weighting by actual population, whereas “equal” normalizes
each country’s population to be of equal size.
                                               Table 3: Proximity to Paved Roads
                                  Mean         SD                     MLD Index                 Theil Index               Income Regressions
                                 Dist. to    Dist. to     90/50    Between Within            Between Within
                                  Road        Road        Ratio    Country Country           Country Country              Baseline     Controls
                                    (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)             (8)          (9)
           Brazil                  29.3        64.1        7.9                    0.956                     1.049           -0.022       -0.019
                                                                                                                           (0.004)      (0.003)
           Mexico                   9.5         9.9        3.2                    0.382                     0.379           -0.124       -0.096
                                                                                                                           (0.011)      (0.010)
           Panama                  12.4        23.2        3.0                    0.643                     0.756           -0.157       -0.138
                                                                                                                           (0.026)      (0.025)
           United States            1.5         3.3        3.4                    0.914                     0.795           -0.080       -0.076
                                                                                                                           (0.026)      (0.021)
           Venezuela               11.1        26.2        2.7                    0.508                     0.747           -0.017        0.010
                                                                                                                           (0.006)      (0.006)


           All (actual)            13.2        36.5        6.4       0.621        0.774        0.439        0.815

           All (equal)             18.6        37.8        5.8       0.311        0.649        0.286        0.656

           No U.S. (equal)         19.7        38.6        5.6       0.240        0.634        0.249        0.655
See Appendix Table A1 and the text for sources. The unit of measure for distance is kilometers. Column (3) presents the ratio of the 90th percentile of the
proximity to paved roads distribution to the 50th percentile. Columns (4) through (7) decompose inequality, using the Mean Log Deviation index and the
Theil index, respectively. Column (8) includes state fixed effects, and column (9) includes state fixed effects; geographic controls for municipal elevation,
slope, and mean temperature and precipitation between 1950 and 2000; and a full set of age dummies. The sample in columns (8) and (9) is limited to
males between the ages of 18 and 55. “Actual” refers to weighting by actual population, whereas “equal” normalizes each country’s population to be of
equal size. The final row omits the United States from the sample. Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering by municipality, are in parentheses.
                                            Table A1: Data Sources
                            Income                                Expenditure                                Prices
Country       Source                        Year      Source                        Year      Source                        Year
Bolivia       Encuesta de Hogares           02        Encuesta de Hogares           02        Encuesta de Hogares           02
Brazil        Population Census 6%          00        Pesquisa de Orcamentos        02 - 03   Pesquisa de Orcamentos        02 - 03
              sample                                  Familiares                              Familiares
Canada        Population Census 2.5%        01                                                The Inter-city Index of       01
              sample                                                                          Price Differentials
Chile         VI Encuesta de Pre-           06-07     VI Encuesta de Pre-           06-07     Calcs performed by Na-        06-07
              supuestos Familiares                    supuestos Familiares                    tional Statistics Office
Colombia      Encuesta de Calidad de        03        Encuesta de Calidad de        03        DANE Regional Price In-       06-08
              Vida                                    Vida                                    dex
Costa Rica    Encuesta Nacional de In-      04        Encuesta Nacional de In-      04        Encuesta Nacional de In-      04
              gresos y Gastos de los Hog-             gresos y Gastos de los Hog-             gresos y Gastos de los Hog-
              ares                                    ares                                    ares
Ecuador       Encuesta de Condiciones       05 - 06   Encuesta de Condiciones       05/06     Encuesta de Condiciones       05 - 06
              de Vida                                 de Vida                                 de Vida
El Salvador   Encuesta de Propositos        06        Encuesta de Propositos        06                    none available
              Multiples                               Multiples
Guatemala     Encuesta Nacional de          00        Encuesta Nacional de          00        Encuesta Nacional de          00
              Condiciones de Vida                     Condiciones de Vida                     Condiciones de Vida
Honduras      Encuesta de Condiciones       04        Encuesta de Condiciones       04        Encuesta de Condiciones       04
              de Vida                                 de Vida                                 de Vida
Mexico        Population Census 10.6%       00        Encuesta Nacional de In-      05        Encuesta Nacional de In-      05
              sample                                  gresos y Gastos de los Hog-             gresos y Gastos de los Hog-
                                                      ares                                    ares
Nicaragua                                             Encuesta Nacional de Hog-     05        Encuesta Nacional de Hog-     05
                                                      ares sobre Medicion de                  ares sobre Medicion de
                                                      Nivel de Vida                           Nivel de Vida
Panama        Population Census 10%         00        Encuesta de Niveles de        03        Encuesta de Niveles de        03
              sample                                  Vida                                    Vida
Paraguay      Encuesta Integrada de         01        Encuesta Integrada de         01        Encuesta Integrada de         01
              Hogares                                 Hogares                                 Hogares
Peru          Encuesta Nacional de Hog-     01        Encuesta Nacional de Hog-     01        Encuesta Nacional de Hog-     01
              ares                                    ares                                    ares
U.S.          Population Census 5%          00                                                Munic. cost of living index   00
              sample                                                                          (Council for Community
                                                                                              and Economic Research)
Uruguay       Encuesta de gastos y in-      05-06     Encuesta de gastos y in-      05-06     Encuesta de gastos y in-      05-06
              gresos de hogares                       gresos de hogares                       gresos de hogares
Venezuela     Population Census 10%         01                                                           none available
              sample
                                 Table A2: Summary Statistics
                                               Income per Worker
                            No.           Males       No.       Mean Mun./     Ref. to    Country
                            Obs.          18-50     Mun./Reg.    Reg. Pop.     Munic.      Pop.
                            (1)            (2)        (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)
      Bolivia               8,166         4,227        106          108,897     yes        8,152,620
      Brazil             3,481,697      1,920,149     1,519          94,823     yes      175,552,771
      Canada              441,740        196,208        11         2,695,307    no        30,689,040
      Chile                14,879         6,952          2         7,551,517    no        15,153,797
      Colombia             18,479         8,276          9         4,665,758    no        39,685,655
      Costa Rica           5,699                         6                      no        3,710,558
      Ecuador              22,275         10,581        20          628,822     no        12,920,092
      El Salvador          22,937         10,796        64         64906.51     yes        6,122,515
      Guatemala            11,440         5,707        226          41,901      yes       12,820,296
      Honduras             13,160          5,978        98          44,973      yes        6,200,898
      Mexico             2,660,016      1,562,092     2,442         41,390      yes      100,087,900
      Panama               94,645         55053         30          40,776      yes        2,836,298
      Paraguay              6,867         3,441        175          26,820      yes        5,585,828
      Peru                 22,207         11,333       610          30,619      yes      27,012,899
      United States      7,401,156      3,272,003     2,071         126,211     yes      284,153,700
      Uruguay               8,082         3,707         19         141,812      no         3,334,074
      Venezuela           677,524        380,797       219         110,118      yes       23,542,649
      Total              14,910,969     7,457,300     7,627                              799,871,887
See Appendix Table A1 for variable sources.
                                               Table A3: Labor Income Inequality (All Individuals)
                                                                            Mean Log Deviation Index                                        Theil Index
                                             Mean      90/10    Between      Within    Between       Within               Between     Within      Between           Within
                                            Income     Ratio    Country     Country Munic/Reg Munic/Reg                   Country     Country Munic/Reg            Munic/Reg
                                              (1)       (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)              (6)           (7)         (8)            (9)            (10)
        Ref. to Munic.
        Bolivia                              6,029      29.6                   0.693         0.116           0.577                      0.590         0.096           0.494
        Brazil                              14,062      12.0                   0.676         0.129           0.548                      0.858         0.120           0.738
        ElSalvador                          10,696      33.3                   0.780         0.060           0.721                      0.540         0.061           0.479
        Guatemala                           11,386      19.0                   0.690         0.219           0.471                      0.696         0.226           0.470
        Honduras                             6,902      25.7                   0.762         0.139           0.622                      0.843         0.120           0.723
        Mexico                              16,860       8.6                   0.515         0.106           0.409                      0.794         0.114           0.680
        Panama                              18,024      14.6                   0.550         0.081           0.469                      0.541         0.075           0.466
        Paraguay                            11,179       9.3                   0.401         0.096           0.304                      0.387         0.089           0.298
        Peru                                14,039      44.0                   0.872         0.231           0.641                      0.726         0.224           0.503
        UnitedStates                        66,885      16.3                   0.546         0.038           0.508                      0.468         0.041           0.427
        Venezuela                           15,004      15.0                   0.812         0.027           0.785                      0.988         0.025           0.963
        Actual pop. weights                             34.2      0.292        0.607         0.087           0.520          0.250       0.544         0.058           0.486
        Equal pop. weights                              28.6      0.231        0.663         0.113           0.550          0.285       0.622         0.088           0.534
        No U.S. (equal)                                 20.2      0.054        0.675         0.120           0.555          0.048       0.706         0.114           0.592

        Ref. to Region
        Canada                              50,099      21.0                   0.537         0.005           0.532                      0.360         0.004           0.355
        Chile                               27,228      10.3                   0.510         0.004           0.506                      0.546         0.004           0.543
        Colombia                            12,079      19.0                   0.686         0.038           0.648                      0.687         0.040           0.648
        CostaRica                           21,325      16.0                   0.559         0.015           0.543                      0.512         0.015           0.498
        Ecuador                             10,501      34.7                   0.967         0.067           0.900                      1.680         0.064           1.616
        Uruguay                             20,842      23.4                   0.803         0.096           0.706                      0.844         0.089           0.755
        Ref. to Region
        Actual pop. weights                             36.7      0.206        0.651         0.028           0.623          0.203       0.529         0.016           0.513
        Equal pop. weights                              32.7      0.138        0.677         0.037           0.639          0.139       0.615         0.026           0.589

        Full Sample
        Actual pop. weights                             35.0      0.289        0.613         0.079           0.534          0.253       0.542         0.054           0.488
        Equal pop. weights                              32.1      0.210        0.668         0.086           0.582          0.235       0.619         0.061           0.558
        No US/CA (equal)                                21.6      0.075        0.685         0.095           0.590          0.071       0.726         0.081           0.645

        GDP pwkr/pc - actual pop.                                    0.263/0.326                                              0.237/0.287
        GDP pwkr/pc - equal pop.                                     0.178/0.247                                              0.183/0.257
See Appendix Table A1 for sources. Column (2) gives the ratio of the 90th percentile of the labor income distribution to the 10th percentile, and columns (3) through (10) decompose
inequality. “Actual” refers to weighting by actual population, whereas “equal” normalizes each country’s population to be of equal size.
                                     Table A4: Labor Income Inequality (Regionally Deflated)
                                                              Mean Log Deviation Index                                            Theil Index
                                  Mean      90/10     Between Within     Between       Within                   Between     Within      Between           Within
                                 Income     Ratio     Country Country Munic/Reg Munic/Reg                       Country     Country Munic/Reg            Munic/Reg
                                   (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)           (5)             (6)            (7)          (8)           (9)             (10)
       Ref. to Munic.
       Bolivia                    7,256      31.2                   0.720          0.126           0.594                      0.626          0.100           0.526
       Brazil                    15,462      12.1                   0.648          0.098           0.550                      0.829          0.090           0.739
       El Salvador               10,955      17.7                   0.720          0.049           0.671                      0.526          0.049           0.477
       Guatemala                 10,190      18.2                   0.678          0.212           0.466                      0.681          0.223           0.458
       Honduras                   6,121      24.9                   0.760          0.133           0.627                      0.842          0.114           0.728
       Mexico                    18,628      7.9                    0.503          0.097           0.406                      0.779          0.104           0.675
       Panama                    19,499       9.8                   0.416          0.126           0.290                      0.397          0.112           0.285
       Paraguay                  12,237      42.2                   0.874          0.205           0.669                      0.731          0.203           0.528
       Peru                      11,082      14.7                   0.530          0.093           0.436                      0.501          0.084           0.417
       United States             67,865      16.4                   0.541          0.034           0.506                      0.462          0.037           0.425
       Venezuela                 14,848      15.7                   0.815          0.029           0.786                      0.991          0.027           0.964
       Mun (actual)                          30.5       0.282       0.583          0.070           0.513          0.237       0.535          0.050           0.485
       Mun (equal)                           29.2       0.237       0.655          0.109           0.546          0.290       0.610          0.081           0.529

       No US (equal)                         20.5       0.061       0.666          0.117           0.550          0.057       0.690          0.105           0.585

       Ref. to Region
       Canada                    51,796      19.7                   0.534          0.002           0.532                      0.357          0.002           0.355
       Chile                     28,929      10.0                   0.511          0.003           0.507                      0.545          0.004           0.541
       Colombia                  13,759      19.3                   0.689          0.041           0.648                      0.691          0.042           0.649
       Costa Rica                20,949      16.0                   0.558          0.015           0.543                      0.512          0.014           0.498
       Ecuador                   10,704      34.2                   0.955          0.056           0.900                      1.637          0.054           1.583
       Uruguay                   19,491      22.2                   0.787          0.067           0.720                      0.833          0.061           0.772
       Reg (actual)                          35.1       0.181       0.650          0.026           0.623          0.177       0.532          0.015           0.518
       Reg (equal)                           31.4       0.130       0.672          0.031           0.642          0.132       0.609          0.020           0.589

       All (actual)                          32.5       0.276       0.593          0.063           0.530          0.240       0.535          0.046           0.489
       All (equal)                           32.0       0.214       0.661          0.082           0.580          0.238       0.610          0.055           0.555

       No US/CA (equal)                      22.1       0.079       0.678          0.090           0.588          0.076       0.713          0.072           0.640
See Appendix Table A1 for sources. All incomes are deflated by the state median of a household-specific Paasche index. Column (2) gives the ratio of the 90th percentile of the
income distribution to the 10th percentile, and columns (3) through (10) decompose inequality. “Actual” refers to weighting by actual population, whereas “equal” normalizes
each country’s population to be of equal size.
                                   Table A5: Household Equivalent Expenditure Inequality
                                                                            Mean Log Deviation Index                                       Theil Index
                         Mean       90/10     90/50                  Between Within Between         Within                 Between      Within Between            Within
                        Expend.     Ratio     Ratio    V (log(c))     Cntry   Cntry Mun/Reg Munic/Reg                       Cntry       Cntry Mun/Reg            Mun/Reg
                           (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)            (8)           (9)         (10)        (11)          (12)
 Ref. to Munic.
 Bolivia                  2,953       5.2       2.2       0.414                    0.200        0.076          0.123                     0.196        0.067         0.129
 El Salvador              5,890       5.6       2.4       0.447                    0.222        0.037          0.185                     0.220        0.037         0.183
 Guatemala                5,241       9.9       3.9       0.782                    0.458        0.273          0.185                     0.574        0.312         0.262
 Honduras                 3,075       8.0       2.5       0.629                    0.298        0.096          0.201                     0.284        0.085         0.199
 Mexico                   8,674       6.9       2.7       0.590                    0.308        0.082          0.227                     0.328        0.077         0.251
 Nicaragua                2,802       5.1       2.3       0.400                    0.210        0.045          0.166                     0.223        0.042         0.181
 Panama                   5,850       9.2       2.9       0.768                    0.379        0.162          0.218                     0.377        0.145         0.232
 Paraguay                 3,278       7.3       2.6       0.598                    0.291        0.118          0.173                     0.284        0.108         0.177
 Peru                     4,442       5.7       2.3       0.458                    0.226        0.104          0.122                     0.226        0.096         0.129
 Mun. (actual)                        8.7       2.9       0.720        0.077       0.295        0.095          0.199         0.070       0.323        0.088         0.235
 Mun. (equal)                         8.2       2.9       0.684        0.070       0.288        0.110          0.178         0.070       0.317        0.112         0.205

 Ref. to Reg.
 Brazil                   5,649      11.5       3.6       0.903                    0.466        0.037          0.429                     0.474        0.035         0.439
 Chile                    7,813       9.4       3.5       0.747                    0.397        0.006          0.392                     0.414        0.006         0.408
 Colombia                 4,084       7.8       2.9       0.659                    0.336        0.065          0.270                     0.344        0.075         0.269
 Costa Rica               6,469       9.3       3.1       0.804                    0.402        0.021          0.382                     0.411        0.022         0.389
 Ecuador                  5,098       5.9       2.6       0.504                    0.267        0.019          0.249                     0.285        0.019         0.266
 Uruguay                  7,192       7.5       2.8       0.595                    0.298        0.046          0.253                     0.295        0.043         0.253
 Reg. (actual)                       10.3       3.4       0.838        0.014       0.422        0.039          0.383         0.013       0.436        0.037         0.399
 Reg. (equal)                         8.9       3.1       0.747        0.023       0.361        0.032          0.329         0.022       0.373        0.030         0.343

 All (actual)                         9.9       3.3       0.809        0.048       0.368        0.063          0.306         0.049       0.382        0.062         0.320
 All (equal)                          8.7       3.0       0.721        0.059       0.317        0.079          0.238         0.056       0.343        0.074         0.269
See Appendix Table A1 for sources. Column (2) presents the ratio of the 90th percentile of the household equivalent expenditure distribution to the 10th percentile,
Column (3) gives the ratio of the 90th percentile to the median, and column (4) presents the variance of log household equivalent expenditure. Columns (5) through (12)
decompose inequality, using the Mean Log Deviation index and the Theil index, respectively. “Actual” refers to weighting by actual population, whereas “equal”
normalizes each country’s population to be of equal size.
                  Table A6: Inequality Decomposition, Theil Index (Controlling for Density)
                                      Labor Income                            Predicted Labor Income                         Residual Labor Income
                         Betw.     With.    Betw.          With.        Betw. With.      Betw.      With.              Betw. With.     Betw.       With.
                         Cntry     Cntry Mun/Reg          Mun/Reg       Cntry Cntry Mun/Reg Mun/Reg                    Cntry Cntry Mun/Reg Mun/Reg
                           (1)       (2)        (3)           (4)         (5)      (6)         (7)           (8)        (9)      (10)        (11)          (12)
 Ref. to Mun.
 Brazil                            0.812       0.105         0.707                0.268       0.058        0.210                 0.455      0.030         0.425
 Mexico                            0.747       0.116         0.631                0.123       0.022        0.101                 0.646      0.082         0.564
 Panama                            0.438       0.053         0.385                0.179       0.042        0.137                 0.282      0.017         0.266
 United States                     0.424       0.056         0.368                0.120       0.007        0.112                 0.321      0.020         0.302
 Venezuela                         0.947       0.032         0.915                0.028       0.007        0.021                 0.902      0.024         0.878


 Mun. (equal)             0.295    0.567       0.101         0.467      0.109     0.212       0.074        0.138       0.085     0.440      0.047         0.393

 No US (equal)            0.041    0.647       0.126         0.522      0.032     0.240       0.095        0.145       0.082     0.460      0.051         0.409

 Ref. to Region
 Canada                            0.300       0.005         0.295                0.112       0.001        0.111                 0.248      0.004         0.245


 All (equal)              0.257    0.589       0.073         0.516      0.107     0.191       0.051        0.140       0.081     0.445      0.036         0.409

 No US/CA (equal)         0.064    0.725       0.097         0.627      0.057     0.222       0.068        0.154       0.078     0.481      0.042         0.440
See Appendix Table A1 for sources. Columns (1) through (4) decompose the Theil index for labor income inequality, and columns (5) through (12) do the same for
predicted labor income inequality and residual labor income inequality, respectively. We normalize each country’s population to be of equal size.
                          Table A7: Proximity to Paved Roads
                             Mean         SD                     MLD Index                Theil Index
                            Dist. to    Dist. to    90/50     Between Within           Between Within
                             Road        Road       Ratio     Country Country          Country Country
                               (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)
       Argentina               8.5        9.7         3.2                   0.436                    0.413
       Bolivia                73.5        83.0        6.3                   0.609                    0.513
       Brazil                 29.3        64.1        7.9                   0.956                    1.049
       Chile                  25.1        21.1        4.1                   0.353                    0.306
       Colombia               19.3        31.7        3.7                   0.692                    0.681
       Costa Rica              5.7        6.0         4.0                   0.622                    0.470
       Ecuador                23.8        35.7        9.8                   0.641                    0.703
       El Salvador             4.3         2.4        1.9                   0.147                    0.139
       Guatemala              13.3        24.3        6.8                   0.824                    0.860
       Honduras               11.6        18.0        3.7                   0.418                    0.535
       Mexico                  9.5         9.9        3.2                   0.382                    0.379
       Nicaragua              21.8        38.3        8.6                   0.915                    0.886
       Panama                 12.4        23.2        3.0                   0.643                    0.756
       Paraguay               34.7        49.6        6.0                   1.001                    0.752
       Peru                   19.5        33.9        9.1                   1.180                    0.889
       United States           1.5         3.3        3.4                   0.914                    0.795
       Uruguay                10.7        10.6        4.5                   0.478                    0.416
       Venezuela              11.1        26.2        2.7                   0.508                    0.747

       All (actual)           13.2        36.5        6.4       0.621       0.774        0.439       0.815

       All (equal)            18.6        37.8        5.8       0.311       0.649        0.286       0.656

       No U.S. (equal)        19.7        38.6        5.6       0.240       0.634        0.249       0.655
See Appendix Table A1 and the text for sources. Column (3) presents the ratio of the 90th percentile of the proximity
to paved roads distribution to the 50th percentile. Columns (4) through (7) decompose inequality, using the Mean Log
Deviation index and the Theil index, respectively. “Actual” refers to weighting by actual population, whereas “equal”
normalizes each country’s population to be of equal size. The final row omits the United States from the sample.




                                                         34
                       Figure A1: Labor incomes in North America




Mean Labor Income (PPP $)
     <45,000
     45,000 - 55,000
     55,000 - 70,000
     70,000 - 85,000
     >85,000
    Figure A2: Labor incomes in Mexico and Central America




Mean Labor Income (PPP $)
     <4,000
     4,000 - 7,000
     7,000 - 10,000
     10,000 - 15,000
     >15,000
Figure A3: Labor incomes in South America




                                   Mean Labor Income (PPP $)
                                        <4,000
                                        4,000 - 7,000
                                        7,000 - 10,000
                                        10,000 - 15,000
                                        >15,000
