                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE POTATO'S CONTRIBUTION TO POPULATION AND URBANIZATION:
                EVIDENCE FROM AN HISTORICAL EXPERIMENT

                                            Nathan Nunn
                                            Nancy Qian

                                        Working Paper 15157
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15157


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2009




We thank David Canning, Greg Clark, Angus Deaton, Azim Essaji, Andrew Foster, Oded Galor, Claudia
Goldin, Larry Katz, Wolfgang Keller, Joel Mokyr, Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, Yona Rubinstein, Andrei
Shleifer, Peter Temin, and David Weil for valuable feedback and discussions. We also thank seminar
participants at Bocconi University, Boston University, Brown University, Harvard University, MIT,
Ohio State University, Princeton University, Tufts University, University of Chicago Booth School
of Business, BREAD, CEA Annual Meetings, ISNIE Annual Conference, and NEUDC Annual Conference.
We thank Sayon Deb for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Nathan Nunn and Nancy Qian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Potato's Contribution to Population and Urbanization: Evidence from an Historical Experiment
Nathan Nunn and Nancy Qian
NBER Working Paper No. 15157
July 2009
JEL No. J1,N1,N5,O13,O14

                                              ABSTRACT

We exploit regional variation in suitability for cultivating potatoes, together with time variation arising
from their introduction to the Old World from the Americas, to estimate the impact of potatoes on
Old World population and urbanization. Our results show that the introduction of the potato was responsible
for a significant portion of the increase in population and urbanization observed during the 18th and
19th centuries.


Nathan Nunn
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1805 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
nnunn@fas.harvard.edu

Nancy Qian
Department of Economics
Yale University
27 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520-8269
and NBER
nancy.qian@yale.edu
1. Introduction

Between 1000 and 1900         AD ,   world population grew from under 300 million to 1.6 billion, and the

share of population living in urban areas more than quadrupled, increasing from two to over nine

percent. As shown in Figure 1, this increase occurred almost entirely in the latter two or three

centuries of this period.1 The determinants of these phenomena have been the subject of much

interest to economists, demographers and historians.2 Population increase can be the result of

either an increase in fertility and/or a decline in mortality. The latter was particularly important

after 1820, when fertility began to decline (Maddison, 1991, p. 241).

   The seminal empirical studies by Fogel (1984, 1994, 2004) and McKeown (1976) argue that the

main contributing factor to the decline in mortality, and the resulting increase in life expectancy,

was improved nutrition.3 Fogel (2004) shows that there was an enormous increase in caloric

intake after the middle of the eighteenth century, measured both directly, from agricultural output

and diary surveys, and indirectly through changes in adult height. Between the middle of the

eighteenth century and today, for example, caloric intake per person increased by more than thirty

percent, and heights in most of Europe increased by ten centimeters or more (Fogel, 1994). Fogel

(1997) argues that nearly all of the reduction in mortality from the late eighteenth century to

the late nineteenth century, and half of the mortality improvement in the twentieth century, can

be attributed to improved nutrition. It is important to note that he does not measure increased

nutrition directly. Rather, he uses height as a measure of accumulated past nutritional experiences

during years of growth, and then infers nutrition’s positive effects on life expectancy from the

positive relationship between height and life expectancy during the 18th and 19th centuries.

   While Fogel’s work has been widely acclaimed, the causal link between nutrition and popula-

tion increase remains an unsettled question. Various cross-sectional studies from England between
   1 The  sources of the population and urbanization data are discussed in Section 3.
   2 For studies in the growth literature that have focused on the link between population increase and factors such as
per capita incomes see Galor and Weil (2000), Jones (2003), and Voigtländer and Voth (2006). For micro-level studies of
the determinants of increased life expectancy see the literature review provided by Cutler, Deaton, and Lleras-Muney
(2006).
    3 Within Europe, life expectancy at birth hovered around 25 years until at least the 15th century (Russell, 1948). After

the 15th century there is some evidence of sporadic and at times temporary increases in life expectancy. According to
data from Wrigley, Davies, Oeppen, and Schofield (1997), life expectancy in England had increased to 34 years by the
1540s, then increased further to 38 years by the 1620s, before falling to 35 years by the 1730s. By the early 19th century,
life expectancy had risen to 41 years and by 1900 it was 50 years. England’s surge in life expectancy, starting in the 18th
century, is also observed in other parts of the World. In France, life expectancy rose from 25 years in the 1740s to 39 years
by 1820 (Blayo, 1975). By the 19th century, life expectancy in Sweden and Japan was also well over 35 years (Maddison,
2001, p. 29).



                                                             1
                                                                                                                     10
                            1500




                                                                                                                     City population share (percent)
               World population (millions)




                                                                                                                                               8
                              1000




                                                                                                                                    6
                 500




                                                                                                                         4
                            0




                                                                                                                     2
                                             1000          1200        1400           1600          1800         2000
                                                                               year

                                                            World population                 City population share
                                              Sources: See text.




                           Figure 1: Growth in world population and urbanization, 1000–1900.


the 16th and 18th centuries, and from the British colonies in America during the same period, fail

to provide evidence that wealthier or better nourished populations had lower mortality and longer

life expectancy (Livi-Bacci, 1991). Moreover, the traditional view is that the most important contrib-

utors to increased life expectancy are the improvements in modern medicine and public sanitation

that occurred during the end of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the 20th century.4 In

reality, improvements in nutrition, medicine, and public sanitation, all likely contributed to the

observed increase in life expectancy and population. This, along with the fact that improvements

in each factor typically occurred simultaneously, makes identifying the effects of any one channel

very difficult.

   Our study contributes to the debate by providing causal estimates of the impact of improved

nutrition on population growth. We estimate the effect of improved nutrition caused by the large

increase in availability of calories and nutrients that followed the introduction of the potato from

the New World to the Old World.5 We do not attempt a comparison of the importance of nutrition
   4 Preston(1975, 1980, 1996) famously discusses the importance of public sanitation. For examples of the evidence of
medical improvement on mortality, see Cutler (2004) and Cutler, Deaton, and Lleras-Muney (2005).
   5 Throughout the paper we use a broad definition of ‘Old World’, which includes the entire Eastern Hemisphere. In

other words, by ‘Old World’ we do not mean Europe only.


                                                                                2
relative to medicine or sanitation. Instead, our goal is to causally identify the importance of

nutrition by estimating the effect of one positive shock to nutrition on subsequent population

growth. Because this shock occurred more than two centuries before improvements in modern

sanitation and medicine, the results can be plausibly interpreted as reflecting the benefits of

improved nutrition only.

   We also estimate the effect of the introduction of potatoes on the share of population living in

cities. The estimates provide evidence of the importance of agricultural productivity in spurring

the transition from rural agriculture to urban manufacturing. A productivity shock in agriculture

could have two potentially offsetting effects on urbanization. On the one hand, it may delay

urbanization as workers become more attracted to the agricultural sector. On the other hand, the

increased agricultural productivity means more workers can be freed from agriculture, allowing

them to migrate to the cities and work in industry. Our estimates of the effect of the introduction

of potatoes on urbanization provide historic evidence of the net effect of a significant positive

agricultural productivity shock on the movement of labor from the countryside into cities.6

   Any study attempting to estimate the causal effects of improved nutrition faces two main

empirical difficulties, both of which arise because of the endogeneity of nutritional improvements.

The first is the problem of reverse causality. For example, Cullen (1968) argues that in Ireland,

population expansion led to the adoption of the potato, and not the other way around as many

others have argued.7 In this case, the correlation between improved nutrition and population may

reflect the reverse-causal effect of population on nutrition. The second problem arises from the

existence of potentially omitted variables. Population growth and improved nutrition may both

be outcomes of an unobserved factor, such as political stability.

   The principal contribution of our study is to provide a strategy that helps resolve these prob-

lems. Our estimation exploits the introduction of the potato to the Old World following the dis-

covery of the Americas. This event, together with geographic and climatic variation in a country’s

ability to cultivate and adopt the new food crop, provides a source of variation in nutrition that is

plausibly exogenous to other factors that affect population growth. Because potatoes are superior

to existing crops in terms of both calories and nutrition, we proxy for access to improved nutrition
   6 The existing empirical literature has found it very difficult to establish causality when looking at the relationship
between agriculture and development. The best macro-level studies attempt to infer the effect of agriculture on
economic development by examining panel data and employing lags and Granger causality tests (Tiffin and Irz, 2006).
   7 For others arguing reverse causality see Salaman (1949) and Connell (1962). Also, see the empirical evidence from

Mokyr (1981).



                                                            3
with the amount of land that is suitable for cultivating potatoes. Our empirical strategy is similar

to a differences-in-differences (DD) estimation. We compare the levels and changes in Old World

population and urbanization before and after the introduction of potatoes between regions that

were suitable for cultivating potatoes and regions that were not suitable. Because our estimates

are identified from the interaction between time (from the introduction of potatoes) and country

characteristics (suitability for potato adoption), we are able to control for time-invariant country

characteristics (country fixed effects), as well as country-invariant differences in the time periods

being examined (time-period fixed effects).

   Despite the existence of country fixed effects in our estimating equation, country characteristics

may still bias our estimates if they affect population or urbanization differentially during the

period after the adoption of potatoes as a field crop relative to before. We address this possibility

by controlling for the interaction of potentially important country characteristics with an indicator

variable for the post-adoption period. The set of controls in our baseline specifications include

interactions with three alternative measures of agricultural suitability – the overall suitability of a

country for growing any agricultural plant or crop, suitability for growing Old World staple crops

(e.g., rice and wheat), and the suitability for growing New World staple crops (e.g., maize and

sweet potatoes) – as well as interactions of geographic measures potentially correlated with potato

suitability. Because potatoes were particularly suitable for cultivation on rugged terrain at high

elevations, we also control for these two geographic characteristics in our estimates.

   Our results show that Old World regions that were suitable for potato cultivation experienced

disproportionately faster population and urbanization growth after the introduction of potatoes.

The estimates are extremely robust to a variety of sensitivity checks, including the omission of

outliers and influential observations, the omission of Western Europe, the inclusion of the countries

north of Mezzo America, and the inclusion of a host of additional control variables.

   The magnitudes of our estimates are also interesting. One way to measure the estimated effects

is to ask how much of the average difference in population or urbanization levels (or their growth

rates) between the pre-potato adoption period (1000–1700) and the post-adoption period (1700–

1900) is explained by the introduction of the potato. Doing this calculation, our baseline estimates

suggest that the potato accounts for 12% of the increase in population, 22% of the increase in

population growth, 47% of the increase in urbanization, and 50% of the increase in urbanization

growth.


                                                  4
   The notion that the introduction of the potato dramatically increased agricultural productivity,

which resulted in increased population growth, has long been recognized by historians (e.g.,

Langer, 1963, McNeill, 1948, 1999, Salaman, 1949). William Langer (1963, p. 14) argues that in

Europe “the spread of the potato culture everywhere corresponded with the rapid increase of

population”. Historians have, in fact, attributed even greater significance to the potato. McNeill

(1999, p. 67), in an article title “How the Potato Changed World History”, argues that “potatoes,

by feeding rapidly growing populations, permitted a handful of European nations to assert domi-

nation over most of the world between 1750 and 1950”.

   Our study contributes to the historical literature by providing empirical estimates of the effect

of the potato on population and urbanization. Only one previous paper has empirically examined

the effect of the introduction of the potato. This is the study by Joel Mokyr (1981), which estimates

the relationship between potato cultivation and population growth across Irish counties in 1845.

To address problems arising from the endogeneity of potato adoption, Mokyr estimates a system

of two equations using 2SLS. He finds that potato cultivation resulted in a statistically significant

increase in population growth. He also finds no evidence that the potato was adopted in response

to rapid population growth.8

   Our study differs from Mokyr’s (1981) in two important ways.                          First, our difference-in-

differences estimation strategy is very different from Mokyr’s IV strategy. Our estimates are

identified not by variation in the cross-section only, but from the interaction of regional variation

in potato suitability together with time variation arising from the introduction of potatoes from

the New World. Second, our study also examines the impact of potatoes beyond the Irish context

and over a longer time horizon. Therefore, we are able to provide estimates of the full impact of

potatoes on population and urbanization across the Old World during the 18th and 19th centuries.

   The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the background on potatoes. Section 3

describes the data, Section 4 presents the empirical strategy, and Section 5 discusses the results.

Section 6 offers concluding remarks.
   8 The only other piece of empirical evidence about the effects of the potato, although indirect, is from Baten and
Murray (2000). The authors examined the determinants of the heights of 4,100 men and women that were incarcerated
and sent to two prisons in Bavaria between 1856 and 1908. Included as a control variable in their analysis was the per
capita production of potatoes in the prisoner’s region of birth. According to their estimates, men and women from
regions with greater potato production were taller. This was also true for regions with greater milk production, but was
not the case for the production of bread grains, which was negatively correlated with heights.




                                                           5
2. Potatoes

A. Nutrition

From a nutritional standpoint, there are two primary reasons why the potato is superior to other

staple crops. First, because potatoes contain nearly all important vitamins and minerals, they

support life better than any other crop when eaten as the sole article of diet (Davidson, Passmore,

Brock, and Truswell, 1975, Reader, 2008).9 Humans can subsist healthily on a diet of potatoes,

supplemented with only milk or butter, which contain the two vitamins not provided for by

potatoes, vitamins A and D (Connell, 1962, Davidson et al., 1975).10 This, in fact, was the typical

Irish diet, which although monotonous, was able to provide sufficient amounts of all vitamins and

nutrients (Connell, 1962).

   According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture (2007), a medium potato (150 g/5.3 oz) with

the skin provides 29.55 mg of vitamin C (45% of the daily value (DV)). This is important since

the other staple crops, such as wheat, oats, barley, rice, and maize, do not contain any vitamin

C, a necessary deterrent for scurvy. For much of the Old World, the potato provided the only

source of vitamin C and protection against scurvy.11 A medium potato also contains 632 mg of

potassium (18% of DV), 0.44 mg of vitamin B6 (20% of DV), as well as significant amounts of

thiamin, riboflavin, folate, niacin, magnesium, phosphorus, iron, and zinc. Moreover, the fiber

content of a potato with skin (3.5 grams) is similar to that of many other cereals such as wheat.

   The second remarkable fact about the potato is that it yields more energy per acre of land than

Old World cereal crops, and also requires less labor input (Langer, 1963, pp. 11-12; Connell, 1951,

p. 391). Historic evidence of the caloric superiority of the potato over pre-existing Old World crops

is shown in Table 1. The table reports data collected by Arthur Young (1771) in a survey of farming

communities throughout England in the 1760s. The first two columns compare the average yields

of oats, wheat, barley, and potatoes. As shown, yields (measured in either bushels or kilograms)
   9 Nutritionists Davidson and Passmore (1965, p. 285) write that “the potato is the only single cheap food that can
support life when fed as the sole article of diet.” (emphasis in the original text).
  10 Milk is not actually necessary for vitamin D since humans produce it after absorbing sunlight.
  11 As an example, the average Irish diet of 4.5 to 6.5 kilograms of potatoes per day provided 40 to 60 times the quantity

of vitamin C required to prevent scurvy (Hughes, 2000). An alternative source of vitamin C in the Old World, before
the arrival of potatoes, came from turnips (although potatoes provide more vitamin C than turnips). Turnips were also
relatively hardy in cold weather. Some have argued that they played an important role in providing nutrition for places
such as England (see Timmer (1969), and the references therein, for detailed studies of the role of turnips). However,
relative to a potato, it provides fewer nutrients, and more importantly, it provides less than one-quarter the calories
(U.S. Department of Agriculture, 2007).




                                                            6
                Table 1: Average
                           Averagecrop
                                  Yieldsyields of English
                                         from English Farms infarms   inCentury
                                                               the 18th  the 18th century.
                                                                  Energy Value        Acres of land needed
                                    Average Yield per Acre          of Crop           to provide 42 MJ per
                                     Bushels       Kilograms        Megajoules           day for one year

              Wheat                      23            650              8,900                   1.70

              Barley                     32            820            11,400                    1.40

              Oats                       38            690              9,300                   1.60

              Potatoes                  427         10,900            31,900                    0.50

              Notes : Data are from 18th century England, recorded in Young's (1771, p. 20) The Farmer's Tour
              through the East of England Volume 4; reproduced in Davidson et al . (1975).




are well over ten times higher for potatoes relative to the other crops. This partly reflects the fact

that potatoes are 75–80% water and are therefore naturally heavier and more bulky than the other

crops. The third column compares the energy value of the yields reported in the first two columns.

As shown, an acre of potatoes yield approximately three times more energy than the other crops.

The final column reports this fact in a slightly more intuitive manner. It shows the number of acres

required to provide the total energy needs for a family of two adults and three young children,

which is estimated to be 42 mega joules (or approximately 10,000 calories) per day. While this

family could subsist by cultivating a plot of only a 1/2 acre of potatoes, it would need to cultivate

about 1.5 acres – three times as much land – if it were to grow wheat, oats, or barley. The data from

Table 1 confirm historic reports that a single acre of land cultivated with potatoes and one milk

cow was nutritionally sufficient for feeding a large family of six to eight (McNeill, 1999, Langer,

1963).

   Potatoes also had two additional benefits that further increased the amount of calories available.

First, due to easy storage during the winter, potatoes provided excellent fodder for livestock. This

meant that potatoes increased both meat available for consumption and manure which was used

as an input in agriculture. Second, potatoes increased the productivity of land that was already

used for cultivating grain crops. Typically, between 1/3 and 1/2 of the land under grain cultivation

was left fallow each year. This was a strategy that was undertaken to control weeds. One benefit

of potatoes was that they could be planted on the fallow land between periods of grain cultivation

(Mokyr, 1981, McNeill, 1999). Thus, even when land was not converted from the cultivation of

grains to the cultivation of potatoes, the introduction of the potato still increased the total supply


                                                             7
of food from a given plot of land.


B. Diffusion from the New World to the Old World

Archeological evidence suggests that the potato was first cultivated in the Andes between 7,000

and 10,000 years ago (Messer, 2000b). After the discovery of the Americas by Christopher Colum-

bus in 1492, the potato was soon introduced to Europe by the Spanish in the late sixteenth century.

It was first cultivated in the Spanish Canary Islands around 1570. The first record of potatoes being

cultivated as a staple crop was in England in the 1690s, where the potato was used as a supplement

to bread (Langer, 1963, McNeill, 1999).12

   By historical standards, the diffusion of the potato throughout Europe was rapid if not instan-

taneous. By most accounts, it took less than the time necessary for the 13th and 14th Century

diffusion of gunpowder through Europe.13 The rapid adoption is all the more surprising since

at first the potato was generally viewed either as a strange exotic gift and botanical curiosity,

or as a poisonous and dirty plant that caused leprosy (Langer, 1975). Adoption was probably

encouraged by failures of existing crops during the “Little Ice Age” and the wars and famines of

the period. In many countries, adoption was also encouraged by policy. For example, in 1744,

Prussia’s Frederick the Great ordered his subjects to grow potatoes as insurance against cereal

crop failure and distributed free seed potatoes with instruction on how to plant them. The French

scientist Antoine Parmentier, influenced by his observation of the benefit of potatoes in Prussia

during the Seven Years War (1756–1763), devoted his research to investigating and extolling the

virtues of the potato. Once persuaded to plant potatoes, European farmers quickly recognized

their advantages over other crops, and soon potatoes became the staple field crop they are today.

By the late 18th century, potatoes, with the encouragement of government policy, had become

an important field crop in countries such as France, Austria, and Russia. (Langer, 1963, McNeill,

1999).

   The potato was spread to other parts of the Old World by European mariners who carried

potato plants to ports across Asia and Africa. Although we do not have historical evidence on
  12 The first documented introduction of potatoes to continental Europe was in 1601 when Carolus Clusius reported in
his Rariorum Plantarum Historia that he had seen potatoes planted in Northern Italy (McNeill, 1999, p. 73).
  13 There is some debate on whether gunpowder was first introduced to Europeans during the wars with the Islamic

empires or during the Mongol invasion. In either case, it first was introduced to Europeans during the early to mid
13th century and became widely used by the end of the 14th and beginning of the 15th centuries in European warfare
(Parker, 2000).



                                                         8
the exact date of its first introduction, the existing evidence suggests that the potato was probably

brought to the Philippines in the late 16th century and later brought to Java in the 17th century

by the Dutch (Burkill, 1935). It’s introduction to China probably occurred several times during the

seventeenth century. It was cultivated as early as 1603 by Dutch settlers of the Penghu Islands, and

later in Taiwan after the Dutch occupied the island from 1624 to 1662. Given the Dutch initiation

of trade links between Taiwan and the coastal province of Fujian, it is likely that the potato was

also introduced to mainland China during this time. There is evidence from a document, dating

back to 1700, of potato cultivation in a mountainous area of northern Fujian. According to Lee

(1982, p. 738), by 1800 the populations in Southwest China had replaced the traditional lower yield

crops of barley, oats, and buckwheat with either potatoes or maize, another New World crop.14 By

the mid 19th century, potatoes had become an important field crop in Manchuria and the Korean

Peninsula.

   Historic evidence suggests that the potato first reached India not much later than Europe, taken

there either by the British or the Portuguese. The earliest known reference to the potato in India

is from an account by Edward Terry, who was chaplain to Sir Thomas Roe, British ambassador to

the court of the Mughal Emperor Jahanagir from 1615 to 1619, in Northern India. British colonial

governor Warren Hastings promoted potato cultivation during his term from 1772 to 1785. By the

late eighteenth century, potatoes were well established in the hills and plains of India (Pandey and

Kaushik, 2003).

   The introduction of potatoes to Africa is not well documented. The first written account sug-

gests that it arrived slightly later than other parts of the world, around the end of the 19th century.

In Ethiopia, the potato was introduced in 1858 by a German immigrant named Wilhelm Schimper.

Subsequent adoption by native farmers occurred gradually over a period of several decades.

   As the historic evidence illustrates, the actual date when the potato was adopted as a field crop

varied across the Old World within a 150-year window. This was due in large part to idiosyncratic

factors, such as the views of individuals and the ability and desire of governments to promote the

adoption of the crop. For our estimates, we wish to avoid having our estimates affected by the

timing of adoption, which was endogenous and potentially determined by a host of factors that

may bias our estimates. Instead we use the initial date of the introduction of potatoes as a field

crop to continental Europe, the earliest adopter of potatoes, as the date of when potatoes become
 14 In   our analysis, we are careful to control for the effects of maize and other New World food crops.



                                                             9
“available” as a staple food to the Old World. This date is in the late 1600s. Because our data are

only observed at the century level, we take 1700 as the approximate treatment date.

   Before taking this date as given, we first let the data "speak" by estimating a flexible equation

that allows the effect of potatoes to vary for each century. This enables us to compare the timing of

the effect observed in the data with the historical evidence before we impose greater structure on

the data and estimate our main DD specification.


C. Other New World Staple Crops

After the discovery of the Americas, other New World crops, in addition to potatoes, were also

introduced to the Old World. These include maize, tomatoes, chilli and bell peppers, cacao, and

the sweet potato. Of these, the two crops that became high-caloric staples in the Old World are

maize and the sweet potato.

   Maize is unable to rival potatoes in terms of nutrients or calories. It produces significantly fewer

calories per acre of land. Further, humans are unable to subsist on a diet that is too concentrated

in maize. Significant consumption of maize is associated with Pellagra, which is a disease caused

from niacin deficiency. The effects of Pellagra include skin disorders, digestion disorders, mental

disorders, and eventually death. The disease was first observed in the 1730s in Italy and even

today continues to affect poor populations with diets that rely too heavily on corn. A second

adverse effect of a primarily corn diet is protein deficiency (Messer, 2000a). Given the negative

effects associated with diets too heavily dependent on corn, one would not expect corn to have the

same positive effects as potatoes.

   Sweet potatoes are also nutritious and produce similar amounts of calories per acre of land as

potatoes. But they differ from potatoes in two important ways. First, the archaeological evidence

suggests that sweet potatoes, transported by Polynesians, reached the Old World long before the

European discovery of the New World. For many countries in our sample, their impact would

have been felt as early as 1000 AD (Hather and Kirch, 1991). Second, a close substitute to the sweet

potato, the yam, already existed in the Old World (O’Brien, 2000). Yams are broadly similar to

sweet potatoes both in terms of nutritional content and the requirements for cultivation. Many

regions that were suitable for cultivating sweet potatoes had already cultivated yams when the

former were introduced. Therefore, the sweet potatoes would not be expected to result in the same

increase in agricultural productivity and caloric-availability as potatoes.


                                                  10
   In our empirical analysis, we are careful to make sure that our results are robust to controlling

for any potential effects of other New World staple crops.


3. Data

A. Crop Suitability

Our analysis uses a measure of a region’s suitability for growing potatoes, as well as measures of

the suitability of Old and other New World staple crops. To construct these variables, we rely on

data from the FAO’s Global Agro-Ecological Zones (GAEZ) 2000 database. The data measure the

suitability for cultivating individuals crops at a very disaggregated geographic level.

   The construction of the FAO’s GAEZ database occurred in two stages. The FAO first collected

information on the characteristics of 154 different crops. These data were used to determine what

environmental conditions are required for the cultivation of each crop. The FAO then compiled

data on the physical environment of 2.2 million grid-cells, spanning the entire globe. Each grid-cell

is 0.5 degrees by 0.5 degrees, which is approximately 56 kilometers by 56 kilometers (measured at

the equator). The primary characteristics used are climatic and are taken from a global climatic

database that has been compiled by the Climate Research Unit (CRU) at the University of East

Anglia. In total, nine variables from the global climatic database are used by the FAO: precipitation,

frequency of wet days, mean temperature, diurnal (i.e. daily) temperature range, vapor pressure,

cloud cover, sunshine, ground-frost frequency, and wind speed. The second set of characteristics

are land characteristics and are taken from the FAO’s Digit Soil Map of the World (DSMW), except

for the information on the slope of soils, which are from the GTOPO30 Database developed at the

U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) EROS Data Center.

   Combining the information on the constraints for the cultivation of each crop with the data on

the physical environment of each grid-cell, the FAO calculated an estimate of the potential yield

of each crop in each grid cell, given an assumed level of crop management and input use. This

process involved a number of detailed steps, which we briefly summarize here.

   First, for each grid-cell and crop, the FAO identified the days of the year when the moisture

and thermal (i.e., temperature) requirements of the crop are met. With this information, the FAO

determined the exact starting and ending dates of the length of growing period (LGP) for each




                                                 11
crop and grid-cell (the growing period is, by definition, the period of time for which the minimum

temperature and moisture requirements of the crop are satisfied).

   At this stage, an initial classification of each grid-cell and crop pair was performed. If the

minimum requirements for cultivation were not satisfied, then the grid-cell was determined to be

unsuitable for cultivation of the crop.15 If the minimum requirements are met, then a second stage

is performed where the actual potential yields are determined. For each crop, the “constraint-free

crop yields” were determined, and the yield in each grid-cell was measured as a percentage of

this benchmark. Next, the FAO identified additional constraints existing in each grid-cell for each

crop. The procedure quantified the “agro-climatic” constraints (i.e., variability in water supply and

existence of pests and weeds) as well as the “agro-edaphic” suitability (i.e., soil erosion) of each

grid-cell.

   The end product of the entire procedure is, for each crop, a GIS raster file with global coverage

that contains information on the suitability of each grid-cell for the cultivation of the crop in

question. The FAO also constructed a country level version of the database, which reports for

each country and crop, the proportion of the country’s land that is classified under five mutually

exclusive categories describing how suitable the environment is for growing the crop. The cate-

gories are based on the calculated percentage of the maximum yield that can be attained in each

grid-cell. The five categories, and their corresponding yields, are: (i) very suitable land (80–100%),

(ii) suitable land (60–80%), (iii) moderately suitable land (40–60%), (iv) marginally suitable land

(20–40%), and (v) not suitable land (0–20%). To approximate historical conditions as closely as

possible, we use the variables constructed under the assumption that cultivation occurs under

rain-fed conditions and under medium input intensity.




  15 This is done by comparing each crop’s requirements with the grid-cell’s calculated (i) length of the growing period
(LGP), (ii) temperature profile, (iii) and the accumulated temperature.


                                                          12
13
     Legend
           Country Boundaries
     Potato Suitability:
           Ocean
           Completely suitable: 100%
           Very suitable: 80-100%
           Suitable: 60-80%
           Moderately suitable: 40-60%
           Marginally suitable: 20-40%
           Not suitable: 0-20%
           Completely unsuitable: 0%
           Inland Water Bodies




                                 Figure 2: Average potato suitability among Old World countries, measured at the grid-cell level.
   We define land to be suitable for cultivation if it is classified in the database as being either

“very suitable”, “suitable”, or “moderately suitable”. Put differently, our measure defines land to

be suitable if it yields at least 40% of the maximum possible yield.16 Our baseline measure of a

country’s suitability for growing potatoes is the fraction of each country’s land area that is defined

as suitable based on our definition. Note that because the FAO does not report the distribution

of suitability within each category, we are unable to calculate a measure of average suitability for

each country. We can only calculate the fraction of land that falls into different categories.

   Figure 2 illustrates the FAO’s suitability measures at the grid-cell level for the Old World

countries of our sample. The map shows grid-cells classified according to the five categories above.

Also shown are the extreme grid cells for which 100% of the maximum potato yield is obtainable

and for which 0% is obtainable. A darker shade corresponds to greater suitability.

   A number of facts are immediately apparent from the map. The first is that much of the world

is completely unsuitable for growing potatoes. The result of this is that 53 of the 130 Old World

countries in our sample have a measure of land suitable for cultivating potatoes equal to zero. In

our empirical analysis we pay particular attention to this fact, and show that our results are not

being driven by zero suitability countries. We obtain similar results if we omit zero suitability

countries from the sample.

   The second fact that is apparent from Figure 2 is that much of the land area suitable for potato

cultivation is concentrated in Europe. This fact is a potential cause of concern since we know

that Western Europe diverged from the rest of the world after 1700. The underlying causes of

this divergence may bias our estimated impact of the introduction of potatoes on population and

urbanization. We address this concern explicitly in a number of ways. We show that our estimates

do not change if we control for underlying determinants of Western Europe’s divergent growth

after the 18th century. Furthermore, we also show that our results are robust to the exclusion of

Western European countries from our sample.

   A final concern with our potato suitability measure is whether the measure calculated in the

1990s by the FAO is an accurate indicator of suitability two hundred years ago. The construction

of the suitability measures gives us confidence that it is. The measures are based primarily on

geographic characteristics that do not change over the period of our study, namely, temperature,
  16 The results are very similar when we use 20% or 60% of the maximum yield as alternative cut-offs. They are not

reported for sake of brevity.




                                                        14
humidity, length of days, sunlight, and rainfall. In constructing our measure, we also deliberately

use the FAO measures that assume rain fed conditions, avoiding measurement error caused by

changes over time in irrigation technology and intensities of irrigation use.

   It is also important to recognize that factors that can respond quickly to human intervention,

such as soil pH or slope, only enter the calculation in an indirect manner, and only have small

effects on the underlying measures. Climatic characteristics, which are unaffected in any signifi-

cant way by human actions, are the sole determinants of whether potatoes can be cultivated on a

grid-cell. Conditional on their ability to be cultivated, the estimated productivity of a grid-cell is

affected by factors that can be influenced by human actions, such as land characteristics like the

pH and/or slope of the soil. As a robustness check, we also constructed an alternative measure of

potato suitability that classifies any land that can cultivate potatoes, no matter how productively or

unproductively, as being fully suitable for potato cultivation. This measure, although potentially

less precise, has the benefit of being determined solely by climatic factors, and not by factors

potentially influenced by human action.17 We find that our results are robust to the use of this

alternative measure of potato suitability. For brevity the results are not reported in the paper, but

are available upon request.

   A second reason why our FAO-based variable may be an imperfect measure of suitability in

the past is because of the evolution of new potato varieties overtime. Certainly, since the Potato

Blight (Phytophthora infestans) of 1845 and 1846, there has been a concerted effort to develop new

varieties. However, the effort was focused on developing new varieties with increased resistance to

Phytophthora infestans, not on developing varieties that could be grown in new climates (Salaman,

1949, pp. 159–166). In the 20th century, the focus was on developing varieties that were visually

appealing to consumers. To this end, varieties were developed that were oval or kidney-shaped,

had a uniform skin color, and were without sprouts in their pits. The other major objective

has been the development of varieties that are resistant to ‘dry rot’, which can develop during

transit (Salaman, 1949, pp. 169–171). In short, the development of new potato varieties has not

focused on creating varieties that can be grown in new locations. Therefore, it is very unlikely that

the development of new varieties results in measurement error that biases our estimates in any
  17 Recall that climatic factors only are used by the FAO to initially determine if a location is suitable or not. If an area
is suitable, then additional factors, including soil characteristics, are used to determine just how suitable the area is. The
alternative measure that we construct captures the first stage of the procedure only, and therefore is unaffected by the
factors most likely influenced by human actions.




                                                             15
significant way.

   As a check of the sensibility of our potato suitability measure, we examine whether our measure

is correlated with historic potato production. The earliest period for which data are available for a

cross-section of countries is 1900. These data are from Mitchell (1998, 2003). We construct the natu-

ral logarithm of tons of potato production per capita and examine its relationship with our potato

suitability measure. The correlation between the two variables, measured by the standardized beta

coefficient, is 0.42. This is statistically significant at the 1% level. The correlation is similar if we also

include New World countries in the sample, or if we control for a measure of overall agriculture

suitability (which we describe in detail below). The positive correlation between potato suitability

and historic potato production provides added confidence in the validity of our measure.

   In our analysis, we also control for the suitability of Old World staple crops and for New World

staple crops. These measures are also constructed using data from the FAO’s GAEZ database. We

define Old World staple crops to be wetland rice, dryland rice, and wheat; and New World crops

to be grain maize, silage maize, sweet potatoes, and, of course, the potato. For both aggregate

measures, we take the maximum of the shares of land that are suitable for growing each of the

component crops.18 In other words, the measures are the fraction of land that can grow the most

suitable Old World and New World staples, respectively.19

   The FAO database also provides a composite measure of the suitability of an area for growing

any agricultural crop for human consumption (i.e., not including crops for fodder). The measure,

which captures the suitability of 154 crops, is much broader than our constructed measures of the

suitability for cultivating Old World staple crops or New World staples. The measure of overall

agricultural suitability also includes: other cereals, such as sorghum, millet, rye, and barley; other

roots, such as cassava; pulses, like beans, chickpeas, and cowpeas; oil crops, such as the soybean,

groundnuts, sunflower, palm oil; fiber crops, such as cotton; sugar crops, like sugarcane and sugar

beets; and fruit crops, such as bananas and plantains. We include this measure as an additional

control to capture a country’s overall agricultural productivity.20

   In our analysis we also consider city-level measures of suitability. We construct the city-level
   18 As with our potato suitability measure, here (and for all other measures) we define land to be suitable for cultivation

if it is classified as either “very suitable”, “suitable”, or “moderately suitable”.
   19 An alternative strategy is to measure the union of the land that was suitable for all the crops in each category. In

other words, this measure is the fraction of land that can grow any Old World and New World crop. These alternative
controls yields very similar estimates. Unsurprisingly, the two measures are highly correlated.
   20 The raw correlations between a country’s potato suitability and its suitability for growing Old World staple crops,

New World staple crops, and all crops are reported in Appendix Table A1.


                                                             16
measures manually using the FAO’s finer grid-cell level GIS raster data. For each city, we define the

relevant agricultural region to be a circle with a 100 km radius originating from the city. Suitability

for the city is then the fraction of land within the circular region that is suitable.21


B. Outcome Variables

The historic populations of individuals living on land that today is a modern country are from

McEvedy and Jones (1978). In our analysis, we examine the level of population in the following

years: 1000, 1400, 1500, 1600, 1700, 1800, and 1900. We do not use the years 1100, 1200, and

1300. This is because the population fluctuations due to the Black Death cause these data to be

particularly unreliable.

   We also examine the average annual population growth rate between each time period. This is

calculated in the standard manner:

                                                    ln(Populationit ) − ln(Populationit−n )
                      Population growthit =
                                                                       n

where n is 100 years, except when t = 1400; then n = 400.

   We examine the effects of potatoes on the growth of population not because we believe the

introduction of the potato had permanent growth effects. Instead, our interest is in testing whether

the introduction of potatoes increased the carrying capacity of land, thereby increasing the pop-

ulation that could be supported on it. Because the transition to the higher population may occur

over centuries, the introduction of potatoes may have affected the growth rate of population in

the centuries following its introduction. Therefore, we view our population growth estimates as

alternative robustness estimates to our population level estimates.

   We also examine the effect of potatoes on urbanization. Data on the populations of urban centers

are from Chandler (1987), Bairoch (1988), and Modelski (2003). We measure a country’s total

urban population to be the number of people living in cities with more than 20,000 inhabitants.

We construct each country’s urbanization rate by dividing its total urban population by its total

population taken from McEvedy and Jones (1978). We measure the urbanization rate in percentage

terms; it therefore ranges from zero to 100.
  21 We have also tried other distances from a city in our analysis. The results are robust to the use of either 200 or 500

kilometer radii.




                                                            17
   We also examine the average annual change in the urbanization rate between time periods. This

is calculated as follows:

                                                     City population shareit − City population shareit−n
      Change in city population shareit =
                                                                              n

where as before n is 100, except when t = 1400; then n = 400.

   Urbanization is an interesting outcome to examine, in and of itself, because it reveals whether

the net effect of the positive shock to agriculture caused by the introduction of potatoes facilitated

the movement of people to cities. However, urbanization can also be taken as a proxy for historic

industrialization and income per capita.22 A number of studies have shown that, historically (and

today), urbanization rates serve as a good proxy for per capita GDP (DeLong and Shleifer, 1993,

Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2002, 2005). In particular, Acemoglu et al. (2002) document the

strength of the correlation between urbanization and per capita income.23

   Accuracy is an obvious concern for historic data that spans such a long time horizon and broad

cross section. McEvedy and Jones (1978), which is the standard source for historic population data

at the country level, provide detailed discussions of the sources used to construct their population

estimates. It is important to keep in mind that measurement error in our outcome variables will

not bias our regression estimates as long as it is random. Systematic variation in the error either by

time period or by country are addressed by country and year fixed effects. As a robustness check,

we also estimate the effect of potatoes on city population growth. Since the historic populations

for larger urban centers are generally thought to be more confidently known than for smaller

rural towns, this provides an alternative estimate of population growth based on data that are

potentially more accurate (Bairoch, 1988, pp. 524–525).24 Similar findings using the data at the

country and city levels will give us confidence in the country-level data.

   Our country-level sample consists of 132 Old World countries. With the exception of seven

countries, each country is observed in each time period. Our city-level sample consists of 1,143 Old

World cities (i.e., locations with over 20,000 people). The number of cities observed increases each
  22 Because  per capita income data are unavailable prior to 1500, and even in 1500 they are only available for 22 Old
World countries, we are unable to examine the effect of the introduction of potatoes on income directly.
  23 Using the most extensive historic income data available, which are from Maddison (2003), we have also examined

the relationship between urbanization and income back to 1500. In a panel setting with either country fixed effects
and/or year fixed effects, we find that the correlation between urbanization and income is extremely strong and highly
significant.
  24 The clear draw back of the city-level analysis relative to the country-level is that, although a country’s suitability for

potatoes is clearly defined, the suitability of a ‘city’ is far from clear. For this reason, we use the country as our standard
unit of analysis, and rely use the city-level estimates only as a robustness check.


                                                              18
century. Of the 1,143 cities, only 308 are observed in 1800, 214 in 1400, and by 1000 we only observe

77 cities. As we discuss below, our estimated coefficients do not differ dramatically depending on

whether we use the full sample of 1,143 or restrict the sample to obtain a more balanced panel.

Summary statistics are reported in Appendix Table A2.


4. Estimating Equations

Our first estimating equation imposes very little structure on the data and simply examines how

the relationship between a country’s suitability for growing potatoes and each of our four out-

comes of interest varies over time. Our estimating equation is:
                    1900                          1900                                       1900
                    ∑                             ∑       δj All Cropsi × It + ∑ γc Iic +    ∑
                                          j                               j                              j
           Yit =            β j Potatoi × It +                                                       ρt It + ε it       (1)
                   j=1400                        j=1400                        c            j=1400

where i indexes countries and t indexes time periods, which are for the years 1000, 1400, 1500,

1600, 1700, 1800, and 1900. Yit denotes our outcome of interest, either population, average annual

population growth, the urbanization rate, or the average annual change in the urbanization rate.

The equation includes country fixed effects ∑c Iic , which capture average time invariant differences

in country characteristics that affect the outcome variable. Similarly, the time period fixed effects
    j
∑ j It capture time specific shocks that affect all countries. We control for the share of land suitable
                                                                                                                    j
for overall agriculture interacted with the time period dummy variables ∑ j δj All Cropsi × It to

ensure that the effect of introducing potatoes is not confounded by other changes in the importance

of agricultural productivity over time. All Cropsi is the fraction of land that is suitable for growing

any crop for human consumption.

   The variable Potatoi measures the fraction of land in country i that is suitable for the cultivation

of potatoes. By interacting the variable with each of the time period indicator variables, we

are able to estimate a period specific relationship between potato suitability and the outcome

variable. These are the β j ’s is equation (1), which are our coefficients of interest. If population or

urbanization increased due to the adoption of potatoes after 1700, then we expect to find that after

this date, countries with greater potato suitability experienced disproportionately faster growth.

Therefore, we expect to find that: β̂ j>1700 > β̂ j≤1700 ≈ 0. Because Potatoi is time invariant and

the equation includes country and time-period fixed effects, the estimated β j ’s must be measured

relative to a baseline time period, which we take to be 1000 AD.



                                                              19
   Our second estimating equation examines the impact of the introduction of potatoes in a more

structured manner, using a strategy that is similar to differences-in-differences estimation. This

strategy compares the outcome of interest before and after the introduction of potatoes across

countries with varying suitability for potato cultivation. Given the endogeneity of the date of

adoption, we use the approximate date of the introduction to Europe, 1700, rather than the actual

date of adoption. We also continue to use a country’s suitability for cultivating potatoes rather

than the extent of actual cultivation.

   We estimate the following baseline equation.


               Yit = β Potatoi × ItPost + δ All Cropsi × ItPost + η Old World Staplesi × ItPost
                                                                                        1900
                                                                   µ + ∑ γc Iic +        ∑
                                                                                                    j
                        +φ New World Staplesi × ItPost + Xi0 IPost
                                                              t                                 ρt It + ε it       (2)
                                                                            c          j=1400

                                                                                                    j
As before, Yit denotes one of our four outcomes of interest, and ∑c Iic and ∑ j It denote country

and time period fixed effects. Our measure of potato suitability, Potatoi , is now interacted with an

indicator variable that equals one after 1700, ItPost . All Cropsi , Old World Staplesi , New World Staplesi

indicate our suitability measures for overall agriculture, Old World staples, and New World sta-

ples. We control for these measures, each interacted with a post-1700 indicator variable.

   Our coefficient of interest is β, which is the estimated impact of potato suitability on the differ-

ence in the outcome variable before and after 1700. For concreteness, consider population growth

as the dependent variable. The estimated coefficient, β̂, measures the additional population growth

rate experienced by countries that are suitable for potatoes relative to those that are not, after

potatoes were introduced in 1700 (relative to before). If the coefficient is positive, then this indicates

that countries with a geographic environment more suitable for growing potatoes witnessed a

greater increase in population growth after 1700 relative to before 1700.

   In our analysis, we are also careful to control for various geographic characteristics, which may

be correlated with potato suitability and may have affected population differentially after 1700

relative to the period prior to this date. Because one of the benefits of potatoes is that they can be

grown on rugged terrain at high levels of elevation, in our estimates we are particularly careful to

control for a country’s average elevation and ruggedness.25 The vector of interaction controls is

denoted by Xi0 IPost
                t    in equation (2).
  25 Detailsof these measures are reported in Tables A1 and A2 of the Appendix. Table A1 reports the pair-wise
correlations between suitability for potatoes and the two geographic controls, and Table A2 reports summary statistics.



                                                          20
   Our estimation strategy has all of the potential advantages and hazards of standard DD esti-

mators. Country fixed effects control for all time invariant factors that differ between countries.

Time period fixed effects control for any secular patterns of population growth or urbanization

that affect all regions similarly. Our identification relies on the assumption that conditional on the

controls, there are no other events, also occurring around 1700, that may have affected population

or urbanization. This assumption should not be taken for granted since there were many changes

during the 18th and 19th centuries which could have affected population or urbanization. In the

section on robustness, we will consider and control for a large number of alternative country

characteristics and historic events that may potentially confound our estimates. We discuss this

in more detail in the Section 5C.

   One important caveat when interpreting our results is that the strategy literally estimates

the effect of suitability conditional on the introduction of potatoes, rather than the effect of the

introduction of potatoes. As with any “experiment”, our estimates cannot directly estimate the

effect of potatoes relative to a counterfactual state of the world where potatoes do not exist. To

use our results to shed light on the overall effect of the introduction of potatoes, there must not be

spillovers between countries. In Section 5B we test for the presence of spillover effects, and show

that they are estimated to be very close to zero.


5. Estimation Results

A. Flexible Estimation

We begin with estimates for our flexible estimating equation (1). The estimates are reported in

Appendix Table A3 and visually in Figures 3 and 4. The figures show for each of our four outcome

variables – population, population growth, urbanization, and change in the urbanization rate –

the relationship in each time period, between the outcome of interest and, either the suitability

for potato cultivation, or the suitability for overall agriculture. These coefficients are the β j ’s and

δj ’s in equation (1). The y-axes of the figures are identical in scale so that the magnitudes of the

coefficients can be easily compared. Because equation (1) includes time-period and country fixed
                                                    j                 j
effects, the estimated coefficients for Potatoi × It and AllCropsi × It must be measured relative to a

baseline time period, which we take to be the year 1000. Therefore, the figures show the estimated

relationship between suitability in the dependent variable relative to the relationship in 1000 AD.



                                                    21
                                                                          3.5                                                                                                                                            4




                                                                            3                                                                                                                                          3.5




                                                                          2.5                                                                                                                                            3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5
                                                                            2




                                               y x Year Dummy Variables
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                          1.5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.5
                                                                            1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                          0.5




                                                                                                                                                        Coefficients of All Crop Suitabiility x Year Dummy Variables




              Coefficients of Potato Suitability
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                            0
                                                                                 1400    1500            1600              1700          1800    1900

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                          -0.5                                                                                                                                                1400     1500              1600          1700          1800    1900
                                                                                                                Year                                                                                                                                            Year

                                                                                                                       j                                                                                                                                                j
                                                                                                       (a) Potatoi × It                                                                                                                              (b) All Cropsi × It




22
                                                                          1.4                                                                                                                                          1.1



                                                                          1.2                                                                                                                                          0.9



                                                                            1                                                                                                                                          0.7



                                                                          0.8                                                                                                                                          0.5



                                                                          0.6                                                                                                                                          0.3




                                               y x Year Dummy Variables
                                                                          0.4                                                                                                                                          0.1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1500          1600              1700          1800          1900
                                                                          0.2                                                                                                                                          -0.1



                                                                            0                                                                                                                                          -0.3
                                                                                  1500          1600            1700              1800          1900




              Coefficients of Potato Suitability
                                                                                                                                                        Coefficients ofAll Crop Suitabilitty x Year Dummy Variables




                                                                          -0.2                                                                                                                                         -0.5



                                                                          -0.4                                                                                                                                         -0.7
                                                                                                                Year                                                                                                                                            Year

                                                                                                                       j                                                                                                                                                j
                                                                                                       (c) Potatoi × It                                                                                                                              (d) All Cropsi × It

     Figure 3: Estimated coefficients of the interaction of cultivation suitability with time period fixed effects. The dependent variables are: (a-b)
     ln population, and (c-d) population growth.
                                                                          50                                                                                                                                           40




                                                                          40                                                                                                                                           30




                                                                          30                                                                                                                                           20




                                                                          20                                                                                                                                           10




                                               y x Year Dummy Variables
                                                                          10                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1400     1500              1600          1700          1800    1900



                                                                            0                                                                                                                                          -10
                                                                                 1400     1500            1600             1700          1800    1900




              Coefficients of Potato Suitability
                                                                                                                                                        Coefficients of All Crop Suitabilitty x Year Dummy Variables
                                                                          -10                                                                                                                                          -20




                                                                          -20                                                                                                                                          -30
                                                                                                                 Year                                                                                                                                           Year

                                                                                                                         j                                                                                                                                              j
                                                                                                        (a) Potatoi ×   It                                                                                                                           (b) All Cropsi × It




23
                                                                          0.4                                                                                                                                          0.3




                                                                          0.3                                                                                                                                          0.2




                                                                          0.2                                                                                                                                          0.1




                                                                          0.1                                                                                                                                            0




                                               y x Year Dummy Variables
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1500          1600              1700          1800          1900



                                                                            0                                                                                                                                          -0.1
                                                                                   1500          1600            1700             1800          1900



                                                                          -0.1                                                                                                                                         -0.2




              Coefficients of Potato Suitability
                                                                                                                                                        Coefficients of All Crop Suitabilitty x Year Dummy Variables




                                                                          -0.2                                                                                                                                         -0.3




                                                                          -0.3                                                                                                                                         -0.4
                                                                                                                 Year                                                                                                                                           Year

                                                                                                                         j                                                                                                                                              j
                                                                                                        (c) Potatoi × It                                                                                                                             (d) All Cropsi × It

     Figure 4: Estimated coefficients of the interaction of cultivation suitability with time period fixed effects. The dependent variables are: (a-b)
     city population share, and (c-d) change in city population share.
   Figures 3 and 4 show that potato suitability had little effect between 1400 and 1700. But, begin-

ning in 1700, countries more suitable for potato cultivation began to experience faster population

growth and faster increases in urbanization. In contrast, the figures show that the correlation

between agricultural suitability and the outcomes of interest did not change systematically over

time. These patterns are similar for all four outcomes.

   The figures also show that the effect on urbanization is delayed by roughly one century relative

to the effect on population. This should be interpreted only as a rough approximation of the

length of the delay because our data are at the century level. Hence, any effects on urbanization

that occurred after the middle of the 18th century, for example, will show up in our results as

a one century delay. In any case, the difference in timing between the effect on population and

urbanization is consistent with potatoes having an immediate effect on population growth, but a

delayed effect on the movement into cities.


B. Preliminary Differences-in-Differences Population Estimates

Given the historic and empirical evidence for 1700 being the key date of potato adoption, we now

turn to our main estimating equation (2), which explicitly assumes that potatoes were adopted after

this date. We begin by reporting preliminary estimates focusing on population as the outcome

variable (i.e., ln population and population growth). The estimates are reported in columns (1)

and (2) of Table 2. Recall that in addition to controlling for All Cropsi , equation (2) also controls for

our measure of suitability for growing Old World staple crops, New World staple crops, and for

average terrain ruggedness and elevation, each interacted with the post-1700 indicator variable.

   Table 2 also reports a number of preliminary sensibility checks. We first address the quality of

our historic country-level population data. We do this by reporting alternative estimates based on

city-level population data. Although it is difficult at best to measure the ability of a city to adopt

potatoes, the use of city-level data has the advantage that historic city populations are arguably

more accurately known than historic country-level populations.26 Therefore, the alternative city-

level estimates provide a check of the sensibility of our country-level results.
  26 There  is little information on the actual distances that potatoes traveled when moving from the countryside into
cities, except statements that it generally was not very far. Salaman (1949) reports that potatoes consumed in cities were
obtained from local gardens and nearby rural villages. In our analysis, have used different distances from each city
when constructing our city-level suitability measures. The results are robust if, rather than using 100 kilometers, we use
either a 200 or 500 kilometer radius.




                                                           24
                       Table 2: Country- and city-level difference-in-differences estimates.
                                            Country level                      City level                               Country level
                                          (1)           (2)              (3)                (4)         (5)           (6)            (7)           (8)
                                                     Population                      Population                   Population                    Population
                                     ln Population    growth       ln Population      growth      ln Population    growth       ln Population    growth

 Potato x Post                          1.236          0 .741          0.942            0.638          1.335         0.816         2.135          1.024
                                       (0.291)        (0.118)         (0.308)          (0.251)        (0.314)       (0.169)       (1.023)        (0.460)
 Neighbors' Potato x Post                                                                              0.065        -0.026
                                                                                                      (0.456)       (0.204)
 Potato x Old World Staples x Post                                                                                                -1.525         -0.481
                                                                                                                                  (1.457)        (0.670)

 Observations                            922            790             885                 649        922            790           922            790

 Notes : All regressions control for All Crops x Post, Old World Staples x Post, New World Staples x Post, Elevation x Post, Ruggedness x Post, country
 fixed effects and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the country level in the country-century level regressions (columns 1-2 and 5-8) and
 at the city level in the city-century level regressions (columns 3-4). There are 132 clusters in the country regressions and 186 clusters in the city
 regressions.




    Columns (3) and (4) report the estimated effects of potatoes on population and population

growth at the city level. To be as conservative as possible, we restrict our sample to locations that

existed as cities (i.e., a population of more than 20,000) in at least one pre-adoption time period

and at least one post-adoption period. The results are similar if we include all cities in the sample,

even if they do not appear in a pre-adoption time period.27

    Comparing the city-level estimates of columns (3) and (4) with the country-level estimates

of columns (1) and (2), one finds that they are very similar. In both cities and countries, the

introduction of potatoes has a positive and significant effect on population and population growth.

The magnitude of the estimates are slightly larger at the country level, which could potentially be

explained by the fact that the city-level estimates do not include the impact of potatoes on the rise

of new cities. The fact that we obtain similar results when we use city-level and country-level

population data is reassuring.

    To interpret the DD estimates from columns (1) and (2) as literally the effect of potatoes on

historic population, we must assume that countries that were unsuitable for cultivating potatoes

were not affected in any way by the introduction of potatoes. This assumption is violated if there

were either positive or negative spillover effects, so that countries that did not adopt potatoes

were also affected when their neighbors adopted potatoes. Positive spillovers may have occurred

through trade in agricultural products. If a neighboring trading partner adopted potatoes and
  27 A significant proportion of the cities in our full sample (640 of 1,143) appear only in 1900.                          A total of 186 cities appear
in at least one pre-adoption and one post-adoption time period.




                                                                               25
was able to effectively produce more calories, then this may have also benefitted its trading

partners.28 Negative population spillovers could have occurred through migration. An increase

in a neighboring country’s suitability may have negatively affected a country’s population if there

was movement out of the country and to the neighboring country that adopted the potato. Because

our estimates are identified from comparisons between potato-suitable and non-suitable regions,

any positive spillovers will attenuate our estimated impact of potatoes, while negative spillovers,

will cause our estimates to overstate the true effect of potatoes.

   In columns (5) and (6), we test for the existence of spillovers. This is done by constructing, for

each country, a measure of the average suitability of all adjacent countries i.e., Neighbors’ Potatoi ×

ItPost . We then include this measure in our baseline estimating equation (2). The estimation results

fail to provide any evidence for the presence of spillover effects. The estimated coefficients for

Neighbors’ Potatoi × ItPost are very small in magnitude and statistically insignificant. Given the lack

of evidence for spillovers, we can be more confident that our DD coefficients provide consistent

estimates of the effect of potatoes on historic population.29

   The final check that we perform is motivated by the notion that potatoes may have had the

greatest benefit in regions that were less suitable for pre-existing staple crops. We test for this by

allowing the impact of potatoes to differ depending on whether a country was suitable for the

production of Old World staple crops. This is done by including Potatoi × ItPost × Old World cropsi

in our baseline estimating equation. Columns (7) and (8) show that the estimated interaction terms

are negative, providing some evidence that potatoes had smaller benefits in regions that were more

suitable for existing staple crops. However, the coefficients should be interpreted cautiously since

they are not statistically significant.
  28 The fact that potatoes are not highly traded does not rule out the possibility of positive spillovers from trade. A
region may adopt potatoes and only consume the potatoes domestically. Because potatoes are much more efficient to
produce, this may free up resources for the production of other, more freely tradable crops.
   29 We have also undertaken alternative tests to ensure that migration, in particular, is not affecting our estimates.

We have estimated equations where the dependent variable is the “natural change” in the population of each country,
which we calculate as the change in the total population that was not the result of either in- or out-migration. This was
done by taking the McEvedy and Jones (1978) population data and subtracting the net immigration for the century. The
migration data are from Mitchell (1998, 2003). The estimated impact of potatoes on population, using this alternative
measure of non-migration induced population increases, are nearly identical to the baseline estimates reported here. An
alternative strategy is to estimate our baseline equations controlling for net migration in the 100 years prior to period t.
Our estimates remain virtually unchanged when we do this.




                                                            26
C. Baseline Differences-in-Differences Estimates

Having addressed the two largest issues facing our estimates – the quality of the historic country

level population data, and the existence of spillover effects – we now turn to our baseline DD

estimates, and report country-level estimates for all four of our outcomes of interest: population,

population growth, city population share, and change in the city population share. The estimates

are reported in columns (1) and (7) of Table 3. As shown, we find a positive and statistically

significant effect of the introduction of the potato on both urbanization and the change in the

urbanization rate. Consistent with our flexible estimates, the DD estimates also show that potatoes

had a positive effect on the rise of cities.

   The remaining columns of the table show the robustness of our baseline estimates to alternative

specifications. In columns (2) and (8), we interact each of our baseline control variables with a full

set of time period fixed effects. As the estimates show, our results are fully robust to allowing our

set of covariates to have a completely flexible effect on population and urbanization over time.

   In columns (3)–(6) and (9)–(12) of Table 3, we report estimates, including additional control

variables that may capture alternative determinants of differential growth in certain parts of the

world after 1700. The fact that a large fraction of Europe is suitable for potatoes raises the concern

that our estimates capture other factors that may have affected the divergence of Europe during

this time period. One explanation for this divergence is that many European countries benefited

from a history of Roman rule (Jones, 1981, Landes, 1998). Acemoglu et al. (2005) construct a

measure meant to capture this determinant of Europe’s divergent growth: an indicator variable

that equals one if a country was part of the Roman Empire.30 We control for the interaction of this

variable with an indicator variable for the post-1700 period. Columns (3) and (9) show that our

baseline estimates are robust to the inclusion of this control.

   Another potentially confounding factor is the occurrence of the Black Death. If the plague,

which killed up to 30% of Europe’s population, was more severe in regions that were suitable for

potatoes, then our estimates may overstate the true effect of potatoes. The coefficients in columns

(4) and (10) show that our estimates are robust to controlling for the average annual growth rate of

population between 1000 and 1400.31

  30 This variable is taken from Acemoglu et al. (2005), who construct their measure using information from Langer

(1972).
  31 In this specification, our sample is reduced by 12 observations since the pre-trend control variable cannot be

constructed for two countries, New Zealand and Finland, because of missing population data for the year 1000.


                                                        27
                                      Table 3: Country-level difference-in-differences estimates, controlling for other factors.
                                        (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)            (7)           (8)            (9)          (10)         (11)        (12)
                                                                     ln Population                                                                     Population growth
     Potato x Post                     1.364        1.363         1.350         1.059       1.347         1.255          0.804         0.804          0.819         0.768        0.797       0.745
                                      (0.306)      (0.310)       (0.305)       (0.229)     (0.305)       (0.319)        (0.147)       (0.149)        (0.148)       (0.152)      (0.147)     (0.149)

     Controls x century FEs             N             Y            N             N            N             N              N             Y             N             N            N           N
     Roman history x Post               N             N            Y             N            N             N              N             N             Y             N            N           N
     Pop growth 1000-1400 x Post        N             N            N             Y            N             N              N             N             N             Y            N           N
     Distance to sea x Post             N             N            N             N            Y             N              N             N             N             N            Y           N
     Slave exports                      N             N            N             N            N             Y              N             N             N             N            N           Y

     Observations                      922           922          922           910          922           922            790          790            790           780          790         790




28
                                                                City population share                                                           Change in city population share
     Potato x Post                    14.605       14.608       13.825        14.520       14.697        13.957          0.140         0.140         0.138         0.143         0.139       0.135
                                      (5.639)      (5.716)      (5.664)       (5.758)      (5.649)       (5.723)        (0.031)       (0.032)       (0.032)       (0.032)       (0.031)     (0.032)

     Controls x century FEs             N             Y            N             N            N             N              N             Y             N             N            N           N
     Roman history x Post               N             N            Y             N            N             N              N             N             Y             N            N           N
     Pop growth 1000-1400 x Post        N             N            N             Y            N             N              N             N             N             Y            N           N
     Distance to sea x Post             N             N            N             N            Y             N              N             N             N             N            Y           N
     Slave exports                      N             N            N             N            N             Y              N             N             N             N            N           Y

     Observations                        922            922           922        910          922          922            790          790         790           780           790           790
     Notes : All regressions also control for All Crops x Post, Old World Staples x Post, New World Staples x Post, Elevation x Post, Ruggedness x Post, country fixed effects and year fixed effects.
     Standard errors are clustered at the country level (132 clusters).
   Next, we consider the fact that the spread of potatoes occurred during a period of increased

globalization and overseas trade. Columns (5) and (11) show that our estimates are robust to

controlling for an interaction between access to trade, which we proxy with a country’s average

distance from an ice-free coast, interacted with the post-1700 indicator variable.32

   Finally, we consider the large global trade in slaves from Africa. The slave trades reached their

height in the 18th century, which is approximately the same time that potatoes were being adopted

globally. If the countries that were least able to adopt potatoes are also African countries that

were depopulated because of the slave trade, then this may explain part of the effect of potatoes

on increased population growth and urbanization after 1700. To capture the potential effects of

Africa’s slave trades, we include a country and time-period specific measure of the number of

slaves taken during the 100 years prior to period t. The results are reported in columns (6) and

(12). As shown, including this control has little effect on our estimated potato coefficients.

   We next turn to the possibility that our baseline estimates are being driven by a few influential

observations. Figure 5 shows the partial correlation plots between potato suitability and the out-

comes of interest from the baseline estimates reported in columns (1) and (7) of Table 3. The eastern

portion of the plots show that it is primarily the Eastern European countries such as Belarus (BLR),

Latvia (LVA), Lithuania (LTU), and Poland (POL) that have the greatest leverage, or influence, on

our estimates. The fact that the main beneficiaries from the introduction of potatoes are primarily

Eastern European countries helps alleviate the concern that our estimates also capture benefits to

population and urbanization from the industrial revolution or the rise in Atlantic trade. Eastern

Europe did not participate in the Atlantic trade during this period. Nor did they experience

the industrial revolution until the final decades of the 19th century (Stearns, 2007, pp. 90–94).

Figure 5 also shows that Australia (AUS), New Zealand (NZL), Philippines (PHL), and Thailand

(THA) are outliers, with either large positive or negative residuals. This is likely because these

countries experienced large population changes, due to colonization, that were unrelated to potato

cultivation.

   To check that our results are not drive by these outliers, we re-estimate our baseline specification

using a number of restricted samples that omit potential outlying observations. These are reported
  32 The measure of a country’s average distance from an ice-free coast is taken from Nunn and Puga (2007). The results
are also robust if we focus specifically on the lucrative Atlantic, which has been emphasized by Acemoglu et al. (2005).
Our results are robust to controlling for an indicator variable that equals one if the country was an ‘Atlantic trader’, as
defined by Acemoglu et al. (2005), interacted with a post-1700 indicator variable.




                                                            29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AUS
               2




                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                    AUS

                                                                                   FIN
                                                                  PHL
                                                                         NZL IRQ




                                                                                                                                                  1.5
                                                                                  ZAF
                       1




                                                                                                                          e( Population growth | X)
                                                                                  RUS
                                                                              SWZ
                                                                            TUN  LSO
                                                                                  ARM
                                                                                  FIN         EST
 e( ln Population | X)




                                                             PHL IRL LBY   ISR
                                                                           EGYLBN
                                                                             MAR    MYS
                                                                           GBR
                                                                            TUR
                                                                           YEM
                                                                          SAU
                                                                            SYR
                                                                           ISL AZE   CHN
                                                                                       MDA UKR              BLR
                                                                VNM MNG   ESH
                                                                          DZA
                                                                           IRN
                                                                          AFG
                                                                          SLB
                                                                         FJI IDN  SWE                  LTULVA
                                                                    NZLNLDPNG
                                                                         NOR
                                                                           OMN ALBRUS
                                                                                GEO
                                                                                  SWE                    POL
                                                                     BGR  JPNNLD
                                                                           ARE
                                                                           ISL
                                                                            BEL
                                                                          QAT
                                                                          KWT
                                                                           ISR GRC
                                                                               NZL
                                                                              LBN    CHN
                                             TLS                  IRL
                                                                 CZE      SDN
                                                                         MDGSYR   PHL KHM
                                                                                  ZAF  KHM
                                                                                         ROU  EST




                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                   GNQPRT
                                                                      AUT
                                                                    SVK
                                                                     BIH
                                                                    SCG
                                                                  SVN  AUS
                                                                      FRA
                                                                      CHE SLB
                                                                         FJI
                                                                          JOR
                                                                          PNG
                                                                            DJI
                                                                           ISL
                                                                           GBR
                                                                          JPN
                                                                           YEM
                                                                         MNG  HRV
                                                                             NLD
                                                                             KWT
                                                                            QAT
                                                                          SAU
                                                                           ISR
                                                                          LBY
                                                                          SOM
                                                                           ARETZA
                                                                            TUN
                                                                            BEL
                                                                              MKD BWA
                                                                                GAB
                                                                                  BGD
                                                                                    MOZ
                                                                                   LKA
                                                                                  NER  KHM
                                                                                        SLE
                                                                                      HUN
                                                                                     KEN   GHA
                                                                                         CMR
                                                                                          TGO  CIV
                                                                                              CAF
                                                                                             BEN
                                                          MOZ
                                                         DNKLVA
                                                              LTU
                                                             POL
                                                           BLR
                                                            LAO  DEU
                                                                 CZE
                                                                 DEU
                                                                   UKRFRA
                                                                      AUT
                                                                     AGO
                                                                      PRT
                                                                      MDA
                                                                      HUN
                                                                    SVK
                                                                     BIH
                                                                     ROU
                                                                      CHE  GBR
                                                                          JPN
                                                                          SLB
                                                                          COG
                                                                         FJI
                                                                          PNG
                                                                          SDN
                                                                         NOR
                                                                         GEO
                                                                           ITA
                                                                           KOR
                                                                          JOR
                                                                           EGY
                                                                         PRK
                                                                         MNG
                                                                        IND   MRT
                                                                              BTN
                                                                             ZMB
                                                                            TJK
                                                                            KGZ
                                                                            TUR
                                                                           RWA
                                                                           PAK
                                                                          PAK
                                                                           UZB   ZAR
                                                                               NGA
                                                                             KAZ
                                                                               IRL
                                                                              NPL
                                                                               LBR
                                                                               MLI
                                                                             TKM
                                                                             JORMWI
                                                                              LBN
                                                                            TCD GNB
                                                                               NZL
                                                                              HRV   NAM
                                                                                   BFAGIN
                                                                                    MOZ
                                                                                    MYS
                                                                                  BGD
                                                                                GMB      ROU
                                                                                       MDA   SEN
                                                                                            UKR
                                                                                          ZWE
                                                                                          TGO    DEU
                                                                                               CIV
                                                                                              CAF           BLR
                                                      THA  LKA
                                                           UGA
                                                             POLGMB
                                                                 DEU
                                                                 GNBSCG
                                                                  SVN
                                                                   SEN
                                                                   EST
                                                                 CZE
                                                                   NPL
                                                                   GNQBDI
                                                                    ZWENAM
                                                                     BGR
                                                                       BFA
                                                                        BWA
                                                                       ESP
                                                                     BTN
                                                                     MKD   YEM
                                                                            DJI
                                                                          SAU
                                                                          SDN
                                                                           KGZ
                                                                          TCD
                                                                            SYR
                                                                           OMN
                                                                         MLIMDG
                                                                           ITA
                                                                          LBY
                                                                           ERI
                                                                            ESP
                                                                          MRT
                                                                          TKM
                                                                         AZE
                                                                          KAZ
                                                                        NER
                                                                         TZA
                                                                          RWA
                                                                          BEL
                                                                        SWE
                                                                         ETH
                                                                          SOM
                                                                           IRQ
                                                                         TJK
                                                                       NLD     GRC
                                                                              DZA
                                                                              LBN
                                                                              SWZ
                                                                             ESH
                                                                              ALB
                                                                              MKD
                                                                             MAR
                                                                             SOM
                                                                            SYR
                                                                            DJI
                                                                           KOR
                                                                          TCD
                                                                          COG     IND
                                                                                  MMR
                                                                                 LSO
                                                                               ETH
                                                                                GAB
                                                                                VNM
                                                                              ALB
                                                                             MAR   UGA
                                                                                   LAO
                                                                                   UGA
                                                                                 ZAR
                                                                                  BGD THACMR
                                                                                       KHM
                                                                                      BDI
                                                                                        SLEGHA
                                                                                           GHA
                                                                                          TGO
                                                                                          TLS
                                                                                         CMR   CIV
                                                                                             BEN
                                                                                              CAF      LTULVA
                                                                                                         POL
                                                         DNKLVA VNM
                                                                 CZESVK
                                                                   LBR
                                                                  NGA HUN
                                                                      KEN
                                                                     ROU
                                                                      ZMB
                                                                     AGO
                                                                      BDITZA
                                                                        IND
                                                                         MLI
                                                                         FJI
                                                                         SWZTUN
                                                                            MDG
                                                                           PAK
                                                                          MRT
                                                                           ERI
                                                                          SAU
                                                                        NER
                                                                        LSO
                                                                        ARMISR
                                                                            TUR
                                                                            ESP
                                                                          SLB
                                                                           YEM
                                                                           RWA
                                                                         GEO
                                                                          PNG
                                                                        RUSKOR
                                                                           ARE
                                                                         TZA
                                                                          SOM
                                                                          TCD
                                                                         PRK    MWI
                                                                               NGA
                                                                              BTN
                                                                            TJKLBR
                                                                              NPL
                                                                             IDN
                                                                             ZMB
                                                                             AFG
                                                                              DZA
                                                                               ETH
                                                                             ESH
                                                                           ERI    ARM
                                                                                GAB
                                                                                  MMR
                                                                                GNB    PRT
                                                                                      GIN
                                                                                        SLE
                                                                                      HUN
                                                                                     CHE
                                                                                   LAOGIN ZWE
                                                                                         AGO BEN                    DNK
                                                 SLE GIN DNK
                                                          MOZMMR
                                                              LTU    BIH
                                                                   GNQ
                                                                  SVN
                                                                    SCG
                                                                   UKR
                                                                   SEN  BWA
                                                                      FRA
                                                                      HUN
                                                                      KEN
                                                                     BGR
                                                                    SVK
                                                                      BDIMLI
                                                                       NAM
                                                                      PRT  EGY
                                                                          JPN
                                                                          MRT
                                                                           UZB
                                                                          QAT
                                                                           KGZ
                                                                          IDN
                                                                        NER
                                                                          DZA
                                                                           RWA
                                                                           OMN
                                                                          COG
                                                                          SDN
                                                                          TKM
                                                                         ETH
                                                                          KAZ
                                                                           IRNHRV
                                                                            NOR
                                                                          ESH
                                                                          KWT  NGA
                                                                               LBR
                                                                                GMB
                                                                                MWI
                                                                              BTN
                                                                              NPL
                                                                             JOR
                                                                            TJK
                                                                            ESP    LKA
                                                                                  PHL
                                                                                 ZAR
                                                                                  BGD
                                                                                VNM
                                                                              JPNPRK
                                                                                GNB   THA
                                                                                    MOZ   SVK
          0




                                        BEN                BLR
                                                            LAO  MWI
                                                               ZAR  ZWE
                                                                   SEN
                                                                   HRV BFA
                                                                       CHN
                                                                      MDA
                                                                       ESP
                                                                     MKD
                                                                      HUN
                                                                      CHE
                                                                     ROU
                                                                      AUT
                                                                    ZWE
                                                                   EST    TCD
                                                                          ESH
                                                                        IND
                                                                         MLI
                                                                          DZA
                                                                        ZAF
                                                                       MYS
                                                                     AGONERITA
                                                                         FJI
                                                                       BFA
                                                                         MNG
                                                                       DJI    SDN
                                                                            TUR
                                                                            EGY
                                                                          AFG
                                                                           ERI
                                                                         AZE
                                                                           PAK
                                                                          PAK
                                                                            COG
                                                                          SDN
                                                                          PNG
                                                                          KAZ
                                                                        ARM
                                                                       NAM     GRC
                                                                             ZMB
                                                                           UZB
                                                                           IRQ
                                                                          KOR
                                                                          SLB
                                                                           KGZ
                                                                             AFG
                                                                             NLD
                                                                            MDG
                                                                          TKM
                                                                           ARE
                                                                           IRN
                                                                           ITA
                                                                           OMN
                                                                          QAT
                                                                            TJK
                                                                          KWT
                                                                        BWA     MNG
                                                                              ALB
                                                                                GMB
                                                                              MKD
                                                                            NOR
                                                                          MRT      UGA
                                                                                   LKA
                                                                                  IND
                                                                                VNM
                                                                              TZA
                                                                            ESP
                                                                            NOR
                                                                           GBR
                                                                          AFG     MMRKEN
                                                                                      FRA
                                                                                      THA
                                                                                     AUT  TLS
                                                                                          SCG
                                                                                         BIH   SVN
                                                                                             GNQ CZE
                                             TGO             BGD
                                                             MMR
                                                           LKA
                                                            LVA
                                                      THA BLR LTU  ALB
                                                                 DEU
                                                                  SVN  MAR
                                                                     BIH
                                                                    SCG
                                                                     BGR
                                                                   GRC
                                                                   HRV  IND
                                                                       FIN
                                                                      KEN
                                                                       MYS
                                                                      BDI
                                                                       AUS
                                                                       MYS
                                                                      FRA
                                                                       CHNLBY
                                                                           ERI
                                                                           PAK
                                                                           RWA
                                                                           ARE
                                                                          ITA
                                                                          IDN
                                                                        SWEUZB
                                                                           KGZ
                                                                           ISL
                                                                          QAT
                                                                           IRN
                                                                          KWT
                                                                         ETH
                                                                          TKM
                                                                          KAZ
                                                                        LSO
                                                                        RUS
                                                                      ZMB RWA
                                                                          YEM  AZE
                                                                               GRC
                                                                              HRV
                                                                               IRL
                                                                             MAR
                                                                           IRNLBN
                                                                              JPN
                                                                              PNG
                                                                              MKD
                                                                              SLB  BFA
                                                                                 PRK
                                                                               FJINER
                                                                                   LAOBDI
                                                                                        BGR  SEN
                                                                                          SCGSVN
                                                                                          TLS
                                                                                         BIH
                                                                                         AGO     DEU
                                   CIVCAF GHATLS
                                               CMRKHM        POLGMBUKR
                                                                 GAB
                                                                   ALB
                                                                   NPL
                                                                 GNB
                                                                 MWI  MDA
                                                                       MAR
                                                                     BTN
                                                                   EST    KOR
                                                                         SWZ
                                                                         MNG
                                                                          AFG
                                                                        LSO
                                                                        SWE
                                                                      PRT
                                                                       CHN
                                                                     ROU
                                                                       AUS YEM
                                                                          SAU
                                                                          IDN MRT
                                                                             SAU
                                                                            SYR
                                                                            TCD
                                                                          ESH
                                                                          DZA
                                                                           EGY
                                                                          LBY
                                                                        ZAF
                                                                          IRQ
                                                                          BEL
                                                                         TZA
                                                                         TUR
                                                                           ISL
                                                                          JOR  MLI
                                                                             LBY
                                                                              ALB    AUTBGR                                                                                                                   JORAZE    ARM
                                                               ZAR GRC
                                                                   LBR
                                                                  NGA   ZAF
                                                                      HUN   COG
                                                                          SYR
                                                                            TUN   BWA
                                                                                  PHLFRA GNQ
                                                                                GEO                                 DNK
                                        BEN      SLE GIN UGA
                                               CMR
                                                             BGD CZE
                                                                 DEU
                                                                 GAB
                                                                      AUT
                                                                     ROU
                                                                    SVK RUS
                                                                       MYSISL
                                                                        LSO
                                                                         SWZ
                                                                       FIN
                                                                      CHE
                                                                       CHN  QAT
                                                                          TUN
                                                                          JOR
                                                                           IRQ
                                                                          ESH
                                                                         GEO
                                                                          DZA
                                                                          TUN
                                                                           ARE
                                                                          ISR
                                                                        ZAF
                                                                        SWE
                                                                               IRL NAM
                                                                             MAR
                                                                           ISR
                                                                           OMN
                                                                             LBY
                                                                            NOR
                                                                           GBR
                                                                             NLD
                                                                             KWT                                                                                                                                  EGYGEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SWZ ZAF
                                                                                VNM
                                                                              SDN




                                                                                                                                .5
                                   CIVCAF    TGO
                                            GHA                     LBNAUS
                                                                         TUR
                                                                          IRQ
                                                                         AZE
                                                                          ISL
                                                                        ARM  SOM
                                                                            EGY MNG
                                                                                  PHL                                                                                                                              IDNLSO MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CHN
                                                                       AUS GBR
                                                                          SYR
                                                                          ISR
                                                                          BEL
                                                                          YEM  IRL
                                                                             SAU    AUS
                                                  KHM       LVA
                                                             POL
                                                           BLR      LBN
                                                              LTU UKR  DJI
                                                                      MDA JPN  NZLMOZ
                                                                             NLD                                                                                                    TLS
                                                                                                                                                                                                          AUTIRQALB     FINHUN
                                                                   EST  RUS
                                                                       FIN    PNG
                                                                            MDGFJI
                                                                              SLB                                                                                                                  VNMBGR             NZL      ROU                               DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ROU
                                                                                                                                                                                                         PRT  ESH
                                                                                                                                                                                                              DZA MAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ITA     RUS ZWEEST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NZL
                                                                       FIN                                                                                                               THA LKA  CZEHRV
                                                                                                                                                                                                PHL    SVKFRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                         MKD
                                                                                                                                                                                                        NZL  NORARE
                                                                                                                                                                                                               QAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                               KWT
                                                                                                                                                                                                               BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                              JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                            NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                              TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                            SWE     DZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ESH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DJI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NLDLBR     MDASCG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BIH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GIN   SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  UKR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SLEGHA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TGO  CIV      POL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LTU  BLR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LVA
                                                                                                                                                                                                         PRT  SOM
                                                                                                                                                                                                              JPNTUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                IRQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ARE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NLD   SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GNB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LBN              BEN
               −1




                                                                                                                                                                                            POL   DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                MMR
                                                                                                                                                                                               LAO    IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                     SEN  CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                            MAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                          NAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                           BFA QAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                               KWT
                                                                                                                                                                                                             PRK
                                                                                                                                                                                                              MDG
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                              SLB
                                                                                                                                                                                                             FJI
                                                                                                                                                                                                              SAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                            BWA  KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SYR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                OMN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              PNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ISL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ARE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                               EGY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                IRN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                YEM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                              AFGRWABTN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  KWT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  QATNPL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BTN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LBN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TKM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DJI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SYR    GMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BGD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GAB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   KAZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NPL      GIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BGRSLEGHA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    EST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TGO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CMR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                KHM     CIV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CAF          BLR
                                                                                                                                                                                              UGA
                                                                                                                                                                                             MOZPHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                  CZEGNQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                      IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                      GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                       NPLCHN
                                                                                                                                                                                                          BDI
                                                                                                                                                                                                          FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                        AGO LSO
                                                                                                                                                                                                           FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                            NER
                                                                                                                                                                                                          CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                          NAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                          FRA  ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                               COG
                                                                                                                                                                                                             MNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                             MLI
                                                                                                                                                                                                              SOM
                                                                                                                                                                                                               TCD
                                                                                                                                                                                                             PRK
                                                                                                                                                                                                              SDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              SAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                            IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                              JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                             GEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                            BWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                             NOR  TCD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                UZB
                                                                                                                                                                                                              MRT ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ISL LBY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   KAZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 KGZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                YEM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TKM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ISL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ERI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                UZB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                OMN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              SWZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                               YEM
                                                                                                                                                                                                              TJK
                                                                                                                                                                                                             MNG    MRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AFG MWI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MLIZAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GNB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        GMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BWAKEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BFA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          UGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LAO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LKA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NAMMDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MOZ AGOUKR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GIN  SENBEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GHA CIV    LTULVA
                                                                                                                                                                                        DNKBLR
                                                                                                                                                                                            LVA     SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                  DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                  GMB
                                                                                                                                                                                             LTU ZAR   SVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                     SEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ALB
                                                                                                                                                                                                      GRC CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                        BIH
                                                                                                                                                                                                         MKD
                                                                                                                                                                                                       HRV  ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                          HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                          KEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                         BTN
                                                                                                                                                                                                       SCGAUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                           BFASLB
                                                                                                                                                                                                             FJI
                                                                                                                                                                                                              MRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                              PNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ETH
                                                                                                                                                                                                             AZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                            NER
                                                                                                                                                                                                              TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                             MLI
                                                                                                                                                                                                              LBY
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ARM
                                                                                                                                                                                                          BDI
                                                                                                                                                                                                        LBN
                                                                                                                                                                                                          CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                          NAM    KGZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MDG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ERI
                                                                                                                                                                                                               TCD
                                                                                                                                                                                                             PRK  TJK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DJI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                IRN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                OMN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              TJK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                KGZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                              AFG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ARE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                UZB
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                              TKM
                                                                                                                                                                                                              KAZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ETH
                                                                                                                                                                                                              SOM    ETH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HRV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MKD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NPL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BTN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                IRQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  COG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                OMN
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ISR       MMR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GAB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GNB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PNGMWI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FJI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SLB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TJK       BDI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LAO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LKA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          UGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ZAFMOZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MMR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BGD    KHM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              THA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SCG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AGO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ZWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BIH TGO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CMR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GNQ CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ROU
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ZWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                     GNQ  HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                        BIH   SDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                            BWACOG
                                                                                                                                                                                                               QAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                               KWT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                KGZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PAKSOM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                               RWA   LBN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SWZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ISR    GMB        TLS           POL




                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                           BEN
                                                                                                                                                                         CAF      CMRKHMDNK POL
                                                                                                                                                                                             LTU
                                                                                                                                                                                            LVA   ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                BGD  UKR
                                                                                                                                                                                                    SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                  DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                    GNB
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ESTSCG
                                                                                                                                                                                                     NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                     SEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                     MWI
                                                                                                                                                                                                    GAB  MDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                          KEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                        AGO
                                                                                                                                                                                                         BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                                         PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ALB    MDG
                                                                                                                                                                                                             MNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                              TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                            SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                             GEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                              TKM
                                                                                                                                                                                                            RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                             TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                             DJI
                                                                                                                                                                                                           BFA
                                                                                                                                                                                                          BDI    SYR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TJK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                UZB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                KGZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                YEM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MDG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ERI
                                                                                                                                                                                                              KAZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                              AFG
                                                                                                                                                                                                              SAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                               BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                              IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                               EGY
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ISL
                                                                                                                                                                                                             AZE  COG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                IRN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              SYR
                                                                                                                                                                                                              LBY    HRV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MKD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LBY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SYR  GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VNM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GAB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LBN  LAO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MOZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MMR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BFA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MWI    BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              THA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FRA    GNQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CMR  CAF                       DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                TLS
                                                                                                                                                                                  CMR   GINBLR
                                                                                                                                                                                         THA
                                                                                                                                                                                    SLE DNK POL MMR
                                                                                                                                                                                              LKA    UKR
                                                                                                                                                                                                    EST
                                                                                                                                                                                                    GAB
                                                                                                                                                                                                   VNM
                                                                                                                                                                                                    SVN  MDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                       LBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ZWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                     GNQ BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                                        BIH
                                                                                                                                                                                                       SCG
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ROU
                                                                                                                                                                                                        AGO  ETH
                                                                                                                                                                                                            SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                           MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                                             GEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                            IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ARMCOG
                                                                                                                                                                                                              AFG
                                                                                                                                                                                                              TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                            RUSBEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                              KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                               IRQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                              JOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                             AZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ESP   NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                IRN  ALB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MAR   ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LSO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PRK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VNM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HRV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MKD    CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LKA THA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BDI    TLS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SEN DEU
                                                                                 PHL
                                                                               NZL                                                                                    CIVCAF GHATGO         POLLAO
                                                                                                                                                                                             LTU
                                                                                                                                                                                            LVA   DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                  CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                BGD
                                                                                                                                                                                             MOZ GMB
                                                                                                                                                                                           BLR       UKR
                                                                                                                                                                                                    EST
                                                                                                                                                                                                    GNBSVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                     NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                           MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                                          AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                          CHN
                                                                                                                                                                                                         MDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ZWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                        LBN
                                                                                                                                                                                                         PRT TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ARM
                                                                                                                                                                                                            LSO
                                                                                                                                                                                                           FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                            RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                             GEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MDG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ESH
                                                                                                                                                                                                              DZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                               BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                               EGYJOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                IRQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                               RWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                              KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                              SWZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                              IDN   TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                OMN  ALB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PRK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  JOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NOR MNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ARM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           KEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ROU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SVKTLS CZE
                                                                                                                                                                           BEN                           BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                                       LBR  LSO
                                                                                                                                                                                                          CHNAZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                            SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ZAFYEM
                                                                                                                                                                                                              SWZ TCD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ISL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                IRQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ARMMRT   MLI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AZENERCHN
                                                                                                                                                                                TGO SLE
                                                                                                                                                                               GHA   KHMGIN            NPLHUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                         BTN          NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GEOBWA
                                                                                                                                                                      CIV                     UGA       ROU   ESH
                                                                                                                                                                                                              DZA MARFJI NAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    JPN     FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SLB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SOM
                                                                                                                                                                                                        NZL  DJIEGY
                                                                                                                                                                                                           AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                            NLD   KWT AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  QAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ARE

                                                                                                                                             −.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                           AUS
               −2




                                                                                                                                                                                                           FIN

                                   −.2                  −.1               0                  .1                .2                                                   −.2                    −.1                  0                     .1                        .2
                                                                e( Potato x I^Post| X )                                                                                                               e( Potato x I^Post| X )
                                 (coef = 1.364, se = 0.306, N = 922)                                                                                                (coef = 0.804, se =0.147, N = 790)



                                                   (a) Dep var: ln population                                                                                                       (b) Dep var: population growth
               40




                                                                                     THA                                                                                                                               THA
                                                                                                                                             .4




                                                                             GBR
                                                                                                                          e( Change in city population share | X)




                                                                   LTU                                                                                                                                    GBR
                                                                                    AUS
 e( City population share | X)




                                                                                                                                                         .2




                                                                                                         LVA                                                                                           NZL           MKD           DEU                    LVA
                                                                          ISR                                                                                                                   LTU    LBN MAR    BELAUS AUT
                                                                                    AUT                                                                                                                              NLD
                      20




                                                                   NZL
                                                                             MKD                DEU                                                                                          IRL                 COG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                NORAUS
                                                                 IRL                                                                                                                       LTU           BGRISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                           UZB  AZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                IRQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                              HUN         THA
                                                                   ZWE
                                                                   LBN                                                                                                                                                      SLE    EST
                                                                             MKD
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ZWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                     BIH    IRN
                                                                                                                                                                                                       PRTETH
                                                                                                                                                                                                            BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                            NER
                                                                                                                                                                                                             IRQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                            TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                             KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                            BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                            NER   FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                OMN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              LBY    LAOIRLCHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AFG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MLI         BEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ZWE                    LTU          DNK
                                                                      NLDNLD          KHM                           DNK                                                                         GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ALB      MLI
                                                                                                                                                                                                         PRK
                                                                                                                                                                                                           JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                         BGR   TUN  TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IRN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  EGY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VNM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PHLIRLUKR               POL
                                                                            MAR
                                                                             MKD                                                                                                GHA     SLELTU UGA
                                                                                                                                                                                       DNK         NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                    MKD
                                                                                                                                                                                                   LAOZWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                    CZE   ROU
                                                                                                                                                                                                         MDG
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ESPDZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                          AGO
                                                                                                                                                                                                           MLI
                                                                                                                                                                                                         SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                         MRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                       PRT     ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                               TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                            IRN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              SAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                            EGY
                                                                                                                                                                                                           AFG
                                                                                                                                                                                                             KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                            GNQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                            FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                             MWI MAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                TCD
                                                                                                                                                                                                               SYRITALAO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VNM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BDI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NLD BFA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NGACHN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     KEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MKDBWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ARM SEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BGDKHM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ZWE  CZE
                                                                        PRK
                                                                         BEL      LAO                                                                                                CMR
                                                                                                                                                                                      KHM
                                                                                                                                                                                 CAFBEN        MOZ
                                                                                                                                                                                              POL
                                                                                                                                                                                              GAB
                                                                                                                                                                                             GIN
                                                                                                                                                                                              POL ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                  NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                LKA
                                                                                                                                                                                                  SVNBIH
                                                                                                                                                                                                    CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                  LBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                  PHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                    TUR  PRK
                                                                                                                                                                                                       SCG
                                                                                                                                                                                                        TJK
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ARE
                                                                                                                                                                                                        SVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                        BTN
                                                                                                                                                                                                       PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                       NPL
                                                                                                                                                                                                       HRV  GMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                           TKM
                                                                                                                                                                                                            DZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                           JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                          GNB
                                                                                                                                                                                                          LSO
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ROU
                                                                                                                                                                                                         BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                                          SOM
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ESH
                                                                                                                                                                                                          QAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                          KWT
                                                                                                                                                                                                        TJK
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ARM
                                                                                                                                                                                                        RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                      UKR
                                                                                                                                                                                                       SENIND
                                                                                                                                                                                                         CHN   RWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                             SYR
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ERI
                                                                                                                                                                                                             IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                            PNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                           SLB
                                                                                                                                                                                                           JOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                           FJI
                                                                                                                                                                                                           KAZDJI
                                                                                                                                                                                                              RWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                            EGY
                                                                                                                                                                                                            SDNGMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ISL
                                                                                                                                                                                                             SWZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                             TCD
                                                                                                                                                                                                           KEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ETH
                                                                                                                                                                                                         BWA IRQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                           MLI    EGY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                               KGZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                               SYR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                               SAUARE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NPL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                SWZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ISL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 COG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ERI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                GNB
                                                                                                                                                                                                               MWI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                MRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                               GNQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                               TKM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                MDG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                YEM
                                                                                                                                                                                                              SAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                            IRN DJI
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                              YEM    ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   JOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SLB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ITA  MMR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ESH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SOM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    KAZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LSO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      QAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FJI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BTN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HRV     RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AGOBFA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MOZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ALB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      KWT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LBRGAB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        UGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MMR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ROU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NGA RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PRK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          THATLS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BGD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SLEBENGHA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TGO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CMR  CIV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GHA               BLR
                                                                                                                                                                                TGO    TLSBLR
                                                                                                                                                                                           BGD   MMRVNM
                                                                                                                                                                                                  NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                LKA       NAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                           BDI
                                                                                                                                                                                                           TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                            SDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                           AFG
                                                                                                                                                                                                          AGO
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ROUIDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                            MDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                           UZB
                                                                                                                                                                                                            NER
                                                                                                                                                                                                          MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                                         CHN    UZB
                                                                                                                                                                                                              PAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                              KGZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                            FRA  TJK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 COG
                                                                                                                                                                                                               LBY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                YEM
                                                                                                                                                                                                               TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 KORJPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DZA  LKA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MKDGRC                         BLR
                                                                                                                                             0




                                                                        NORBELAZEAUSCHE                                                                                   CIV          DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                      KHM     POL
                                                                                                                                                                                            THAUGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                GRC CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                   EST
                                                                                                                                                                                                    MKD  AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                       PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                      UKR
                                                                                                                                                                                                       CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                       HRVFIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                        BFA
                                                                                                                                                                                                          IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                         MNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                        RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                       NPL GEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                         SWE OMN
                                                                                                                                                                                                           AFG
                                                                                                                                                                                                          AGO
                                                                                                                                                                                                           JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                          IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ETH
                                                                                                                                                                                                         PRKISR OMN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                            EGYZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                               SYR
                                                                                                                                                                                                               SAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                              SAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                             NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                            FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                             AZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                           TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                         MRTGNQ ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                TCD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                AZE FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                UZB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SDNZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LAO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ETH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BDIAGO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     KEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    KAZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MDA    CHN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BWA SCG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SVK KHM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            UKRBIHCZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SVKBIH DEU SVN             LVA DNK
                                                                        MLI
                                                                        MLIESP
                                                                          UZB
                                                                         COG                                                                                                           DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                       DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                 CAF CMR LVA   MOZ
                                                                                                                                                                                              GAB
                                                                                                                                                                                             GIN   LAO
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                 MMR
                                                                                                                                                                                                   DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                  LBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                    VNM
                                                                                                                                                                                                    TUR COG
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ARE
                                                                                                                                                                                                        BTN
                                                                                                                                                                                                        MAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                         AUT MWI
                                                                                                                                                                                                           AFG
                                                                                                                                                                                                            GMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                           TKM
                                                                                                                                                                                                         MDG
                                                                                                                                                                                                         BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                                          GNB   ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                               RWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                               SYR
                                                                                                                                                                                                              HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                             KOR   MLI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   JOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LBN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                               TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                SWZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                              LBYISL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ERI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NERESH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ETH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SOM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SLB  ARM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      KWT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LSO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      QAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ROU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FJI  IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        GRC        EST        POL
                                                                         COG
                                                                         IRQ      LAOHUN     EST                                                                          CIV   TGO    TLS
                                                                                                                                                                                        SLEBGD
                                                                                                                                                                                            THA   PHL  LBN
                                                                                                                                                                                                      GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                     BIH AUTIRN
                                                                                                                                                                                                            DZA DJI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                UZB
                                                                                                                                                                                                              HUN    NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VNM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AFG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GBR      SCG
                                                                 IRL   NER
                                                                      NLD   AFGGEO
                                                                              IRL    FRA
                                                                                       SLE                                                                                      GHA BEN           ALB  NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                                         AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                        MAR EGY
                                                                                                                                                                                                            BEL IRQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ISRNER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GBR  PRK PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SLE                   LTU
                                                                    BIH
                                                                  UKR
                                                                    BGRNER
                                                                     PRT DZA
                                                                         TUN
                                                                          EGY
                                                                          UZB
                                                                          OMN
                                                                         BEL
                                                                         SAU              GHA           POL                                                                                             COG TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                             IRQ  IRNLAO
                                       BEN                           ZMB ISR
                                                                        ETH
                                                                         SYRMAR
                                                                            LBY
                                                                           TUR
                                                                          EGY    SWE
                                                                               VNMBFAPRT BEN
                                                                                 IND                                                                                                               NLD      BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                           MLI   MAR
                                                                CZE
                                                                MWI
                                                               GMBUKR
                                                                  GRC
                                                                  ALB
                                                             LTUGNB  HUN
                                                                    ROU
                                                                    BGR
                                                                    BTN   IRQ
                                                                        MDGTUR
                                                                          IRN
                                                                         DZA
                                                                          KOR
                                                                          ITA
                                                                          IRN
                                                                          IRQJPN
                                                                            MAR
                                                                           KGZ
                                                                         SYR
                                                                         JPN   MNG
                                                                             TZA FIN
                                                                                 ARM
                                                                                 ZAF
                                                                                 IND
                                                                                 PHL
                                                                                 BGD
                                                                                 BWACHN
                                                                                      MDA   SEN            BLR      DNK                                                                                           BELBGR
                                                SLE      MOZPHL
                                                          UGA   CZESCG
                                                                    AGO
                                                                    BGR
                                                                  NPL
                                                                  GNQ
                                                                   SVK
                                                                    ROU
                                                                   SCG
                                                                  GNQKENTJK
                                                                       NER
                                                                     FRA
                                                                       SWE
                                                                      ESP ITA
                                                                         RWA
                                                                          KOR
                                                                           TCD
                                                                         SDN
                                                                         BEL
                                                                           KGZ
                                                                         SLB
                                                                        FJIDJI
                                                                          ARE
                                                                         QAT
                                                                         KWT
                                                                          IRN
                                                                         TKM
                                                                         AFG
                                                                         MRT
                                                                         SOM
                                                                       ZAF
                                                                        SWZ
                                                                        TJK
                                                                         KAZ  NGA
                                                                            JOR
                                                                          ISL
                                                                         PNG
                                                                          ERI
                                                                         IRQ
                                                                         ESH
                                                                          ITA
                                                                         JOR
                                                                       RUS
                                                                         DZA JPNLSO
                                                                               GAB
                                                                               VNM
                                                                              GRC
                                                                              LBR
                                                                               MNG
                                                                              ETH
                                                                              GRC
                                                                             HRV
                                                                             SWZ
                                                                             SDN   NAM
                                                                                  BFA
                                                                                 NER
                                                                                 RUS
                                                                                 ZAF
                                                                               GAB
                                                                                ZAR
                                                                              LBRBGD
                                                                                 MMR BDI
                                                                                   MYS
                                                                                    KEN
                                                                                    AUT  TGO
                                                                                        AGO
                                                                                      KHM
                                                                                     GINCMR
                                                                                         TLS
                                                                                         TGO  CIV
                                                                                              CIV
                                                                                             CAF
                                     CAF GHATLS
                                              CMR GIN DNK LKA
                                                          BLR ZAR
                                                            POL
                                                            POL
                                                            MMR  SVN
                                                                 NGA
                                                               VNM
                                                                 SVN MDA
                                                                   SVK
                                                                    AGO
                                                                    BGR
                                                                     BDI
                                                                      NAM
                                                                    ROU
                                                                  SEN
                                                                    BIH
                                                                  HRV
                                                                  UKRBDI SAU
                                                                         IDN
                                                                         PAK
                                                                         KWT
                                                                         TCD
                                                                       LSO
                                                                         SLB
                                                                         TKM
                                                                        FJI
                                                                        PRK
                                                                        SWZ
                                                                      MYS
                                                                      DJI
                                                                     MDA
                                                                     KEN
                                                                     PRT
                                                                     FRA
                                                                      NAM
                                                                    BIH
                                                                  SEN CHN   SOM
                                                                          ERI
                                                                         ISL
                                                                       BWAARE
                                                                         ESH
                                                                         YEM
                                                                        TZA
                                                                         MRT
                                                                         QAT
                                                                         SOM
                                                                       ARMYEMMRT
                                                                           TUN
                                                                           SYR
                                                                           QAT
                                                                          UZB
                                                                          PAK
                                                                         JPN
                                                                         KOR
                                                                         KAZ
                                                                         JOR
                                                                         SDN
                                                                        ETH
                                                                        TUR
                                                                         DZA
                                                                       LSO
                                                                         TCD
                                                                          RWA
                                                                           TJK
                                                                         AFG
                                                                         LBY
                                                                       BWA
                                                                         IDN
                                                                       ARM    ALB
                                                                            ESH
                                                                            IDN
                                                                          RWA
                                                                          ISL
                                                                         PNGKAZ
                                                                            ZMB
                                                                            AFG
                                                                          YEM
                                                                          KGZ
                                                                          OMN
                                                                         PAK   GNB
                                                                             MKD
                                                                           DJI
                                                                            TKM
                                                                             PNG
                                                                             BTN
                                                                            KWT
                                                                             NPL
                                                                           MDG GMB
                                                                               MWI
                                                                             HRV
                                                                              FJI
                                                                             SLB
                                                                             ALB
                                                                           EGY     MOZ
                                                                                 SWE
                                                                                  UGA
                                                                                 RUS
                                                                                  LKA
                                                                                ZAR
                                                                               VNM
                                                                                 PHL
                                                                               GNB
                                                                             BTN
                                                                             NPL
                                                                           MDGNGA    GIN
                                                                                   MOZ
                                                                                  UGA
                                                                                PRK
                                                                                  LKA    ZWE
                                                                                       BGR
                                                                                        CMR
                                                                                         TLS
                                                                                          GHACAFCZE      LVA
                                                                                                           BLR                                                                               IRL
                                                                  EST FIN
                                                                        MNG
                                                                      MYS PAK
                                                                          UZB
                                                                        GEO    GMB
                                                                               MWI
                                                                             TZA PHL
                                                                                   MYS      GNQ
                                                                                            BEN
       0




                                   CIV      TGO           BLR
                                                          LKALTU
                                                            BGD GAB AGO
                                                                  UKR
                                                                  LBR
                                                                CZE
                                                                 NGA
                                                                  EST
                                                                  UKR
                                                                CZE
                                                                MWI
                                                               GMB
                                                             LTU     ZMB
                                                                      BFA
                                                                     FRA
                                                                     HUN
                                                                    ROU
                                                                     PRT
                                                                      ESP
                                                                      BFA
                                                                    AGO
                                                                  NPL    YEM
                                                                       IND
                                                                       SWE
                                                                     CHE
                                                                     FRA  EGY
                                                                        TUR
                                                                        TZA
                                                                      CHN
                                                                        AZE
                                                                        MNG
                                                                       RUS
                                                                        ETH
                                                                       ZAF
                                                                       IND  LBY
                                                                           TJK
                                                                         LBYZMB
                                                                          KGZ
                                                                            SAU
                                                                           ESP
                                                                          OMN
                                                                           NOR
                                                                          GBR
                                                                        GEO
                                                                          IRQ
                                                                        TZA
                                                                          KOR
                                                                        AZE
                                                                         SAU  MLI
                                                                               VNM
                                                                              GRC
                                                                             DZA
                                                                              NGA
                                                                            MAR
                                                                            SAU
                                                                          ITA    FIN
                                                                                 MMR
                                                                               VNM   THA
                                                                                    CHE
                                                                                    CHNSLE
                                                                                      PRT
                                                                                       SLE
                                                                                      KHM  UKR
                                                                                         SCG
                                                                                         SVK  SVN
                                                                                            BEN         POL
                                                            POL
                                                          UGA
                                                        DNK         BGR
                                                                  HRV
                                                                    BTNSWE
                                                                     CHE
                                                                     HUN
                                                                     AUTETH
                                                                        MDG
                                                                       ZAF
                                                                        PRK
                                                                        NORSYR
                                                                         COG
                                                                           NOR
                                                                          IRN
                                                                           TUR
                                                                           TUN
                                                                          GBR
                                                                          KOR
                                                                        MLI
                                                                         COG
                                                                         TUN
                                                                         AFG
                                                                         RWA
                                                                          UZB NGA
                                                                               GEO
                                                                             LBN
                                                                              AZE
                                                                              IRL
                                                                              ETH
                                                                             SDN
                                                                           TCD
                                                                           COG
                                                                         ITA     ARM
                                                                                 BWA
                                                                                  LAO
                                                                                LSONAM  BIH
                                                                                        ROU SEN CZE                                                                                                   ZWE
                                                SLE      MOZMMR GNB
                                                                DEU  HUN
                                                                   ZWE       LBN
                                                                            KAZ
                                                                            IDN
                                                                          IRN
                                                                         JPN
                                                                           TUN
                                                                         ITA DZA
                                                                           ESP
                                                                            JOR      BDI
                                                                                     FRA
                                                                                    KEN
                                                                                  LAO    ZWEESTDEU
                                                                                        AGO
                                                                                         SVK
                                                                                                                                −.2




                                     CAF
                                       BEN TLSCMRKHMGIN DNK PHL
                                                           LAO  DEU
                                                              ZAR
                                                               VNMALB
                                                                   LBN
                                                                   ZWE NER
                                                                     FRAMLI
                                                                      MAR ERI
                                                                         ISL
                                                                         KOR
                                                                         BEL SWZ
                                                                            SOM
                                                                             MRT
                                                                            ESH
                                                                            TKM
                                                                             PNG
                                                                            KWT
                                                                          EGY
                                                                          ARE
                                                                         JPN
                                                                        MLI
                                                                      DJI
                                                                       NER    NZL
                                                                            NLD
                                                                           QATFJI
                                                                             SLB     THABIH
                                                                                      MDA
                                                                                        ROU                                                                                                                          MKD
                                                           LVA
                                                           LVA    GRC
                                                                  LBRAUT
                                                                   NZL    UZB
                                                                          ISR
                                                                          IRN        HUN    GNQ
                                                                                           UKR
                                   CIV      TGO KHM
                                           GHA              BGDGAB   AUT
                                                                     PRT
                                                                     AUT
                                                                      AUS
                                                                         DZA
                                                                          GBR
                                                                          UZB
                                                                           SYR
                                                                          IRQ
                                                                           COG  PRK      SCG           LTU
                                                        DNK           MAR
                                                                      AUSISR  MLI
                                                                            MAR  NER
                                                     THA LAO              GBR
                                                                           BEL
                                                                          GBR IRL THA
                                                                              IRL    THA
                                                                                       BGR                                                                                                      LTU
                                                     THA                    NLD
                                                                            NLD                        LTU
                                                             LTU             MKD
                                                                    MKDBEL
                                                                                                                                             −.4




                                                                         MKD
               −20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       THA

                                   −.2                  −.1               0                  .1                .2                                                   −.2                   −.1                 0                .1                    .2
                                                                e( Potato x I^Post| X )                                                                                                               e( Potato x I^Post | X )
                                 (coef = 14.605, se= 5.639, N = 922)                                                                                                (coef =0.140, se = 0.031, N = 790)



                                             (c) Dep var: city population share                                                                                       (d) Dep var: change in city population share

Figure 5: Partial correlation plot for the interaction of potato suitability with the post-1700 indicator
variable. The dependent variable is (a) ln population, (b) population growth, (c) city population
share, and (d) change in the city population share.




                                                                                                                    30
    Table 4: Robustness of the results to the removal of outliers and to different subsamples.
                                                                     Subsamples
                                     Omitting BLR,                                            Excluding     Including
                                      DNK, LVA,    Omitting AUS,           Omitting zero      Western      Canada and
                     Baseline sample  LTU, POL     NZL, THA, PHL            suitability        Europe         USA
                            (1)            (2)           (3)                    (4)              (5)           (6)
                                                       A. Dependent variable: ln Population
Potato x Post              1.364            1.437             1.520            1.880            1.581          1.418
                          (0.306)          (0.426)           (0.284)         (0.583)           (0.262)        (0.314)

Observations               922              887                895                551           825             936

                                                     B. Dependent variable: Population growth
Potato x Post              0.804            0.845             0.799            1.077           0.881           0.847
                          (0.147)          (0.213)           (0.136)          (0.279)         (0.155)         (0.154)

Observations               790              760                767                472           707             802

                                                 C. Dependent variable: City population share
Potato x Post             14.605           12.812         12.744            14.499           11.837           14.848
                          (5.639)          (6.373)        (5.385)           (7.021)         (6.274)           (5.596)

Observations               922              887                895                551           825             936

                                            D. Dependent variable: Change in city population share
Potato x Post              0.140            0.133          0.131            0.120             0.128            0.143
                          (0.031)          (0.047)        (0.030)          (0.045)           (0.037)          (0.031)

Observations                790               760              767              472             707               802
Notes: All regressions control for All Crops x Post, Old World Staples x Post, New World Staples x Post, Elevation x Post,
Ruggedness x Post, country fixed effects and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the country level.




                                                             31
in Table 4. Column (1) reports our baseline estimates with the full sample of observations for

comparison. Column (2) omits the influential Eastern European countries, and column (3) omits

the observations with the largest residuals. These auxiliary estimates show that our baseline results

are not sensitive to these potentially influential observations.

   We now address a number of potential concerns related to our potato suitability measure.

One concern is the large number of zero-suitability countries in our sample. Column (4) reports

estimates with all zero-suitability countries omitted from the sample. Although, this reduces the

sample size significantly, our results remain robust.

   An additional concern with our suitability measure is that many suitable countries are Western

European countries, which experienced the industrial revolution at approximately the same time

potatoes were adopted. In Table 3 we attempted to control for potential determinants of the rise of

Western Europe. Here, we pursue an alternative strategy and simply omit all Western European

countries from our sample.33 Omitting these countries does not affect our estimates.

   Because our identification strategy only applies to regions in which potatoes were not indige-

nous, our baseline sample contains only Old World countries. It is disputed whether potatoes were

cultivated by the indigenous populations north of Mezzo America before their “re-introduction”

by European settlers. Historians have found no evidence that they did, although there are no

widely accepted theories of why the crop did not diffuse into these regions. Therefore, out of inter-

est, we expand our sample to include the countries north of Mezzo America, namely Canada and

the United States.34 The estimates are shown in column (6). They are very similar to the baseline

estimates both in magnitude and statistical significance. These estimates should be interpreted

cautiously, since potatoes may have already existed in America and Canada. Further, the native

populations of the Americas suffered large negative population shocks due to diseases introduced

by Europeans


D. Magnitudes of the Estimates

It is well known that after 1700 the world experienced an unprecedented increase in the growth of

population and urbanization. This well established fact can be seen in Figure 1, which shows the

evolution of World population and urbanization between 1000 and 1900. The figure shows that
  33 The  Western European countries include: Belgium, Denmark, Germany, France, Finland, Great Britain, Ireland,
Italy, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland.
   34 Because FAO data are unavailable for Greenland, it is not included in the larger sample.




                                                       32
relative to the pre-1700 period, after 1700 there is an increase in both the level and the growth rate

of population and urbanization. These facts are summarized for the Old World in the first three

rows of Table 5. The first row reports averages for the pre-1700 period (1000–1700), the second

row reports averages for the post-1700 period (1700–1900), and the third row reports the difference

between the two periods. The table confirms that after 1700, Old World countries witnessed a

significant increase in average population, population growth, urbanization, and the rate of change

of urbanization.

   As a way to illustrate the magnitude of our estimated effects of potatoes, we calculate how

much of the observed differences between the pre- and post-adoption periods can be attributed

to the introduction of the potato. On average, approximately 7.78% of a country’s land is suitable

for potato cultivation according to the definition used in this study. This is the fraction of land

that could potentially be used to grow potatoes after 1700. Prior to 1700, since potatoes were

not yet introduced, no Old World country was able to grow potatoes and therefore this number

was 0%. The introduction of potatoes, therefore, increased the average amount of land that could

potentially be used for potato cultivation from 0 to 7.78%.

   Our DD estimates provide a measure of the impact of being able to cultivate potatoes on

population and urbanization after 1700. We use our baseline estimates of the effect of potatoes

on each outcome, reported in columns (1) and (7) of Table 3. These are reproduced in the fourth

row of Table 5. Because the coefficients report the estimated impact on the relevant outcome from

a one unit (i.e., 100%) increase in a country’s share of land suitable for potatoes, the average gain

to an Old World country from the introduction of potatoes is given by the coefficient multiplied by

the average increase in suitability, which is 7.78% or 0.0778. These effects are reported in the sixth

row of Table 5.

   The final row of the table reports how much of the difference between the pre- and post-1700

periods can be attributed to the introduction of the potato. This is calculated as the difference

between the two periods that is explained by potatoes (reported in row 6) divided by the observed

difference between the two periods (reported in row 3). Doing this calculation for each of our four

outcome measures, we find that the availability of potatoes can explain: 12% of the increase in

population, 22% of the increase in population growth rate, 47% of the increase in urbanization,

and 50% of the increase in urbanization growth.

   While these effects are large, they are not as large as they may seem at first glance. Take for


                                                 33
                       Table 5: Calculating the global effects of the introduction of potatoes.
                                                                                                           Outcomes
                                                                                                                 City population        Change in city
                                                                           ln Population     Population growth        share            population share
(1)    Pre-adoption average: 1000-1700                                          -0.52               0.14                2.10               0.00021
(2)    Post-adoptoin average: 1800-1900                                         0.36                0.42                4.53               0.02193
(3)    Difference between two periods: (2) -(1)                                 0.88                0.29                2.43               0.02171


(4)    Estimated effect of being 100% suitable for potatoes                     1.364              0.804               14.605                0.140
(5)    Average suitability for potatoes                                         0.078              0.078                0.078                0.078
(6)    Average effect of potato suitability: (4) x (5)                          0.106              0.063                1.138                0.011


(7) Percent of change explained by potatoes: (6)/(3) x 100                     12.07%              21.93%              46.82%                50.25%
Notes : The first row of the table reports the average outcome for all countries in each time period between 1000 and 1700. The second row reports the
same averages for the time periods after 1700 (i.e., 1800 and 1900). The difference between the two averages is reported in row 3. The fourth row
reports the baseline regression coefficients, which is for the effect of having 100% of land suitabile for potatoes. The fifth row reports the average
suitability across countries. The sixth row reports the impact from the introduction of the potato, the product of the fourth and fifth row. The final row
reports the percentage of the total difference between the pre- and post-1700 periods that is explained by the introduction of potatoes. This is equal to
row 6 divided by row 3 multiplied by 100.




example our figure of 22% for population growth. This does not mean that 22% of the total increase

in population growth between 1000 and 1900 is explained by potatoes. Nor does it mean that

22% of the increase in population growth after 1700 is explained by potatoes. The statement is

that after 1700 (i.e., 1700–1900), relative to the period before 1700 (i.e., 1000–1700), there was an

increase in the average rate of population growth; it is 22% of this difference that is explained by

the introduction of the potato.


E. Heterogeneous Effects

Until this point, we have been focused on the average effect of potatoes among Old World coun-

tries. The final exercise of the paper is to consider heterogeneity, and examine whether the effects

of the potato differ systematically depending on certain characteristics.

      We first consider the possibility that global trade may have been an important factor that was

complementary to potato adoption. We test this possibility by using a country’s average distance

from an ice-free coast as a measure of its natural openness to overseas trade. We then include an in-

teraction between this measure and Potatoi × ItPost in our baseline estimating equation.35 Estimates

are reported Panel A of Table 6. The estimated effects are mixed. In the population regressions the

triple interactions are positive and in the urbanization regressions they are negative. This indicates

that potatoes had a smaller effect on population growth in naturally open countries, but a larger

effect on urbanization in more open countries.
 35 We    also control for the interaction of distance from the coast with the post-1700 indicator variable.



                                                                           34
   Although seemingly counter-intuitive, there is a straight-forward explanation for the opposite

differential effects from trade openness. First, consider population. The finding that the effects

of local agricultural productivity shocks are reduced when an area is more integrated is a well

established prediction of trade models. As a country becomes more integrated it becomes less

responsive to domestic shocks and more responsive to foreign shocks. Donaldson (2008) provides

a trade model applied to colonial India that highlights this effect of integration. He also provides

evidence that increased integration made domestic prices less responsive to local weather shocks.

Next, consider urbanization. If cities located in countries that were more engaged in overseas trade

were more dynamic and had greater economic opportunities for workers, then the surplus labor

generated from potato cultivation would have moved more extensively, and more quickly, into

cities located in countries more open to trade. It is important to note, however, that the estimates

should be interpreted cautiously, and as suggestive evidence only, since three of the coefficients

are insignificant.

   We also explore the possibility that labor was pulled into cities by growing labor demand (e.g.,

from industrialization) by examining whether a high initial demand for urban labor increased the

benefits of potatoes. It is possible that regions with more developed cities and greater opportuni-

ties, exerted a greater pull on labor in the country side, resulting in faster urbanization growth after

the adoption of potatoes. We test for this by taking the urbanization rate in 1700 as an admittedly

imperfect proxy for pre-existing urban labor demand. We then test whether the benefits from

potatoes were greater for countries with a higher urbanization rate in 1700. The estimates are

reported in Panel B of Table 6.36 Across the four outcomes of interest, we do not observe any

consistent pattern. Three of the four coefficients are negative, and none are statistically significant.

The lack of a robust positive coefficient for the triple interaction suggests that there is no evidence

that potatoes had a larger effect in countries that were more urban at the time of adoption.

   Finally, we explore whether the effects of potato adoption differed depending on the ability of

the elites to capture the returns of labor. If the increase in agricultural productivity arising from

the introduction of potatoes accrued primarily to a small group of elites, rather than to labor more

generally, then this may cause potatoes to have a smaller positive impact on aggregate population

growth and urbanization. We proxy for the ability of elites to capture the benefits of potatoes
 36 It is unclear whether one would also expect a heterogenous effect for population growth. However, for completeness

we also report estimates with population and population growth as the dependent variable.




                                                         35
                      Table 6: Checking for heterogeneous effects of potato adoption.
                                                                                    Dependent variables
                                                            (1)                    (2)                 (3)                (4)
                                                                                                 City population     Change in city
                                                       ln Population        Population growth         share         population share
                                       Panel A. Differential effects by access to international markets
  Potato x Post                                            0.710                  0.691               19.545              0.151
                                                          (0.406)                (0.184)              (6.941)            (0.046)

  Potato x Distance to ice free coast x Post              0.0023                0.00038              -0.018            -0.00008
                                                         (0.0011)              (0.00040)             (0.013)           (0.00008)

  Observations                                             922                    790                  922                790

                                           Panel B. Differential effects by pre-1700 urbanization
  Potato x Post                                           1.438                  0.913               18.816               0.137
                                                         (0.301)                (0.156)              (5.733)             (0.045)

  Potato x City share in 1700 x Post                      -0.027                 -0.035              -1.671               0.004
                                                          (0.052)                (0.022)             (1.280)             (0.007)

  Observations                                             922                    790                  922                790

     Panel C. Differential effects by elite capture, measured by an indicator variable for legal serfdom or domestic slavery in 1700
  Potato x Post                                           1.285                0.573                   9.435               0.120
                                                         (0.297)              (0.159)                 (9.482)             (0.049)

  Potato x Serfdom or slavery in 1700 x Post              -0.139                  0.302                7.953              0.020
                                                          (0.407)                (0.214)             (10.188)            (0.062)

  Observations                                          922                  790                  922                  790
  Notes : All regressions control for All Crops x Post, Old World Staples x Post, New World Staples x Post, Elevation x Post,
  Ruggedness x Post, country fixed effects and year fixed effects. Regressions also control for Distance to ice free coast x Post in
  Panel A, City share in 1700 x Post in Panel B, and Serfdom or slavery in 1700 x Post in Panel C. Standard errors are clustered at
  the country level (132 clusters).




with an indicator variable that equals one if there is any evidence from ethnographic and historical

sources that either domestic slavery or serfdom was legal in 1700. As above, we then include the

interaction of this indicator variable with Potatoi × ItPost in our estimating equation. A negative

coefficient indicates that the benefits of potatoes are greater in regions where the elites are weaker.

The estimates, reported in Panel C of Table 6, do not provide evidence of this being the case.

Rather than being negative, three of the four coefficients are positive, although none are significant.

In sum, we fail to find evidence that the benefits of potatoes systematically vary with the rent-

capturing power of the elites.




                                                                       36
6. Conclusions

We have estimated the effect of the introduction of the potato on Old World population growth and

urbanization. The nutritional and caloric superiority of the potato, and its diffusion from the New

World to the Old, allows us to estimate causal effects using a difference-in-differences estimation

strategy. According to our most conservative estimates, the introduction of the potato explains

22% of the observed post-1700 increase in population growth. These results show that food and

nutrition matter. By increasing the nutritional carrying capacity of land they can have large effects

on population.

   To the extent that urbanization serves as a measure of the shift from rural agriculture to urban

manufacturing, our estimates also provide historic evidence of the importance of agricultural

productivity for economic development. According to our estimates, the introduction of the potato

explains 47% of the post-1700 increase in the average urbanization rate. Our estimates suggest

that increased agricultural productivity can play a significant part in promoting the rise of urban

centers, industry, and economic development.



References

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson, “Reversal of Fortune: Geography
  and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution,” Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 117 (2002), 1231–1294.

———, “The Rise of Europe: Atlantic Trade, Institutional Change and Economic Growth,” Ameri-
 can Economic Review, 95 (2005), 546–579.

Bairoch, Paul, Cities and Economic Development: From the Dawn of History to the Present (University
  of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1988).

Baten, Jörg, and John E. Murray, “Heights of Men and Women in 19th-Century Bavaria: Economic,
  Nutritional, and Disease Influences,” Explorations in Economic History, 37 (2000), 351–369.

Blayo, Yves, “La Mortalité en France de 1740 a 1829,” Population (French Edition), 30 (1975), 123–142.

Burkill, I.H., A Dictionary of the Economic Products of the Malay Peninsula (Crown Agents for the
  Colonies, London, 1935).

Chandler, Tertius, Four Thousand Years of Urban Growth: An Historical Census (The Edwin Meller
  Press, Lewiston, U.S.A., 1987).

Connell, K.H., “The History of the Potato,” Economic History Review, 3 (1951), 388–395.

———, “The Potato in Ireland,” Past and Present, 23 (1962), 57–71.

Cullen, L.M., “Irish History Without the Potato,” Past and Present, 40 (1968), 72–83.

                                                 37
Cutler, David M., Your Money or Your Life (Oxford University Press, New York, 2004).

Cutler, David M., Angus Deaton, and Adriana Lleras-Muney, “The Role of Public Health Improve-
 ments in Health Advances: The Twentieth-Century United States,” Demography, 42 (2005), 1–22.

———, “The Determinants of Mortality,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20 (2006), 97–120.

Davidson, Stanley, and R. Passmore, Human Nutrition and Dietetics (Churchill Livingstone, Balti-
 more, 1965).

Davidson, Stanley, R. Passmore, J.F. Brock, and A.S. Truswell, Human Nutrition and Dietetics
 (Churchill Livingstone, New York, 1975).

DeLong, J. Bradford, and Andrei Shleifer, “Princes and Merchants: City Growth Before the Indus-
 trial Revolution,” Journal of Law and Economics, 36 (1993), 671–702.

Donaldson, Dave, “Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation Infrastructure,”
 (2008), mimeo, London School of Economics.

Fogel, Robert W., “Nutrition and the Decline in Mortality since 1700: Some Preliminary Findings,”
  Working Paper 1402, NBER (1984).

———, “Economic Growth, Population Theory, and Physiology: The Bearing of Long-Term Pro-
 cesses on the Making of Economic Policy,” American Economic Review, 84 (1994), 369–395.

———, “New Findings on Secular Trends in Nutrition and Mortality: Some Implications for
 Population Theory,” in Mark R. Rosenzweig and Oded Stark, eds., Handbook of Population and
 Family Economics (Elsevier Science, North Holland, Charlottesville, 1997), 433Ű–481.

———, The Escape from Hunger and Premature Death, 1700-2100 (Cambridge University Press, New
 York, 2004).

Galor, Oded, and David N. Weil, “Population, Technology and Growth: From Malthusian Stagna-
 tion to the Demographic Transition and Beyond,” American Economic Review, 90 (2000), 806–828.

Hather, Jon, and Patrick V. Kirch, “Prehistoric Sweet Potato (Ipomoea Batatas) from Mangaia
 Island, Central Polynesia,” Antiquity, 65 (1991), 887–893.

Hughes, R.E., “Scurvy,” in Kenneth F. Kiple, ed., The Cambridge World History of Food, Volume II
 (Cambridge University Press, New York, 2000), 988–1000.

Ingram, John Kells, A History of Slavery and Serfdom (Adam and Charles Black, London, 1895).

Jones, Charles, “Population and Ideas: A Theory of Endogenous Growth,” in Philippe Aghion,
  Roman Frydman, Joseph Stiglitz, and Michael Woodford, eds., Knowledge, Information, and Ex-
  pectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund S. Phelps (Princeton University Press,
  Princeton, 2003), 498–521.

Jones, Eric L., The European Miracle: Environments, Economies, and Geopolitics in the History of Europe
  and Asia (Cambridge University Press, New York, 1981).

Landes, David S., The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some are so Rich and Some so Poor (W.W.
  Norton & Company, New York, 1998).

Langer, William L., “Europe’s Initial Population Explosion,” American Historical Review, 69 (1963),
  1–17.


                                                  38
———, An Encyclopedia of World History, Fifth Edition (Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, 1972).

———, “American Foods and Europe’s Population Growth,” Journal of Social History, 8 (1975),
 51–66.

Lee, James, “Food Supply and Population Growth in Southwest China, 1250–1850,” Journal of Asian
  Studies, 41 (1982), 711–746.

Livi-Bacci, Massimo, Population and Nutrition: An Essay on European Demographic History (Cam-
  bridge University Press, Cambridge, 1991).

Maddison, Angus, Dynamic Forces in Capitalist Development (Oxford University Press, Oxford,
 1991).

———, The World Economy: A Millenia Perspective (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
 Development, Paris, 2001).

———, The World Economy: Historical Statistics (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
 Development, Paris, 2003).

McEvedy, Colin, and Richard Jones, Atlas of World Population History (Penguin Books, New York,
 1978).

McKeown, Thomas, The Modern Rise of Population (Academic Press, New York, 1976).

McNeill, Wiliam H., “The Introduction of the Potato into Ireland,” Journal of Modern History, 21.

———, “How the Potato Changed the World’s History,” Social Research, 66 (1999), 67–83.

Messer, Ellen, “Maize,” in Kenneth F. Kiple and Kriemhild Coneè Ornelas, eds., The Cambridge
 History of World Food, Volume I (Cambridge University Press, New York, 2000a), 97–112.

———, “Potatoes,” in Kenneth F. Kiple and Kriemhild Coneè Ornelas, eds., The Cambridge History
 of World Food, Volume I (Cambridge University Press, New York, 2000b), 187–201.

Mitchell, B.R., International Historical Statistics: Africa, Asia and Oceania, 1750-1993 (Palgrave
 MacMillan, London, 1998).

———, International Historical Statistics: Europe (Palgrave MacMillan, London, 2003).

Modelski, George, World Cities: -3000 to 2000 (Faros, Washington, D.C., 2003).

Mokyr, Joel, “Irish History with the Potato,” Irish Economic and Social History, 8 (1981), 8–29.

Murdock, George Peter, Ethnographic Atlas (University of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh, 1967).

Nunn, Nathan, “The Long-Term Effects of Africa’s Slave Trades,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 123 (2008), 139–176.

Nunn, Nathan, and Diego Puga, “Ruggedness: The Blessing of Bad Geography in Africa,” (2007),
 mimeo.

O’Brien, Patricia J., “Sweet Potatoes and Yams,” in Kenneth F. Kiple and Kriemhild Coneè Ornelas,
  eds., The Cambridge History of World Food, Volume I (Cambridge University Press, New York,
  2000), 207–218.




                                                  39
Pandey, S.K., and S.K. Kaushik, “Origin, Evolution, History and Spread of Potato,” in S.M. Paul
  Khurana, J.S. Minhas, and S.K. Pandey, eds., The Potato: Production and Utilization in Sub-Tropics
  (Mehta, New Delhi, 2003).

Parker, Geoffrey, Cambridge Illustrated History of Warfare (Cambridge University Press, London,
  2000).

Preston, Samuel H., “The Changing Relation Between Mortality and Level of Economic Develop-
  ment,” Population Studies, 29 (1975), 231–248.

———, “Causes and Consequences of Mortality Declines in Less Developed Countries during
 the 20th Century,” in Richard A. Easterlin, ed., Population and Economic Change in Developing
 Countries (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1980), 289–360.

———, “American Longevity: Past, Present, and Future,” (1996), mimeo, Syracuse University.

Reader, John, Propitious Esculent: The Potato in World History (William Heinemann, London, 2008).

Russell, J.C., British Medieval Population (University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, 1948).

Salaman, Redcliffe, The History and Social Influence of the Potato (Cambridge University Press,
  Cambridge, 1949).

Stearns, Peter, The Industrial Revolution in World History, Third Edition (Westview Press, Boulder,
  Colorado, 2007).

Tiffin, Richard, and Xavier Irz, “Is Agriculture the Engine of Growth?” Agricultural Economics, 35
  (2006), 79–89.

Timmer, Peter, “The Turnip, the New Husbandry, and the English Agricultural Revolution,” Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 83 (1969), 375–395.

U.S. Department of Agriculture, USDA National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference, Release 20
  (U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Washington, D.C., 2007).

Voigtländer, Nico, and Hans-Joachim Voth, “Why England? Demographic Factors, Structural
  Change and Physical Capital Accumulation during the Industrial Revolution,” Journal of Eco-
  nomic Growth, 11 (2006), 319–361.

Wrigley, E.A., R.S. Davies, J.E. Oeppen, and R.S. Schofield, English Population History from Family
 Reconstitution, 1580–1837 (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1997).

Young, Arthur, The Farmer’s Tour through the East of England, Volume 4 (W. Strahan, London, 1771).



A. Data Appendix

Crop suitability measures

Data on the suitability of climates for growing different crops are from the FAO’s Global Agro-

Ecological Zones (GAEZ) 2000 database (http://fao.org/Ag/AGL/agll/gaez/index.htm). We use

the country level measures that have constructed by the FAO for our country-level regressions.

                                                40
   We construct a measure of the average suitability of each country’s neighbors by first identify-

ing, for each country, all countries that share a border. We then construct an average measure of

suitability, weighted by land area. For islands, their neighbor is effectively the ocean, where one

cannot cultivate potatoes. We therefore assign zero suitability for islands. All results using the

neighbors’ potato suitability measure are completely robust to simply omitting islands from the

analysis.


Population and urbanization

Country level population data are from McEvedy and Jones (1978). Data on the populations of

cities with more than 20,000 inhabitants are from Chandler (1987), Bairoch (1988), and Modelski

(2003).


Geographic characteristics

A country’s average elevation, average ruggedness, and average distance from an ice-free coast

are taken from Nunn and Puga (2007). A country’s average elevation is measured in meters.

Ruggedness is the average uphill slope of a country’s land area. A country’s average distance from

an ice-free coast is measured in kilometers. See Nunn and Puga (2007) for details of measurement

and the underlying data sources.


Other control variables

The number of slaves taken from a country during the Indian Ocean, Red Sea, trans-Saharan,

and trans-Atlantic slave trades each century from 1400 to 1900 is taken from Nunn (2008). Our

control variable for slave exports is the natural log of the number of slaves exported (measured in

millions of people). When we take the natural log, countries with zero slaves exported are treated

as exporting one slave.

   Our control for a history of Roman rule is an indicator variable that equals one if a country was

a part of the Roman Empire. This measure is taken from Acemoglu et al. (2005).

   We construct an indicator variable that equals one if there is evidence of either legal serfdom

or domestic slavery in a country in 1700. For information on the prevalence of domestic slavery

we rely on data from George Peter Murdock’s (1967) Ethnographic Atlas. Using the location data

provided for the 1,267 ethnic groups in the Atlas, we match each ethnic group to a modern country.

                                                41
We then construct an indicator variable if there is evidence that any of the ethnic groups have

domestic slavery, whether it is hereditary or otherwise. We also assign a value of one to the variable

if there is evidence of serfdom in 1700. This information is from Ingram (1895).


City-level variables

Data on the populations of cities with more than 20,000 inhabitants are from Chandler (1987),

Bairoch (1988) and Modelski (2003). The locations of cities were identified using the global

gazetteer Geonames, which is accessible at: www.geonames.org.

   Data on the suitability of the climate of a city for growing various crops are from the FAO’s

Global Agro-Ecological Zones (GAEZ) 2002 database. The data are publicly available and can be

downloaded from: http://www.iiasa.ac.at/Research/LUC/SAEZ/index.html. We use their un-

derlying grid-cell data, which are available as GIS raster files. City level suitability is defined as

the suitability of grid-cells within a 100 kilometer radius of the city.

   The underlying data used to construct city-level measures of ruggedness are from the FAO’s

Terrastat 2002 data compilation. The data are originally from the USGS GPOTO 30 elevation grid,

which is the same source used by Nunn and Puga (2007) to construct a country-level measure

of terrain ruggedness. Ruggedness is measured as the average uphill slope of land within a 100

kilometer radius of the city. Data used to construct each city’s average elevation (measured in

meters) is from Global Mapping International’s Seamless Digital Chart of the World Base Map

(DCW), version 3.2.




                                                   42
                                                Table A1: Correlations with potato suitability.

                                                                                                                 Potato suitability




                                  Other suitability measures
                                                               Neighbors' potato suitability                          0.661

                                                               All crops suitability                                  0.577

                                                               Old World staple crops suitability                     0.712

                                                               New World staple crops suitability                     0.601
                                  Geography




                                                               Average elevation                                      -0.216

                                                               Average ruggedness                                     -0.058

                            Notes : The table reports pairwise correlation coefficients for the 132
                            Old World countries in the sample.




                                                                    Table A2: Summary statistics.

                                                                                       Country level data                             City level data
                                                                             Obs             Mean       Std. error           Obs          Mean          Std. error
A. Demographic variables
  ln Population                                                              922            -0.265          (1.808)           885         -2.669         (0.920)
  Population growth                                                          790             0.231          (0.272)           649         0.331          (0.650)
  City population share                                                      922             2.794          (0.593)
  Change in city population share                                            790             0.007          (0.049)
B. Agricultural suitability variables
  Potato suitability                                                         922             0.078          (0.144)           885         0.278          (0.292)
  All crops suitability                                                      922             0.290          (0.236)           885         0.636          (0.300)
  Old World staple crops suitability                                         922             0.211          (0.206)           885         0.433          (0.316)
  New World staple crops suitability                                         922             0.170          (0.175)           885         0.362          (0.292)
  Neighbors' potato suitability                                              922             0.063          (0.106)
C. Geography variables
  Average elevation                                                          922           613.130      (563.060)             885        812.851         (0.708)
  Average ruggedness                                                         922             3.404          (0.329)           885        15.908          (0.990)
  Average distance from ice-free coast                                       922           380.556      (431.544)
D. Other variables
  Existence of serfdom or slavery in 1700                                    922             0.161          (0.350)
  City population share in 1700                                              922             2.229          (0.410)
  Population growth 1000-1400                                                922             0.098          (0.078)
  Part of the Roman Empire                                                   922             0.061          (0.239)
  ln Total slave exports                            922        -14.294       (4.332)
Notes : The table reports summary statistics for the variables used in the analysis. An observation is either a country and time
period or a city and time period.




                                                                                           43
  Table A3: Flexible equation estimates for potato suitability and all crops suitability.
                                                                                   Dependent Variable
                                                           (1)                   (2)                  (3)                  (4)
                                                                                                City population       Change in city
                                                     ln Population       Population growth           share           population share
Potato x 1400                                            0.261                                       10.960
                                                        (0.157)                                     (8.371)


Potato x 1500                                            0.437                 0.117                 5.118                 -0.085
                                                        (0.230)               (0.065)               (2.994)               (0.083)


Potato x 1600                                            0.573                 0.076                 1.118                 -0.067
                                                        (0.235)               (0.079)               (4.893)               (0.034)


Potato x 1700                                            0.497                 -0.135                3.941                 0.001
                                                        (0.268)               (0.073)               (3.286)               (0.044)


Potato x 1800                                            1.293                 0.737                 5.123                 -0.015
                                                        (0.334)               (0.106)               (2.903)               (0.043)


Potato x 1900                                            2.380                 1.027                 32.484                0.247
                                                        (0.414)               (0.117)               (5.927)               (0.058)


All Crops x 1400                                         0.522                                       0.555
                                                        (0.117)                                     (1.654)


All Crops x 1500                                         0.653                 0.030                 0.567                 0.000
                                                        (0.138)               (0.027)               (1.696)               (0.013)


All Crops x 1600                                         0.626                 -0.128                3.861                 0.033
                                                        (0.131)               (0.067)               (2.698)               (0.020)


All Crops x 1700                                         0.826                 0.098                 1.801                 -0.021
                                                        (0.158)               (0.051)               (1.751)               (0.021)


All Crops x 1800                                         0.792                 -0.135                1.055                 -0.008
                                                        (0.191)               (0.055)               (1.756)               (0.012)


All Crops x 1900                                         0.567                 -0.327                -3.398                -0.045
                                                        (0.255)               (0.125)               (2.529)               (0.019)


F-test for Potato x 1800 = Potato x 1900 =0              34.44                 50.56                 16.93                 19.35


Observations                                               922                   790                   922                   790
Notes : All regressions include country fixed effects and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the country level.




                                                                  44
