                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     SEAM BIAS, MULTIPLE-STATE, MULTIPLE-SPELL DURATION MODELS AND
          THE EMPLOYMENT DYNAMICS OF DISADVANTAGED WOMEN

                                             John C. Ham
                                            Xianghong Li
                                         Lara Shore-Sheppard

                                         Working Paper 15151
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15151


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2009




This paper was previously circulated under the title “Analyzing Movements over Time in Employment
Status and Welfare Participation while Controlling for Seam Bias using the SIPP.” This work is supported
by the NSF. We are grateful for comments received at the IRP Summer Research Workshop “Current
Research on the Low-Income Population,” Madison, WI, June 19-22, 2006, as well as seminars at
many universities and branches of the Federal Reserve Bank. We are particularly grateful to Geert
Ridder, Melvin Stephens, Lowell Taylor and Tiemen Woutersen for suggestions that significantly
improved the paper. Sandra Black, Mary Daly, Jose Lopez, Robert Moffitt, Bruce Meyer and Soohyung
Lee also made very helpful remarks on an earlier draft. Eileen Kopchik provided, as usual, outstanding
programming in deciphering the SIPP. Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations
in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science
Foundation. We are responsible for any errors. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by John C. Ham, Xianghong Li, and Lara Shore-Sheppard. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Seam Bias, Multiple-State, Multiple-Spell Duration Models and the Employment Dynamics
of Disadvantaged Women
John C. Ham, Xianghong Li, and Lara Shore-Sheppard
NBER Working Paper No. 15151
July 2009
JEL No. C41,C42,I38,J22

                                              ABSTRACT

Panel surveys generally suffer from “seam bias”--too few transitions observed within reference periods
and too many reported between interviews. Seam bias is likely to affect duration models severely since
both the start date and the end date of a spell may be misreported. In this paper we examine the employment
dynamics of disadvantaged single mothers in the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP)
while correcting for seam bias in reported employment status. We develop parametric misreporting
models for use in multi-state, multi-spell duration analysis; the models are identified if misreporting
parameters are the same for fresh and left-censored spells of the same type. We extend these models
to allow misreporting to depend on individual characteristics and for a certain fraction of the sample
never to misreport. These extensions are informative about misreporting, but do not affect estimates
of the hazard functions. We compare our results to two approaches used previously: i) using only data
on the last month of reference periods and ii) adding a dummy variable for the last month of the reference
periods. We find that there are important differences between our estimates and those obtained from
ii), and very important differences between our estimates and those obtained from i). Finally, we also
consider three alternative models of misreporting and are able to reject them based on aggregates of
our micro data.


John C. Ham                                          Lara Shore-Sheppard
University of Maryland                               Department of Economics
Department of Economics                              Williams College
3105 Tydings Hall                                    South Academic Building
College Park, MD 20742                               24 Hopkins Hall Drive
johnham@usc.edu                                      Williamstown, MA 01267
                                                     and NBER
Xianghong Li                                         lshore@williams.edu
Department of Economics
Vari Hall 1068, 4700 Keele St
Toronto, ON, M3J 1P3, Canada
xli@econ.yorku.ca
1.      Introduction

        Panel surveys generally suffer from “seam bias.” This refers to the fact that transitions or
changes in status within reference periods are underreported while too many transitions or changes
are reported as occurring between interviews. To the best of our knowledge, this effect was noted
first by Czajka (1983) for benefit receipt in the U.S. Income Survey Development Program. Since
then seam effects have been documented for various longitudinal surveys, e.g. the Current
Population Survey, the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, the Canadian Survey of Labour and
Income Dynamics, the European Community Household Panel Survey, the British Household Panel
Survey, the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), and banking data.1 Lemaitre (1992)
concludes that all current longitudinal surveys appear to be affected by seam problems, regardless of
differences in the length of recall periods or other design features. Seam bias poses an important
problem for the SIPP, which was intended to provide accurate reporting of labor force and program
participation dynamics at the monthly level. The existence of seam bias plausibly would be most
serious for estimating duration models, since it affects the timing of transitions. The Census Bureau,
which collects the SIPP, has long recognized this problem and has attempted to reduce it in the SIPP,
most recently by incorporating “dependent interviewing” procedures in the 2004 panel of the survey.
Notwithstanding the adoption of such procedures, which explicitly link the wording of current
interview questions to information provided in the preceding interview, seam bias continues to be a
substantial problem in the SIPP (Moore 2008).
        Pischke (1995) proposes a method for dealing with seam bias in the SIPP when using data
on continuous variables such as income. Here we address the issues that occur with duration models
when seam bias is present; the extension to other limited dependent variable models is
straightforward. Specifically, we allow for seam bias when estimating monthly discrete time duration
models to analyze the employment dynamics of single mothers with a high school education or less, a
group that has been the focus of much recent policy. We estimate monthly transition rates into and
out of employment for the period 1986-1995, prior to the replacement of Aid to Families with
Dependent Children (AFDC) with Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF). Transitions
into and out of employment are of crucial importance to policymakers, as they determine
unemployment rates, poverty rates and the overall well-being of low-income individuals. The SIPP is
particularly well-suited to estimate such models because of its detailed monthly information on
employment and program participation.



1See Moore (2008) for a summary of seam bias research. See Chakravarty and Sarkar (1999) for information
about seam bias in banking data.



                                                    2
        With the exception of studies focusing on job training outcomes (see, for example, Ham and
LaLonde (1996) and Eberwein, Ham and LaLonde (1997) who analyze employment dynamics using
data from the National Supported Work and Job Training Partnership Act experiments, respectively)
there have been relatively few studies of employment dynamics for less-educated women. (An
exception is Aaronson and Pingle 2006, who study employment dynamics among single mothers in
the 1990-2001 SIPP panels.) On the other hand, welfare dynamics for less-educated women have
been examined in numerous studies, e.g. Blank and Ruggles (1996), Acs, Philips, and Nelson (2003)
and Ribar (2005). Note that employment dynamics and welfare dynamics will differ, as single
mothers can work and collect welfare simultaneously, and can certainly be out of employment and
off welfare simultaneously. A clear understanding of employment dynamics is essential for policy; for
example policy makers are likely to be very interested in the determinants of employment duration,
since short employment spells prevent individuals from acquiring on-the-job human capital. Further,
as we show below, our results have important implications for the debate over whether transitions
into non-employment are pro-cyclical (Elsby, Michaels, and Solon 2009 and Shimer 2005a, 2005b).
        Most of the welfare duration studies have estimated some form of discrete time hazard
models using the SIPP or other panel surveys.2 Consequently, these studies have been forced to
confront the seam bias problem. The approaches used in the literature to address this problem can
be grouped into three types. One approach is to use the monthly data and to include a dummy
variable for the last month of the reference period in addition to an indicator variable for each
reference period (known as a “wave” in the SIPP). Blank and Ruggles (1996) use this approach in
their study of entry into and exit from welfare and Food Stamps using the 1986 and 1987 SIPP
panels. Fitzgerald (2004) uses a similar approach in his study of welfare exits using the 1986, 1988,
1990, and 1992 SIPP panels. A second approach involves collapsing the monthly data into data by
wave and setting participation and employment indicator variables to be 1 if respondents were
employed or on welfare in a sub-period of a wave. Acs, Philips, and Nelson (2003) use the 1990 and
1996 SIPP panels to focus on welfare entry, setting welfare participation to be 1 for a wave if
participation was reported in at least two of the four months in a wave, and zero otherwise. Ribar
(2005) uses the 1992 and 1993 panels of the SIPP to examine welfare entry and exit, setting
participation equal to one for a wave if participation was reported for at least one month in the wave,
and zero otherwise. This redefines the concept of participation and will result in the loss of short
spells. To see this, note that an individual could have a two-month spell of nonparticipation in a
reference period but this spell would not be counted in the analysis. This approach will be especially


2For example Gittleman (2001) and Hofferth, Stanhope, and Harris (2002) use data from the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics (PSID) to estimate dynamic models of welfare exit or entry.



                                                    3
problematic if used in modeling employment dynamics, since employment spells are often quite short
for the disadvantaged population.
         Another very common solution to the seam bias problem in the SIPP data is to use only the
last month observation from each wave, dropping the three other months. (For example, Grogger
2004, Ham and Shore-Sheppard 2005b, and Aaronson and Pingle 2006 use this approach.) Two
reasons are given for using the last month data. First, most transitions take place between waves, i.e.
in the last month. However, as we show in Section 3, this reason ignores the fact that one loses
almost one half of fresh spells (i.e. those starting after the beginning of the sample) by using only the
last month data. Further, we show below that information on the timing of transitions that occur in
months other than the last month is lost, potentially introducing severe distortions to the true
employment and welfare participation patterns. Second, it is argued that using only the last month is
preferable because many of the transitions in months other than the last month are likely to be due
to imputation.3 However, for the time period we consider (1986-1993 SIPP panels), we find that
about 80% of the transitions in the imputed data are reported to have occurred in the last (seam)
month, while 50% of the transitions in the non-imputed data are reported to have taken place in the
last month.
         We propose a parametric approach to correct for seam bias in a duration model setting and
use maximum likelihood to estimate the model. Our approach is most similar in spirit to that used by
Pischke (1995) for continuous variables. We first develop a monthly discrete time duration model
with parameters representing the propensity to under-report transitions in each of the first three
months of the reference period by allocating them to the last month of the previous wave. (This
form of misreporting will occur if respondents simply replace their actual employment status in the
first three months of a wave with their month 4 employment status.) This form of misreporting is
consistent with the findings of previous researchers on seam bias, including Goudreau, Oberheu and
Vaughan 1984, who link AFDC income reporting in the Income Survey Development Program data
to administrative records. We show that this model is identified without restricting the form of the
duration dependence for fresh spells, but that this is not true for left-censored spells (i.e. spells which
are in progress at the start of the sample). Thus we assume that left-censored employment (non-
employment) spells and fresh employment (non-employment) spells share the same misreporting
parameters when we estimate a multiple-state, multiple-spell model of employment dynamics. Our



3 For example, Grogger (2004, p.674) states “... some of the within-wave transitions that exist are due to the
SIPP imputation procedures rather than changes in behavior (Westat 2001). Since most transitions are
reported to occur between waves, I only make use of data from month 4 of each wave.”




                                                      4
models explicitly allow for the fact that if seam bias causes the end month of a spell to be
mismeasured, it also causes the start month of the next spell to be mismeasured.
        Next we consider three richer misreporting models to shed light on the underlying causes of
seam effects. First, we consider the case where the misreporting probability varies with demographic
characteristics. Second, we allow for the possibility that a fraction of people never misreport, and
finally, we also let this fraction depend on demographics. The first richer model indicates Whites
have a significantly lower probability of misreporting. This is consistent with the pattern found by
Kalton and Miller (1991) for misreporting of a known Social Security payment increase in the SIPP
1984 panel and with the findings of Black, Sanders, and Taylor (2003) on education misreporting in
the Census.
        For comparison we also carry out the estimation of the duration models using two of the
alternative models discussed previously: i) using only the last month data and ii) putting a dummy for
the last month observations in the hazard and then adjusting the constant using the coefficient of this
dummy variable.4 We find that there are important differences between our seam bias estimates and
those obtained with a last month dummy, and very important differences between our seam bias
estimates and those obtained using the last month data. We find a number of interesting empirical
results concerning the employment dynamics of disadvantaged women. For example, we estimate the
effect of changes in several policy and macro variables on the short term, intermediate term and long
term fraction of time during which a woman is employed. These changes include states implementing
positive incentives to leave welfare (“carrots”), changes in the overall unemployment rate or welfare
benefits in states, states introducing punitive incentives to leave welfare (“sticks”), and changes in the
minimum wage. Intriguingly, the first three changes have statistically significant effects in the
expected direction while the last two changes do not. A small number of empirical studies (for
example, Ashenfelter and Card 1981, Currie and Fallick 1996 and Campolieti, Fang and Gunderson
2005) have used individual panel data sets to estimate minimum wage effects on employment
transition probabilities, and they mainly focus on the minimum wage effects on transitions out of
employment. Our findings regarding the minimum wage are particularly notable because our models
have taken into consideration the minimum wage effects on transitions out of and into employment
simultaneously.
        We find that when the overall unemployment rate increases: i) the hazard function for
leaving left-censored and fresh non-employment spells falls; ii) the hazard function for leaving fresh
employment spells increases; but iii) the hazard function for leaving a left-censored employment spell


4 Previous researchers who used the month 4 dummy variable method did not adjust the constant. Not making
this adjustment will lead to an underestimate of the hazard function at each duration.



                                                    5
is unaffected. Elsby, Michaels, and Solon (2009) argue that that the higher unemployment rate during
a recession is due to both longer unemployment spells (i.e. the non-employment hazards fall) and
more unemployment spells (i.e. the employment hazards rise); Shimer (2005a, 2005b) argues that
only the first effect occurs. None of these studies control for individual heterogeneity; when we do
so and thus take into account changes in the composition of those in employment and non-
employment over the business cycle, we find both of these positions continue to have merit.
        Of course, as with any study using a parametric model, there is the issue of whether we have
the right model of misreporting behavior. To address this concern, we estimate several variants of
our base model. In addition, there are several pieces of indirect evidence supporting our model. First,
the telescoping behavior underlying all of our misreporting models is exactly the type of behavior
that the 2004 revision of the SIPP aimed to minimize. Second, the findings of several previous
studies support our model of misreporting behavior and our finding of a higher misreporting
probability for minorities. Finally, we consider three alternative models of misreporting, but reject
them on the basis of aggregate data from the SIPP. Thus we consider a wide range of possible
behavior and find substantial support for our modeling strategy.
        The paper proceeds as follows: In Section 2 we discuss the SIPP data and the extent of the
seam bias problem. In Section 3 we discuss the problems that occur when one uses only the last
month observations. In Section 4 we present our seam bias correction approach. We first outline the
assumptions underlying our parametric approach, which we believe to be reasonable. We then
outline our approach for estimating parametric single spell duration models in the presence of seam
bias and discuss identification of these models. Finally, we consider the estimation of multi-spell,
multi-state duration models with seam bias correction. We present our empirical results in Section 5
and conclude the paper in Section 6.


2.       Seam Bias and the SIPP Data
        Our primary data consist of the 1986-1993 panels of the SIPP. The SIPP was designed to
provide detailed information on incomes and income sources, as well as on labor force and program
participation, of U.S. individuals and households. Our sample is restricted to single mothers who
have at most twelve years of schooling. Since we investigate employment status, we only consider
women between the ages of 16 and 55.5 Although researchers investigating welfare durations often
smooth out one-month spells, we use the original data with all one-month spells intact because
employment status is often very unstable among low-educated women and it is common for them to

5Respondents are chosen based on their education and age at the beginning of the panel. If a single mother
marries in the middle of the survey, we keep the observations before the marriage and treat the spell in
progress at the time of marriage as right-censored.



                                                    6
have very short employment and non-employment spells.6 Since we use state level variables such as
maximum welfare benefits, minimum wage rates, unemployment rates, and whether the state
obtained a welfare waiver and introduced positive incentives to leave welfare (carrots) or negative
incentives to leave (sticks), we exclude women from the smaller states which are not separately
identified in the SIPP.
         The SIPP uses a rotation group design, with each rotation group consisting of about a
quarter of the entire panel, randomly selected. For each calendar month, members of one rotation
group are interviewed about the previous four months (the reference period or wave), and all
rotation groups are interviewed over the course of any four month period. Calendar months are thus
equally distributed among the months of the reference period. We call the four months within each
reference period month 1, month 2, month 3 and month 4. We will also refer to month 4 as the last month.
The rotation design guarantees that approximately 25% of transitions should occur in months 1, 2, 3
and 4 respectively. Summary statistics show that for our sample more than 45.86% of job transitions
(from non-employment to employment and vice-versa) are reported to occur in month 4, the last
month. This number is far greater than the 25% one would expect. This seam effect, which
researchers have attributed to both too much change across waves and too little change within waves,
is observed for most variables in the SIPP (see, e.g. Young 1989, Marquis and Moore 1990,
Ryscavage 1988 and Moore 2008).7
         As noted earlier, some, e.g. Grogger, have expressed concern that many of the off-seam
transitions are simply the result of an imputation procedure by the Census Bureau, making their use
suspect. In the SIPP, monthly data are imputed when a sample member either refuses to be
interviewed or is unavailable for that interview (and a proxy interview cannot be obtained), or when
someone who enters a sample household after the start of the panel leaves the household during the
reference period.8 The Census Bureau indicates whether a monthly observation is imputed using a


6 Hamersma (2006) investigates a unique Wisconsin administrative data set containing information from all

Work Opportunity Tax Credit (WOTC) and Welfare-to-Work (WtW) Tax Credit applications. The majority of
WOTC-certified workers in Wisconsin are either welfare recipients or food stamp recipients. She finds that
over one-third of certified workers have fewer than 120 annual hours of employment (job duration), while
another 29 percent of workers have fewer than 400 annual hours. Only a little over one-third of workers have
annual employment of more than 400 hours. These administrative data show that a significant share of
employment spells are less than one month among disadvantaged individuals. In our data it makes surprisingly
little difference whether or not we smooth out the one-month spells.
7 An experimental study of seam effects (Rips, Conrad, and Fricker 2003) suggests that seam effects may arise

from respondents forgetting the timing of events together with “constant wave responding” in which
respondents simply give the same answer for all four months of a wave.
8 All adults in sampled households at the start of the panel are considered original sample members and are

followed to any new address. Someone entering a sample household after the start of the panel is interviewed
as a member of the household, but not followed if he or she leaves. In that case, the remaining months of a
reference period after the departure will be imputed.



                                                     7
variable INTVW, which equals 1 or 2 if a self or proxy interview is obtained (and hence the data are
not imputed) and 3 or 4 if the respondent refuses to be interviewed or left, respectively (and hence
the data are imputed). Using this variable, we compare the frequency of transitions at the seam in the
imputed and non-imputed data (see Appendix Table A1). We find that approximately 50% of the
transitions take place in month 4 in the non-imputed data, but about 81% take place in month 4 in
the imputed data. That is, imputation accentuates seam bias rather than ameliorates it, negating part
of the argument for omitting data on the first three months of a wave.
         In our examination of employment dynamics using the SIPP, we follow Heckman and
Singer (1984a) and the standard duration literature and distinguish between left-censored spells,
which are in progress at the start of the sample, and fresh spells which begin after the start of the
sample, for time spent both in and out of employment.9 The left-censored spells constitute the great
majority of all spells in our data. For example, even in month 30 of the various SIPP samples, i.e. two
and half years after the samples began, left-censored spells still constitute over sixty percent of both
employment and non-employment spells. This raises two issues. First, using only fresh spells will not
give an accurate picture of the employment dynamics of a typical woman in our sample, who is in a
left-censored spell. Second, there is likely to be an important issue of selection in which women are
observed in a fresh spell. Thus we analyze left-censored and fresh spells jointly to correct for this
selection.10
         Table 1 provides summary statistics (for the first month of each spell) for our sample of
employment and non-employment spells. Panel A shows that single mothers in left-censored non-
employment spells are usually more disadvantaged than those in fresh non-employment spells.
Specifically, those in left-censored non-employment spells are more likely to be minorities, less likely
to have a full twelve years of schooling, less likely to have had a previous marriage, and are more
likely to be disabled or have missing disability information than those in fresh non-employment spells.
Also, the single mothers in left-censored non-employment spells tend to have more children, and
their youngest children tend to be younger, compared to those in fresh non-employment spells. The
two groups are similar in terms of age.
         Panel B shows that those in left-censored employment spells tend to be less disadvantaged
than those in fresh employment spells. Specifically, they are older, less likely to be minority group
members, more likely to have twelve years of schooling, more likely to have had a previous marriage,



9Left-censored spells are sometimes called interrupted spells.
10While this selection bias may be important in principle, in practice Eberwein, Ham and LaLonde (1997)
found it was not important in analyzing employment dynamics for similar women using data from the National
Job Training Partnership Act Study.



                                                    8
less likely to be disabled or have missing disability information, and tend to have both fewer children
and older children than those in fresh employment spells.


3.       Problems in Measuring Spells Using Only the Last Month Observations
         As noted above, a common approach to the problem of seam bias is to use only the
observations from the last month of the reference periods.            Under this approach spells are
constructed by acting as if we observe only the last month data for each wave. When there is a status
change from the previous month 4 to the current month 4, month 4 of the current wave is coded as
the end of a spell. Here we construct three examples representative of our data to illustrate the
problems that may arise when adopting this approach. In these examples, which are shown in
Figures 1.1 – 1.3, we let U , U ', E and E ' denote a fresh non-employment spell, a left-censored non-
employment spell, a fresh employment spell and a left-censored employment spell, respectively. In
each figure, the numbers above the line indicate the survey months and the numbers below the line
represent the reference period months. The first example illustrated in Figure 1.1 assumes that a
respondent has four spells. The first spell is a left-censored non-employment spell ending in a month
1, the second is a fresh employment spell ending in a month 3, the third is a fresh non-employment
spell ending in another month 3, and the last spell is a right-censored fresh employment spell. Using
only the last month data, we would treat this respondent’s work history as consisting of a left-
censored non-employment spell lasting 32 months and a right-censored employment spell lasting
four months. We would lose both a two-month fresh employment spell and a 24-month fresh non-
employment spell. In addition, we would miscalculate the spell length of both the left-censored and
right-censored spells.
         The next example, illustrated in Figure 1.2, shows that using only the last month data may
lead to spell lengths being miscalculated, but does not necessarily lead to omission of spells. In Figure
1.2 we keep everything else the same as in Figure 1.1 and only shift the ending point of the second
spell, which is also the starting point of the third spell. Now the second fresh employment spell lasts
for five months with a month 4 in the middle of the spell. For such a case, using only last month
data would not lead to the omission of the second and third spells, but only to the miscalculation of
the length of all four spells.
         Finally, we construct our last example to show how we can actually misclassify the type of a
spell using only the last month data. Assume that a respondent has three spells as in Figure 1.3. The
first spell is a left-censored non-employment spell ending in month 3 of the first reference period;
the second is a completed fresh employment spell; and the third is a fresh non-employment spell
censored at the end of the sample. Using only last month data we would record her work history as a




                                                   9
left-censored employment spell and a fresh non-employment spell. From this example it is clear that
we will lose all left-censored spells less than or equal to three months in length by switching to the
last month data. In addition, using the last month data may lead to both miscalculating spell length
and even misclassifying spell type for left-censored spells.
         To recap, the above three examples show that by using only the last month data, we could
lose some spells, miscalculate the length of spells, and misclassify the spell type. Further, the problem
is more severe with short spells that are less than four months duration and that do not cover a
month 4. From these examples it appears to be ambiguous whether using only the last month data
will overestimate or underestimate the average duration. It is clear that in general using only the last
month observations will lead to an overestimate of the length of left-censored spells. However, for
fresh spells, using only the last month data may underestimate or overestimate the length of an
observed fresh spell, since both the start and finish of a fresh spell could be mismeasured due to
seam bias.
         Of course, the above three examples compare the last month data to the true duration data,
while in practice we do not know the true duration of spells. Thus the relevant comparison is the last
month data versus the monthly data contaminated by seam bias, as some researchers only use the last
month because of the seam bias. Here we would make two points. First, even in the presence of
seam bias we still observe many short spells in our data, including spells falling between two
interviews as in Figure 1.1.11 If some short spells are omitted due to seam bias, switching to using
only the last month data certainly will not help us capture those omitted short spells. Second, the
implications of Figures 1.1 to 1.3 also hold for comparisons of estimates based on the monthly data
contaminated by seam bias (the SIPP data) and estimates based on only the last month observations
from the contaminated data.
         To shed more light on the comparison between the contaminated monthly data and the last
month only data, we examine the number of completed spells and the empirical survivor functions
for each data type. First, comparing the number of completed spells (which provide the empirical
identification for the parameters of the hazard functions), we find that shift from using monthly data
to the last month data results in the loss of about 47% of fresh employment spells, 48% of fresh
non-employment spells, 20% of left-censored employment spells, and 18% of left-censored non-
employment spells. Second, when considering all spells (completed spells and right-censored spells),
shifting from monthly data to the last month data still results in the loss of 34 to 35 percent of fresh
spells. (See online Appendix Table A2, which presents distributions of spell length and total number


11
  An accurate measure of the frequency with which individuals fail to report short spells can only be obtained
from matched administrative-survey data, which we do not have for this sample.



                                                     10
of spells of monthly data versus last month data for all spells.12) However, it is difficult to ascertain
the effect of using the last month data on spell lengths from Table A2 because of the right censored
spells. Instead, we investigate the empirical survivor functions. Online Appendix Figures A.1 and
A.2 show that using only the last month data will increase the estimated survivor function for left-
censored employment and non-employment spells by a considerable amount. Online Appendix
Figures A.3 and A.4 show that this phenomenon is even more pronounced for fresh employment
and non-employment spells.
         These calculations indicate that shifting from the contaminated (by seam bias) data to only
the last month data leads to omitting spells and overestimating the spell length. Moreover, using only
the last month data will lead to a loss of efficiency since data from three-fourths of the months are
being discarded, and nearly 55 percent of transitions occur in these months.


4.       Correcting for Seam Bias: A Parametric Approach
         We consider a model of misreporting behavior that allows us to save the valuable
information contained in the monthly SIPP data and to address the seam bias problem. Specifically,
we first develop a monthly single state discrete time duration model with three extra parameters that
capture the misreporting of transitions. 13 Under reasonable assumptions, we show that we can
identify these parameters in our model. We then consider the extension to multi-state multi-spell
duration model. Since the model is significantly over identified, we are able to use this to consider
several extensions of the model.


4.1       Notation
         We first set up our notation before discussing our assumptions. Let M obs = ( m, l ) represent

a spell reported to end in month m of reference period (wave) l .14 Note that M obs = ( m, l ) could

be misreported because of seam bias. Further, let M true = ( m, l ) represent the fact that a spell truly

ended in month m of reference period l . The variable m in M obs and M true assumes five possible
values: 1, 2, 3, 4, or 0, where m = 1, 2, 3 or 4 indicates a transition in months 1, 2, 3 or 4, respectively,
and m = 0 indicates a right-censored spell ending with the survey. For our sample l takes on the
values from 1 to L , where L is the number of waves, which depends on the specific SIPP panel


12 The numbers of spells in the table are larger than those in Table 1 because here we have not imposed the

selection criteria discussed in Section 2. The online Appendix is available at http://dept.econ.yorku.ca/~xli.
13 See Romeo (2001) for a very different approach to dealing with seam bias in a duration model.
14 The end of a spell can occur either because a transition took place or because the individual reached the end

of the sample period.



                                                      11
being used.15 For example, M obs = (4, 4) indicates that a transition was reported to have occurred

in month 4 of reference period 4, while M true = (3,5) denotes that the transition actually occurred in
month 3 of reference period 5.


4.2      Behavioral Assumptions
         As discussed in the introduction, seam bias is observed for many variables in the SIPP. The
employment status variable we use to construct our measure of transitions is no exception. This
constancy within waves of employment status in the SIPP is plausibly a feature of the interview
structure. The respondent is first asked whether she had a job or business at any time during the
previous four-month period; if the answer is yes, the respondent is then asked whether she had a job
or business during all weeks of the period. Further questions are asked of individuals who report
some time employed and some time not employed. This serves to determine the timing of their
periods of employment and non-employment. For example, suppose an individual continues a spell
of non-employment into a given wave and does not have a job for months 1 and 2 of the new wave,
but she gets a job in month 3 that continues into month 4 of the wave. Given the interview structure,
this individual may report that she has a job for the whole wave based on the fact she has a job in
month 4, which is the month closest to (right before) the interview month. For this particular
example, a non-employment spell ending in month 2 of the current reference period will be reported
to end in month 4 of the previous reference period. Goudreau, Oberheu and Vaughan (1984)
document this as the most common type of misreporting behavior for AFDC benefits in the Income
Survey Development Program.16
         Based on the interview structure, documented empirical evidence of seam bias in SIPP
variables, and previous research based on survey and administrative data, we make the following
main assumption: respondents sometimes move a transition in months 1, 2 or 3 of a given reference
period to month 4 of the previous reference period.             This shifting of transitions will occur if
respondents sometimes report the employment status of month 4 for all months in the reference
period. In terms of labor market state, this reflects the well-known phenomenon of telescoping
(respondents recall that previous states are the same as the state in the current period, Sudman and
Bradburn 1974, p.69), while in terms of transitions, it reflects the well-known phenomenon of
“reverse telescoping” of transitions (respondents recall transitions as having occurred more distantly
than in fact was the case, Lemaitre 1992). This is also similar to the third type of household behavior

15 There are seven waves in the 1986 and 1987 panels, six in the 1988 panel, eight in the 1990 and 1991 panels,

ten in the 1992 panel, and nine in the 1993 panel.
16 Their study is conducted by comparing respondents’ reports obtained from interviews with administrative

record information.



                                                      12
considered by Pischke (1995, p.824), where he assumes that respondents report their permanent
income (but not transitory income) in month 4 as applying to all months in the wave. We make the
following five assumptions for each interview:
A1) the respondents report all transitions that occurred during reference period l as occurring either
in the true month or month 4 of reference period l − 1 ;
A2) if a respondent reports that a transition happened in months 1, 2 or 3 of a reference period, it is
a truthful report;
A3) a respondent reports a transition that actually occurred in months 1, 2 or 3 of reference period l
as taking place in month 4 of reference period l − 1 with some pre-specified (but unknown)
probabilities γ 1 , γ 2 and γ 3 ;
A4) if a transition truly happened in month 4 of a reference period, the respondent reports it as
occurring in that month; and
A5) the true transition rate for a given duration does not depend on the reference period month,
m .17
               Given these behavioral assumptions,18 we have the following conditional probabilities:

     (
P M obs = (m, l ) M true ≠ (m, l ) = 0       )         m = 1, 2, 3;                                    (4.1)

     (
P M obs = (4, l − 1) M true = (m, l ) = γ m      )            m = 1, 2, 3;                             (4.2)

 (
P M obs = (4, l ) M true = (4, l ) = 1;     )                                                          (4.3)

P(M      obs
               = (0, l ) M true    = (0, l ) ) = 1 .                                                   (4.4)


4.3            Correcting for Seam Bias in a Single Spell Model
               To illustrate the method in the simplest way, we first explore the problem involving a single
spell of employment. We define the hazard function for individual i as
                                                 1
               λi (t | θ ) =                                                                           (4.5)
                               1 + exp {− h(t ) − X i (τ + t ) β − θi }




17 This assumption is the consequence of the survey design. For ease of interviewing, the entire sample is
randomly split into four rotation groups, and one rotation group (1/4 of the sample) is interviewed each
calendar month. Each rotation group in a SIPP panel is interviewed once every four months about
employment and program participation during the previous four months.
18 Our assumptions rule out the possibility that individuals forget about very short spells that fall between two

interviews. As discussed before, without administrative data linked to the SIPP data we have no way of
verifying the truth of this assumption.



                                                                    13
where t denotes current duration, h(t ) denotes duration dependence, τ denotes the calendar time

of the start of the spell ( τ is suppressed in the following expressions), and X i (τ + t ) denotes a

(possibly) time changing explanatory variable. Further, θi denotes unobserved heterogeneity, and
following Heckman and Singer (1984b), we assume that it is i.i.d. across i and is drawn from a
discrete distribution function with points of support θ1 ,...,θ J −1 ,θ J and associated probabilities
                                J −1
 p1 ,..., pJ −1 and pJ = 1 − ∑ pk . 19 For example, if a spell lasts K months, the contribution to the
                                k =1

likelihood function for individual i is
                        J                  K −1
           Li ( K ) = ∑ p j λi ( K | θ j )∏ (1 − λi (t | θ j )) .                                                       (4.6)
                       j =1                 t =1


For notational simplicity, we drop the individual subscript i in what follows.
          Based on our behavioral assumptions, it is straightforward to derive the likelihood function

given that we observe M obs = ( m, l ) , and the reported length of the spell, dur obs , both of which
potentially have been contaminated by seam bias.20 The contribution to the likelihood function for a
completed spell of observed length K that ends in month 1 of reference period l is given by:

P ( M obs = (1, l ) , dur obs = K )
= P ( M obs = (1, l ) , M true = (1, l ) , dur true = K ) + P ( M obs = (1, l ) , M true ≠ (1, l ) , dur true ≠ K ) .

Since the second term is zero by assumption A2, we have
P ( M obs = (1, l ) , dur obs = K ) = P ( M obs = (1, l ) , M true = (1, l ) , dur true = K )

                                                               (                                )
= P ( M obs = (1, l ) | M true = (1, l ) , dur true = K ) ⋅ P M true = (1, l ) dur true = K ⋅ P ( dur true = K )
= (1 − γ 1 ) L( K ),
                                                                                                                        (4.7)
In (4.7) we have used the implication of assumption A3 that

P ( M obs = (1, l ) | M true = (1, l ) , dur true = K ) = (1 − γ 1 ) .

Moreover,

     (                                 )
P M true = (1, l ) dur true = K = 1 and P ( dur true = K ) = L( K ).

Similarly, if a transition is reported to end in month 2 or month 3 of reference period l , and to have
lasted for K months, we have


19Our analysis is equally applicable to any other choice for the discrete time hazard function.
20Here we assume that seam bias affects only the end date, and not the start date, of a spell. We relax this
assumption when we consider multiple spell data.



                                                                   14
P ( M obs = ( 2, l ) , dur obs = K ) = (1 − γ 2 ) ⋅ L ( K ) and                                                              (4.8)

P ( M obs = ( 3, l ) , dur obs = K ) = (1 − γ 3 ) ⋅ L ( K ) .                                                                (4.9)

Finally, the contribution to the likelihood function of a completed spell of observed length K that is
observed to end in month 4 of reference period l is given by

P ( M obs = ( 4, l ) , dur obs = K )
= P ( M obs = ( 4, l ) , M true = (1, l + 1) , dur true = K + 1) + P ( M obs = ( 4, l ) , M true = ( 2, l + 1) , dur true = K + 2 ) +
P ( M obs = ( 4, l ) , M true = ( 3, l + 1) , dur true = K + 3) + P ( M obs = ( 4, l ) , M true = ( 4, l ) , dur true = K )

                                                                                 (                                )
= P ( M obs = ( 4, l ) | M true = (1, l + 1) , dur true = K + 1) ⋅ P M true = (1, l + 1) dur true = K + 1 ⋅ P ( dur true = K + 1)

                                                                  (
+ ( M obs = ( 4, l ) | M true = ( 2, l + 1) , dur true = K + 2 ) ⋅ P M true = ( 2, l + 1) dur true        = K + 2 ) ⋅ P ( dur   true
                                                                                                                                       = K + 2)

+ ( M obs = ( 4, l ) | M true    = ( 3, l + 1) , dur = K + 3) ⋅ P ( M = ( 3, l + 1) dur
                                                          true                       true          true
                                                                                                          = K + 3) ⋅ P ( dur   true
                                                                                                                                       = K + 3)

+ ( M obs = ( 4, l ) | M true    = ( 4, l ) , dur = K ) ⋅ P ( M = ( 4, l ) dur = K ) ⋅ P ( dur
                                                   true                   true              true             true
                                                                                                                    = K ).
Note that P ( M obs = ( 4, l ) | M true = ( 4, l ) , dur true = K ) = 1 by assumption A4, and

    (                                                                 )
P M obs = ( 4, l ) M true = ( j , l + 1) , dur true = K + j = γ j , j = 1, 2,3, by assumption A3. Thus the

contribution of a spell that ends in month 4 of wave l is

P ( M obs = ( 4, l ) , dur obs = K ) = γ 1 L ( K + 1) + γ 2 L ( K + 2 ) + γ 3 L ( K + 3) + L ( K ) .                         (4.10)

             A natural question to ask is whether the model is identified without restricting the form of
the duration dependence. In Appendix 1 we show that a model with only duration dependence and
misreporting parameters is (over) identified for fresh employment and non-employment spells, but is
not identified for left-censored employment and non-employment spells, assuming that each type of
spell has entirely different misreporting and duration dependence parameters. However, we also
show that all parameters are identified if we assume that left-censored employment (non-
employment) spells and fresh employment (non-employment) spells share the same misreporting
parameters, and thus we make this assumption below.
             We also consider models where the misreporting probabilities depend on individual
characteristics. For example, suppose the probabilities differ among Whites and non-Whites (African
Americans and Hispanics). We now assume that the misreporting probability in reference period
month j for employment spells is given by

                            1
γ   E
        =                                                  j = 1, 2, 3,                                                      (4.11)
            1 + exp ( − α        − α 1Ej N W   )
    j                       E
                            0j




                                                                      15
where NW a dummy variable is equal to 1 if an individual is non-White and zero otherwise. We use
an analogous specification for non-employment spells. Since one could estimate this model by simply
estimating the base model separately for Whites and non-Whites with constant misreporting
probabilities, and then use a minimum distance procedure to estimate the parameters in (4.11), this
extended model is also identified. Below we find that the misreporting probabilities indeed vary
significantly by race. Interestingly, the misreporting probabilities do not vary by level of education,
independent of whether we let the misreporting probabilities depend on race.


4.4      Correcting for Seam Bias in a Multiple Spell Model
         In a multiple spell discrete time duration model, correcting for seam bias complicates the
likelihood function dramatically since adjusting a response error in one spell involves shifting not
only the end of the current spell but also the start of the subsequent spell. This is a serious problem
as respondents in our sample have up to seven spells and a respondent can have several spells ending
in month 4 in her history.
         We estimate a discrete time duration model with multiple spells, duration dependence and
unobserved heterogeneity. Due to the presence of unobserved heterogeneity and the lack of
information on the start date, it is extremely complicated to derive the density function for time
remaining in a left-censored spell using the same parameters as for fresh spells. Thus we continue to
use separate hazard functions for the left-censored spells (Heckman and Singer 1984a). We allow the
unobserved heterogeneity terms to be correlated across different types of spells.
         As noted above, for identification we let the employment spells, both left-censored and fresh,

share one set of seam bias parameters, γ 1E , γ 2E , and γ 3E as defined in equation (4.2), while we specify

another set of parameters, γ 1U , γ 2U and γ 3U , which represent the seam bias associated with non-
employment spells. As defined in Section 3, we let U ' and U represent left-censored and fresh
non-employment spells respectively, and let E ' and E represent left-censored and fresh employment
spells respectively. 21 We follow standard practice and specify the unobserved heterogeneity
corresponding to these four types of spells through a vector θ = (θU ,θU ' ,θ E ,θ E ' ) , and assume that

θ is distributed independently across individuals and is fixed across spells for a given individual.
Following McCall (1996) we let θ follow a discrete distribution with points of support θ1 ,θ 2 ,...,θ J ,




21
   As we show in the previous section, we cannot let the seam bias parameters differ between left-censored and
fresh spells of the same type.



                                                     16
(where, e.g., θ1 = (θU 1 ,θU '1 ,θ E1 ,θ E '1 ) ) and associated probabilities p1 , p2 ,..., pJ respectively,
                     J −1
where pJ = 1 −      ∑p .
                     k =1
                            k


           The following discussion is based on the relatively simple example in Figure 2, which covers
all essential problems for multiple spells with seam bias. To distinguish among the four types of
spells, we add a subscript to the transition indicators defined in Section 4.1 and duration indicators
defined in Section 4.3. In Figure 2, the respondent reports three spells with a reporting history given

by   {M   obs
          U'    = (1,2 ) , durUobs' = 5, M Eobs = ( 4,3) , durEobs = 7, M Uobs = ( 0,9 ) , durUobs = 24} , which indicates

that the first spell is a left-censored non-employment spell ending in month 1 of reference period 2,
the second is a fresh employment spell reported to end in month 4 of reference period 3, and the
third is a fresh non-employment spell which is censored at the end of the sample. (Again in Figure 2
the numbers above the line are the survey months and the numbers below the line are reference
period months.) Since the first spell ends in month 1 of the reference period, we assume it is
reported correctly. However, the second spell is reported to have ended in month 4 of the third
reference period. Given our assumptions the reported history could be true, but there are also three
additional possible histories A, B, and C as illustrated in Figure 2. Specifically, the second spell could
actually have ended in month 1 of the following reference period, which implies that we would need
to reduce the duration of the subsequent (censored) spell by one month. Alternatively, it also could
have ended in months 2 or 3 of the following reference period, in which case we would need to
shorten the length of the subsequent spell by two or three months respectively.
           As we show in our Online Appendix 2, the contribution to the likelihood function for the
reported history in Figure 2 is given by 22




22 Grogger (2004) suggests clustering the spells for the same individual in addition to allowing for person-
specific unobserved heterogeneity to obtain robust standard errors. We do not follow this approach since the
parameter estimates will not be consistent if there is spell-specific heterogeneity that is not taken into account
in estimation.



                                                            17
          ⎛⎡                                                              ⎤                ⎞
                              (                       )
          ⎜ ⎢(1 − γ 1 ) ∏ 1 − λU ' ( r | θU ' j ) ⋅λU ' ( 5 θU ' j ) ⎥
                           4
                     U
                                                                                           ⎟
          ⎜⎣             r =1                                             ⎦                ⎟
          ⎜ ⎧⎡                                                                      ⎤   ⎫  ⎟
          ⎜ ⎪ ⎢γ 1E ∏ (1 − λE ( r | θ Ej ) ) ⋅ λE (8 | θ Ej )∏ (1 − λU (r | θUj ) ) ⎥ ⎪ ⎟
                     7                                          23


          ⎜ ⎪ ⎣ r =1                                           r =1                 ⎦ ⎪⎟
          ⎜ ⎪ ⎡                                                                            ⎟
                                                                                      ⎤ ⎪⎟
L = ∑ p j ⎪+ ⎢γ 2 ∏ (1 − λE (r | θ Ej ) ) ⋅ λE (9 | θ Ej )∏ (1 − λU (r | θUj ) ) ⎥ ⎪
     J                 8                                            22
          ⎜         E
                                                                                                      (4.12)
    j =1
          ⎜ ⎪ ⎣ r =1                                               r =1               ⎦ ⎪⎟
          ⎜⎨                                                                            ⎬.⎟
          ⎜⎪ ⎡ E 9                                                                     ⎤⎪ ⎟
          ⎜ ⎪+ ⎢γ 3 ∏ (1 − λE (r | θ Ej ) ) ⋅ λE (10 | θ Ej )∏ (1 − λU (r | θUj ) ) ⎥ ⎪ ⎟
                                                                      21


          ⎜ ⎪ ⎣ r =1                                                 r =1              ⎦ ⎟
                                                                                        ⎪
          ⎜⎪ ⎡ 6                                                                  ⎤     ⎪⎟
         ⎜⎜ ⎪+ ⎢∏ (1 − λE (r | θ Ej ) ) ⋅ λE (7 | θ Ej )∏ (1 − λU (r | θUj ) ) ⎥
                                                              24

                                                                                        ⎪ ⎟⎟
          ⎝ ⎩ ⎣ r =1                                         r =1                 ⎦     ⎭⎠

          Finally, we also consider an extended model to allow for the possibility that a fraction of the
sample never misreports.            Specifically, we assume that there are two types of people: type A
individuals who always truthfully report their employment histories, and type B individuals who
misreport in the way described in Section 4.2 above. Type A people comprise a fraction PA of the
population, but of course we cannot discern types in our sample. If an individual is a type A person,
she will have the standard multiple-state, multiple-spell likelihood function, see e.g. Eberwein, Ham
and LaLonde (1997). If she is a type B person, her likelihood would be the appropriate seam bias
likelihood such as (4.12) above. Since we do not know what type of person each individual is, a
representative individual’s contribution to the likelihood function is
          L ( ⋅) = PA LA ( ⋅) + (1 − PA ) LB ( ⋅) .                                                   (4.13)
Maximizing the log likelihood based on (4.13) involves estimating only one additional
parameter, PA .23
          For both of our models (represented in (4.12) and (4.13)), we consider two alternatives: i) the
misreporting probabilities ( γ ' s and PA ) are constant for the whole sample; and ii) the misreporting

probabilities ( γ ' s and PA ) vary by individual demographics taking the form of equation (4.11). For

both γ ' s and PA , we find only the race variable has a statistically significant effect on the
misreporting probabilities.




23Care must be exercised if one wants to test the null hypothesis PA = 1 , both because it is on the boundary of
the parameter space, and because the misreporting parameters γ ' s are not identified under this null
hypothesis (Davies 1987). Fortunately the estimate of PA is quite far from 1 in our case.



                                                             18
4.5     Using Aggregated Data to Consider Additional Misclassification Schemes
        Of course, there is the possibility that the transitions are misclassified in a way that differs
from the scenarios considered above. Here we consider several other possibilities which we argue can
be rejected based on aggregates of our micro data. The first possibility we consider is: some of the
month 1 transitions are pushed into month 2, some of the month 2 transitions are pushed into
month 3, and some of the month 3 transitions are pushed into month 4, but none of the month 4
transitions are pushed into the next reference period (because it is the last month in the reference
period). If 50% of the transitions in months 1, 2 and 3 are pushed to the next month, then we would
see 12.5 % of the transitions in month 1, 25% in month 2, 25% in month 3, and 37.5% in month 4.
Alternatively, suppose 75% of the transitions get pushed out of months 1, 2, and 3. Then we would
see 6.25% of the transitions in month 1, 25% in month 2, 25% in month 3, and 43.75% in month 4.
In either case, month 1 should have a considerably smaller proportion of the transitions than months
2 and 3, and month 4 should have a considerably larger proportion of the transitions than months 2
and 3. However, in our data, months 1, 2, 3, and 4 have 16.57%, 19.08%, 18.49%, and 45.86% of the
employment/non-employment transitions respectively, which is clearly inconsistent with this
alternative model. (Note that our assumptions in Section 4.2 are consistent with this pattern).
        Secondly, we consider the possibility that some of the transitions in month 1 of the
reference period l + 1 are pushed back into month 4 of reference period l . (Recall that month 1 of
the reference period l + 1 is the interview month for reference period l .) If this is the only source of
misclassification, then the pattern should be similar to the scheme above: about 25% of the observed
transitions are reported in months 2 and 3, a smaller proportion of transactions are reported in
month 1, and a larger proportion in month 4. This model would also be rejected by the summary
statistics presented in the previous paragraph.
        A third possible explanation is that individuals may forget about a fraction of very short
spells starting in reference period months 1, 2 and 3. In other words, the number of transitions in
month 4 is accurately reported, but the numbers in months 1, 2 and 3 are under-reported. It is
difficult to address the suggestion that individuals forget about some short spells starting in months 1,
2 and 3 without access to linked administrative data, and certainly this explanation is consistent with
the aggregate data reported above. However, we can examine this explanation in another way. We
know from administrative data that short spells are much more frequent in employment duration
than in welfare duration for the disadvantaged single mothers we study. Thus if we compare the
transitions in months 1, 2, 3 and 4 for employment duration data and welfare duration data we would
expect to see a larger fraction of transitions in month 4 for the employment data if this explanation is
correct. However, we find that 52.7% of all transitions out of employment were reported to have




                                                   19
occurred in month 4, while 62.7% of all transitions out of welfare were reported to have occurred in
month 4, casting doubt on this explanation.


5.       Empirical Results
5.1      Hazard Function Estimates from Four Seam Bias Correction Models
         Tables 2A, 2B, and 2C present estimates of the parameters of the hazard functions for four
models. The first and second models are the seam bias corrections described in section 4.4 when the
misreporting probabilities are constant across individuals (constant misreporting probability model hereafter)
and variable across individuals (variable misreporting probability model hereafter) respectively. The third
model consists of adding a month 4 (last month of any reference period) dummy to the model (last
month dummy model hereafter). The last model uses month 4 data only (last month data model hereafter).
Estimates from the last month dummy and last month data models allow us to compare our
approach with those that are currently used. All models are estimated with unobserved heterogeneity.
We let the data choose the number of support points for the unobserved heterogeneity (as specified
in Section 4.4) and the best fitting polynomials (in logarithms) for duration dependence according to
the Schwartz criterion for each model, as suggested by Ham, Svejnar and Terrell (1998) and Baker
and Melino (2000); this helps to avoid numerical instability problems that come from over-fitting the
data. Although we do not focus on the duration dependence and unobserved heterogeneity
distribution estimates, they affect our policy experiments, in which we examine the effect of changes
in several different variables on the expected duration of a spell and the fraction of time spent in
employment.
         Tables 2A and 2B contain the hazard estimates for left-censored spells and fresh spells
respectively. We believe the parameters of the hazard coefficients are of substantial interest since the
employment dynamics of women with low levels of schooling have received much less attention in
the literature than the welfare dynamics, despite their importance for determining which families will
be in poverty. Table 2C reports the misreporting probabilities for our seam bias correction models.24
         Our explanatory variables include a relatively standard mix of policy and demographic
variables, except that we also use the minimum wage as an explanatory variable. The hazard is
parameterized such that a negative coefficient implies that the hazard decreases if the explanatory
variable increases (see equation 4.5). Considering first our seam bias correction estimates with respect
to left-censored non-employment spells in the first two columns of Table 2A, we see that higher


24Note   that unlike the standard case, the log-likelihood function of our seam bias correction models does not
become additively separable in the different types of spells even if we ignore unobserved heterogeneity, or
restrict the unobserved heterogeneity to be independent across spell type, because we still must allow for seam
bias.



                                                     20
welfare benefits, a higher unemployment rate, being African American or Hispanic, being older,
having never been married, having more children under six years of age, and having a disability all
significantly lower the probability (in a partial correlation sense) that a woman leaves a left-censored
non-employment spell. The minimum wage and the implementation of welfare waiver policies (sticks
and carrots) at the state level have no significant effect on left-censored non-employment duration.
On the other hand, having twelve years of schooling (as opposed to less schooling) significantly
increases the probability of leaving such a spell. In terms of left-censored employment spells (Table
2A, columns 5 and 6), we see that higher welfare benefits, having twelve years of schooling, and
being older are associated with significantly longer left-censored employment spells. The sign for the
welfare benefits variable is puzzling, but we will see in Table 3A (upper right panel) that the effects of
increasing this benefits variable by 10% on the expected duration of left-censored employment spells
are quite small and statistically insignificant for both the constant and variable misreporting
probability models. Being Hispanic, never having been married, having more children under age six,
having a disability, or having missing disability status are associated with significantly shorter left-
censored employment spells. Again the minimum wage and the two welfare waiver variables have no
significant effects.
         Table 2B reports hazard estimates for fresh spells. The fact that we have substantially fewer
fresh employment and non-employment spells (see Table 1 for the number of spells) leads to fewer
variables being statistically significant. For the fresh non-employment spells (columns 1 and 2), facing
a higher unemployment rate, being African American, having more children under age eighteen,
having more children under age six, having a disability or having missing disability status decreases
the hazard rate for leaving a fresh non-employment spell. Being offered a “carrot” to leave welfare
significantly reduces the length of a fresh non-employment spell, as does having twelve years of
schooling. Finally, when considering fresh employment spells (columns 5 and 6), the exit rate from
these spells significantly decreases with an increase in the minimum wage, having twelve years of
schooling and being older. On the other hand, an increase in welfare benefits, higher unemployment
rate, and having a disability or missing disability status increase the exit rate from a fresh employment
spell. For both constant and variable misreporting probability models, the Schwartz criterion
indicates that two support points for unobserved heterogeneity, a linear form (in the logarithm of
spell duration) of duration dependence for left-censored spells and a quadratic form (in the logarithm
of spell duration) of duration dependence for fresh spells are appropriate.
         In the constant and variable misreporting probability models, the unemployment rate
coefficients suggest that both left-censored and fresh non-employment durations increase with the
overall unemployment rate. Further, as in Elsby, Michaels, and Solon (2009), the probability of




                                                   21
leaving a fresh employment spell increases with the overall unemployment rate, but as in Shimer
(2005a, 2005b), the probability of leaving a left-censored employment spell is not affected by the
business cycle.
         Finally, we discuss the estimated misreporting probabilities from both of our models as
presented in Table 2C. For the constant misreporting probability model, the misreporting
                                                                                        1
probabilities for employment spells are re-parameterized as γ kE =                                   k = 1, 2, 3 to
                                                                                         (
                                                                                 1 + exp −α kE   )
constrain the probabilities to be between 0 and 1. For the variable misreporting probability model,
the misreporting probabilities for employment spells are parameterized as in equation (4.11). We use
analogous specifications for non-employment spells. Note that given the above re-parameterization,

an estimated α kE that is not significantly different from zero implies an estimated γ kE close to 0.5. In
the variable misreporting model, we find that race is the only demographic variable that significantly
affects misreporting behavior. Panel A of Table 2C reports parameter estimates of α 's and Panel B
reports calculated misreporting probabilities according to the estimates in Panel A. Standard errors in
Panel B are calculated using the delta method. All of the misreporting probabilities are statistically
and economically significant. In general, the misreporting probabilities are larger for the employment
spells than for the non-employment spells. Another interesting pattern is that the probabilities of
misreporting are descending from month 1 through month 3. This pattern indicates that among all
transitions occurring in months 1, 2 and 3, the longer the time distance between the transition and
the interview, the more likely it is that the respondent heaps that transition into the previous month 4.
(Recall that interviews were conducted in month 1 of the following reference period, thus month 1
transitions occurred furthest from the interview time). According to the constant misreporting
probability model, 56.8%, 45.6% and 44.1% of month 1, 2, and 3 transitions out of non-employment
spells, respectively, have been shifted to month 4; while 72.9%, 60.1%, and 58.5% of month 1, 2, and
3 transitions out of employment spells, respectively, have been shifted to month 4. 25 African
Americans and Hispanics are more likely to misreport by about 7 to 8 percentage points for non-
employment spells and by about 7 to 10 percentage points for employment spells.
         Interestingly, while we find significantly lower misreporting probabilities among Whites, the
coefficients and significance levels are remarkably similar for the estimates of the parameters of the

25
   We do not formally test the null hypothesis that all the misreporting probabilities are zero using a likelihood
ratio test for two reasons. First, it is clear from the aggregate data that a model that does not account for seam
bias in some way will fit the data poorly; i.e. the null hypothesis does not describe an interesting model.
Secondly, if we were to test formally this null hypothesis, we would have to take into account that we are
testing whether parameters are on the boundaries of the parameter space (in six dimensions), i.e. we are in a
nonstandard testing situation. Given the size of the estimated misreporting probabilities, testing whether they
are zero does not seem very interesting and thus would not warrant dealing with the nonstandard testing issues.



                                                       22
hazard functions from the two (constant versus variable) misreporting models in Tables 2A and 2B.
For the sole purpose of correcting for seam bias, our results suggest that a constant misreporting
probability model will be sufficient. However, if a researcher is also interested in investigating
misreporting behavior, a richer model allowing misreporting probability to vary with individual
characteristics will be needed.
        There are differences among the estimates based on our seam bias correction models and
the estimates from the other two approaches in the literature, the last month dummy model and the
last month data model, in terms of point estimates and standard errors. Note that the magnitudes of
the coefficients of the last month data model are not directly comparable with our seam bias
correction models and the last month dummy variable model. For the seam bias correction models
and the last month dummy variable model, the time unit for the discrete hazard is one month, while for
the last month data model, the time unit for the discrete hazard is four months (refer to Section 3 for
details of the spell construction for the last month data model). However, here we compare signs as
well as statistical significance across the four models, and then in the next section we compare the
effect of changing explanatory variables on the expected durations of the individual spells for the
four models, which takes into account different time intervals for the different hazards.
        Since empirical researchers typically focus only on estimates that are statistically significant,
we compare differences in the significant coefficients produced by each model. First considering the
left-censored non-employment spells in Table 2A (left panel), our seam bias approach finds
significant effects of being African American, while this is not true for the simpler models. Further,
all models except the last month data model find a significant effect of being Hispanic. On the other
hand, the simpler models find a significant effect of having disability status missing, but this is not
true for our seam bias models. Considering the estimates for the left-censored employment spells
(right panel), the seam bias models find a significant effect for welfare benefits but the simpler
models do not; the opposite is true for the unemployment rate and being African American. Finally
while the seam bias models and the last month dummy variable model show significant effects for
both the number of children less than 6 years old and the disability variable missing, this is not true
for the last month data model. As for the age of the youngest child variable, only the last month data
model finds a significant effect.
        Considering the fresh non-employment spells (Table 2B, left panel), our seam bias models
and the last month dummy variable model find significant roles for the unemployment rate, the
welfare waiver carrot variable and being African American, while this is not true for the last month
data approach. Welfare benefits are only significant using the last month dummy variable model, and
the number of children less than 18 years is only significant for our seam bias models. Finally,




                                                  23
considering the fresh employment spells (Table 2B, right panel), we note that only our seam bias
models find significant roles for the unemployment rate, the minimum wage and the disability
variable missing, and only the last month data model finds a significant effect of being African
American and having never been married.


5.2         Expected Durations and the Effect of Changing an Explanatory Variable on
            Expected Durations
            To look at estimated effects which are comparable across the four models we first calculate
expected durations and the effects of changing explanatory variables on the expected duration of
each type of spell. Conditional on the unobserved heterogeneity, the probability that a spell of type j ,
where j = U ',U , E ', E (as defined in Section 3), lasts longer than t − 1 months is given by the
survivor function
                                       t −1
            S j ( t − 1 θ j ) = ∏ ⎡⎣1 − λ j (τ θ j ) ⎤⎦ .
                                τ =1

The density function for a spell of type j that lasts t months is given by

             f j (t θ j ) = λ j (t θ j ) S j (t − 1 θ j ) .

The expected duration for a spell of type j is given by
                             ∞
            ED j = ∑∑ t ⋅ f j ( t θ j ) ⋅ p j .
                       J


                       j =1 t =1


Since there is no guarantee this expected duration will be finite, we instead calculate a truncated mean
for each type of spell as follows:

                     ⎡T                                      ⎤
                                                     (        )
                                   *


            ED j = ∑ ⎢ ∑ t ⋅ f j ( t θ j ) + S T * θ j ⋅ T * ⎥ ⋅ p j .
                       J


                   j ⎣ t =1                                  ⎦
We choose T * = 60 .26 We calculate the expected durations for each individual and take the sample
average. To test whether the out-of-sample durations are having a disproportionate impact on
estimated expected duration, we also follow Eberwein, Ham and LaLonde (2002) and freeze the
hazard function for durations longer than 15 months at 15 months for fresh spells and freeze the
hazard function for durations longer than 25 months at 25 months for left-censored spells. We find
that freezing the hazard function does not make a noticeable difference in estimated expected
durations. We also estimate the effect on expected duration if we change an explanatory variable for
the four models. We set an explanatory variable at two different levels and calculate the


26   The longest panel in our data lasts 40 months.



                                                                  24
corresponding expected durations; the difference between the two expected durations represents the
effect of changing that particular explanatory variable on expected duration. Standard errors for
expected durations and effects of changes in explanatory variables on expected duration are
calculated using the delta method.
        Our estimated expected durations and the effects which changing explanatory variables have
on expected duration are presented in Tables 3A and 3B. Note that when we calculate the expected
duration for the last month data model, we have taken into consideration that this model uses a four-
month hazard (compared with the other models’ monthly hazards), while when we calculate the
expected duration for the last month dummy model, we add one-quarter of the last month dummy
coefficient to each support point of unobserved heterogeneity. The first row of Table 3A reports the
expected durations (without freezing the duration function for longer spells).             The expected
durations for left-censored spells, both employment and non-employment, are comparable across the
four models, with those from the last month dummy variable model being slightly shorter. For fresh
spells, the expected durations are quite similar between the constant and variable misreporting
probability models as both are about 11 to 12 months. However the estimates from the last month
data model are much larger: the expected fresh non-employment duration is about 23 months and
the expected fresh employment duration is about 33 months. The estimates from the last month
dummy variable model are between those from our misreporting probability models and the last
month data model, with the expected fresh non-employment duration being about 16 months and
the expected fresh employment duration being about 28 months. The longer expected durations for
fresh spells estimated from the last month data model can at least be partly explained by the loss of
short fresh spells (as discussed in Section 3).
        The rest of Table 3A presents the effects of changes in welfare policy variables or
macroeconomic conditions on expected durations. We first discuss the effects for left-censored non-
employment spells (top left panel). Increasing state maximum welfare benefits by 10% lengthens left-
censored non-employment spells by around half a month in all models, although this effect is not
statistically significant in the last month data model. We do not find statistically significant effects of
implementing welfare carrot or stick waivers; moreover there is not a statistically significant effect of
increasing the minimum wage by 10%. If the state overall unemployment rate increases by 25% (i.e.
from 6% to 7.5%), the expected duration of left-censored non-employment spells increases by about
1.4 to 1.8 months. None of the above variables have a precisely estimated effect in any model for
left-censored employment spells (top right panel).
        Next we discuss the estimated effects for fresh non-employment spells (bottom left panel).
Increasing the state maximum welfare benefit by 10% has a very small positive effect, and it is




                                                    25
statistically significant only for the last month dummy variable model. Implementing a carrot waiver
policy reduces the expected duration by 3 to 4 months, but this effect is not statistically significant
for the last month data model. Neither implementing a stick waiver policy nor increasing the
minimum wage has a statistically distinguishable effect on the expected duration. If the state
unemployment rate increases by 25%, the expected duration increases, in this case by about 0.8 to 1.2
months. This effect is not significant for the last month data model.
        Lastly we discuss the effects on fresh employment spells (bottom right panel). The constant
and variable misreporting probability models and the last month dummy model estimate significant
effects of increasing the state maximum welfare benefits by 10%, reducing the expected duration by
0.2 to 0.4 months. None of the four models precisely estimate any effects of the two welfare policies,
carrot and stick waivers. Only the constant and variable misreporting probability models estimate
significant effects of increasing the minimum wage by 10%, with the change increasing the expected
duration by about 1.5 months. Finally, the constant and variable misreporting probability models
predict that increasing the unemployment rate by 25% reduces the expected duration by about 0.7 of
a month while this effect is statistically insignificant in the other two models.
        Table 3B presents the effects of changing individual characteristics on expected durations.
Compared with the effects presented in Table 3A, in general these effects exhibit larger discrepancies
between models in terms of both magnitude and statistical significance. Again we first discuss the
effects for the left-censored non-employment spells (top left panel). Being older (age 35 versus age
25) makes the expected duration of these spells significantly longer. This effect is about 7.5 months
according to the two misreporting probability models, about 6.3 months according to the last month
dummy model, and about 3.6 months according to the last month data model. Those who have a
full 12 years of education have an expected duration 5 to 7 months shorter than those with less
education, and the last month data model predicts the largest effect. Only the two misreporting
probability models estimate significant effects of being an African American (versus being White),
lengthening the expected duration by about 2.5 months. The two misreporting probability models
and the last month dummy variable model estimate that being Hispanic (versus White) makes the
expected duration about 2 to 3 months longer. (Note that all of these effects are only significant at
the 10% level.) All four models estimate a positive and significant effect of having one child under
six years old relative to having none, and this effect on expected duration is about 4 to 5 months.
        We discuss the effects on left-censored employment spells in Table 3B (top right panel). All
models predict that growing older (again 35 versus 25) makes the expected duration 3 to 5 months
longer, with the estimate from the last month data model being the smallest. Having 12 years of
education versus having less education increases the expected duration by 7 to 9 months. The two




                                                    26
misreporting probability models estimate the effect of being African American to be small and
insignificant while the other two models estimate that this reduces expected employment duration by
a statistically significant 5 months. The two misreporting probability models and the last month
dummy model variable estimate being Hispanic as shortening the expected duration by about 2.6
months, while the last month data model does not detect a significant effect. Except for the last
month data model, all of the other three models predict that having one child less than 6 years old
reduces the expected duration by approximately 2 months.
        Turning to the fresh non-employment spells in Table 3B (bottom left panel), none of the
models predict that age has a significant effect. The two misreporting probability models estimate the
effect of having more education to be about 2 months, while the last month data model predicts this
effect to be almost 4 months. The estimated education effect from the last month dummy variable
model is about 3 months. Among the four models, the last month dummy variable model predicts
the largest effect of being African American, with the expected duration being about 4.6 months
longer. The two misreporting probability models predict this effect to be about 1.8 months, while the
effect in the last month data model is statistically insignificant. None of the models show a significant
effect of being Hispanic. The four models predict quite different effects of having one child less than
six years old. According to the two misreporting probability models, this effect is about 1.2 months,
while it is about 2 months according to the last month dummy variable model and about 3 months
according to the last month data model.
        Lastly we discuss the effects of changing the explanatory variables on the fresh employment
spells in Table 3B (bottom right panel). The two misreporting probability models estimate a small
effect of age 35 versus age 25, with an expected duration of approximately 1 additional month.
However, the other two models predict this effect to be much larger: more than 5 months. The last
month dummy and last month data models also predict the effect on expected duration of having 12
years of education relative to less schooling (about 6 and 5 months, respectively,) to be larger than
our misreporting probability models predict (about 3 months). Only the last month data model
predicts a significant effect of being African American, with expected duration being about 3 months
shorter. None of the models predict significant effects of being Hispanic or having one child less
than 6 years old (versus none).
        Tables 3A and 3B show that there are important differences between our seam bias
estimates and estimates from the last month dummy variable model, and very important differences
between our seam bias estimates and those obtained using the last month data. As discussed in
Section 3, when considering completed spells, shifting from monthly data to the last month data
yields a loss of about 20% of left-censored spells and about 50% of fresh spells. The substantial




                                                   27
discrepancies in both magnitude and statistical significance between the estimates from our seam bias
correction models and those from the last month data model are likely to be due at least partially to
this major shift in data structure. While the last month dummy model often produces results that are
closer to the results from the seam bias correction models than the results of the last month data
model, the fact that important differences remain indicates that the last month dummy model is not a
totally adequate solution.


5.3      Results from the Extended Model with a Fraction of Individuals Accurately
         Reporting Their Employment Histories
         To further explore the misreporting behavior, we estimate an extended model as specified in
equation (4.13) of Section 4.4 where some individuals never misreport. This model involves one
additional parameter PA , the fraction of individuals who always report accurately. In addition, we

also estimate a version of this richer model allowing PA and the six misreporting parameters to vary
with ethnicity.   Our Online Appendix Table A3 presents the estimated hazard coefficients from the
constant and variable probability versions of this richer model, while the misreporting estimates are
reported in Table 4. The estimated hazard coefficients and standard errors are remarkably similar
between the two models, and indeed they are very close to the results for the hazard coefficients
from the constant and variable probability models discussed in Section 5.1 above. The last row of
Table 4 Panel B reports the fraction of individuals reporting accurately. The constant probability
model estimates that fraction to be 15.5% with a 95% confidence interval of approximately (9.6%,
21.4%). Interestingly, the race effects are no longer statistically significant in this richer model. These
results reinforce our earlier conclusion that a simple constant misreporting probability model will
serve the purpose of estimating the parameters of the hazard functions, but if a researcher is also
interested in misreporting behavior per se, increasing the model complexity provides added valuable
information about misreporting behavior.27


5.4      Simulation Results for the Effects of Changing an Explanatory Variable on the
         Fraction of Time Spent Employed
         Estimating the effect of changing an explanatory variable on the fraction of time that an
individual is employed is another useful exercise for policy purposes. We use simulations to predict
the fraction of time spent in employment over 3-year (short-run), 6-year (medium-run) and 10-year


27We do not test the null hypothesis that the fraction of individuals who always report truthfully is zero, since
again we would have to take into account that we are testing whether a parameter is on the boundary of the
parameter space.



                                                      28
(long-run) horizons, as well as to examine how these fractions change with macro and public policy
variables. We only use our simple constant misreporting probability model (presented in Tables 2A
and 2B) for the simulation, since as noted above, the hazard estimates are very similar across our
misreporting models. We simulate an employment/non-employment history for each individual over
a particular time horizon and then calculate the sample fraction of time employed based on simulated
individual histories. Note that the simulated fractions depend on the parameter estimates for all four
types of spells (but not on the misreporting probabilities). Because the simulations are discontinuous
functions of the parameter estimates, we cannot use the delta method to obtain standard errors;
instead to obtain standard errors we follow Ham and Woutersen (2009) and sample from the
asymptotic distribution of the parameters. We outline our simulation procedure in the following
steps:
1. For each individual, we simulate her 10-year monthly employment history by unobserved
    heterogeneity type.28 For example, if the model indicates that there are two points of support for
    unobserved heterogeneity ( J = 2 in the specification described in Section 4.4), we simulate two
    employment histories for each individual conditional on belonging to each of the two types.
    1.1 The starting point of an employment history is determined by the data. If a person was in a
         left-censored non-employment spell at the beginning of the sample, her simulated
         employment history will start with a left-censored non-employment spell.
    1.2 From the starting month, an individual monthly hazard rate is calculated based on
         unobserved heterogeneity type, observed heterogeneity (individual means over the sample
         period are used), spell type (e.g. left-censored employment spell) and spell length.29
    1.3 A uniform random number is drawn to compare with the calculated hazard and determine
         whether the individual exits into the next spell. Steps 1.2 and 1.3 are repeated for 120
         months for each individual and unobserved heterogeneity type. If individual i ( i = 1, N ) of

         unobserved type j ( j = 1, J ) is employed in month t ( t = 1,120 ) then Eijt = 1 , otherwise

          Eijt = 0 .

    1.4 For individual i , we average simulated histories across unobserved heterogeneity type
         according to the estimated probabilities p j to yield weighted employment history




28 Our simulation results (including standard errors) are insensitive to increasing the number of simulations per

person.
29 Again we face the issue of what to do with the duration dependence once we get out of sample. We choose

to freeze the hazard function for durations longer than 15 months at 15 months for fresh spells and freeze the
hazard function for durations longer than 25 months at 25 months for left-censored spells.



                                                       29
                 J
         Eit =   ∑p E
                 j =1
                            j
                                t
                                ij   .

2. We average the simulated histories over the sample and over the first 36, 72, or all 120 months to
    estimate 3-year, 6-year, and 10-year employment fractions
                        N       36

                        ∑∑ E             i
                                          t


        ER3 yr =        i =1 t =1
                         36 ⋅ N
                        N       72

                        ∑∑ E             i
                                          t


        ER6 yr =        i =1 t =1
                         72 ⋅ N
                         N 120

                        ∑∑ E                  i
                                               t


        ER10 yr =        i =1 t =1
                         120 ⋅ N
3. We simulate standard errors for estimates of fractions as follows:
    3.1 We assume generate (1000) alternative values of the parameters using the estimated
        asymptotic Normal distribution.
    3.2 We repeat steps 1 to 2 for each set of parameter values to get new estimates of ER3 yr , ER6 yr

        and ER10 yr .

    3.3 We construct standard errors for all three fractions using the 1000 estimates of ER3 yr , ER6 yr

        and ER10 yr .

4. To predict the effect of changing one of the macro or policy variables on the above three
    fractions, we follow the previous steps by setting the variable of interest at different levels for
    each person and then taking the difference in estimated fractions. For example to estimate the
    effect of implementing positive incentives to leave welfare (carrot waiver policy), we first set the
    carrot waiver dummy to 1 for each person (i.e. carrot waivers are implemented in all states) to
    calculate ER31 yr , ER61 yr and ER101 yr ; then set the carrot waiver dummy to 0 for each person (i.e.

    carrot waivers are not implemented in any state) to calculate ER30yr , ER60yr and ER100 yr .

    ER31 yr − ER30yr , ER61 yr − ER60yr and ER10
                                              1
                                                 yr − ER10 yr are the estimated effects of implementing a
                                                        0



    carrot waiver policy.
5. We estimate standard errors for the effects of changing macro or public policy variables
    following step 3 at each level of those variables.
        Table 5 presents our simulation results. The first row contains the estimated employment
fractions for 3-year, 6-year and 10-year periods, respectively. The predicted employment fractions are



                                                   30
only around 44% for our sample of single mothers with 12 years of education or less. The rest of the
table presents how those employment fractions would change with welfare policies and general
macroeconomic conditions. Increasing the state maximum monthly welfare benefits by 10% reduces
the predicted fraction of time employed by 0.2 to 0.3 percentage points. This effect is statistically
significant but relatively small. Implementing a carrot waiver policy increases the predicted fraction
of time employed by 3.6 to 4.2 percentage points, although these effects are only significant at the
10% level. Implementing a stick waiver policy has no effect on the predicted fraction of time
employed. We find that increasing the minimum wage by 10% also has essentially no effect on the
employment fraction. Finally if the overall state unemployment rate increases by 25%, the fraction of
time employed is predicted to fall by 1.4 to 1.8 percentage points.


6.      Summary and Conclusions
        Transitions into and out of employment for disadvantaged single mothers are of crucial
importance to policymakers, as they determine unemployment rates, poverty rates and the overall
well-being of many low-income families. In this paper we use the SIPP to estimate monthly
transition rates into and out of employment for these women. Such employment dynamics have been
relatively understudied in the literature, given the substantial policy interest paid to less-educated
single mothers and their children and the emphasis that policy makers have placed on increasing
employment durations as a means of increasing on-the-job human capital for disadvantaged women.
        Seam bias is an important problem that faces any researcher estimating transition rates from
the SIPP. In this study we propose a parametric approach to address this issue. Specifically, we
develop a monthly discrete time duration model with parameters representing the propensity to
underreport transitions in the first three months of a reference period. We first assume that
misreporting probabilities are constant across individuals, and then consider a second case where we
allow the misreporting probabilities to depend on demographic variables. We show that both models
are identified without restricting the form of the duration dependence as long as we assume that the
misreporting probabilities are the same for left-censored and fresh employment (non-employment)
spells. We also estimate the hazard functions using two approaches found in previous literature: using
only the last month data and putting in a dummy variable in the hazard for month 4 and then
adjusting the constant using the estimated coefficient on this dummy variable. We find that our
estimates of the parameters of the hazard functions from our seam bias models are not sensitive to
allowing the misreporting probabilities to depend on race. However, we do find that there are
important differences between our seam bias estimates and those obtained from the last month
dummy variable model, and very important differences between our seam bias estimates and those




                                                  31
obtained using only last month data. Our estimates of the hazard functions are also robust to
allowing for the possibility that a certain fraction of individuals never misreport. We conclude that
allowing for richer models of misreporting are important for understanding misreporting behavior,
but not for estimating the hazard functions.
        In considering the issue of whether we have the “right” model of misreporting, we would
make the following points: First, we estimate four misreporting models: i) our main model with
constant misreporting probabilities, ii) our main model in which the misreporting probabilities are
allowed to vary with the characteristics of the individual, iii) the richer model in which some
respondents truthfully report while others misreport with constant misreporting probabilities, and iv)
the richer model still in which the probability of a respondent always truthfully reporting and the
misreporting probabilities vary with ethnicity. As noted above, all four of these models produce very
similar estimates of the parameters of the hazard functions. Second, the telescoping behavior
assumed in our misreporting models is exactly the type of behavior that the 2004 revision of the
SIPP aimed to minimize. Third, a previous study that compared survey data against administrative
records (Goudreau, Oberheu and Vaughan 1984) also suggests that our assumed misreporting
behavior is the most common source of discrepancies between survey data and administrative
records. Fourth, our results on higher misreporting by minorities mirror the previous findings of
Kalton and Miller (1991) and Black, Sanders, and Taylor (2003), who investigated how different
demographic factors affect individuals’ reporting of Social Security income amounts and education,
respectively. Finally, we also consider three alternative models of misreporting and are able to reject
them based on aggregates of our micro data. Thus we have considered a wide range of misreporting
models; moreover, our choice of these models and our results are supported by previous research.


References

Aaronson, S., and J. Pingle (2006): “The Employment Dynamics of Single Mothers Following
        TANF.” Mimeo, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Acs, G., K. R. Phillips, and S. Nelson (2003): “The Road Not Taken? Changes in Welfare Entry
        During the 1990s.” Urban Institute Discussion Paper 03-03.
Ashenfelter, O., and D. Card (1981): “Using Longitudinal Data to Estimate the Employment Effects
        of the Minimum Wage.” Centre for Labour Economics, London School of Economics
        Discussion Paper.
Baker, M., and A. Melino (2000): “Duration Dependence and Nonparametric Heterogeneity: A
        Monte Carlo Study.” Journal of Econometrics, 96(2), 357–393.
Black, D., S. Sanders, and L. Taylor (2003): “Measurement of Higher Education in the Census and
        Current Population Survey.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 98(463), 545-554.
Blank, R., and P. Ruggles (1996): “When Do Women Use Aid to Families with Dependent Children
        and Food Stamps? The Dynamics of Eligibility Versus Participation.” Journal of Human
        Resources, Winter, 31(1), 57-89.



                                                  32
Campolieti, M., T. Fang, and M. Gunderson (2005): “Minimum Wage Impacts on Youth
         Employment Transitions, 1993-1999.” Canadian Journal of Economics, 38(1), 81-104.
Chakravarty, S., and A. Sarkar (1999): “Liquidity in U.S. Fixed Income Markets: A Comparison of the
         Bid-Ask Spread in Corporate, Government and Municipal Bond Markets.” Mimeo, Purdue
         University.
Currie, J., and B. C. Fallick (1996): “The Minimum Wage and the Employment of Youth: Evidence
         from the NLSY.” Journal of Human Resources, Spring, 31(2), 404-428.
Czajka, J. (1983): “Subannual Income Estimation” in Technical, Conceptual and Administrative Lessons of
         the Income Survey Development Program (ISDP), ed. by M. David, New York: Social Science
         Research Council, 87-97.
Davies, R. B. (1987): “Hypothesis Testing when a Nuisance Parameter is Present Only under the
         Alternative.” Biometrika, 74(1), 33-43.
Eberwein, C., J. Ham, and R. LaLonde (1997): “The Impact of Being Offered and Receiving
         Classroom Training on the Employment Histories of Disadvantaged Women: Evidence
         From Experimental Data.” The Review of Economic Studies, 64(4), 655-682.
________ (2002): “Alternative Methods of Estimating Program Effects in Event History Models.”
         Labour Economics, 9(2), 249-278.
Elbers, C. and G. Ridder (1982): “True and Spurious Duration Dependence: The Identifiability of
         the Proportional Hazard Model.” Review of Economic Studies, 49(3), 403-409.
Elsby, M., R. Michaels, and G. Solon (2009): “The Ins and Outs of Cyclical Unemployment.”
         American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1), 84–110.
Fitzgerald, J. M. (2004): “Measuring the Impact of Welfare Benefits on Welfare Durations: State
         Stratified Partial Likelihood and Fixed Effect Approaches.” Topics in Economic Analysis &
         Policy, 4(1), article 1, http://www.bepress.com/bejeap/topics/vol4/iss1/art1.
Gittleman, M. (2001): “Declining Caseloads: What Do the Dynamics of Welfare Participation
         Reveal?” Industrial Relations, 40(4), 537-570.
Goudreau, K., H. Oberheu, and D. Vaughan (1984): “An Assessment of the Quality of Survey
         Reports of Income from the Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) Program.”
         Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 2(2), 179-186.
Grogger, J. (2004): “Welfare Transitions in the 1990s: The Economy, Welfare Policy, and the EITC.”
         Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 23(4), 671-695.
Ham, J. and R. LaLonde (1996): “The Effect of Sample Selection and Initial Conditions in Duration
         Models: Evidence from Experimental Data on Training.” Econometrica, 64(1), 175-205.
Ham, J. and L. Shore-Sheppard (2005a): “Did Expanding Medicaid Affect Welfare Participation?”
         Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 58(3), 452-470.
_________ (2005b): “The Effect of Medicaid Expansions for Low-Income Children on Medicaid
         Participation and Private Insurance Coverage: Evidence from the SIPP.” Journal of Public
         Economics, 89(1), 57-83.
Ham, J., J. Svejnar, and K. Terrell (1998): “Unemployment, the Social Safety Net and Efficiency
         during the Transition: Evidence from Micro Data on Czech and Slovak Men.” American
         Economic Review, 88(5), 1117- 1142.
Ham, J., and T. Woutersen (2009): “Calculating Standard Errors for Discontinuous Functions of
         Parameter Estimates.” Mimeo, Johns Hopkins.
Hamersma, S. (2006): “Why Don’t Eligible Firms Claim Hiring Subsidies? The Role of Job
         Duration.” Mimeo, University of Florida.




                                                  33
Heckman, J. J., and B. Singer (1984a): “Econometric Duration Analysis.” Journal of Econometrics, 24(1-
         2), 63-132.
_________ (1984b): “A Method for Minimizing the Impact of Distributional Assumptions in
         Econometric Models for Duration Data.” Econometrica, 52(2), 271-320.
_________ (1984c): “The Identifiability of the Proportional Hazard Model.” Review of Economic Studies,
         51(2), 231-241.
Hofferth, S. L., S. Stanhope, and K. M. Harris (2002): “Exiting Welfare in the 1990s: Did Public
         Policy Influence Recipients’ Behavior?” Population Research and Policy Review, 21, 433–472.
Honore, B. (1993): “Identification Results for Duration Models with Multiple Spells.” Review of
         Economic Studies, 60(1), 241-246.
Kalton, G., and M. E. Miller (1991): “The Seam Effect with Social Security Income in the Survey of
         Income and Program Participation.” Journal of Official Statistics, 7(2), 235-245.
Lemaitre, G. (1992): “Dealing with the Seam Problem for the Survey of Labour and Income
         Dynamics.” SLID Research Paper Series, No. 92–05. Ottawa: Statistics Canada.
Manski, C. (1994): “Analog Estimation of Econometric Models,” in Handbook of Econometrics, Vol.
         4, ed. by R. Engle and D. McFadden, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2559-2582.
Marquis, K. H. and J. C. Moore (1990): “Measurement Errors in the Survey of Income and Program
         Participation (SIPP) Program Reports.” 1990 Annual Research Conference Proceedings,
         Washington, D.C.: U.S. Bureau of the Census.
McCall, B. P. (1996): “The Identifiability of the Mixed Proportional Hazards Model with Time-
         Varying Coefficients.” Econometric Theory, 12(4), 733-738.
Moore, J. C. (2008): “Seam Bias in the 2004 SIPP Panel: Much Improved, but Much Bias Still
         Remains.” U.S. Census Bureau Statistical Research Division Survey Methodology Research
         Report Series #2008-3. Available at http://www.census.gov/srd/papers/pdf/rsm2008-
         03.pdf.
Pischke, S. (1995): “Individual Income, Incomplete Information, and Aggregate Consumption.”
         Econometrica, 63(4), 805-840.
Ribar, D. (2005): “Transitions from Welfare and the Employment Prospects of Low-Skill Workers.”
         Southern Economic Journal, 71(3), 514-533.
Rips, L. J., F. G. Conrad, and S. S. Fricker (2003): “Straightening the Seam Effect in Panel Surveys.”
         Public Opinion Quarterly, 67(4), 522-554.
Romeo, C. (2001): “Controlling for Seam Problems in Duration Model Estimates: With Application
         to the Current Population Survey and the Computer Aided Telephone Interview/Computer
         Aided Personal Interview Overlap Survey.” Journal of Human Resources, 36(3), 467-499.
Ryscavage, P. (1988): “Measuring Spells of Unemployment and Their Outcomes.” U. S. Bureau of
         the Census SIPP Working Paper #84, (http://www.census.gov/dusd/MAB/wp84.pdf).
Shimer, R. (2005a): Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment, Mimeo, University of Chicago.
_________ (2005b): “The Cyclicality of Hires, Separations, and Job-to-Job Transitions.” Federal
         Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, July-August, 87(4), 493-507.
Sudman S., and N. M. Bradburn (1974): Response Effects in Surveys: A Review and Synthesis.
         Chicago: Aldine Publishing Co.
Yelowitz, A. (1995): “The Medicaid Notch, Labor Supply, and Welfare Participation: Evidence from
         Eligibility Expansions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(4), 909-940.
Young, N. (1989): “Wave Seam Effects in the SIPP: Implications for Analysis.” U.S. Bureau of the
         Census, Mimeo.




                                                 34
          Table 1. Characteristics of Employment and Non-employment Spells
            Single Mothers with a Maximum of Twelve Years of Education
                                               Left-censored spells                  Fresh spells
Panel A: Non-employment spells                  Mean      Std Dev                 Mean      Std Dev
Right censored (%)                              64.5%                             42.6%
African American                                  0.34       0.48                   0.33        0.47
Hispanic                                          0.23       0.42                   0.17        0.38
12 years of schooling                             0.44       0.50                   0.61        0.49
Age                                              30.08       9.01                  31.24        8.65
Never married                                     0.50       0.50                   0.45        0.50
# of children < 18                                1.98       1.19                   1.72        0.97
Age of youngest child                             5.00       5.09                   6.56        5.10
# of children < 6                                 0.93       0.91                   0.65        0.75
Disability (adult or child)                       0.24       0.42                   0.19        0.39
Disability variable missing                       0.17       0.37                   0.08        0.27

number of spells                                 3,528                            2,578
number of individuals                            3,528                            1,889
number of observations: year*individual         63,384                           18,811

                                               Left-censored spells                  Fresh spells
Panel B: Employment spells                      Mean      Std Dev                 Mean      Std Dev
Right censored (%)                              69.9%                             47.8%
African American                                  0.26       0.44                   0.32        0.47
Hispanic                                          0.14       0.35                   0.18        0.39
12 years of schooling                             0.74       0.44                   0.61        0.49
Age                                              33.99       8.49                  30.86        8.58
Never married                                     0.27       0.45                   0.45        0.50
# of children < 18                                1.55       0.86                   1.78        1.02
Age of youngest child                             8.14       5.44                   6.28        5.12
# of children < 6                                 0.46       0.66                   0.68        0.76
Disability (adult or child)                       0.12       0.33                   0.18        0.38
Disability variable missing                       0.13       0.34                   0.07        0.26

number of spells                                 3,826                            2,732
number of individuals                            3,826                            2,000
number of observations: year*individual         71,613                           21,376

total number of individuals                      7,354
total number of observations                   175,184

Notes:
1. Sample means are from the first month of spells.
2. Summary statistics across spells are not independent in the sense that some individuals show up in
both left-censored and fresh spells.
3. The numbers of spells reported in this table include both completed spells and right-censored
spells.
4. The total number of individuals in the sample is not the sum of the number of individuals in the
four types of spells because some individuals have multiple spells of different types, e.g. a left-
censored non-employment spell followed by a fresh employment spell.




                                                 35
                     Table 2A. Duration Models of Employment and Non-employment Spells Single Mothers
                             with a Maximum of Twelve Years of Education - Left-censored Spells
                                              Left-censored non-employment spells                                 Left-censored employment spells

                               Constant           Variable        Last Month         Last Month    Constant          Variable       Last Month      Last Month
                              Probabilities     Probabilities       Dummy                 Data    Probabilities    Probabilities     Dummy              Data
Maximum Welfare Benefit         -9.985**          -9.998**         -10.130**          -11.918**     -7.757**         -7.754**          -0.756           1.561
                                 (2.386)           (2.386)           (2.122)            (2.392)      (2.957)          (2.957)         (2.262)         (2.556)
Unemployment Rate              -0.0613**          -0.061**         -0.0742**           -0.081**      -0.0004          -0.0003         0.038*          0.046*
                                 (0.023)           (0.023)           (0.021)            (0.024)      (0.028)          (0.028)         (0.021)         (0.025)
Minimum Wage                       0.133            0.133             0.140               0.088       0.280            0.281            0.127           0.051
                                 (0.189)           (0.189)           (0.166)            (0.194)      (0.238)          (0.238)         (0.175)         (0.199)
Welfare Waiver Stick              -0.171            -0.171            -0.217              0.072       -0.397           -0.398          -0.119          -0.091
                                 (0.259)           (0.259)           (0.235)            (0.225)      (0.344)          (0.344)         (0.246)         (0.278)
Welfare Waiver Carrot              0.043            0.044             0.085              0.106        -0.014           -0.014          -0.104          -0.255
                                 (0.190)           (0.190)           (0.166)            (0.176)      (0.218)          (0.218)         (0.170)         (0.199)
African American                -0.171**          -0.175**            -0.117             -0.129       0.088            0.085          0.346**         0.388**
                                 (0.085)           (0.087)           (0.077)            (0.086)      (0.100)          (0.103)         (0.076)         (0.086)
Hispanic                        -0.184**           -0.188*           -0.140*             -0.101       0.209*           0.207*         0.199**         0.133**
                                 (0.096)           (0.098)           (0.085)            (0.095)      (0.111)          (0.114)         (0.090)         (0.105)
12 Years of Schooling            0.365**          0.365**           0.420**             0.509**     -0.549**         -0.549**        -0.600**        -0.670**
                                 (0.070)           (0.070)           (0.064)            (0.072)      (0.084)          (0.084)         (0.066)         (0.077)
Age                             -0.049**          -0.049**          -0.040**           -0.026**     -0.039**         -0.039**        -0.029**        -0.026**
                                 (0.007)           (0.007)           (0.006)            (0.006)      (0.007)          (0.007)         (0.005)         (0.006)
Never Married                   -0.441**          -0.441**          -0.367**           -0.276**     0.203**          0.204**          0.229**         0.279**
                                 (0.084)           (0.084)           (0.076)            (0.085)      (0.097)          (0.097)         (0.076)         (0.088)
# of Children < 18                 0.010            0.011             -0.005              0.038       0.079            0.079            0.035           0.017
                                 (0.039)           (0.039)           (0.035)            (0.038)      (0.052)          (0.052)         (0.040)         (0.045)
Age of Youngest Child              0.003            0.003             0.008              -0.012       -0.016           -0.016          -0.016         -0.024*
                                 (0.013)           (0.013)           (0.011)            (0.013)      (0.014)          (0.014)         (0.011)         (0.012)
# of Children < 6               -0.284**          -0.284**          -0.292**           -0.363**     0.160**          0.160**          0.137**           0.103
                                 (0.063)           (0.063)           (0.057)            (0.068)      (0.079)          (0.079)         (0.062)         (0.074)
Disability                      -0.466**          -0.466**          -0.596**           -0.615**     0.815**          0.817**          0.769**         0.844**
                                 (0.092)           (0.092)           (0.085)            (0.092)      (0.103)          (0.103)         (0.083)         (0.094)
Disability Variable Missing       -0.106            -0.106          -0.209**           -0.428**     0.363**          0.363**          0.332**           0.009
                                 (0.118)           (0.118)           (0.106)            (0.127)      (0.139)          (0.139)         (0.107)         (0.140)




                                                                                36
           Table 2A. (continued) Duration Models of Employment and Non-employment Spells Single Mothers
                         with a Maximum of Twelve Years of Education - Left-censored Spells

                                             Left-censored non-employment spells                                 Left-censored employment spells

                              Constant           Variable        Last Month         Last Month    Constant          Variable       Last Month      Last Month
                             Probabilities     Probabilities      Dummy                Data      Probabilities    Probabilities     Dummy             Data
log(duration)                  -0.363**          -0.363**         0.288**            -0.705**      -0.314**         -0.314**        0.432**         -0.707**
                                (0.041)           (0.041)          (0.124)            (0.064)       (0.049)          (0.049)         (0.150)         (0.065)
Square of log(duration)                                           -0.188**                                                          -0.238**
                                                                   (0.035)                                                           (0.040)
Last-Month Dummy                   -                 -            0.700**                -             -                -            1.359**            -
                                                                   (0.064)                                                           (0.065)

Unobserved Heterogeneity
Theta1                         -1.195*            -1.193*           -1.121*           1.386*       -2.971**          -2.970**        -3.579**        -0.369
                               (0.708)            (0.708)           (0.673)           (0.846)       (0.854)           (0.854)         (0.660)        (0.800)
Theta2                          -1.131             -1.132          -1.993**            0.685       -3.691**          -3.692**        -4.048**        -0.878
                               (0.707)            (0.707)           (0.632)           (0.718)       (0.842)           (0.843)         (0.657)        (0.742)
Heterogeneity Probability
                               0.396**            0.396**          0.365**           0.265**
                               (0.022)            (0.022)          (0.106)           (0.125)
Notes:
1. We allow unobserved heterogeneity to be correlated across different type of spells (see Section 4.4). For each model, the heterogeneity probability is
the same for each of the four types of spells.
2. Year dummies are included in each regression and their coefficients are omitted.
3. Standard errors are in parentheses.
4. The maximum welfare benefit variable has been divided by 10,000.
* Significant at the 10% level. ** Significant at the 5% level.




                                                                               37
                     Table 2B. Duration Models of Employment and Non-employment Spells Single Mothers
                                with a Maximum of Twelve Years of Education - Fresh Spells
                                              Fresh non-employment spells                                       Fresh employment spells

                               Constant         Variable      Last Month         Last Month    Constant         Variable      Last Month   Last Month
                              Probabilities   Probabilities    Dummy                 Data     Probabilities   Probabilities    Dummy           Data
Maximum Welfare Benefit           -3.414          -3.419       -7.348**             -3.875      8.481**         8.474**         5.542**     11.675**
                                 (2.252)         (2.252)        (2.462)            (3.666)       (2.338)         (2.339)        (2.393)      (3.924)
Unemployment Rate               -0.054**        -0.054**       -0.054**             -0.033      0.060**         0.060**           0.023        0.055
                                 (0.021)         (0.021)        (0.023)            (0.036)       (0.021)         (0.021)        (0.022)      (0.039)
Minimum Wage                      -0.150          -0.149         0.072              -0.232      -0.504**        -0.505**         -0.094        0.418
                                 (0.181)         (0.182)        (0.189)            (0.296)       (0.198)         (0.198)        (0.200)      (0.321)
Welfare Waiver Stick              -0.321          -0.322         -0.309             -0.215        0.176           0.176          -0.149       -0.508
                                 (0.199)         (0.199)        (0.208)            (0.309)       (0.181)         (0.182)        (0.204)      (0.348)
Welfare Waiver Carrot            0.380**        0.380**        0.370**               0.243        -0.120          -0.120         -0.060       -0.276
                                 (0.127)         (0.128)        (0.150)            (0.223)       (0.139)         (0.139)        (0.148)      (0.235)
African American                -0.200**        -0.196**       -0.332**             -0.089         0.061           0.061          0.065      0.247*
                                 (0.076)         (0.077)        (0.087)            (0.128)       (0.079)         (0.080)        (0.083)      (0.144)
Hispanic                          -0.049          -0.046         0.023               0.194        -0.012          -0.012         -0.062       -0.093
                                 (0.086)         (0.086)        (0.097)            (0.149)       (0.097)         (0.098)        (0.099)      (0.164)
12 Years of Schooling            0.211**        0.211**        0.226**             0.284**      -0.420**        -0.420**       -0.358**     -0.365**
                                 (0.063)         (0.063)        (0.070)            (0.111)       (0.069)         (0.069)        (0.071)      (0.119)
Age                                0.001          0.001          0.002              -0.001      -0.015**        -0.015**       -0.032**     -0.039**
                                 (0.006)         (0.006)        (0.006)            (0.009)       (0.006)         (0.006)        (0.007)      (0.011)
Never Married                     -0.075          -0.074         -0.131             -0.130         0.079           0.079          0.080      0.239*
                                 (0.075)         (0.075)        (0.084)            (0.130)       (0.080)         (0.080)        (0.083)      (0.146)
# of Children < 18               -0.063*         -0.063*         0.021              -0.004        -0.018          -0.018         -0.005        0.061
                                 (0.038)         (0.038)        (0.041)            (0.061)       (0.037)         (0.037)        (0.039)      (0.064)
Age of Youngest Child              0.004          0.003          0.005              -0.001        -0.006          -0.006         -0.002        0.002
                                 (0.011)         (0.011)        (0.013)            (0.019)       (0.012)         (0.012)        (0.012)      (0.020)
# of Children < 6               -0.128**         -0.128*       -0.157**           -0.232**        -0.023          -0.023          0.003       -0.060
                                 (0.064)         (0.064)        (0.071)            (0.111)       (0.062)         (0.062)        (0.065)      (0.110)
Disability                      -0.595**        -0.596**       -0.486**           -0.590**      0.586**         0.587**         0.480**      0.426**
                                 (0.083)         (0.083)        (0.092)            (0.148)       (0.090)         (0.090)        (0.090)      (0.158)
Disability Variable Missing      -0.283*         -0.283*       -0.443**           -0.715**      0.702**         0.702**           0.152       -0.418
                                 (0.157)         (0.157)        (0.149)            (0.278)       (0.155)         (0.155)        (0.143)      (0.270)




                                                                            38
            Table 2B (continued) Duration Models of Employment and Non-employment Spells Single Mothers
                             with a Maximum of Twelve Years of Education - Fresh Spells
                                            Fresh non-employment spells                                       Fresh employment spells

                             Constant         Variable      Last Month         Last Month    Constant         Variable      Last Month   Last Month
                            Probabilities   Probabilities    Dummy                Data      Probabilities   Probabilities    Dummy          Data
log(duration)                   0.103           0.101          -0.041           -0.688**       0.089            0.087         0.362**     -0.706**
                              (0.099)          (0.099)        (0.100)            (0.116)      (0.101)          (0.101)        (0.109)      (0.135)
Square of log(duration)        -0.019           -0.019       -0.116**                          0.065*          0.065*        -0.278**
                              (0.031)          (0.031)        (0.037)                         (0.035)          (0.035)        (0.040)
Last-Month Dummy                  -                -         0.950**                -             -               -           1.360**        -
                                                              (0.060)                                                         (0.061)

Unobserved Heterogeneity
Theta1                            0.541         0.533         -2.448**           -0.004       -2.118**        -2.113**         -1.169      -0.319
                                 (0.662)       (0.662)         (0.694)           (1.117)       (0.711)         (0.713)         (0.743)    (1.224)
Theta2                          -1.634**      -1.640**         -1.251*            1.454         0.264           0.270          -2.254     -2.172*
                                 (0.663)       (0.663)         (0.694)           (1.104)       (0.711)         (0.713)         (0.740)    (1.247)
Heterogeneity Probability
                                0.396**       0.396**         0.365**           0.265**
                                (0.022)       (0.022)         (0.106)           (0.125)
Notes: See notes to Table 2A.




                                                                          39
                    Table 2C. Misreporting Probabilities Due to Seam Bias
                    Constant Probabilities vs. Probabilities Varying by Race
                                      Panel A: Parameter Estimates
                                Non-employment Spells                       Employment Spells
                        Constant        Probabilities Varying     Constant        Probabilities Varying
                      Probabilities          with Race          Probabilities          with Race
Month 1 Intercept        0.275*               0.796**             0.989**               0.0986
                        (0.142)               (0.168)             (0.149)                (0.17)
Month 2 Intercept        -0.174                0.211              0.410**               -0.350*
                        (0.174)               (0.181)             (0.158)               (0.198)
Month 3 Intercept        -0.236               0.1349              0.345**               -0.375*
                        (0.177)               (0.184)             (0.161)               (0.194)
Minority Dummy                                0.384**                                    0.299*
                                              (0.159)                                   (0.156)


                                   Panel B: Misreporting Probabilities
                                Non-employment Spells                       Employment Spells
                        Constant        Probabilities Varying     Constant        Probabilities Varying
                      Probabilities          with Race          Probabilities          with Race
      Month 1           0.568**         White       0.525**       0.729**         White       0.689**
                        (0.035)                     (0.042)       (0.029)                     (0.036)
                                      Minorities 0.598**                        Minorities 0.765**
                                                    (0.039)                                   (0.030)

      Month 2           0.456**         White       0.413**       0.601**         White       0.553**
                        (0.043)                     (0.048)       (0.038)                     (0.045)
                                       Minorities   0.487**                      Minorities   0.645**
                                                    (0.040)                                   (0.035)

      Month 3           0.441**         White       0.407**       0.585**         White       0.534**
                        (0.044)                     (0.047)       (0.039)                     (0.046)
                                       Minorities   0.481**                      Minorities   0.627**
                                                    (0.037)                                   (0.035)
Notes: See notes to Table 2A. Also:
1. For the constant probability model, the parameters in Panel A are based on the reparameterization
specified in Section 5.1.
2. For the model with seam bias probabilities varying with the minority dummy variable, the
parameters in Panel A are specified in equation (4.11).
3. Standard errors in Panel B are calculated using the delta method.




                                                     40
                      Table 3A. Expected Durations and the Effects of Changes in Macro and Public Policy Variables
                                              Employment and Non-employment Spells

                                           Left-censored non-employment spells                                Left-censored employment spells
                                    Constant            Variable                                  Constant           Variable
                                   Misreporting       Misreporting     Last-Month   Last Month   Misreporting      Misreporting     Last-Month   Last Month
                                   Probabilities      Probabilities   Dummy Model      Data      Probabilities     Probabilities   Dummy Model      Data
 Average Expected Duration (in       39.305**           39.299**        35.478**     38.834**      42.248**          42.252**        38.999**     41.157**
 months)                              (0.731)            (0.725)         (0.574)      (0.600)       (0.608)           (0.634)         (0.533)      (0.601)
 Changes with respect to:
 Maximum welfare benefits            0.515**            0.516**         0.552**        0.585         0.352             0.352          0.040         -0.074
 increasing by 10%                   (0.143)            (0.169)         (0.185)       (0.495)       (0.359)           (0.259)        (0.112)       (0.228)
 Carrot waiver                        -0.639             -0.654         -1.313         -1.498        0.168             0.165          1.436         3.055
 (implemented - not implemented)      (2.892)            (2.827)        (2.608)       (2.497)       (2.655)           (2.537)        (2.253)       (2.225)
 Stick waiver                          2.427              2.427          3.228         -1.005        4.483             4.485          1.639         1.125
 (implemented - not implemented)      (3.458)            (3.503)        (3.416)       (3.195)       (3.514)           (3.537)        (3.400)       (3.374)
                                      -0.768             -0.773         -0.841         -0.485       -1.381             -1.383        -0.707         -0.250
 Minimum wage increasing by 10%
                                      (1.423)            (1.079)        (1.142)       (1.345)       (1.043)           (1.201)        (0.972)       (0.873)
 Unemployment rate                   1.446**            1.445**         1.834**      1.806**         0.007             0.006         -0.898         -0.980
 increasing by 25%                   (0.580)            (0.713)         (0.643)      (0.599)        (0.548)           (0.587)        (0.525)       (0.628)
                                                   Fresh non-employment spells                                   Fresh employment spells
                                    Constant            Variable                                  Constant           Variable
                                   Misreporting       Misreporting     Last-Month   Last Month   Misreporting      Misreporting     Last-Month   Last Month
                                   Probabilities      Probabilities   Dummy Model      Data      Probabilities     Probabilities   Dummy Model      Data
 Average Expected Duration (in       11.821**           11.827**        16.458**     23.342**      11.929**          11.920**        27.711**     32.563**
 months)                              (0.516)            (0.514)         (1.312)      (2.254)       (0.495)           (0.497)         (1.394)      (2.197)
 Changes with respect to:
 Maximum welfare benefits              0.118              0.119         0.375**        0.196       -0.220**          -0.220**        -0.341*        -0.565
 increasing by 10%                    (0.119)            (0.149)        (0.136)       (0.407)       (0.070)           (0.062)        (0.206)       (0.446)
 Carrot waiver                       -3.099**           -3.103**        -4.531**       -3.139        0.881             0.885          0.988         3.471
 (implemented - not implemented)      (1.009)            (0.933)         (1.703)      (2.790)       (1.074)           (1.014)        (2.471)       (2.826)
 Stick waiver                          3.138              3.152          4.388         2.950        -1.222             -1.220         2.453         6.266
 (implemented - not implemented)      (2.100)            (2.075)        (3.212)       (4.323)       (1.217)           (1.228)        (3.355)       (4.187)
                                       0.545              0.540         -0.375         1.238       1.484**           1.486**          0.608         -2.133
 Minimum wage increasing by 10%
                                      (0.613)            (0.715)        (1.027)       (1.420)      (0.538)           (0.570)         (1.180)       (1.499)
 Unemployment rate                   0.835**            0.837**         1.226**        0.732       -0.693**          -0.695**        -0.633         -1.193
 increasing by 25%                   (0.343)            (0.354)         (0.550)       (0.892)       (0.277)           (0.249)        (0.593)       (0.826)

Note: See notes to Table 2A. Standard errors are calculated using the delta method.




                                                                              41
                 Table 3B. The Effects of Changes in Demographic Variables - Employment and Non-employment Spells
                                            Left-censored non-employment spells                           Left-censored employment spells
                                Constant            Variable                                  Constant           Variable
                               Misreporting       Misreporting     Last-Month   Last Month   Misreporting      Misreporting     Last-Month   Last Month
                               Probabilities      Probabilities   Dummy Model      Data      Probabilities     Probabilities   Dummy Model      Data
Changes with respect to:
                      Age        7.471**            7.475**         6.253**       3.619**      5.095**           5.099**         4.328**      3.455**
       (age=35) - (age=25)       (1.069)            (1.098)         (0.875)       (0.902)      (0.996)           (1.012)         (0.892)      (1.005)
     12 years of schooling       -5.293**           -5.295**        -6.398**      -6.999**     7.013**           7.013**         8.813**      8.822**
         (s = 12) - (s < 12)      (1.051)            (1.126)         (0.977)       (0.992)     (1.142)           (1.111)         (1.026)      (1.106)
                     Race         2.524*            2.584**          1.802         1.791        -1.074             -1.036        -4.938**     -4.991**
           (Black - White)        (1.299)           (1.268)         (1.206)       (1.299)       (1.182)           (1.218)         (1.117)      (1.142)
                    Race          2.708*             2.759*         2.139*         1.402       -2.616*           -2.583*         -2.773**       -1.630
     (Hispanic - White)           (1.408)            (1.449)        (1.292)       (1.357)      (1.534)           (1.479)          (1.281)      (1.528)
  Number of children less        4.225**            4.225**         4.512**       5.120**      -1.965*           -1.967**        -1.940**       -1.299
        than 6 years old         (0.906)            (0.929)         (0.895)       (0.954)      (1.029)            (0.953)         (0.919)      (0.967)
             (one - zero)
                                               Fresh non-employment spells                                   Fresh employment spells
                                Constant            Variable                                  Constant           Variable
                               Misreporting       Misreporting     Last-Month   Last Month   Misreporting      Misreporting     Last-Month   Last Month
                               Probabilities      Probabilities   Dummy Model      Data      Probabilities     Probabilities   Dummy Model      Data
                      Age         -0.070             -0.077         -0.220         0.106       1.027**           1.029**         5.479**      5.195**
       (age=35) - (age=25)        (0.532)            (0.514)        (0.847)       (1.261)      (0.430)           (0.420)         (1.052)      (1.439)
     12 years of schooling       -1.940**           -1.940**        -3.057**      -3.861**     2.970**           2.969**         5.984**      4.737**
         (s = 12) - (s < 12)      (0.595)            (0.593)         (0.961)       (1.497)     (0.504)           (0.503)         (1.196)      (1.671)
                     Race        1.842**            1.808**         4.581**        1.214        -0.440             -0.438         -1.079      -3.199**
           (Black - White)       (0.718)            (0.730)         (1.252)       (1.769)       (0.590)           (0.591)        (1.381)       (1.787)
                    Race           0.435              0.407         -0.291        -2.521         0.090             0.086          1.027         1.175
     (Hispanic - White)           (0.771)            (0.773)        (1.224)       (1.904)       (0.725)           (0.708)        (1.670)       (2.116)
  Number of children less        1.151**            1.155**         2.096**       3.101**        0.165             0.164          -0.043        0.763
        than 6 years old         (0.581)            (0.575)         (0.963)       (1.493)       (0.452)           (0.452)        (1.102)       (1.424)
             (one - zero)
Note: See notes to Table 3A.




                                                                                42
 Table 4. Misreporting Estimates for the Models Where a Fraction of the
                      Population Never Misreports
                                   Panel A: Parameter Estimates
                             Non-employment Spells                     Employment Spells
                          Constant    Probabilities Varying      Constant    Probabilities Varying
                        Probabilities      with Race           Probabilities      with Race
Seam Bias Parameters:
Month 1 Intercept          0.814**             1.614**           1.822**               0.605**
                           (0.217)             (0.389)           (0.314)               (0.264)
Month 2 Intercept           0.257              0.837**           1.024**                0.041
                           (0.220)             (0.321)           (0.259)               (0.270)
Month 3 Intercept           0.083              0.592*            0.802**                -0.089
                           (0.216)             (0.314)           (0.222)               (0.254)
Minority Dummy                                 0.3559                                  0.3499
                                               (0.348)                                 (0.253)

Fraction of individuals reporting accurately
Intercept                  -1.694**            -1.596**
                            (0.227)             (0.365)
Minority Dummy                                   -0.224
                                                (0.457)

                                Panel B: Misreporting Probabilities
                               Non-employment Spells                    Employment Spells
                           Constant    Probabilities Varying     Constant     Probabilities Varying
                         Probabilities      with Race          Probabilities       with Race
       Month 1              0.693       White         0.647       0.861       White          0.834
                           (0.046)                   (0.060)     (0.038)                    (0.054)
                                       Minorities     0.722                  Minorities      0.878
                                                     (0.048)                                (0.036)

       Month 2               0.564        White       0.510       0.736        White         0.698
                            (0.054)                  (0.067)     (0.050)                    (0.068)
                                        Minorities    0.597                  Minorities      0.767
                                                     (0.058)                                (0.055)

       Month 3               0.521        White       0.478       0.690        White         0.644
                            (0.054)                  (0.063)     (0.047)                    (0.072)
                                        Minorities    0.565                  Minorities      0.721
                                                     (0.062)                                (0.051)

 Fraction of Accurate        0.155        White       0.169
      Reporting             (0.030)                  (0.051)
                                        Minorities    0.139
                                                     (0.035)
Notes: See notes to Table 2C.




                                                     43
  Table 5. Effect of Changing Policy and Macro Variables on the Fraction of Time
                 Spent in Employment for Different Time Horizons

                                       3-year Period          6-year Period         10-year Period
Average Expected Employment               0.431**               0.439**                0.449**
Fraction                                  (0.009)               (0.009)                (0.010)

Changes with respect to:
Maximum welfare benefits                 -0.002**               -0.003**              -0.003**
increasing by 10%                         (0.001)                (0.001)               (0.001)

Carrot waiver                             0.036*                 0.039*                0.042*
(implemented - not implemented)           (0.020)                (0.022)               (0.023)

Stick waiver                               -0.002                 -0.006                -0.011
(implemented - not implemented)           (0.032)                (0.034)               (0.036)

Minimum wage                               0.002                  0.002                 0.003
increasing by 10%                         (0.010)                (0.011)               (0.011)

Unemployment rate                        -0.014**               -0.016**              -0.018**
increasing by 25%                         (0.005)                (0.005)               (0.005)
Note: See notes to Table 2A. Standard errors are calculated as described in Section 5.4.




                                                  44
                                                                 Figure 1.1



             1      2    3      4     5      6    7    8     9    10     11    12   13     14   15            31   32     33   34   35   36

             1      2     3     4     1      2    3    4    1     2      3      4   1      2     3            3    4      1    2    3       4

  Monthly
    Data
                    U' spell:             E spell:                                                                 E spell: 5 months
                                                                       U spell: 24 months
                    5 months              2 months
Last Month
      Data
                                                 U' spell: 32 months                                                    E spell: 4 months




                                                                 Figure 1.2



             1      2    3      4     5      6    7    8     9    10     11    12   13     14   15            31   32     33   34   35   36

             1      2     3     4     1      2    3    4    1     2      3      4   1      2     3            3    4      1    2    3       4

   Monthly
     Data
                 U' spell: 5 months         E spell: 5 months                  U spell: 21 months                  E spell: 5 months


Last Month
      Data              U' spell: 8 months                 E spell: 4 months             U spell: 20 months             E spell: 4 months




                                                                       45
                                                                                 Figure 1.3

             1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9       10       11        12        13       14        15             31      32        33       34        35       36

             1       2       3       4       1       2       3       4       1       2        3         4         1        2         3               3      4         1        2         3        4

  Monthly
    Data
                 U' spell:                       E spell: 8 months                                                                   U spell: 25 months
                 3 months
Last Month
      Data
                                         E' spell: 12 months                                                                          U spell: 24 months




                                                                                     Figure 2



                         1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8        9        10        11       12        13        14   15   16           33       34        35       36

                         1       2       3       4       1       2       3       4        1        2         3         4        1         2    3    4            1         2        3         4
     observed
       history
                             U' spell: 5 months                          E spell: 7 months                                                           U spell: 24 months

   possible true
      history A
                                                                         E spell: 8 months                                                              U spell: 23 months
                         U' spell: 5 months

   possible true
      history B
                         U' spell: 5 months                              E spell: 9 months                                                              U spell: 22 months

   possible true
      history C
                         U' spell: 5 months                              E spell: 10 months                                                             U spell: 21 months




                                                                                          46
Appendix 1: Identification of Duration Dependence and Seam Bias Parameters in Single
Spell Data
         At first glance, it may appear that we have to restrict the form of the duration dependence to
identify our model. However, this is not the case, at least for fresh spells. For simplicity we consider a
model for employment spells with duration dependence but no explanatory variables and no
unobserved heterogeneity. (The argument for non-employment spells is identical.) 30 One could
estimate the parameters of this simplified model using the Analog principle (Manski 1994) by
comparing sample moments and their probability limits, which we will refer to as population
moments.
         Let m j ( k ) denote the empirical hazard function for spells ending at duration k in reference

month j , j = 1, 2, 3, 4. These are our sample moments; denote their population counterparts by

p j (k ). . To obtain these population moments, first assume that for the population there are Nt ,

N t −1 , N t −2 , and N t −3 individuals having current durations equal to t , t − 1 , t − 2 , and t − 3 in

month 4 (over all reference periods). (One may think of N t , N t −1 , N t − 2 , and N t −3 as being large but
finite for now, as they will drop out of the population moments below.)
         Regarding the terminology of the duration literature, for t ≥ 4 ,                      N t , N t −1 , N t − 2 , and

N t −3 represent the total number of individuals at risk at durations t , t − 1 , t − 2 , and t − 3
respectively in month 4. As discussed in Section 4.2, we assume that seam bias only occurs when
transitions in months 1, 2, and 3 of the following reference period are heaped into current month 4,
so N t , N t −1 , N t − 2 , and N t −3 are not contaminated by seam bias. For month 1, in large samples the

number of individuals who actually enter month 1 at duration t is N t −1 ⋅ ⎡⎣1 − λ ( t − 1) ⎦⎤ . This is the

number of individuals at risk at duration t in month 1, i.e. the difference between the number
entering the previous month 4 at duration t − 1 and the number who leave in the previous month 4
at duration t − 1 . However, note that the number observed to be at risk consists of those actually at
risk minus the sum of:
    1. The number of individuals who actually left in month 1 at duration t but were observed to exit

         in the previous month 4 due to seam bias, N t −1 ⋅ ⎡⎣1 − λ ( t − 1) ⎦⎤ ⋅ λ ( t ) ⋅ γ 1 ;




30 We ignore complications involving identification with explanatory variables since there are many papers on

this issue for single spell data with time constant explanatory variables (Elbers and Ridder 1982, Heckman and
Singer 1984c). Note further that we have multiple spells for some women to aid in identification
(Honore 1993). Identification is also aided in our case by the fact that we have time changing explanatory
variables in all types of spells (Eberwein, Ham and LaLonde 1997).


                                                           47
    2. The number of individuals who actually left in month 2 at duration t + 1 but were observed to

            exit in the previous month 4 due to seam bias N t −1 ⋅ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t − 1) ⎦⎤ ⋅ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t ) ⎦⎤ ⋅ λ ( t + 1) ⋅ γ 2 ;

            and
    3. The number of individuals who actually left in month 3 at duration t + 2 but were observed to
            exit in the previous month 4 due to seam bias

             N t −1 ⋅ ⎡⎣1 − λ ( t − 1) ⎦⎤ ⋅ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t ) ⎦⎤ ⋅ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t + 1) ⎦⎤ λ ( t + 2 ) γ 3 .

            Of those actually at risk in month 1, in large samples a fraction λ ( t ) actually leave, but only a

fraction λ ( t ) ⋅ (1 − γ 1 ) are observed to have left in month 1, and the rest λ ( t ) ⋅ γ 1 were reported to
have left in the previous month 4 due to seam bias.                                               Thus the number observed leaving

equals N t −1 ⋅ ⎡⎣1 − λ ( t − 1) ⎦⎤ ⋅ λ ( t ) ⋅ (1 − γ 1 ) . Given this, we can easily formulate the first population

moment condition for the fraction observed to leave in month 1 at duration t (after deleting the

common factor N t −1 ⋅ ⎡⎣1 − λ ( t − 1) ⎦⎤ from both the numerator and denominator) as

                                                          λ ( t ) ⋅ (1 − γ 1 )
p1 (t ) =                                                                                                                  .   (A.1)
            1 − λ ( t ) ⋅ γ 1 − ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t ) ⎦⎤ ⋅ λ ( t + 1) γ 2 − ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t ) ⎦⎤ ⋅ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t + 1) ⎦⎤ λ ( t + 2 ) γ 3


            For month 2, the expected number of individuals who actually enter month 2 at duration t is

N t − 2 ⋅ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t − 2 ) ⎦⎤ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t − 1) ⎦⎤ . Due to seam bias, the number observed to be at risk in month 2

consists of those actually at risk minus the sum of

    1. those who actually left in month 2 at duration t but were observed to exit in the previous

            month 4, N t − 2 ⋅ ⎡⎣1 − λ ( t − 2 ) ⎦⎤ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t − 1) ⎦⎤ ⋅ λ ( t ) ⋅ γ 2 and


    2. those who actually left in month 3 at duration t + 1 but were observed to exit in the

            previous month 4, N t − 2 ⋅ ⎡⎣1 − λ ( t − 2 ) ⎤⎦ ⎡⎣1 − λ ( t − 1) ⎤⎦ ⋅ ⎡⎣1 − λ ( t ) ⎤⎦ λ ( t + 1) ⋅ γ 3 .

Because of seam bias, the number observed to leave at duration t equals

N t − 2 ⋅ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t − 2 ) ⎦⎤ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t − 1) ⎦⎤ ⋅ λ ( t ) ⋅ [1 − γ 2 ] . Thus our second population moment (after

deleting the common factor N t − 2 ⋅ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t − 2 ) ⎦⎤ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t − 1) ⎦⎤ from both the numerator and

denominator) is
                             λ ( t ) ⋅ [1 − γ 2 ]
p2 (t ) =                                                         .                                                            (A.2)
            1 − λ ( t ) ⋅ γ 2 − ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t ) ⎦⎤ λ ( t + 1) ⋅ γ 3




                                                                          48
            For month 3, the number of individuals who actually entered month 3 at duration t is

N t −3 ⋅ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t − 3) ⎦⎤ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t − 2 ) ⎦⎤ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t − 1) ⎦⎤ . Due to seam bias, the number observed to be at risk

in month 3 consists of those actually at risk minus those who actually left in month 3 at duration t
but were observed to exit in the previous month 4,

N t −3 ⋅ ⎡⎣1 − λ ( t − 3) ⎦⎤ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t − 2 ) ⎦⎤ ⋅ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t − 1) ⎦⎤ λ ( t ) ⋅ γ 3 . The number observed leaving equals

N t −3 ⋅ ⎡⎣1 − λ ( t − 3) ⎦⎤ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t − 2 ) ⎦⎤ ⋅ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t − 1) ⎦⎤ λ ( t ) ⋅ [1 − γ 3 ] . Thus our third population moment

(after deleting the common factor N t −3 ⋅ ⎡⎣1 − λ ( t − 3) ⎦⎤ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t − 2 ) ⎦⎤ ⋅ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t − 1) ⎦⎤ from both the

numerator and denominator) is
            λ ( t ) ⋅ [1 − γ 3 ]
p3 (t ) =                        .                                                                                          (A.3)
            1 − λ (t ) ⋅ γ 3

            For month 4, under our assumptions the number of individuals who actually (and were observed
to) enter month 4 at duration t is N t . The number of individuals who actually leave in month 4 at

duration t equals Nt ⋅ λ ( t ) . However due to seam bias, we also observe leaving in month 4

     1.     N t ⋅ ⎡⎣1 − λ ( t ) ⎦⎤ ⋅ λ ( t + 1) ⋅ γ 1 individuals who actually left in month 1 of the next reference

            period but reported leaving in month 4,

     2.     N t ⋅ ⎡⎣1 − λ ( t ) ⎦⎤ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t + 1) ⎤⎦ ⋅ λ ( t + 2 ) ⋅ γ 2 individuals who actually left in month 2 of the

            next reference period but reported leaving in month 4 and

     3.     N t ⋅ ⎡⎣1 − λ ( t ) ⎦⎤ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t + 1) ⎦⎤ ⋅ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t + 2 ) ⎦⎤ ⋅ λ ( t + 3) ⋅ γ 3 individuals who actually left in

            month 3 of the next reference period but reported leaving in month 4.
The number of individuals observed leaving in month 4 equals the sum of Nt ⋅ λ ( t ) and the three

terms above. Thus after deleting N t from both the numerator and denominator we have

p4 (t ) = λ ( t ) + ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t ) ⎦⎤ ⋅ λ ( t + 1) ⋅ γ 1 + ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t ) ⎦⎤ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t + 1) ⎦⎤ ⋅ λ ( t + 2 ) ⋅ γ 2
                                                                                                                            (A.4)
            + ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t ) ⎦⎤ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t + 1) ⎦⎤ ⋅ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t + 2 ) ⎦⎤ ⋅ λ ( t + 3) ⋅ γ 3 .

            If we equate population and sample moments, we only have four equations in seven
unknowns, λ ( t ) , λ ( t + 1) , λ ( t + 2 ) , λ ( t + 3) , γ 1 , γ 2 and γ 3 . However, we can have seven equations in
seven unknowns by considering, for example, the additional population moments
                λ ( t + 1) ⋅ [1 − γ 3 ]
p3 (t + 1) =                            ,
                1 − λ ( t + 1) ⋅ γ 3




                                                                         49
                    λ ( t + 2 ) ⋅ [1 − γ 3 ]
p3 (t + 2) =                                 and
                    1 − λ (t + 2) ⋅ γ 3

                    λ ( t + 3) ⋅ [1 − γ 3 ]
p3 (t + 3) =                                .
                    1 − λ ( t + 3) ⋅ γ 3

In fact, the model is actually over-identified, since we have many other moment conditions; for
example
                                                                  λ ( t + 1) ⋅ (1 − γ 1 )
p1 (t + 1) =                                                                                                                               and
                  1 − λ ( t + 1) ⋅ γ 1 − ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t + 1) ⎦⎤ ⋅ λ ( t + 2 ) γ 2 − ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t + 1) ⎦⎤ ⋅ ⎣⎡1 − λ ( t + 2 ) ⎦⎤ λ ( t + 3) γ 3

                                     λ ( t + 1) ⋅ [1 − γ 2 ]
p2 (t + 1) =                                                                   ,
                   1 − λ ( t + 1) ⋅ γ 2 − ⎡⎣1 − λ ( t + 1)⎤⎦ λ ( t + 2 ) ⋅ γ 3

and we now have nine equations in seven unknowns. 31 Since we can add many more moments
without introducing new parameters, the model is significantly over-identified. Of course when the
number of equations is greater than or equal to the number of unknowns, this is a necessary, but not
sufficient, condition for identification. To pursue this issue further, for the exactly identified models
we used several reasonable sets of values for the empirical moments and let Maple solve for the
parameters.             For each set of empirical moments, we found only one set of real solutions for the
parameters when we restricted them to the unit interval.
           However, without any auxiliary information, the parameters for the left-censored spells are
not identified. Since we measure the duration of these spells from the start of the sample, we will
only observe a spell of length 1, 5, 9, 13… ending in month 1 of the reference period, a spell of
length 2, 6, 10, 14 ... ending in month 2, a spell of length 3, 7, 11, 15… ending in month 3, or a spell
of length 4, 8, 12, 16… ending in month 4. Adding a superscript lc to denote left-censored spells, for
t ≥ 4 the available population moment conditions are as follows. For t = 5,9,13,… we have

                                                                       λ lc ( t ) ⋅ (1 − γ 1lc )
 p1lc (t ) =                                                                                                                                            .
               1 − λ lc ( t ) ⋅ γ 1lc − ⎡⎣1 − λ lc ( t ) ⎤⎦ ⋅ λ lc ( t + 1) γ 2lc − ⎡⎣1 − λ lc ( t ) ⎤⎦ ⋅ ⎡⎣1 − λ lc ( t + 1) ⎤⎦ λ lc ( t + 2 ) γ 3lc

For t = 6, 10, 14,… we have

                                   λ lc ( t ) ⋅ ⎡⎣1 − γ 2lc ⎤⎦
p (t ) =
  lc
                                                                                    .
               1 − λ lc ( t ) ⋅ γ 2lc − ⎡⎣1 − λ lc ( t ) ⎤⎦ λ lc ( t + 1) ⋅ γ 3lc
  2



For t = 7, 11, 15,… we have




31 Here we are abstracting from an endpoint issue. In the last month of the sample, which will be month 4, we

would not expect any misreported transitions, since there are no future spells to misreport from. Thus we
assume no misreporting in the last month of the sample, and this will aid in identification.


                                                                                50
              λ lc ( t ) ⋅ ⎡⎣1 − γ 3lc ⎤⎦
p3lc (t ) =                                 .
               1 − λ lc ( t ) ⋅ γ 3lc

For t = 8, 12, 16 we have

 p4lc (t ) = λ lc ( t ) + ⎡⎣1 − λ lc ( t ) ⎤⎦ ⋅ λ lc ( t + 1) ⋅ γ 1lc + ⎡⎣1 − λ lc ( t ) ⎤⎦ ⎡⎣1 − λ lc ( t + 1) ⎤⎦ ⋅ λ lc ( t + 2 ) ⋅ γ 2lc
                 + ⎡⎣1 − λ lc ( t ) ⎤⎦ ⎡⎣1 − λ lc ( t + 1) ⎤⎦ ⋅ ⎡⎣1 − λ lc ( t + 2 ) ⎤⎦ ⋅ λ lc ( t + 3) ⋅ γ 3lc .

              For t = 4, 5, 6, 7 we only have four equations in seven unknowns. Unfortunately, if we add
four more population conditions for t = 8, 9, 10, 11, we also will add four more unknowns
λ lc (8), λ lc (9), λ lc (10), λ lc (11) . Thus we now have 8 moments for 11 unknowns and the
identification problem remains. However, if we take the estimated seam bias parameters from the
fresh employment spells and plug them into the left-censored employment spells, i.e. γ k = γ klc , for
k = 1, 2, 3, the number of equations equals the number of unknowns, and the model becomes
exactly identified. We thus impose this constraint and an analogous constraint for non-employment
spells. Note that this identification problem would disappear if we had information on (and used) the
actual start date of the left-censored spells.




                                                                             51
       Table A1. Transitions of Employment Spells Ending in Month 4 As a Fraction of All Transitions
                                    for Imputed and Non-imputed Data
                            Non-imputed                                             Imputed
       INTVW=1: self interview     INTVW=2: proxy interview      INTVW=3: refusal         INTVW=4: left the sample
Year   Percentage   Sample Size   Percentage   Sample Size    Percentage   Sample Size    Percentage   Sample Size
1986      48%          2481          50%          1123           84%          111            70%          83

1987     54%           308          51%            1105         77%           174            86%           95

1988     40%           2519         49%            1030         78%           105            77%           97

1990     49%           4629         55%            2166         85%           331            83%           332

1991     48%           2663         52%            1301         87%           151            72%           120

1992     48%           4177         53%            2271         88%           346            76%           238

1993     50%           3837          56%           1960         83%           326          77%             268
                       Mean of Non-imputed                                    Mean of Imputed
                               50%                                                 81%




                                                     52
