                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    VALUING PUBLIC GOODS USING HAPPINESS DATA:
                             THE CASE OF AIR QUALITY

                                             Arik Levinson

                                         Working Paper 15156
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15156


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2009




This research is part of a project funded by the National Science Foundation grant #0617839. I am
grateful to Resources for the Future for its hospitality during part of the time I worked on the paper,
to Emma Nicholson for superb research assistance, to the research staff at the General Social Survey
for assisting me with matching confidential aspects of their data to geographic information, and to
John Helliwell, Chris Barrington-Leigh, Simon Luechinger, Erzo Luttmer, Karl Scholz and Heinz
Welsch for helpful suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Arik Levinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Valuing Public Goods Using Happiness Data: The Case of Air Quality
Arik Levinson
NBER Working Paper No. 15156
July 2009
JEL No. H41,Q51,Q53

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper describes and implements a method for estimating the average marginal value of a time-varying
local public good: air quality. It uses the General Social Survey (GSS), which asks thousands of people
in various U.S. locations how happy they are, along with other demographic and attitude questions.
These data are matched with the Environmental Protection Agency's Air Quality System (AQS) to
find the level of pollution in those locations on the dates the survey questions were asked. People
with higher incomes in any given year and location report higher levels of happiness, and people interviewed
on days when air pollution was worse than the local seasonal average report lower levels of happiness.
Combining these two concepts, I derive the average marginal rate of substitution between income
and air quality – a compensating variation for air pollution.


Arik Levinson
Department of Economics ICC 571
Georgetown University
3700 O St., NW
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
aml6@georgetown.edu
                         Valuing Public Goods Using Happiness Data:
                                   The Case of Air Quality


1. Introduction
       One of the great challenges facing applied economics involves valuing non-market goods
such as local public amenities. Existing methods, often applied to environmental quality, include
travel-cost models, hedonic regressions of property values, and contingent valuation surveys in
which people are asked directly their willingness to pay for public goods. Here I describe and
test an alternative method for estimating the economic benefit of a local public good. The
fundamental idea is extraordinarily simple. I combine survey data, air quality data, and weather
data to model individuals' self-reported levels of "happiness," or "subjective well-being," as a
function of their demographic characteristics, incomes, and the current air quality and weather at
the date and place they were surveyed. I use the estimated function to calculate the average
marginal rate of substitution between annual household income and air quality that leaves
respondents equally happy, and use this to calculate respondents' marginal willingness to pay for
improved air quality.
       This happiness-based methodology has a number of advantages over existing tools for
valuing environmental quality. Because I include county and year fixed effects, coefficients are
identified from daily fluctuations in pollution within a U.S. county, and are not subject to the
sorting biases associated with travel cost or hedonic models. (The people most averse to air
pollution choose to visit and live in clean locales, leading to underestimates of willingness to pay
for air quality.) Because I estimate marginal rates of substitution between income and pollution
directly, the approach is not confounded by income effects, or large gaps between measures of
willingness to pay and willingness to accept. And because I do not rely on questions asking
people directly about environmental issues, the methodology is not susceptible to the strategic
biases and framing problems of the contingent valuation approach.
       Furthermore, while happiness studies have recently been used to estimate the value of
public goods and bads, including price inflation (Di Tella et al., 2001), state cigarette taxes
(Gruber and Mullainathan, 2005), airport noise (van Praag and Baarsma, 2005), inequality
(Alesina et al., 2004), terrorism (Frey et al., 2009), and even air pollution (Welsch, 2007; Di
Tella and MacCulloch, 2006; Ferreira et al., 2006; Luechinger, 2009), all of this previous work



                                                  2
relies on annual average values of these public goods across regions or countries. If the public
goods are endogenously determined by regional characteristics also associated with happiness, or
if people become habituated to levels of public goods, these studies using annual regional
differences in public goods will yield biased estimates of willingness to pay. Air quality, on the
other hand, varies daily within each location, for reasons exogenous to any particular respondent,
and presumably more quickly than people can become habituated.
       Naturally, this approach also has disadvantages. It treats responses to questions about
happiness as a proxy for utility, and then makes interpersonal comparisons among respondents.
It relies on an oddly vague question about how "things are these days." And it identifies
willingness to pay based on tradeoffs between fluctuations in daily pollution and differences
among respondents' annual incomes. The reason to pursue this line of research, therefore, is not
that it is without shortcomings. Instead, the nice feature of this approach is that its shortcomings
differ so markedly from those of standard approaches to valuing public goods, and therefore it
serves as a useful point of comparison.
       I present two main results. First, I show that happiness is related in sensible ways to
daily local air pollution. After accounting for respondents' demographics, daily local weather
conditions, as well as local, year, and even month fixed effects, individuals surveyed when the
current local levels of airborne particulates are higher are less likely to report high levels of
happiness. This first step is a straightforward empirical exercise. It requires no strong
assumptions except the empirical specification, and I show that the results are robust to a variety
of those. I also show that reported happiness is not sensitive to local levels of undetectable
pollutants, such as carbon monoxide.
       The second result involves using the estimates to calculate marginal rates of substitution
between pollution and income, and then backing out the respondents' implicit willingness to pay
for improved air quality. This step does involve several strong assumptions, but I describe those
assumptions in detail and argue that they are no stronger than the assumptions underlying travel
cost, hedonic or stated-preference estimates of willingness to pay for air quality. Moreover, the
assumptions I make differ entirely from the standard set, and so at a minimum the results here
serve as an alternative to the usual approaches.
       Using my preferred specification, I show that people appear willing to sacrifice about $40
for a one-standard-deviation improvement in air quality. If these are interpreted as daily values



                                                   3
(and there is some ambiguity about tradeoffs between daily air quality and annual income), then
$40 is considerably higher than typical hedonic estimates of willingness to pay, and almost
double the value attributed by the EPA to the economic benefits of the 1970 and 1977 Clean Air
Acts. Of course, in some ways the usual hedonic estimates seem implausibly small, and this
happiness measure includes benefits not captured by the EPA approach -- aesthetics, lost
recreation, and benefits from other pollutants correlated with particulates.
       In the end, this exercise probably will not serve as a useful tool for widespread use in
cost-benefit analyses. The information requirements are too large, and the approach cannot be
applied to pollutants that are imperceptible, though they may be equally damaging. However,
the analysis conducted here does yield several important lessons. For environmentalists and
environmental economists, the results provide evidence that air pollution, in addition to
detrimentally affecting health and property, has a direct negative effect on people's stated well-
being, as well as evidence that the monetary value of that effect may be quite large. For the
growing literature on happiness and economics, the results provide yet another piece of evidence
that subjective well-being varies in sensible ways with respondents' observable characteristics
and circumstances.


2. Happiness in economics
       Happiness has enjoyed a recent surge of serious attention by economists. Articles have
appeared in top academic journals, and as cover stories for The Economist and Time magazines.
The Journal of Economic Literature and Journal of Economic Perspectives have both published
recent surveys of happiness research, articles have appeared in the top general interest economics
journals, a special issue of the Journal of Public Economics was devoted to the issue, and there is
even now a "Handbook" on the economics of happiness (Bruni and Porta, 2007).
       Much of this academic and popular literature addresses the decades-old findings of
Easterlin (1974): stated happiness does not increase with income across countries, or within a
country over time, but does increase with income across individuals within a country at any
given point in time. Some recent work has refuted the first half of this "Easterlin Paradox,"
showing that happiness increases with GDP per capita across countries in expected ways
(Stevenson and Wolfers, 2008; Deaton, 2008; Helliwell et al., 2009). But support for the second
half remains: stated happiness has not increased over time as per capita incomes have increased



                                                 4
(Oswald,1997; Layard, 2006). This paradox has two obvious interpretations. One is that people
become habituated to their situations and change their reference level of well-being.1 Another is
that happiness relates to relative income – the richest man in a poor town may be happier than
the poorest man in a rich town, even if the rich man is poorer in absolute terms.2
         Under either interpretation, the Easterlin paradox has implications for using happiness to
measure willingness to pay for public goods. If happiness does not increase with income across
regions or over time, it would seem unlikely to vary with the level of any particular public good.
For income, happiness increases relative to other people in the same locale at the same time. The
analog for pollution is that happiness will increase with air quality relative to the current regional
norm, but not relative to other regions or within regions over long periods of time. That is why a
key feature of this analysis identifies happiness as a function of the place-specific, date-specific
air quality, at the place and date where the happiness question was asked. In other words, I
compare stated happiness by statistically similar respondents, at the same locale, during the same
season of the same year, who just happen to have been surveyed on days when the air quality
differed.
         While much of the economics literature on happiness focuses on deep questions about the
rationality of economic actors, interpersonal comparisons of ordinal utility functions, and links
between economics and psychology, economists are also attempting practical, policy-relevant
applications.3 Recent work uses happiness surveys to evaluate people's willingness to trade off
unemployment for inflation and argue that central bankers place too much emphasis on
combating inflation (Di Tella et al., 2001), to examine the welfare consequences of German
reunification on different groups (Frijters et al., 2004), to assess the degree to which state
cigarette taxes make smokers better off by helping them cut back (Gruber and Mullainathan,
2005), and to estimate the degree to which the marginal utility of consumption increases or
decreases when people become ill (Finkelstein et al., 2008). Happiness measures have also been
used to try to place a monetary value on airport noise (van Praag and Baarsma, 2005), flood

1
  Kahneman (2000) writes about individuals having a base level of stated well-being, which major life events
(divorce, injury) perturb at most for a few years. Others, such as Oswald and Powdthavee (2008), show incomplete
recovery of happiness after such events.
2
  See Luttmer (2005). Also, recent work suggests this relative interpretation may be optimal from an evolutionary
standpoint (Rayo and Becker, 2007).
3
  These practical applications raise concern among critics of this literature on "happiness economics." Smith (2008)
writes that "the [happiness economics] train is precipitously close to leaving the station and heading for use in full-
scale policy evaluation."


                                                           5
disasters (Luechinger and Raschky, 2009), terrorism (Frey et al., 2009), and weather and climate
(Rehdanz and Maddison, 2005; Becchetti et al., 2007; Barrington-Leigh, 2008).
           Several papers close in spirit to this one use happiness measures to value air quality.
Welsch (2002, 2006, 2007) estimates values of willingness to pay for air quality using various
cross-sections and panels of country-level data. The 2006 paper, for example, estimates that the
reductions in nitrogen dioxide (NO2) and lead pollution in Europe from 1990 to 1997 were
worth $760 per capita and $1390 per capita, respectively. Di Tella and MacCulloch (2006)
regress happiness on income and the national, annual, per-capita emissions of sulfur dioxide
(SO2), and show that a one-standard-deviation increase in SO2 correlates with a decline in
happiness equivalent to a 17 percent reduction in income. As a first use of happiness data to
estimate willingness to pay for air quality, these works break new ground. However, they also
face an obstacle common to this literature – using average annual national measures of air
quality. Aggregating environmental quality across entire countries masks much of its
heterogeneity. I suspect that environmental quality varies more across locations within Germany
than between Germany and France. If the Easterlin paradox suggests people become habituated
to their material circumstances, they may also become habituated to their environmental
circumstances.
           Two recent papers avoid the problems associated with inter-country comparisons of
happiness by looking across regions within Ireland (Ferreira et al., 2006) and Germany
(Luechinger, 2009). Luechinger uses annual mean concentrations of SO2 at 533 monitoring
stations in Germany over a 19 year period. To control for sorting by individuals into different
locales, he cleverly instruments for air quality using respondents' locations upwind and
downwind of large power plants that installed SO2 emissions control equipment. Luechinger
finds a marginal willingness to pay of $232 for a one microgram per cubic meter (μg/m3)
reduction in SO2, while average SO2 concentrations fell by 38 μg/m3 over the time period he
examines.4
           In theory, all of the prior work using happiness to value public goods, air quality
included, could suffer from a version of the Easterlin paradox. If happiness does not increase
systematically with income across countries or over time, we should be surprised if it increases
with public good levels across countries or over time, perhaps because people become

4
    €183 in 2002, converted to 2008 dollars using the average 2002 exchange rate and the CPI-U-RS.


                                                          6
habituated. In that case, it seems unlikely that happiness questions can be used to value public
goods using data on aggregate yearly or national public good levels. Furthermore, work based
on cross-country differences faces the problem that survey questions are asked in various
languages and cultures, where notions of happiness will differ.
        This paper solves these problems. It focuses entirely on the U.S., so fewer language and
cultural differences complicate the responses to questions about happiness. Instead of aggregate
national or yearly measures of pollution, it uses the environmental quality at the time and in the
location where the happiness survey question was asked.5 Time and place fixed effects can
account for relative differences in happiness, and the measured effect of pollution on happiness
will be relative to similar respondents who were interviewed in the same place during the same
month, but happen to have been interviewed on a day when the air quality differed.


3. Data and methodology
        For happiness measures, I rely on the General Social Survey (GSS), which is conducted
annually by the National Opinion Research Center.6 Several thousand respondents are
interviewed in person each year, usually in March. The key GSS question asks "taken all
together, how would you say things are these days? Would you say that you are very happy,
pretty happy, or not too happy?" This question forms the basis for the dependent variable. In
addition to asking about happiness, the GSS contains the usual demographic information: age,
household income, race, education, sex, marital status, etc.
        Importantly for this purpose, the GSS contains the date each respondent was questioned.
I have obtained from the GSS staff the confidential codes identifying the county in which each
respondent was surveyed. These two pieces of information (date and place) allow me to match
the GSS to the particular air quality on the day and in the place where the survey was
administered.
        For air quality information, I turn to the EPA's Air Quality System (AQS). The AQS
contains the raw, hourly and daily data from thousands of ambient air quality monitors




5
  Barrington-Leigh (2008) examines time and place-varying weather conditions, and finds results similar to those
found here for pollution conditions: current local weather affects stated well being.
6
  More information about the GSS can be found at www.norc.org/GSS+Website/.


                                                         7
throughout the United States. The data include the geographic location of each monitor, the
types of pollutants monitored, and the hourly observations.7
        Finally, I control for the current local weather – specifically temperature and
precipitation, both of which are likely to be highly correlated with both happiness and pollution.
Previous studies have estimated happiness as a function of annual averages of weather (Rehdanz
and Maddison, 2005; Barrington-Leigh, 2008) or pollution (Welsch, 2007; Luechinger, 2007; Di
Tella and MacCulloch, 2006). But none have included both, a potentially important source of
omitted variable bias. I obtained from the National Climate Data Center the daily weather at
each of the thousands of weather monitoring stations throughout the U.S.
        To merge the survey data with the weather and air quality data, I take the population-
weighted centroid of the GSS respondent's county and draw an imaginary 25-mile circle around
it. I then take a weighted average of all the air quality and weather monitors within the 25 mile
circle, where the weights are equal to the inverse of the square root of their distance to the
population-weighted centroids.8
        The air quality monitors contain data on ambient concentrations of criteria air pollutants,
but not all data are available in all places or during all time periods. Carbon Monoxide (CO), for
example, does have consistently measured data in many locations going back to the early 1970s.
However, CO is odorless and invisible, and I would not expect it to affect happiness responses in
survey data. Airborne particulates, on the other hand, cause physical discomfort, especially
particles smaller than 10 micrometers (PM10). In addition, small particles form visible haze that
reduces visibility and may affect people aesthetically. The AQS contains PM10 readings
beginning in the mid-1980s, so I begin this analysis in 1984.
        For particulates, monitoring stations only record ambient concentrations every six days.
That means that many of the happiness survey questions were asked on days when no nearby air
quality monitors recorded data. Moreover, in any given location different days may be recorded
by different sets of nearby monitoring stations. To smooth out this variation, and to use as much
of the happiness survey responses as possible, I interpolate between 6-day observations for each
7
  Recent years are available on the AQS web site, earlier years by special request to the EPA. More information
about the AQS can be found at www.epa.gov/ttn/airs/airsaqs.
8
  Other weights, such as a simple average of all the monitors in a county, yield similar results. The process of
matching the GSS data to air quality and weather monitors is not simple. The GSS geographic codes sometimes
correspond to individual cities, sometimes to counties, and sometimes to multi-county areas. Over the 30 years, the
GSS has surveyed about 275 areas, and the names given to these areas do not typically correspond to U.S. Census or
U.S. Postal Service names.


                                                        8
monitoring station. In the robustness checks below, I also report results for the subset of
monitoring stations with true, uninterpolated values.
        Table 1 presents some descriptive statistics for the GSS, broken out by happiness
response. People with larger annual incomes are more likely to have higher levels of happiness.
(Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences from the column to the left.) Note that this
does not contradict the Easterlin paradox, as most of the income variation is across individuals
within years. Other demographic variables correlated with happiness include marital status,
employment, race, education, health, and (curiously!) being the type of person who reads a
newspaper daily.


Methodology
        I estimate versions of the following function:
                              H ijt = α Pjt + γ ln Yi + X i ' β + δ j + ηt + ε ijt                     (1)

where Hijt is the stated happiness of respondent i in location j at date t. The variable Pjt is the air
pollution at location j at date t. The log of income (lnYi) is convenient here because it captures
declining marginal effect of income on happiness, consistent with typical papers estimating
happiness functions, and it translates directly into an increasing marginal willingness to pay
(WTP) for air quality (which I test directly later).9 Below I show that the estimated tradeoffs
between pollution and income are unchanged if I substitute the log of pollution, the log of
income, ordered probit versions of those, include multiple interactions, or estimate a binomial
probability that Hijt > H* for an arbitrary H*. The vector Xi contains a set of other socio-
economic characteristics of respondent i, δj is a location-specific fixed effect, and ηt is a time
fixed effect.
        Once estimated, I can totally differentiate the function, set dH=0, and solve for the
average marginal rate of substitution between pollution and income, ∂Y/∂P:
                                             ∂Y             αˆ
                                                       = −Y                                            (2)
                                             ∂P |dH ≡0      γˆ




9
 Using the log of income also avoids the unattractive feature of exponential functional forms in that the MRS does
not become undefined in the middle of the relevant range. See Layard et al. (2006) for alternatives.


                                                            9
the amount of annual income necessary to compensate for a one-unit increase in air pollution.10
In other words, using this methodology, I will be able to estimate the tradeoffs between income
and air quality that will leave people, on average, equally happy.


Some Theoretical and Practical Concerns
         Using equation (2) to measure marginal rates of substitution involves placing some strong
assumptions on the underlying utility functions. We typically assume individuals make choices
as though they are maximizing some unobserved utility function, observe market prices and the
choices people make, and infer from those prices and choices properties of their underlying
utility functions, such as risk aversion, impatience, and altruism. The fundamental challenge
facing economists valuing public goods is that we do not observe market prices or choices.
There are no markets for public goods such as air quality, and individuals cannot "choose" their
own level of public goods directly, except by voting or relocating. So instead, this analysis
proposes turning the typical economics around. We will observe utility, or a proxy for utility,
and infer what choices people would be willing to make and what prices would therefore be
optimal.
         The first problem with this approach is that "happiness" as recorded by questions on
surveys is not utility. Kahneman (2000) addresses this, distinguishing between "decision utility,"
which is economists' notion of the underlying individual welfare function that drives economic
choices, and "experience utility," something closer to stated happiness, experienced moment-to-
moment. We do not observe either type of utility directly, and in fact the survey questions are
not clear about which they seek, asking only "how happy are you these days?" Perhaps the
easiest way to think about this methodology is that it uses respondents' stated happiness as a
proxy for their utility, or as an observable manifestation of latent utility. As long as respondents
with higher latent utility are more likely to say they are happier, this approach is consistent with
a wide variety of discrete choice models in economics.
         Another potential concern about the approach proposed here is that the GSS asks about
how "things are these days?" The question not only may confound experience and decision
utility, but also is unclear what length of time "these days" refers to. If the question is about
10
  Naturally, alternative formulations of (1) lead to different expressions for WTP in (2). For example, using the
level of income instead of its log means that, conveniently, WTP can simply be expressed as the ratio of the
coefficients on pollution and income, αˆ γˆ .


                                                         10
general well-being spanning several months or years, it should not be influenced by temporary
changes such as the current daily level of air pollution relative to a regional seasonal norm.
Psychologists and economists have found, however, that people tend to respond to these types of
questions based on contemporaneous circumstances. Schwarz and Strack (1991) describe how
people interviewed after making a photocopy were significantly more satisfied with their lives if
they found a dime on top of the copy machine. And Clark and Georgellis (2004) test whether
reported "job satisfaction" proxies for "experience utility," meaning something like the
instantaneous happiness I would like to use, as opposed to "decision utility." They find the
likelihood of quits by British laborers to be predicted by current and lagged values of reported
job satisfaction, suggesting that reported satisfaction has a current component.
       In other words, people asked about their overall satisfaction with life in general respond
in a way that is sensitive to current conditions. I wish, in retrospect, that the GSS had asked
people two happiness questions: one about their overall life satisfaction, and one about their
happiness at the moment the question is asked. I would use the second question to identify the
effect of contemporaneous local pollution. Given that the survey only asks the vague "these
days" question, it is fortunate that people seem to respond as if they had been asked the
momentary happiness question, in a way that is useful for valuing current levels of air quality.
       A third likely objection to this approach is that economists normally assume utility is
ordinal, rather than cardinal. This means that happiness can be used to rank choices for each
person separately, but that interpersonal comparisons based on stated happiness are impossible.
If an unpolluted day moves person #1 from "not happy" to "very happy," and person #2 from
"not happy" to "pretty happy," that does not mean that person #1 gets more utility from clean air
than person #2, or even that person #1 would be willing to pay more for clean air. Put
differently, we could alter some people's happiness functions by a positive monotonic
transformation, while leaving others' unchanged, and it will yield the same rank ordering of
outcomes for each individual. It will not, however, yield the same OLS estimates.
       Economists studying happiness have responded to this concern in several ways. Some,
like Ng (1997), have argued that ordinal utility is an overly restrictive assumption, and that there
is evidence that people's utilities are interpersonally comparable and cardinal. Others have
implicitly assumed that happiness is ordinal, but is interpersonally comparable. In other words,
if the latent utility of person #1 is higher than that of person #2, then the stated happiness of



                                                  11
person #1 will be higher than that of person #2. This allows researchers to estimate an ordered
discrete choice model, such as an ordered logit or probit. Alesina et al. (2004), Blanchflower and
Oswald (2000), and Finkelstein et al. (2008) follow this empirical approach. Most researchers
who have applied both approaches have found little difference between the results of a linear
regression and an ordered logit or probit (Ferrer-i-Carbonell and Frijters, 2004).11 Since I am not
interested in the marginal utility of income or air quality separately, but only the ratio of the two
as in equation (2), the analysis here is less sensitive to these issues. I show below that the
estimate of equation (2) is robust to a wide variety of empirical specifications.
         In the end, all I can do is remain cognizant of these strong assumptions, remind readers
that standard approaches to valuing environmental quality (travel costs, hedonics, stated
preferences) have their own sets of strong assumptions, and demonstrate that the results obtained
from this approach are robust, and yield plausible valuations and sensible differences for various
subsets of the sample population.


4. Results


         Table 2 begins by estimating versions of equation (1). The first column excludes every
right hand side variable except income and daily local pollution, measured using particulates
(PM10). Happiness increases with annual income and decreases with pollution on the day of the
interview. The coefficients suggest that a 10 μg/m3 increase in local daily particulates is
associated with a decrease in happiness of 0.014, on a three point scale. The log income
coefficient suggests that a 10 percent increase in annual income is associated with an increase of
happiness of 0.013, on a three point scale. However, since happiness is ordinal (or a proxy for
utility which is ordinal), I do not want to make too much of the absolute magnitudes. More
important is the ratio of the two coefficients, or the tradeoff between pollution and income that
leaves people at the same level of happiness.


11
  One key advantage of the regression approach over the ordered probit is that the former can include fixed effects.
So if there are individual or region-specific norms for happiness, those can be differenced out. Allowing for
individual fixed effects in an ordered probit generates inconsistent estimates (Cameron and Trivedi, 1998). There
have been two recent proposed econometric approaches that deal with this in the context of economics and
happiness: Boes and Winkleman's (2004) generalized threshold and sequential models, and Ferrer-i-Carbonell and
Frijters' (2004) conditional fixed-effect ordered logit.



                                                         12
         To place a dollar value on air pollution, we need to calculate equation (2). Plugging in
−0.0014 for α̂ , 0.132 for γˆ , and 42.3 for the mean income (in $1000s), we get that the average
marginal rate of substitution is ∂Y/ ∂P=$464. This means that a one μg/m3 increase in PM10, on
the day they of the interview, reduces an average person's stated happiness by an amount equal to
a $464 decline in annual income. What does this mean? This is where some ambiguity arises.
The $464 figure represents an estimate of the amount of annual income that increases happiness
(at the mean log income in the sample) by the same amount as a one μg/m3 reduction in PM10
pollution, but the PM10 coefficient is identified from daily fluctuations in air quality. If we
divide the $464 by 365 days per year, we get an estimate of $1.27 per day. A $464 increase in
annual income means an extra $1.27 to spend each day. To try to put this into context, note that
the standard deviation of PM10 is 14.4 μg/m3. Our estimate, then, corresponds to a willingness
to pay $18 (14.4×$1.27) for a one-standard-deviation improvement in air quality, for one day.
         Column (2) adds the average particulate count for each respondent's location, for the
month in which the survey was taken. Now the daily PM10 measure is identified from the
difference between air quality on the day of the survey, and the prevailing conditions that month.
The monthly coefficient is statistically insignificant, suggesting a degree of habituation to
environmental circumstances.12 The daily coefficient increases, suggesting a willingness to pay
of $23 rather than $18. Column (3) adds year, month, and county fixed effects.13 These do not
change the basic findings, and the year and location fixed effects (unreported) are statistically
insignificant, an unsurprising result given the Easterlin paradox.
         Finally, column (4) adds a battery of demographic and local covariates. Happiness
decreases and then increases with age, falling to a minimum at about age 40. Women, and
people who are married, not unemployed, and healthy are happier. Happiness rises with
temperature at low temperatures, falls with temperature at high temperatures, and rises in the
difference between the daily max and min, which proxies for cloud cover or humidity. None of
these are surprising and all conform to standard results in this literature. More importantly, none
change the basic result that happiness increases with income and decreases with local daily

12
   Month fixed effects also account for seasonal effects. If people are happier in spring, say, and particulates are
lower in the spring, that may bias the results.
13
   Note that this standard deviation of 14.4 μg/m3 represents variation both across and within year-month-county
"cells." The average standard deviation within cells is 5.7 μg/m3. The sample includes an average of 776
observations per year, 2305 per month, and 142 per county. The average year-month-county cell has 10
observations, ranging from 1 to 59.


                                                          13
pollution. If anything, the demographic variables halve the coefficient on income, thereby
doubling the estimate of WTP to $41 for a one-standard-deviation change in PM10.
         Table 3 presents a sample of some of the alternative specifications I have tried. Column
(1) uses the level of income, rather than its log, on the grounds that WTP likely increases with
income. Nothing changes, except of course the formula for calculating WTP. (See fn. 10.)
Column (2) uses both the log of income and the log of PM10, again with no discernable change
in the calculated WTP. Column (3) estimates equation (1) as an ordered probit, and again the
qualitative results are the same. Column (4) estimates a probit where the dependent variable is
an indicator for the highest happiness response, with little change to the measured tradeoff
between pollution and income, though the estimated WTP is somewhat higher ($65).14 Table 3
thus demonstrates that respondents' stated happiness varies systematically with their incomes and
the local daily air quality in ways that are robust to a variety of empirical specifications.
         Table 4 estimates the basic linear specification from column (4) of Table 2 for alternative
measures of air quality. First, the results so far use air quality measures that interpolate between
readings that occur every six days. As an alternative, I tried using only those observations where
there was a true uninterpolated reading at a nearby station. Those results are summarized in
column (1) of Table 4. The effects of pollution and income on happiness are both slightly larger,
leading on balance to a smaller estimate of the willingness to pay for a one μg/m3 reduction in
PM10 ($953). Because the variance across the uninterpolated values is higher (18.2 rather than
14.4), the WTP for a one standard deviation change is slightly higher -- $47.
         Column (2) of Table 4 estimates equation (1) for ozone. Here the coefficient on pollution
is negative, but statistically insignificant. The point estimate of WTP for a one standard
deviation change is $13. My initial expectation was that the ozone coefficient would be
significant, since ozone is associated with aesthetically unpleasant brown skies. Perhaps,
however, the fact that the GSS is collected mostly in March of each year, and that ozone is
largely a summer phenomenon, means that I cannot identify an ozone effect.
         Column (3) reports results for SO2. This is the pollutant studied by Luechinger (2009),
using annual averages for SO2 upwind and downwind from power plants. In my case, the SO2
coefficient is statistically insignificant, though the point estimate leads to a WTP of $10. My


14
  I also estimated versions of equation (1) as both linear probabilities and probits that H>1 and H>2, respectively,
again with the same results.


                                                         14
guess is that the different result stems from the fact that SO2 is less ubiquitous than PM10. SO2
poses a particular problem downwind of coal-fired electric power plants. By focusing on
respondents in the neighborhood of such plants, Luechinger was able to identify an SO2 effect.
My study covers many areas without significant SO2 problems.
       Column (4) of Table 4 reports results for carbon monoxide (CO). Again the coefficient
on CO is statistically insignificant, and the point estimate, for a one standard deviation change, is
$14. I am not surprised that daily CO has no effect on happiness, as it is both odorless and
colorless – any effect of CO on reported well-being would necessarily be the result of its
correlation with omitted covariates.
       Finally, columns (5) through (7) of Table 4 run the basic specification for PM10, but also
include daily measures of Ozone, SO2, and CO, respectively. In each case, the PM10 coefficient
is essentially unaffected, the additional variable is statistically insignificant, and the WTP for a
one-standard-deviation in PM10 stays within same range – between $30 and $50.


Magnitudes
       So far, I have been discussing willingness to pay for a one-standard-deviation change in
pollution, which amounts to 14.4 μg/m3 for the interpolated PM10 measurements. How large is
this change? The average PM10 reading in the sample is 30.4 μg/m3, so the change constitutes a
50 percent increase (or decrease) in pollution. More concretely, the counties of Riverside and
San Bernardino, CA, had average readings in this sample of 37 and 38 μg/m3, respectively, while
Washington, DC's average was 26, slightly cleaner than average. So the change we are
discussing amounts to slightly more than a move from an average day in DC to an average day in
the most-polluted regions of the U.S.
       Perhaps a more relevant benchmark compares the value of air quality from this new
estimate to those of the traditional approaches. The 1999 EPA publication Benefits and Costs of
the Clean Air Act, estimates that the 1970 and 1977 Clean Air Act Amendments reduced ambient
particulate matter by an average of 45 percent nationally. This improvement in air quality is
predicted to have reduced premature mortality, chronic bronchitis, days with respiratory
symptoms, and lost work days, each of which is assigned a monetary value based on the existing
economics literature valuing health costs and statistical lives. The total benefit of just those
improvements due solely to the reduction in particulate matter is slightly over 1.6 trillion 2008



                                                  15
dollars, or $6880 per capita, or $19 per day per person.15 By comparison, the value of $41 per
day in Table 2 does not seem out of the question. In theory, the happiness approach incorporates
all of the effects in the EPA study, as well as aesthetic values, ecological effects, non-monetized
health effects, altruism, and any immediately observable consequences of multiple pollutants
correlated with PM10.
        An alternative to using health and mortality would be the hedonic method. Smith and
Huang (1995) conduct a meta-analysis of this literature, and find an average marginal
willingness to pay for a one μg/m3 reduction in total suspended particulates of $226 (in 2008
dollars). A 14.4 μg/m3 increase would be worth $3254, which amortized at 5 percent comes out
to $163 per year, or considerably less than $1 per day. More recent work by Chay and
Greenstone (2005) compares housing values in U.S. counties according to whether they are in
compliance with National Ambient Air Quality Standards, using an instrumental variables
approach, and finds that housing values in non-compliance counties grew by an average of
$2774 between 1970 and 1980 (in 2008 dollars) due to the Clean Air Act.16 Amortized at 5
percent this amounts to $137 per year, comparable to the Smith and Huang numbers, but again
considerably less than the values in EPA (1999) or this study.
        Probably the most controversial methodology for valuing environmental quality is
contingent valuation – asking respondents directly to place monetary values on environmental
changes. The EPA uses a version of this approach in calculating the benefits of the Clean Air
Act, in that the monetary benefits of reduced mortality and morbidity come from contingent
valuation studies. One could imagine, however, asking directly about air quality. A seminal
example of this approach is an EPA-sponsored evaluation of air quality in California (Loehman
et al., 1985). They asked respondents whether or not they would vote to improve air quality by
30 percent, along with associated health and visibility, at various costs, and showed them
photographs of the sky with clean and dirty air. The average annual willingness to pay was $980
in Los Angeles and $251 in San Francisco (in 2008 dollars). While not directly comparable to
the 14.4 μg/m3 improvements discussed above, these results seem considerably smaller than
those in the EPA analysis of the Clean Air Act or these results using happiness data.


15
   Calculations based on tables ES-1 and ES-3 in EPA (1999), adjusted for inflation using the CPI-U-RS, and a 1990
48-state US population of 247 million.
16
   Kim et al. (2003) find a nearly identical value ($2333) for a 4 percent decline in mean ambient SO2
concentrations.


                                                       16
Robustness and interactions with other demographics
        One natural test of whether these results truly measure reactions to air pollution, and not
some spurious covariate, is to check whether they vary sensibly with respondents' characteristics.
A natural candidate is income. If environmental quality is a normal good, we would expect WTP
to increase with income. To test this directly, I include an interaction between the income
variable and the daily PM10 count. To ensure that the coefficient α1 can be interpreted in the
same way as previously, at the average income, I interact pollution with the difference between
the respondent's log income and the mean log income in the sample. Bars above variables
denote means.

                                        (               )
                H ijt = α1 Pjt + α 2 Pjt ln Yi − ln Y + γ ln Yi + X i ' β + δ j + ηt + ε ijt    (3)

Results are reported in the first column of Table 5. The pollution coefficient is unchanged by the
inclusion of the interaction, and although the interaction term's coefficient ( α̂ 2 ) is not

statistically significant, the two terms together ( α̂1 and α̂ 2 ) are jointly significant and the
interaction coefficient is negative, suggesting that higher-income individuals are willing to pay
more for clean air.
        The marginal rate of substitution between income and air quality in this case, for the
average level of pollution and log income, is

                                ∂Y             ⎡αˆ1 + αˆ 2 (ln Y − ln Y ) ⎤
                                          = −Y ⎣                          ⎦                     (4)
                                ∂P |dH ≡0             [γˆ + αˆ 2 P ]
As shown at the bottom of Table 5, the point estimates in column 1 are such that people in the
25th percentile of the GSS income distribution appear willing to pay $33 for a one standard
deviation change in air quality, and people in the 75th percentile appear to be willing to pay $51.
        Another variable we might expect to be correlated with willingness to pay for air quality
is the local average air quality. This could go in one of two directions. People could become
habituated to poor air quality, and a one μg/m3 change could affect people less in polluted areas
than in clean areas. Or, if marginal disutility from pollution increases, we could find the
opposite. In column (2) of Table 5 I estimate a version of
                      H ijt = α1 Pjt + γ ln Yi + α 2 Pjt I ijt + X i ' β + δ j + ηt + ε ijt     (5)




                                                            17
where Iijt represents the interacted variable, in this case local monthly pollution. Here again the
interaction is statistically insignificant, but the interaction and the pollution variables together are
jointly significant. The point estimate of the interaction is positive, suggesting the first
interpretation – if anything pollution affects happiness less in polluted areas. The marginal rate
of substitution can be calculated as
                                   ∂Y            [αˆ + αˆ 2 I ]
                                             = −Y 1                                            (6)
                                   ∂P |dH ≡0         γˆ
where I is the interacted variable. Calculating this at the 25th percentile of the PM10
distribution, WTP is $48. At the 75th percentile, WTP is $40.
        PM10 is especially harmful for people with asthma or other respiratory problems. The
GSS does not have data on respiratory problems per se, but does have self-reported health status:
"fair," "poor," etc. In column (3) of Table 5 I include an interaction between the indicator for
whether a respondent's health status is fair or worse and the PM10 count. The interaction term is
statistically significant and positive, suggesting that people in poor health are not made worse-off
during high PM10 days than people in good health. This may be an indication that the PM10
variable is measuring a spurious correlation between something unmeasured, air pollution, and
happiness. Or, it may be a reflection of the crude nature of the health variable. For example, it
could be that people in excellent health are more likely to exercise out-of-doors, and therefore be
more affected by PM10 than people in poor health who remain indoors regardless of pollution
levels. The bottom of column (3) reports the point estimates of WTP for people in poor health
and those in better health, $25 and $46, respectively.
        If the health variable captures people likely to remain indoors, perhaps weekends can
proxy for time spent outdoors. In column (4) I interact pollution with an indicator for whether
the respondent was surveyed on a weekend day. In fact, the interaction variable has the opposite
sign, suggesting that people are willing to pay less for air quality on the weekends – $9 instead of
$54 – though again the interaction term alone is statistically insignificant.
        Another natural candidate to interact with pollution is whether the respondent considers
himself an environmentalist. In the contingent valuation approach, environmentally-minded
respondents create problems because some claim to be unwilling to pay anything for reduced
pollution, out of the belief that environmental quality should be free, or that polluters should be
required to pay for cleanup. Others claim to be willing to pay unrealistically large amounts,


                                                   18
perhaps hoping their responses will help determine policy. This happiness approach avoids those
problems because respondents are not asked directly about the environment or their willingness
to pay to improve it. They are only asked about their happiness, and I use data from other
sources to gather information about the air quality where and when the happiness question was
asked.
         In 1993, the GSS began asking respondents if they are a "member of any group whose
main aim is to preserve or protect the environment," or if in the last five years they have "taken
part in a protest or demonstration about an environmental issue," "given money to an
environmental group," or "signed a petition about an environmental issue." People who respond
yes to all four, I label "environmentalists," and in column (5) of Table 5 I include the
environmentalist indicator and its interaction with pollution. The interaction is negative, as
expected, suggesting pollution reduces the well-being of environmentalists by more than non-
environmentalists, but it is statistically insignificant, perhaps due in part to the fact that the
environmental questions were asked only on recent surveys, so column (5) has many fewer
observations.
         To examine if older people are willing to pay more for improved air quality, I estimated a
version of equation (5), replacing the interaction variable with an indicator for whether or not the
respondent is over age 69. The results, in column (6) of Table 5, are largely insignificant,
perhaps for the same reasons as for people in poor health. Old people are more susceptible to
respiratory problems associated with high levels of particulates, but may be less likely to be
outdoors and exposed to those particulates.
         The other group strongly affected by PM10 is children. The GSS did not survey children,
but did ask respondents if they had children. In column (7) I interact the PM10 count with a
dummy for respondents with kids. The interaction is negative, but statistically insignificant.
Taken literally, the point estimate suggests that respondents with kids were willing to pay $10
more than childless respondents for a one-standard-deviation change in PM10.
         Column (8) interacts pollution with whether or not the respondent claims to read a
newspaper "every day." This interacted term is statistically significant. In fact, it wipes out the
PM10 coefficient. Taken literally, column (8) means that the willingness to pay for clean air
comes entirely from newspaper readers, raising the possibility that reported air quality may be




                                                   19
driving the results, as opposed to actual air quality. Neidell and Zivin (2009) show that people
do avoid outdoor activities when local newpapers report poor air quality.
        Perhaps reading a daily newspaper merely signals education. To test this, in column (9) I
interact the PM10 count with the college indicator. That coefficient is statistically insignificant,
though again it is jointly significant with daily PM10. The point estimates suggest college
graduates are willing to pay $21 more than those without college degrees for improvements in air
quality.
        Finally, I was curious to see if this measure of WTP has changed over time. We know
the Easterlin paradox says happiness does not increase with income over time. And it seems this
has an environmental counterpart in that happiness does not change with pollution over time.
That would seem to rule out the ratio of those two correlations changing over time, but to make
sure, in column (10) I interacted the PM10 count with a year trend. The coefficient is not only
insignificant but tiny. The difference between measured WTP in 1984 and 1996 amounts to only
$7.
        In sum, the interactions in Table 5 do not tell a completely convincing story. Many of the
interaction coefficients are individually statistically insignificant, though jointly significant with
PM10 levels. Many confirm our expectations, such as the fact that higher-income respondents
and environmentalists appear willing to pay more for clean air. But others do not, such as the
fact that those in poor health and those in polluted locales appear willing to pay less.


5. Conclusions -- Advantages and disadvantages of the happiness approach


        Economists estimate the benefits of public goods using several approaches. Each has
associated advantages and disadvantages. Travel cost models face difficulty valuing time spent
en route and on site. Contingent valuation methods are vulnerable to biases due to framing of the
question, the monetary starting points used, strategic responses, and the critique that if
respondents do not know about the environmental problem until it is described by the surveyor,
the very fact of conducting the survey creates the willingness to pay. Hedonic approaches suffer
from Tiebout sorting and omitted variable bias. And using health care costs alone to value
environmental quality understates the amount people would be willing to pay to avoid being sick
in the first place.



                                                  20
       This "happiness" approach to measuring willingness to pay has its own set of
weaknesses. It makes stronger assumptions about preferences than economists typically make,
in that it compares the stated happiness of different individuals. It translates changes in stated
happiness in response to temporary changes in pollution into systematic willingness to pay, while
at the same time stated happiness does not seem responsive to systematic differences in
pollution. Nevertheless, this new approach has a number of notable advantages.
       First, the drawbacks of this approach are different from the drawbacks of the typically-
used approaches. It is more direct than hedonic or travel cost models, in that it relies on surveys
of people's well-being, yet it is not as direct as the contingent valuation approach, in that it does
not ask about environmental quality per se. Thus this new approach, if nothing else, serves as a
complement to existing approaches.
       Second, the happiness approach proposed here comes from nationally representative
surveys, and so can be used to assess how willingness to pay varies over time and by region, age,
income, education, current level of pollution, and concern for the environment. Third, the output
can be used to estimate the marginal rate of substitution between income and air quality directly,
and thus it does not suffer from the contingent valuation problem of large gaps between stated
willingness to pay and willingness to accept.
       Finally, economists are increasingly interested in using happiness to measure the value of
public goods and bads, such as unemployment and inflation, terrorism, airport noise, inequality,
and flood control. These all face the obstacle that such public goods do not vary across
individuals in the same location during the same year. It seems only natural, therefore, to use
this happiness approach to evaluate the economic benefits of the environment, and to take
advantage of the fact that air quality changes daily in any given location.
       What have we learned from this? The exercise here is unlikely to ever be generally
useful as an everyday cost-benefit tool, if only because its data demands are too extensive.
Moreover, the approach only captures one aspect of environmental damages. It cannot, for
example, be used to value unnoticeable pollutants with long-term consequences. The exercise
has, however, demonstrated several important points. First, the results add to the evidence that
self-reported subjective well-being captures something meaningful about people's circumstances
– in this case the quality of their environments. Second, the results demonstrate that pollution
has a direct effect on people's welfare, at least as self-reported well-being, in addition to any



                                                  21
measured effects through health, lost work days, and other observable outcomes. Finally,
whether or not we believe the particular point estimates, the results do support a substantial
willingness to trade lower income for higher environmental quality.




                                                22
References

Alesina, Alberto, Rafael Di Tella, Robert MacCulloch. 2004. "Inequality and Happiness: Are
       Europeans and Americans Different?" Journal of Public Economics 88(9-10): 2009-
       2042.

Barrington-Leigh, Christopher P. 2008. "Weather as a Transient Influence on Survey-reported
       Satisfaction with Life" University of British Columbia working paper.

Becchetti, Leonardo, Stefano Castrioto, and Londono Bedoya David Andres. 2007. "Climate,
      Happiness and the Kyoto Protocol: Someone Does not Like it Hot" Tor Vergata
      University Working Paper No. 247.

Blanchflower, David and Andrew Oswald. 2000. "Well being over time in Britain and the U.S."
       NBER Working Paper No. 7487.

Boes, Stefan and Rainer Winkelman. 2004. "Income and Happiness: New Results from
       Generalized Threshold and Sequential Models" IZA Discussion Paper No. 1175.

Brereton, Finbarr, J. Peter Clinch, and Susana Ferreira. 2008. "Happiness, Geography, and the
       Environment" Ecological Economics vol 65: 386-396.

Bruni, Luigino and Pier Luigi Porta. 2007. Handbook on the Economics of Happiness.
       Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.

Cameron, A. Colin and Pravin K. Trivedi. 1998. Regression analysis of count data. New York:
      Cambridge University Press.

Chay, Kenneth and Michael Greenstone. 2005. "Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence from the
       Housing Market" Journal of Political Economy 115(2): 376-424.

Clark, Andrew E. and Yannis Georgellis. 2004. "Kahneman Meets the Quitters: Peak-End
       Behavior in the Labour Market" DELTA working paper.

Clark, Andrew E., Paul Frijters, and Michael A. Shields. 2008. "Relative Income, Happiness, and
       Utility: An Explanation for the Easterlin Paradox and Other Puzzles" Journal of
       Economic Literature 46(1): 94-144.

Deaton, Angus. 2007. "Income, Aging, Health and Wellbeing Around the World: Evidence from
      the Gallup World Poll" Journal of Economic Perspectives 22(2): 53-72

Di Tella, Rafael, Robert MacCulloch and Andrew Oswald. 2001. "Preferences over Inflation
       and Unemployment: Evidence from Surveys of Happiness" American Economic Review
       91(1): 335-341.




                                              23
Di Tella, Rafael and Robert MacCulloch. 2005. "Partisan Social Happiness" Review of
       Economic Studies, 72(2), 367-393.

Di Tella, Rafael and Robert MacCulloch. 2006. "Some Uses of Happiness Data in Economics"
       Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(1): 25-46.

Di Tella, Rafael and Robert MacCulloch. 2006. "Gross National Happiness as an Answer to the
       Easterlin Paradox?" Journal of Development Economics 86(1): 22-42.

Easterlin, R. 1974. "Does Economic Growth Improve the Human Lot? Some Empirical
        Evidence," in P.A. David and M.W. Reder, eds., Nations and Households in Economic
        Growth: Essays in Honour of Moses Abramovitz. New York: Academic Press: 89-125.

EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). 1999. Benefits and Costs of the Clean Air Act: Final
      Report to Congress on Benefits and Costs of the Clean Air Act, 1990 to 2010. EPA 410-
      R-99-001.

Ferrer-i-Carbonell, Ada and Paul Frijters. 2004. "How Important is Methodology for the
        Estimates of the Determinants of Happiness?" The Economic Journal 114(497): 641-
        659.

Ferreira, Susana, Mirko Moro, and Peter Clinch. 2006. "Valuing the Environment Using the
        Life-Satisfaction Approach" University College Dublin working paper.

Finkelstein, Amy, Erzo F.P. Luttmer, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2008. "What Good is Wealth
       without Health? The Effect of Health on the Marginal Utility of Consumption" NBER
       working paper 14089, June 2008.

Frijters, Paul, John Haisken-DeNew, and Michael Schields. 2004. "Money Does Matter!
        Evidence from Increasing Real Income and Life Satisfaction in East Germany Following
        Reunification" American Economic Review 94(3): 730-752.

Frank, Robert H. 1997. "The Frame of Reference as a Public Good" The Economic Journal 107:
       1832-1847.

Freeman, A. Myrick III. 2003. The Measurement of Environmental and Resource Values.
      Washington, DC: Resources for the Future Press.

Frey, Bruno and Alois Stutzer. 2002. "What Can Economists Learn from Happiness Research?"
       Journal of Economic Literature 40(2): 402-435.

Frey, Bruno, Simon Luechinger and Alois Stutzer. 2009. "The Life Satisfaction Approach to
       Valuing Public Goods: The Case of Terrorism" Public Choice, forthcoming.

Graham, Carol. 2008. "The Economics of Happiness" in Steven Durlauf and Larry Blume, eds.,
      The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, Second Edition.



                                             24
Gruber, Jonathan and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2005. "Do Cigarette Taxes Make Smokers
       Happier?" Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy 5(1)

Helliwell, John F., Christopher P. Barrington-Leigh, Anthony Harris, and Haifang Huang. 2009.
       "International Evidence on the Social Context of Well-being" NBER Working Paper No.
       14720.

Kahneman, Daniel, Peter P. Wakker, Rakesh Sarin. 1997. "Back to Bentham? Explorations of
     Experienced Utility" Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(2): 375-405.

Kahneman, Daniel. 2000. "Experienced Utility and Objective Happiness: A Moment-Based
     Approach" in D. Kahneman and A. Tversky, eds., Choices, Values and Frames. New
     York, Cambridge University Press.

Kahneman, Daniel. 2005. "What Were They Thinking?" Gallup Management Journal. January
     13.

Kim, Chong Won, Tim Phipps, Luc Anselin. 2003. "Measuring the Benefits of Air Quality
      Improvement: A Spatial Hedonic Approach" Journal of Environmental Economics and
      Management 45(1): 24-39.

Layard, Richard. 2006. "Happiness and Public Policy: A Challenge to the Profession" The
       Economic Journal 116(510): c24-c33.

Layard, R., G. Mayraz, and S. Nickell. 2008. "The Marginal Utility of Income" Journal of Public
       Economics 92(8-9): 1846-1857.

Loehman, Edna, David Boldt, and Kathleen Chaikin. 1985. Measuring the Benefits of Air
     Quality Improvements in the San Francisco Bay Area: Property Value and Contingent
     Valuation Studies, Volume IV of Methods Development for Environmental Control
     Benefits Assessment, EPA-230-12-85-022.

Luechinger, Simon. 2009. "Valuing Air Quality Using the Life Satisfaction Approach" Economic
      Journal, forthcoming.

Luechinger, Simon and Paul A. Raschky. 2009. "Valuing Flood Disasters Using the Life
      Satisfaction Approach" Journal of Public Economics, forthcoming.

Luttmer, Erzo F.P. 2005. "Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-being" Quarterly
      Journal of Economics 120(3): 963-1002.

Neidell, Matthew and Joshua Graff Zivin. 2009. "Days of Haze: Environmental Information
       Disclosure and Intertemporal Avoidance Behavior" Columbia University working paper.




                                              25
Ng, Yew-Kwang. 1997. "A Case for Happiness, Cardinalism, and Interpersonal
      Comparability," The Economic Journal 107: 1848-1858.

Oswald, Andrew. 1997. "Happiness and Economic Performance" The Economic Journal 107:
      1815-1831.

Oswald, Andrew and Nattavudh Powdthavee. 2008. "Does Happiness Adapt? A Longitudinal
      Study of Disability with Implications for Economists and Judges” Journal of Public
      Economics, 92(5-6): 1061-77.

Rayo, Luis and Gary Becker. 2007. "Evolutionary Efficiency and Happiness" Journal of
       Political Economy 115(2): 302-337.

Rehdanz, Katrin and David Maddison. 2005 "Climate and Happiness" Ecological Economics
      52(1): 111-125.

Schwarz, Norbert and Fritz Strack. 1991. "Evaluating One's Life: a Judgment Model of
      Subjective Well-Being," in Fritz Strack, Michael Argyle, and Norbert Schwarz, eds.
      Subjective Well-Being: An Interdisciplinary Perspective, 27-47. Pergamon Press.

Smith, V. Kerry. 2008. "Reflections on the Literature" Review of Environmental Economics and
       Policy 2(2): 292 - 308.

Smith, V. Kerry and Ju-Chin Huang. 1995. "Can Markets Value Air Quality? A Meta-Analysis
       of Hedonic Property Value Models" Journal of Political Economy 103(1): 209-227.

Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers. 2008. "Economic Growth and Subjective Well-Being:
       Reassessing the Easterlin Paradox" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.

van Praag, Bernard M. S. and Barbara E. Baarsma. 2005. "Using Happiness Surveys to Value
       Intangibles: The Case of Airport Noise" The Economic Journal 115(500): 224-246.

Weinhold, Diana. 2008. "How big a problem is noise pollution? A brief happiness analysis by a
      perturbable economist" LSE Working Paper.

Welsch, Heinz. 2002. "Preferences over Prosperity and Pollution: Environmental Valuation
      based on Happiness Surveys." Kyklos 55: 473-494.

Welsch, Heinz. 2006. "Environment and Happiness: Valuation of Air Pollution Using Life
      Satisfaction Data" Ecological Economics 58: 801-813.

Welsch, Heinz. 2007. "Environmental Welfare Analysis: A Life Satisfaction Approach"
      Ecological Economics 62: 544-551.




                                              26
Table 1: Descriptive statistics by Happiness Status

                                                 Happiness (1-3)
                              "not too happy"     "pretty happy"   "very happy"
                                     (1)                (2)             (3)
Real income ($1000 2008)          38.7               54.8*          65.9*
 - (std. dev.)                    (38.6)              (46.8)        (53.0)
 - no. of obs..                 3,530             17,153           9,594
Age                               45.9                 44.2*        46.7*
 - (std. dev.)                    (18.0)              (17.3)        (17.8)
 - no. of obs.                  4,305             20,463           11,582
Female                             0.58               0.56*          0.57
  no. of obs.                           4,323           20,516         11,625
Married                            0.35               0.52*          0.69*
  no. of obs.                           4,323           20,516         11,625
Kids                               0.74               0.71*          0.75*
  no. of obs.                           4,323           20,516         11,625
Employed                           0.49               0.62*          0.59*
  no. of obs.                           4,323           20,516         11,625
Unemployed                         0.080              0.029*         0.015*
  no. of obs.                           4,323           20,516         11,625
Black                              0.23               0.14*          0.09*
  no. of obs.                           4,323           20,516         11,625
College grad.                      0.12               0.19*          0.23*
  no. of obs.                           4,323           20,516         11,625
Health fair or worse               0.46               0.24*          0.15*
 no. of obs.                            3,344           15,207          8,587
Liberal                            0.266              0.265          0.237*
  no. of obs.                           4,323           20,516         11,625
Environmentalist                   0.331              0.427*         0.421
  no. of obs.                              390           1,943          1,007
Read newspaper daily               0.443              0.514*         0.567*
  no. of obs.                           2,960           14,710          8,045
Vocabulary                         0.108              0.143*         0.145
  no. of obs.                           2,125           10,906          6,058
Weekend                            0.310              0.298*         0.290
  no. of obs.                           4,323           20,516         11,625
Continued ...




                                           27
Table 1 (continued)

                                                           Happiness (1-3)
                                      "not too happy"        "pretty happy"        "very happy"
                                             (1)                   (2)                  (3)
Temperature                             44.99                  44.39*                 44.94*
 - (std. dev.)                           (14.47)               (15.01)                 (14.88)
 - no. of obs.                                3,836                18,332                10,373
Precipitation (0.01")                    10.57                   9.78                  10.19
 - (std. dev.)                           (28.31)               (25.44)                 (26.66)
 - no. of obs.                                3,932                18,769                10,715
PM10 (μg/m3)                             29.65                  30.62                  30.23
 - (std. dev.)                           (16.67)               (18.47)                 (17.96)
 - no. of obs.                                  763                 3,561                 1,898
TSP                                      66.82                  66.89                  67.52
 - (std. dev.)                           (38.39)               (40.41)                 (47.13)
 - no. of obs.                                  641                 2,691                 1,573
CO                                         1.76                  1.64*                  1.65
 - (std. dev.)                            (1.84)                 (1.59)                 (2.17)
 - no. of obs.                                2,715                 12,022                6,553
SO2                                        3.00                  2.95                   2.93
 - (std. dev.)                           (10.10)                 (9.15)                 (9.07)
 - no. of obs.                                2,461                 10,945                6,020
Ozone                                      7.41                  7.79                   8.46*
 - (std. dev.)                           (17.63)               (17.78)                 (18.60)
 - no. of obs.                                2,267                 9,632                 5,382
*Mean statistically significantly different from mean for category one column to the left, at 5
percent.




                                                  28
Table 2: Happiness, Pollution, and Income:
       Linear regressions and PM10

                                           (1)                (2)            (3)               (4)
PM10 daily (μg/m3)     [α]             -0.0014*            -0.0018*       -0.0015*         -0.0016*
                                       (0.0006)            (0.0006)       (0.0007)         (0.0007)
log(real income ($1000 2008))           0.132*              0.133*         0.134*           0.066*
[γ]                                    (0.012)             (0.012)        (0.008)          (0.010)
Average PM10 by county                                      0.0017         0.0015           0.0015
     and month                                             (0.0011)       (0.0016)         (0.0015)
Age (÷10)                                                                                  -0.116*
                                                                                           (0.030)
Age (÷10) squared                                                                           0.015*
                                                                                           (0.003)
Female                                                                                      0.042*
                                                                                           (0.016)
Married                                                                                     0.250*
                                                                                           (0.018)
Kids                                                                                       -0.109*
                                                                                           (0.020)
Employed                                                                                   -0.027
                                                                                           (0.020)
Unemployed                                                                                 -0.187*
                                                                                           (0.054)
College grad                                                                                0.032†
                                                                                           (0.019)
Health fair or worse                                                                       -0.246*
                                                                                           (0.022)
Health poor                                                                                -0.212*
                                                                                           (0.041)
Rain (indicator)                                                                           -0.0055
                                                                                           (0.0189)
Rain (0.01 inches)                                                                          0.015
                                                                                           (0.036)
Temperature mean                                                                            0.064*
   (10° F)                                                                                 (0.028)
Temperature squared                                                                        -0.0065*
                                                                                           (0.0033)
Temp diff (daily max – min)                                                                 0.011
   (10° F)                                                                                 (0.013)
Weekend                                                                                    -0.022
                                                                                           (0.017)
Constant                                 1.72*              1.68*          1.90*            1.99*
                                        (0.04)             (0.05)         (0.27)           (0.27)
Year fixed effects                          --                 --            yes               yes
Month fixed effects                                                          yes               yes
County fixed effects                         --               --             yes               yes

R2                                         0.044           0.044           0.050             0.123
No. obs. = 6052
Years: 1984-1996, skipping
1992, 1995
WTP to pay for a one μg/m3                  $464*           $572*           $467*            $1041*
reduction                                    (188)          (198)            (210)            (450)
WTP to pay for a one std. dev.                $18            $23              $18              $41
reduction for one day
* Statistically significant at 5 percent. †10 percent. Standard errors adjusted for clustering by
county. Standard errors of WTP use the delta method.


                                                      29
Table 3: Happiness, Pollution, and Income:
       Alternative functional forms and PM10
                                       linear in       ln(income)       Ordered Probit:         Probit Happy=3
                                        income          ln(PM10)          ln(income)              ln(income)
                                          (1)               (2)                (3)                     (4)
PM10 daily (μg/m3)     [α]             -0.0016*         -0.053*           -0.0037*                -0.0039*
                                       (0.0007)         (0.021)           (0.0011)                (0.0014)
Income     [γ]                          0.0013*          0.066*            0.124*                  0.101*
                                       (0.0002)         (0.010)           (0.019)                 (0.023)
Average PM10 by county and              0.0015           0.001             0.0024                  0.0032
month                                  (0.0015)         (0.002)           (0.0025)                (0.0029)
Age (÷10)                              -0.112*          -0.115*           -0.239*                 -0.189*
                                       (0.030)          (0.030)           (0.058)                 (0.069)
Age (÷10) squared                       0.014*           0.015*            0.030*                  0.027*
                                       (0.003)          (0.003)           (0.006)                 (0.007)
Female                                  0.042*           0.042*            0.080*                  0.081*
                                       (0.016)          (0.016)           (0.031)                 (0.037)
Married                                 0.253*           0.249*            0.508*                  0.523*
                                       (0.018)          (0.018)           (0.036)                 (0.042)
Kids                                   -0.112*          -0.109*           -0.215*                 -0.229*
                                       (0.020)          (0.020)           (0.039)                 (0.045)
Employed                               -0.014           -0.027            -0.044                  -0.078
                                       (0.020)          (0.020)           (0.040)                 (0.046)
Unemployed                             -0.188*          -0.187*           -0.412*                 -0.279*
                                       (0.054)          (0.054)           (0.105)                 (0.138)
College grad                            0.023            0.032†            0.059                   0.028
                                       (0.019)          (0.019)           (0.038)                 (0.043)
Health fair or worse                   -0.248*          -0.246*           -0.482*                 -0.493*
                                       (0.022)          (0.022)           (0.043)                 (0.055)
Health poor                            -0.222*          -0.212*           -0.414*                 -0.257*
                                       (0.041)          (0.041)           (0.082)                 (0.115)
Rain (indicator)                       -0.008           -0.006            -0.001                  -0.010
                                       (0.019)          (0.019)           (0.035)                 (0.042)
Rain (0.01 inches)                      0.021            0.015             0.039                   0.052
                                       (0.036)          (0.036)           (0.070)                 (0.082)
Temperature mean                        0.065*           0.062*            0.081                   0.067
   (10° F)                             (0.028)          (0.028)           (0.050)                 (0.060)
Temperature squared                    -0.0066*         -0.0062†          -0.0091                 -0.0075
                                       (0.0033)         (0.0033)          (0.0058)                (0.0069)
Temp diff (daily max – min)             0.013            0.011             0.050*                  0.046†
   (10° F)                             (0.013)          (0.013)           (0.022)                 (0.025)
Weekend                                -0.023           -0.023            -0.049                  -0.025
                                       (0.017)          (0.017)           (0.033)                 (0.038)
Constant                                2.14*            2.12*                                    -1.15*
                                       (0.27)           (0.28)                                    (0.58)
Year, month, county effects               yes               yes                yes                    yes

R2                                     0.124              0.123
No. obs. = 6052
Years: 1984-1996, skipping
1992, 1995
WTP to pay for a one μg/m3            $1263*             $1112*             $1282*                $1636*
reduction [-α/γ]                       (529)              (484)              (438)                 (676)
WTP to pay for a one std.               $50                $44                $51                   $65
dev. reduction for one day

* Statistically significant at 5 percent. † Statistically significant at 10 percent. Standard errors adjusted for
clustering by county. Standard errors of WTP use the delta method.

                                                         30
Table 4: Other pollutants


                                          PM10
Dependent variable:                     without                                                              PM10 and         PM10 and   PM10 and
Happiness (1-3)                      interpolation             OZ              SO2              CO              OZ               SO2         CO
                                           (1)                  (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)              (6)        (7)
Pollution (daily) [α]                   -0.0019*            -0.0004           -0.00053         -0.0064      -0.0015†          -0.0019*   -0.0013†
                                        (0.0008)            (0.0008)          (0.00078)        (0.0072)     (0.0009)          (0.0007)   (0.0007)
Income ($1000 1986) [γ]                  0.083*              0.068*            0.071*           0.068*       0.055*            0.064*     0.063*
                                        (0.015)             (0.009)           (0.008)          (0.008)      (0.012)           (0.011)    (0.010)
Pollution (monthly county                0.0019              0.0012           -0.0028          -0.0048      -0.0018            0.0003     0.0010
average)                                (0.0023)            (0.0013)          (0.0018)         (0.0113)     (0.0022)          (0.0017)   (0.0016)
Second pollutant                                                                                             0.0012            0.0023    -0.0239
                                                                                                            (0.0013)          (0.0019)   (0.0149)

R2                                         0.14                0.13             0.13             0.13           0.13             0.13       0.13
No. obs.                                 2576                 8177            9902             10124           3863             4930        5455
Years                                   1984-96              1975-96         1975-96          1975-96         1984-96          1984-96    1985-96
WTP to pay for a one μg/m3               $953*                $243            $318           $3930           $1189             $1322*      $901†
reduction                                 (443)                (485)           (465)         (4461)           (743)             (561)      (495)
WTP to pay for a one std.                  $47                  $13              $9             $14            $46               $50        $35
dev. reduction for one day
                                            †
* Statistically significant at 5 percent.       Statistically significant at 10 percent. Standard errors of WTP use the delta method.

All regressions contain the other demographic and local variables, location, year and month fixed effects, as in column (4) of Table 2.




                                                                               31
Table 5: Interactions



                                                                      Local
                                                                    monthly         Health fair
Dependent variable: Happiness (1-3)                Income           pollution        or worse      Weekend       Environmentalist
                                                      (1)              (2)              (3)           (4)               (5)
PM10      [α1]                                     -0.0016*          -0.0018*         -0.0018*     -0.0021*        -0.0008
                                                   (0.0007)          (0.0007)         (0.0007)     (0.0007)        (0.0023)
Income ($1000 1986)       [γ]                       0.085*            0.066*           0.066*       0.066*          0.075*
                                                   (0.020)           (0.010)          (0.010)      (0.010)         (0.026)
Interaction      [α2]                              -0.00063           0.00003          0.0008       0.0018         -0.0014
                                                   (0.00057)         (0.00006)        (0.0013)     (0.0012)        (0.0023)
Interacted variable                                                   0.0004          -0.272*      -0.0755†           0.0175
                                                                     (0.0026)         (0.045)      (0.0388)          (0.0702)

N                                                    6052             6052             6052           6052              1032
R2                                                   0.12             0.12             0.12           0.12              0.14
F test that pollution and interaction zero           3.67*            3.22*            3.23*          4.24*             0.42

WTP to pay for a one std. dev. reduction                $33            $48
for one day when interaction = 25th
percentile
WTP to pay for a one std. dev. reduction                $51            $40
for one day when interaction = 75th
percentile

WTP to pay for a one std. dev. reduction                                                   $46        $54                $16
for one day when interaction = 0
WTP to pay for a one std. dev. reduction                                                   $25         $9                $45
for one day when interaction = 1

* Statistically significant at 5 percent.
†
  Statistically significant at 10 percent.
All regressions contain the other demographic and local variables, location, year and month fixed effects, as in column (4) of Table
2.




                                                                 32
Table 5: Interactions (continued)



Dependent variable: Happiness (1-3)                Age > 69           Kids         Read news         College          Trenda
                                                      (6)              (7)              (8)             (9)             (10)
PM10      [α1]                                     -0.0016*          -0.0014*         -0.0003         -0.0015*       -0.0016*
                                                   (0.0007)          (0.0011)         (0.0011)        (0.0007)       (0.0007)
Income ($1000 1986)       [γ]                       0.0066*           0.066*           0.061*          0.066*         0.066*
                                                   (0.0010)          (0.010)          (0.012)         (0.010)        (0.010)
Interaction      [α2]                               0.0002           -0.0004          -0.0034*        -0.0008         0.2×10-5
                                                   (0.0017)          (0.0012)         (0.0013)        (0.0013)       (1.7×10-5)
Interacted variable                                 -0.077           -0.097*         0.132*           0.057*         -0.0029
                                                    (0.071)          (0.041)         (0.047)         (0.044)         (0.0080)

N                                                    6052            6052             3688             6052            6052
R2                                                   0.12            0.12             0.13             0.12            0.12
F test that pollution and interaction zero           3.06*           3.13*            6.44*            3.27*           3.08*


WTP to pay for a one std. dev. reduction              $41             $34              $9              $37              $45
for one day when interaction = 0                                                                                    (year=1984)
WTP to pay for a one std. dev. reduction              $37             $44             $101             $58              $38
for one day when interaction = 1                                                                                    (year=1996)

* Statistically significant at 5 percent.
†
  Statistically significant at 10 percent.
a
 The variable "trend" takes on the values 0 through 12 for 1984 through 1996.
All regressions contain the other demographic and local variables, location, year and month fixed effects, as in column (4) of
Table 2.




                                                               33
