NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CREATIVE ACCOUNTING OR CREATIVE DESTRUCTION? FIRM-LEVEL PRODUCTIVITY
GROWTH IN CHINESE MANUFACTURING
Loren Brandt
Johannes Van Biesebroeck
Yifan Zhang
Working Paper 15152
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15152

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2009

Funding by SSHRC and CFI/OIT is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Loren Brandt, Johannes Van Biesebroeck, and Yifan Zhang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Creative Accounting or Creative Destruction? Firm-level Productivity Growth in Chinese
Manufacturing
Loren Brandt, Johannes Van Biesebroeck, and Yifan Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 15152
July 2009
JEL No. D24,O14
ABSTRACT
We present the first comprehensive set of firm-level total factor productivity estimates for China’s
manufacturing sector that spans her entry into WTO. We find that productivity growth is among the
highest compared to other countries. For our preferred estimate, the weighted average annual productivity
growth for incumbents is 2.7% for a gross output production function and 7.7% for a value added production
function over the period 1998-2006. Of the various sensitivity checks we carry out, controlling for
the increase in labor quality and labor hours, as proxied by the rising real wage, has the largest (downward)
effect on the productivity estimates. We further document that new entrants are a particularly dynamic
force and that firms experience large productivity declines before exiting from the sample. Overall,
net entry contributes roughly half to total TFP growth. Aggregate productivity growth, however, is
tempered by a much lower effect of reallocation of inputs towards higher productivity firms, compared
to the U.S. benchmark.

Loren Brandt
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 1A1 CANADA
brandt@chass.utoronto.ca
Johannes Van Biesebroeck
Centre for Economic Studies
K.U.Leuven
Naamsestraat 69
3000 Leuven
Belgium
and NBER
jo.vanbiesebroeck@econ.kuleuven.be

Yifan Zhang
Lingnan University
Department of Economics
8 Castle Peak Road Tuen Mun
New Territories Hong Kong SAR
yifan.zhang@ln.edu.hk

1. Introduction
China has enjoyed impressive growth in labor productivity averaging nearly 8 percent for a period now
spanning three decades. Initially propelled by reform of the agricultural sector, since the mid-to-late
1980s the non-agricultural sector has emerged as the engine of growth. By 2006, non-agriculture was
the source of nearly 90 percent of GDP, and employed in upwards of two-thirds of the labor force.
Considerable debate persists over the sources of this growth and the relative contributions of growth in
total factor productivity (TFP) versus the mobilization of additional resources, notably physical and
human capital. Much of this analysis has been at a highly aggregate level that combines agriculture and
non-agriculture (Bosworth and Collins, 2008; Perkins and Rawski, 2008). These studies typically find TFP
contributing approximately half of total growth. In a widely cited study focusing solely on the nonagriculture sector, Young (2003) uses officially published data to paint a much less impressive picture.
Correcting for potential biases in official deflators and the measurement of human capital, Young
reduces productivity growth between 1978 and 1998 from a very respectable 3 percent to a more
pedestrian 1.4 percent.
Young’s estimates have been revised upwards (Brandt and Zhu, 2009). There is also an issue of
aggregation. China’s non-agriculture sector combines secondary industry, which represents nearly half
of GDP and is the source of 90 percent of her exports, with the service sector, to which reform and
market liberalization has only come with a long lag. An earlier literature largely using aggregate data for
industry, supplemented with small panel data sets, typically found only modest effects of reform on TFP
in the state sector, but more rapid growth of TFP in the expanding non-state sector (See, for example,
Jefferson and Rawski, (1994); Groves et. al., (1998)). Overall, capabilities and productivity appeared to
be rising in industry, a product of the growing impact of market forces, expanded entry, and intense
competition.
An analysis of behavior in Chinese manufacturing on par with that carried out for other countries has
been handicapped by the lack of firm-level data sets covering the sector. This has made it difficult, for
example, to examine the benefits of the massive entry of new firms, as well as exodus of incumbents.
The increasing availability of firm-level data sets is helping to relax this constraint, and allow more indepth analysis at the micro level of key aspects of behavior in manufacturing that are missed at the
macro level (See, for example, Bai, Hsieh, and Qian (2006), Doughterty, Herd and He (2007), Hsieh and
Klenow (2007), Park, et al. (2006)) . This paper builds on this work.
Drawing on an unbalanced panel of firms between 1998 and 2006 that represents nearly 90 percent of
the gross output in manufacturing, we present the first comprehensive set of firm-level productivity
estimates for Chinese manufacturing that spans China’s entry into WTO. The absolute size of China’s
manufacturing sector and its exports make this important in its own right.
In our analysis, we pay particular attention to the dynamics of firm entry and exit, and to the
contributions that these processes are making to aggregate productivity growth in the tradition of work
by Baily, Hulten and Campbell (1992), Haltiwanger (1997) and Petrin and Levinsohn (2006). Recent
2

qualitative work of Brandt, Rawski and Sutton (2008), as well analysis by Jefferson, Rawski and Zhang
(2008) using cross-sectional data for 1998 and 2005, identifies entry and exit as potentially important
drivers of the dynamism in the manufacturing sector. We provide estimates directly comparable to
those of Baily et. al for China’s manufacturing sector.
Over the period we examine, we find TFP growth in manufacturing firms averaging 2.7 percent for a
gross output production function and 7.7 percent for a value added production function. Our results
also identify net entry as the source of as much as half of productivity growth however aggregate
growth in Chinese manufacturing remains constrained by limited efficiency-enhancing input allocations
between active firms.
Working with firm-level data for China has its difficulties. Thus, one of the additional contributions of
this paper is to carefully describe and document these data. We also make publically available
complementary data we have constructed, including deflators, industry concordances, etc. that are
required to make full use of the data.1 Furthermore, in light of important concerns of Young and others,
we examine the robustness of our results to a host of measurement issues. We show how alternative
treatment of key variables often reduces productivity growth, but does not alter the basic picture.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next Section we describe our methodology
for measuring productivity. Section 3 describes the data set and the construction of the key variables.
The Appendix and online Appendix provide more detailed documentation. In Section 4 we describe the
Chinese results at the firm level, the performance of entrants and exiting firms, and the aggregate
productivity growth experience. Section 5 concludes.

2. Productivity measurement
The most widely used measure of productivity is labor productivity, which is obtained by simply dividing
value added by the numbers of hours worked or the number of workers. In China's national accounts
the share of labor costs in total GDP is approximately one half for the full economy and even lower in
manufacturing. As a result, not accounting for capital intensity is likely to paint a misleading picture. Any
multi-factor productivity measure is only defined relative to a production technology, which we can
characterize by the production function:
.
(1)
Productivity is inherently a relative concept, and we can write it in general as

1

In an online appendix at http://www.econ.kuleuven.be/public/n07057/China/ we make available capital,
intermediary input and output deflators, industry concordances over time and over different aggregation

levels, and programs to match the firms over time and construct a revised capital stock series.
3

(2)
For productivity growth comparisons, the same firm enters the numerator and denominator (i=j) and for
productivity level comparisons we fix time instead (t=τ). Even though we can allow the production
function in (1) to differ between firms and over time, note the it subscripts on the input aggregator F(),
which imply we have to use the same technology (k) to perform the productivity comparison in (2).
In order to accurately measure productivity, we need to accurately measure inputs and outputs and we
need to estimate the input substitution possibilities that the technology allows. The first task is
described at length in the next section. The second task is discussed here.
In Van Biesebroeck (2007, 2008), alternative methodologies to estimate productivity are compared. In
general, the estimates tend to exhibit very high correlations however in one instance results are
sensitive to the assumption of a homogenous production technology across firms.2 Therefore, we
implement two estimation procedures here.
For the first productivity measure, a particular functional form for the production function is assumed
and its parameters are estimated using the methodology pioneered by Olley and Pakes (1996), inverting
the investment equation nonparametrically to proxy for unobserved productivity. An intermediary
estimation step controls for the non-random sample selection induced by the differing probability of exit
for small and large low-productivity firms. Using the estimates of the production function coefficients,
the productivity level for firm i at time t is calculated as
.
(3)
s superscripts on the coefficient estimates indicate that we estimate the production function separately
by industry. Small cap variables represent logarithms and the three variables q, l, and k are for output
(value added), labor, and capital.3 Measurement issues are discussed in the next section.
To normalize the above measure, recalling that productivity is only a relative benchmark, one can simply
subtract the average productivity for all firms at time t in the same industry. An alternative is to include
industry-year dummies in any regression that characterizes the patterns in the evolution or distribution
of
as the coefficients on the inputs are the same for any firm in the same industry. Productivity
growth boils down to
.

2

The estimation method mattered for the evaluation of learning-by-exporting effects. If the same (parametric)
production technology was imposed on all observations, future exporters were found to always be more
productive than nonexporters, and the difference grew larger with export market entry. Importantly, this finding
disappeared if production technology was allowed to vary across firms.
3
The discussion in this section is for a value added production function. We will also present results for a gross
output production function. In that case, material input always enters the equations similarly as labor input and
the dependent variable q is then gross output instead of value added.

4

The second measure is a straightforward Törnqvist index number, as used by Solow (1957). Caves.
Christensen and Diewert (1982a) illustrate how this approach can be interpreted as an exact
productivity measure without estimating any parameters. The intuition is that a cost-minimizing firm
will equalize the relative factor price to the local elasticity of substitution that the production technology
allows. As a result, factor shares can be used to control for input substitutability.
Productivity growth is calculated in the usual way as
,
(4)
where
is the average wage bill in value added. A major benefit of this approach is
that it allows for technology heterogeneity in the input elasticities across firms (See Van Biesebroeck
(2007)).
To compare the productivity level across firms within the same industry, Caves, Christensen, and
Diewert (1982b) propose the following multilateral productivity measure:
.
(5)
It amounts to a comparison with the hypothetical average firm in the industry. The weight on the labor
input difference is
and one minus this value for capital. While this measure is not
transitive—the input weights differ across observations—it does allow for a comparison with the same
benchmark while maintaining technology heterogeneity.4

3. Data
3.1 Firm-level census
We have annual firm-level data for the period 1998-2006 on all industrial firms that are identified as
being either state-owned, or are non-state firms with sales above 5 million RMB5 (hereafter referred to
as the "above-scale" industrial firms). These data come from annual surveys conducted by the National
Bureau of Statistics (NBS).6 Industry is defined here to include mining, manufacturing and public utilities.
Statistics in Table 1A compare the coverage of our firm-level data (in the top panel) with the
corresponding information from the Chinese Statistical Yearbook (in the bottom panel). In principle, the
coverage should be identical. For the majority of variables reported, the differences between the first

4

The productivity level and growth measures obtained with the Olley-Pakes approach simply replace the varying
input weights in equations (4) and (5) with the estimated input elasticity parameters.
5
This amounts to approximately $US 600,000 over this period, a time when manufacturing prices were relatively
stable.
6
Important changes in the firm identifiers used by the NBS in 1998 make it impossible to link up firms prior to
1998, and thus, our decision to begin the analysis in 1998.

5

two panels are less than 0.1%. For 1999, 2002, and 2003 all aggregates are identical, confirming that the
firm-level data we are using are the basis for the numbers reported in the Statistical Yearbook. For 1998
and 2000 only the employment aggregates are inexplicably lower in the sample, by 8.9% and 3.4%, with
no differences in any of the other variables. In 2001, 2004, and 2005 there are small additional
discrepancies, but there is no real pattern: some variables match, others do not; sometimes the sample
aggregate is higher, other times it is higher in the Yearbook.
[Table 1A & 1B approximately here]
In Table 1B, we make two additional comparisons. First, we extract from the 2004 Industrial Census all
firms that are either SOEs or non-SOEs with sales larger than 5 million RMB, and compare them with our
firm-level data set. The aggregates correspond extremely well. Second, for 2004 and for 1995, also a
Census year, we examine the coverage of our sample (SOEs plus non-SOEs with sales larger than 5
million RMB) relative to the Census. In 2004, 80% of all industrial firms are excluded from our sample,
however they account for only a small fraction of economic activity. These small firms employ 28.8% of
the industrial workforce, but only produce 9.3% of output and generate 2.5% of exports.7 For 1995, the
coverage with respect to sales, employment, and fixed assets is very similar to that in 2004. The
similarity in coverage in 1995 and 2004 increases our confidence that the NBS decision rule on which
firms to include in their annual sample is not introducing any systematic bias in our estimates.8
For the analysis in the paper, we focus only on manufacturing firms.9
Construction of a panel
Unique numerical firm IDs enable us to link firms over time. Firms occasionally receive a new ID if they
go through restructuring, merger or acquisition. Where possible, we have aimed to track firms as their
boundaries or ownership structure changes, using information on the firm's name, industry, address,
etc. to link them.
In Table A.1, we report the percentage of firms that we match each year on the basis of firm ID and then
using information other than firm ID. The fraction of firms in a year that can be linked to a firm in the
previous year increases from 84.5% in the first two years (1998-1999) to almost 92% in the final two
years (2005-2006). The extent to which we need to rely on identifying information other than firm IDs

7

The original numbers reported in the 2005 Chinese Statistical Yearbook for above-scale industrial firms show
smaller totals. For example, output was 18.72 trillion RMB. The higher figure reported in the 2006 Chinese
Statistical Yearbook reflects the upward revision following the 2004 Census. This suggests that before 2004, the
coverage of our sample was probably in the vicinity of 80 percent.
8
Suppose, for example, that TFP in “excluded” firms systematically differed from those included. Changes over
time in their contribution to industrial output could bias aggregate measures of TFP.
9
After 2002, firms with industry codes 1711, 1712, 1713, 1714, 2220, 3648, 3783, 4183 and 4280 were re-classified
as service industries and we also exclude them from the sample in the earlier years.

6

declines substantially as the rate of restructuring slows down. Overall, 95.9% of all year-on-year matches
are constructed using firm IDs and only 4.1% using other information.
The algorithm to perform the firm matches is described in some more detail in the Appendix. The
program used to construct firm matches as well as the program to construct the revised capital stock
series (see below) is made available in the online Appendix mentioned in the introduction.
The difficulty of following firms over time is related to changes in ownership type. While in 10% of the
matches the “ownership type” of a firm changes, the proportion is significantly higher when other
information is needed to trace a firm: the fraction is 24.5% in that case compared to 9.2% for matches
based on IDs.10 Many of the ownership changes coincide with major restructuring that also results in
new firm IDs. These events tend to occur only once over the time we observe a firm, but fully one-sixth
of all firms in the sample that are observed for more than one year have their official ID changed at
some point. Over time, the rate of ownership restructuring slows down markedly.
We end up with an unbalanced panel of firms that increases in size from 148,685 firms in 1998 to
278,753 in 2006. The unit of analysis is the firm, and not the plant. Other information in the survey
suggests that more than 95 percent of all observations in our sample are single-plant firms. In Table 2,
we report the total number of firms in each year and break this down by incumbents, entrants, and
exiting firms. Between 2000 and 2001, for example, the total number of firms increases from 148,905 to
156,658, or an increase of 7,753. Gross entry was significantly larger, namely 37,729, but this was offset
by the exit of 29,476 firms. The way in which we link firms, and the high percentage of the firms in our
panel that experience ownership changes suggests that much of this entry and exit is de novo, as
opposed to being a by-product of firm restructuring.
[Table 2 approximately here]
On average, the annual rate of attrition in our sample is slightly less than 14 percent. Out of our original
sample in 1998 of 148,586 firms, 34,777 firms, or slightly less than a quarter, survive through 2006.
Noteworthy is the sharp increase in the number of firms in the sample between 2003 and 2004, a result
of a lot more new entrants. The increase can be attributed to the 2004 Industrial Census, and the
identification of firms, largely private in ownership, that should have been in the sample in earlier years,
but had been left out because of a less than perfect business registry.
What is also important to note is that the average age of newly entered firms is declining over time. The
median age for firms that showed up for the first time in the sample in 1999 and 2000 was 4 years. This
declined to 3 years in 2001 and 2002 and further to 2 years in 2003. The additional firms picked up in

10

The ownership classification is discussed in more detail below. These statistics are for five ownership categories:
state, hybrid/collective, private, Hong Kong/Macau/Taiwan, and foreign. Using the full ownership detail of 23
categories, changes are more common (13.7%), but again a lot more when non-ID information is used in the
matches (41.5%).

7

the 2004 census year increases the median age of newly entered firms again to 3 years in 2004, but both
in 2005 and 2006 this goes down again to 2 years.11
In any given year, there are firms in the sample with sales that fall below the threshold of 5 million RMB.
The percentage declines from 21.5% in 1998 to only 3.4% in 2005. Most of these firms are SOEs, and
thus are included by fact of their ownership. Among non-SOEs, the percentage of firms with sales less
than 5 million RMB rises slightly after 1998 up through 2000, and then falls sharply. In 2004, the census
year, less than 1% of all non-SOEs record sales below 5 million RMB. By all indications, the 5 million
RMB is not a ``hard'' rule, and firms whose sales slip below the threshold are not automatically removed
from the sample.
In our analysis, we work with the sample as provided rather than strictly enforce the cutoff rule. This
helps to maximize the number of panel observations we have. As reported above, these data also
aggregate to those reported annually on Chinese manufacturing in the Chinese Statistical Yearbook.

3.2 Variable construction
Gross output
Our gross output measure is production, which differs from sales because of changes in inventories and
corresponds more closely to the reported input use.
To construct an output deflator at the most detailed level possible, we use information from the 19982003 surveys, for which firms report the value of their output in both nominal and real prices. Output in
real terms is constructed by firms using a set of ``reference'' prices provided by NBS. In any given year,
the ratio of nominal to real output provides an index of prices in that year relative to the base. The
change in this index between year t and t-1 then is a measure of the firm-specific price change between
the two years, which we average to the four-digit industry level.12 We drop as outliers those
observations for which the price change differs by more than a half standard deviation from the mean,
or approximately 15-25% of observations. We then recalculate the weighted average for each sector,
using as weights each firm's current output.13 These changes are linked over time to provide an output
deflator for each of the 423 sectors.14

11

The decline in age of newly entering firms shows up even more pronouncedly in the higher percentiles. For
example, the 90th percentile age declines from 21 to 9 years over the sample period, with again a slight transitory
up-tick in 2004.
12
We utilize information on the changes rather than the levels because of the noise introduced into our measures
by the entry and exit of firms into a sector.
13
We obtain extremely similar results using the average or the median when aggregating the firm-level
information to the industry-level.
14
The output deflators, as well as those for capital and intermediary inputs, are available in the online Appendix
mentioned in the introduction.

8

For 2004-2006, we use the two-digit (38 sectors) ex-factory price index in the 2007 China Statistical
Yearbook. Output prices decreased between 1998 and 2002 following the Asian Financial Crises and
began to rise after 2003. Between 1998 and 2006, output prices rose by only 9.3 percent, most of which
occurred after 2004.
Value added
Real value added is constructing by separately deflating output, net of goods purchased in for resale and
net of indirect taxes, and material inputs.
Input deflators are calculated using the output deflators and information from the 2002 National InputOutput table. The sectors defined in the Input-Output table are less disaggregated then our output
deflator. The IO sectors are mainly at the 3-digit level, but there are also 2-digit and 4-digit industries.
We construct a concordance table linking IO sectors and 4-digit industries. We obtain indices of output
prices for each IO sector by taking an un-weighted average of prices at the 4-digit level. To obtain the
input deflators for each IO sector, we calculate a weighted average of the output deflators, using as
weights the coefficients in the 2002 IO table.
Between 1998 and 2006, input prices rose by 20.3 percent, more than twice as fast as output prices.
Much of this reflects the rapid increase in raw material and energy prices that occurred after 2003. The
input deflators are weighted averages of output deflators, with a much larger weight on industries
producing raw materials and energy products than in total manufacturing output.
One potential source of measurement error is the input deflators for export processors. Legally, these
firms are allowed to import raw materials and intermediates used directly in export processing dutyfree. Between 1998 and 2006, there was a marked reduction in tariffs on intermediate goods, which we
expect to be reflected in prices. In principle, intermediate goods prices for export processers should not
have been affected, but we have no way to construct alternative indices. For these firms, our input
deflators are likely biased downwards, which leads to an overestimate of real input use, and an
underestimate of value-added.
Employment and wages
Firms report total annual employment and several components of employee compensation. The latter
include wages, employee supplementary benefits, and unemployment insurance. Firms began to report
retirement and health insurance in 2003 and housing benefits in 2004. We utilize information on the
first three categories to generate consistent measures of compensation over the entire period, but
conduct a robustness check including the other measures.
Reported compensation is likely to underestimate total payments to labor. Labor's share of value added
in our sample is only 34.2 percent. By comparison, the national income accounts suggest a share of labor
in all of industry that is between 55 and 60 percent. In some of our productivity estimation, we follow
Hsieh and Klenow (2007) and inflate wage payments by a constant factor for all firms to work with a
9

wage share consistent with the national average. We are forced to rely on the assumption that the bias
in the non-reporting of wage payments is the same across all firms.
Over time there is a slight decrease in the wage share in value added, which is the result of three
evolutions. First, average firm size is declining and the wage share is strongly increasing in firm size.
Second, the share of wages in state-owned firms, which initially was much higher than average,
converged over time towards the lower average for private firms. And third, domestically-owned
private firms, which always had the lowest average wage share, increase in importance.
Capital stock and investment
Firms do not report their fixed investment. Each firm reports information on the value of their fixed
capital stock at original purchase prices, and their capital stock at original purchase prices less
accumulated depreciation. As these book values are the sum of nominal values for different years, we
have to make some assumptions to convert them into real values that are comparable across time and
across firms. Failure to do so will likely introduce systematic biases into our estimates of the capital
stock related to a firm’s age.
Our procedure for estimating the real capital stock in each year begins with estimating the real value of
the capital stock in the first year in which the firm appears in our data set. For simplicity of presentation
here, we assume that it is 1998, the first year of our panel. Ideally, we need information on all of a
firm's past investments (as well as capital disposal) to construct the real capital stock in 1998. This we
do not have. As an alternative, we use information from the 1993 annual enterprise survey to construct
estimates at the two-digit industry level by province of the average rate of growth of the nominal capital
stock between 1993 and 1998.15 Combined with information on the age of each firm, we use these
estimates to calculate the firm's nominal capital stock in the year in which it was established, or NKE. The
real capital stock, or RKE in the same year is obtained by deflating the initial nominal capital stock with
the investment deflator constructed in Brandt and Rawski (2008, Chapter 20).
The nominal capital stock in each year up through 1998 is then calculated by multiplying the initial
nominal capital stock by (1 + rps)n, where n is the number of years since the firm was established, and rps
is the estimated rate of growth in the nominal capital stock in province p in sector s. Annual investment
is the change in nominal capital stock between years. The real capital stock for 1998 is calculated using
the perpetual inventory method, assuming a depreciation rate of 9% and deflating annual investment
using the Brandt-Rawski deflator. For years after 1998, we use the observed change in the firm's

15

We apply the same method for those firms that enter our sample after 1998, but recalculating the nominal rate
of growth in the capital stock.

10

nominal capital stock at original purchase prices as our estimate of nominal fixed investment. The same
rate of depreciation and deflator is used to roll the real capital stock estimates forward.16
Table A.2 in the Appendix illustrates the potential implications of alternative assumptions made in the
construction of the capital stock. Irrespective of the construction method, capital per worker increases
noticeably over the sample period. Average capital per firm tends to be more sensitive to the
assumptions. The un-deflated `net' capital stock (per firm) is relatively flat over time, while our preferred
measure shows an initial increase, but a decline after 2001 as less capital-intensive firms enter the
sample.
Capital per worker in our preferred benchmark estimate increases by 21.3% from 1998 to 2006, which
amounts to 2.4% per year. The best estimate using official statistics, the far right results in the top panel
of Table A.2, only shows an increase of 12.4% over the sample period. This adjustment lowers estimated
productivity growth rates substantially, as the capital share in output is extremely high in China.
The adjustment has further impact on the comparison between firms. Table A.3 in the Appendix
illustrates that our procedure leads to a larger upward adjustment in the capital stock of state-owned
firms than that of other firms. This is largely because the former tend to be older. On average, the
adjustment is 15 percent larger for state-owned firms. Correcting this relative underestimation of capital
input for state-owned enterprises is one factor that reduces estimated productivity levels and growth
rates in the capital stock for that group of firms.
Ownership
We utilize information on a firm's registered type (qiye dengji zhuce leixing) to classify ownership into
five basic groups: state-owned, hybrid/collective, private, and two types of foreign firms, those from
Hong-Kong, Macau, and Taiwan (HMT) and those from all other countries.17 We use additional
information on a firm’s registered capital to classify limited liability corporations and shareholding
corporations as state, hybrid or private. Foreign categories combine both joint ventures and whollyowned subsidiaries.
In Table 3, we report information on the number of firms and employment by ownership for the
beginning and ending year of our sample. Over time, the role of state-owned firms falls markedly on
both counts. The same is true for collective firms. The fastest growing component is private firms, which
increase as a share of the total number of firms from 9.0% to 59.5%, and in terms of employment from
only 5.2% to 38.6%. Foreign-invested firms increase only slightly as a share of the total number of

16

The Brandt-Rawski deflator is a chain-linked price deflator based on separate price indices for equipmentmachinery, and buildings-structures. The weights are the share of these items in fixed investment, as reported by
China’s National Bureau of Statistics.
17
Hong Kong-based subsidiaries of MNCs are included in Foreign I. There is no easy way to untangle them from
the rest of the firms, short of looking at them on a case-by-case basis.

11

firms, and then largely because of the increase in the number of non-HMT firms, but their share of
employment more than doubles from 15.1 to 33%.
[Table 3 approximately here]
The changing importance of ownership types in Table 3 is the product of three forces: exit, new entry,
as well as ownership changes that occur in the course of enterprise restructuring. Figure 1 shows entry
and exit by ownership for the five categories. For private firms, for example, gross entry over the entire
sample period is nearly 190,000, however nearly a third of all private firms exit subsequently. From 2002
onwards, private firms make up more than half of all entrants; from 2005 onwards, they also make up
half of all exiting firms.
[Insert Figure 1 approximately here]
Table A.4 in the appendix reports for select “pairs” of years the transition between ownership categories
for continuing firms. The percentage of continuing firms experiencing a change in ownership rises from
6.4% between 1998-1999 to 9.7% between 2002 and 2003, and then falls slightly to 7.8% between 2005
and 2006. Approximately one-half of the changes are associated with privatization. In each of the years,
the collective and state categories lose more firms than they gain, while the private category is the
destination for the majority of ownership switches.
Results in Table A.5 for the 2005 to 2006 matches further illustrate that ownership changes are three
times more likely when firm information other than ID is used to match firms in adjacent years. It
demonstrates the importance of matching on information other than ID to follow firms over
restructuring episodes. The category by category transitions also highlight the preponderance of
switching into the private category and the switching out of the state and even more the
hybrid/collective category.
Industry Classification
Each firm is classified into an industry following the 4-digit Chinese Industry Classification (CIC) system
that resembles the old U.S. SIC system. In 2003, the classification system was revised to incorporate
more detail for some sectors, while some other sectors were merged. To make the industry codes
comparable across the entire period, we constructed a harmonized classification that groups some
industries prior to and post the revision.

3.3 Final sample
Some firms have missing observations for some of the variables necessary to calculate productivity.
Statistics in Table 4 illustrate how many firms have missing, zero, or negative values for the real capital
stock or value added, which are dropped from the analysis as the logarithms of the input and output
variables are not defined. We treat firms with missing employment similarly, and further drop all firms
with less than 8 employees as they fall under a different legal regime. As a result, 17% of the original
12

firms are dropped from the sample in 1998, but this fraction declines to approximately 6% in each year
after 2001. 34,777 firms remain in the sample throughout.18
[Table 4 approximately here]

4. Results
4.1 Firm-level productivity growth
The benchmark estimates for average productivity growth rates by year are depicted in Figure 2. These
measures use the index number formula in equation (4) for a value added production function on the
full unbalanced panel of firms. Firm-level growth rates are aggregated using value added weights,
averaged over the initial and end year.
[Figure 2 approximately here]
Output growth has been extremely rapid in the Chinese manufacturing sector, outstripping the welldocumented economy-wide growth rate of 10%, by almost a factor of two. Here we find that firm-level
total factor productivity growth has been extremely high as well, rising from an average of just over 2%
in 1999 to almost 14% in 2006. The average over the full period stands at 9.5%.19
Figure 3 presents several alternative TFP growth estimates. These measure different objects, but the
overarching message of extremely rapid productivity growth prevails. In each case, productivity growth
is significantly lower in the first four years of the period, 1998-2001, than in the period following China’s
accession to the WTO.
[Figure 3 approximately here]
Results in the top-left quadrant show that productivity growth rates are approximately 2% higher if a
parametric production function is assumed, which is estimated at the three-digit industry level using the
Olley-Pakes methodology. This is consistent with firms expanding input use more rapidly for those
inputs that they use relatively more intensively, which is what we expect if they are exploiting their
comparative advantage.
Productivity growth rates using a gross output production function, in the top-right quadrant, are much
lower. Abstracting from weighting issues and assuming that intermediate inputs are proportional to
output, the ratio between TFP calculated using a gross output and a net output production function

18

The total number of active firms in the first column in Table 4 differs slightly from the corresponding column in
Table 2, as firms that exit and re-enter the sample are considered operating throughout in Table 2, even though we
do not observe them.
19
To construct the averages in Figure 2, the one percentile at the top and the bottom are dropped, but the effect
on the average is minimal.

13

should be equal to the share of value-added in gross output. In the sample, the latter rises over time
from 0.25 to 0.33 as the average share of intermediate inputs and energy in total output falls over time.
Relative TFP using gross output behaves similarly: in the first few years it is just under one quarter of the
value added TFP growth, and in the latter period it is a third. At 3.8% annually between 2001 and 2006,
TFP growth on a gross output basis is also extremely high—explicit comparisons with other countries are
below.
In the bottom-left quadrant, limiting the sample to the balanced panel of firms that are active
throughout the entire sample period raises the average productivity growth initially. It does not make
any difference to the estimates in the second half of the period. This is the result of two opposing forces
that will be illustrated in greater detail below. On the one hand, many of the firms active in 1998 are
performing poorly and will exit the industry in subsequent years. The survivors outperform this group by
a factor of almost two in the initial years. On the other hand, many of the new entrants are very
productive and enjoy especially rapid productivity growth in their first years. In the second half of the
sample, the intermediate performance of survivors results in average productivity growth.
Finally, the unweighted averages of the firm-level productivity growth rates, reported in the bottomright quadrant, are more than 2% lower per year than the value added weighted averages.20 From this
we can conclude that, somewhat unusually, large Chinese firms are increasing productivity at a higher
than average rate. The positive correlation holds for both productivity measures, for all ownership
categories, and for value added as well as employment weights.21
The restructuring of large state-owned firms is one explanation for the pattern in China. Alternatively,
the inclusion rule in the sample based on annual sales means that some small firms only make the
sample by virtue of an extremely high productivity level, from which further improvements might be
difficult.
To put the extraordinary productivity growth performance documented in Figures 2 and 3 into
perspective, it is important to keep in mind that at least four beneficial factors were jointly at play. The
impact of each of these factors accelerated over time.
First, the sample period covers the cyclical upswing following the Asian financial crises. Second, China's
entry into the WTO and its integration into the world economy lead to exports rising by more than 25%
annually over the sample period, which especially benefitted the manufacturing sector. Third,
restructuring of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and collectively-owned firms started in earnest in the

20

The weight used is the average of current and past value added. With current value added weights the average
productivity growth would be higher still, and with lagged value added it would be lower. With employment
weights instead of value added, the average would be lower as well.
21
There is an abundance of international evidence that firm growth is negatively correlated with size, but the
evidence for productivity growth is a lot weaker. Griliches and Mairesse (1983) find a negative correlation between
size and productivity growth for firms in the United States and France, but the plant-level evidence for the U.S. in
Baily, Hulten, and Campbell (1992) is weak or insignificant once they control for firm-level growth.

14

mid-1990s, and accelerated through the early part of the period we analyze. And fourth, liberalization
and competitive pressures in the manufacturing sector exceeded those in much of the tertiary sector,
especially finance and telecommunications.
We gain added perspective by comparing these numbers with similar statistics for other countries.
Average statistics for both value added and gross output total factor productivity growth for several
countries are reported in Table 5.22 If information was available for several sub-periods, we chose
cyclical expansions to match the Chinese situation.
Compared to these other countries, China's performance remains exemplary, although not completely
unheard of. It records the highest level of firm-level productivity growth of any country for which a
comparable average could be found for a value added production function in manufacturing. Slovenia,
also a transition economy, records a close second productivity growth at 8.5% versus 9.5% for China.
After the recession of the early 1980s, the record of U.S. plants is also better than commonly assumed,
with a total factor productivity growth of 3.1% per year.
[Table 5 approximately here]
The Chinese total factor productivity growth using a gross output production function averaged 2.6%
over the full sample period, and 3.7% over the last five years. This record is bested by Colombia (4.7%)
and Korea (3.5%).23 Results for other countries indicate that a sustained TFP growth in excess of 2% is a
rare event, even in cyclical booms.

4.2 Firm-level productivity growth: Robustness checks
An important message from Young (2003) is that measurement issues matter. Using aggregate statistics
for the entire non-agriculture sector, he shows that with alternative price deflators and adjustments for
input quality the productivity growth estimate is reduced from 3% to 1.4% per year over the period

22

To compare the two sets of statistics, one should scale up the gross output based numbers by one over the value
added share in output.
23
Results for Colombia are not entirely comparable as they refer to productivity calculated using physical output in
the numerator. Firm-specific price increases are subtracted from TFP growth and it is shown that these are
negatively correlated with physical productivity growth. As a result, productivity growth using a value concept
(TFPR) is lower.

15

between 1978 and 1998.24 In Figure 4 we explore how sensitive our average productivity growth
statistics are to a variety of assumptions.25
We consider five possible reasons why our benchmark estimate could be biased upward. These
possibilities follow directly from the definition of productivity growth in equation (4), i.e. output growth
minus weighted input growth: (1) Price inflation is underestimated. (2) Labor input growth is
underestimated. (3) Initial capital stocks are overestimated. (4) The weight on capital is too low. (5)
The sample selects on success.
[Figure 4 approximately here]
A direct input into the productivity calculations are the price deflators for nominal output and input to
construct real value added. Up through 2003, the NBS relied on firm-level reports of output at nominal
and at `reference’ prices to construct implicit price deflators at the industry level. Young argues that out
of convenience firms increasingly tended to report the same value of output at both price levels.26
Alternative price deflators, constructed from separate NBS administered price surveys, suggest higher
price inflation and correspondingly lower productivity estimates.
To verify the sensitivity of our productivity estimates, we show alternative estimates in Figure 4 using
two alternative official deflators that were constructed from independent price surveys, i.e. not from
data collected through the manufacturing surveys that are the source of our firm data. First, the twodigit deflator that is already used for the 2004-2006 period is used wherever it is available (2002-2006).
Second, an even more aggregate deflator, which tracks prices in 14 manufacturing sectors, is used
throughout the entire period.
The changes with the first deflator are negligible; however we do find lower productivity growth using
the most aggregate deflator. The magnitude of the adjustment is non-negligible, lowering productivity
growth on average by 0.68% per year, but the change is smaller than Young (2003) finds for the period
1978-1998. The problems he highlights may be more severe for the rapidly expanding service industry.

24

Brandt and Zhu (2009) resuscitate the higher TFP estimates. First, revisions to nominal GDP by the NBS in 2006,
which were not available to Young, add nearly 0.6 percent to real output growth and TFP. Second, they construct
an alternative service sector deflator that better reflects changes in the price of both consumer and business
services. Young’s alternative to the NBS implicit deflator for services is based solely on the price of consumer
services. Nonetheless, Young’s general concerns remain valid.
25
The “benchmark” estimate in Figure 4 is slightly higher than the 9.5 percent average reported earlier. For
purposes of consistency in our comparisons in Figure 4, we dropped any firm for which we were not able to
construct all of the alternative TFP estimates in the figure. To further make sure the sample of firms did not change
in the alternative calculations, we also did not drop the top and bottom percentile in the productivity growth
distribution, except for our preferred estimates at the bottom.
26
As we directly observe the reported output at the two price levels, we can verify Young’s claim directly for the
period of our analysis. The fraction of firms in the manufacturing sector that report the same output value using
current and constant prices ranges from 16.9% to 21.4% and there is no distinct time trend. There are also many
firms that report higher numbers at constant prices than at current prices, indicating price declines.

16

Using a more aggregate price index is not innocuous either. When Young (2003) introduced the new
price deflator he adjusted value-added directly, rather than deflating separately gross output and input.
Under the plan, input prices were held down and with liberalization they grew more rapidly than output
prices, increasing value added in real terms. The one-digit deflator lacks the detail to properly take this
into account.
Moreover, a more aggregate price index is likely to introduce further errors as more successful subsectors are able to lower costs and prices as they expand and make up a larger share of their sector.
Applying the same price deflator to the entire (aggregate) sector will understate the productivity growth
of the more successful sub-sectors.
The second important adjustment that Young (2003) proposes is to control for increases in human
capital. Over the twenty-year period he studies, 1978-1998, when educational attainment increased
rapidly, this is clearly an important issue. Again, this is likely to be less important for us as our time
period is a lot shorter.
We do not observe any measure of human capital at the firm-level, but can utilize growth in the wage
bill as an imperfect proxy for a broader labor input measure that includes human capital improvements.
This measure grows a lot more rapidly than the absolute number of employees for three reasons: more
hours worked per employee, rising marginal productivity of labor, and rents. In addition to TFP, the
marginal productive of labor will rise with increases in K/L and improvements in human capital.
The results in Figure 4 illustrate that this adjustment is very important. It lowers average productivity
growth by 2.69% per year or even 3.33% if other employment benefits, such as pensions, employment
insurance, and housing benefits, are included as well. It seems that some combination of human capital
improvement and longer average working hours could explain in upwards of one quarter to one third of
the measured productivity growth.
To the extent that wages rise because workers are able to appropriate some rents, the contribution of
human capital is of course overestimated and productivity growth underestimated. There is some
evidence that this is going on. For one, the difference between wage growth and employment growth
increases markedly as the business cycle became more expansionary and labor markets were getting
tighter. The average differential rises from 2.5% in 1999 to 10.3% in 2006; the median differential
increased steadily from 4.8% to 8.5%. New entrants also see higher wage growth than incumbents,
presumably in part because they have to compete harder to attract workers away from other firms.
An additional factor spurring wage increases is that more competitive labor markets and a more liberal
stand towards migration increasingly allows the best firms to attract the best workers. This permits a
more efficient employment of the available labor. This contribution to productivity growth is also taken
out of the alternative productivity measures.
The third factor that potentially leads to a bias in the productivity growth calculation is the construction
of the capital stock. The original capital stock measure in the data set is a hybrid sum of undeflated
17

investment flows and undepreciated past investments (“original value at purchase prices”). Especially if
firms are older or highly capital-intensive, the imperfect capital stock measure will bias productivity
growth estimates. In particular, if the initial stock is overestimated, capital growth will be
underestimated and productivity growth estimates biased upward.
In the new capital stock measures that we construct, we tried to control as accurately as possible for
depreciation and capital price inflation in the initial capital stocks and then use a perpetual inventory
measure to roll the stock forward. Compared with the original capital stock measures, deflated using the
same capital stock deflator, our benchmark productivity growth estimate is 1.45% higher—9.69% versus
8.24%. One important reason for the increase is that for many state-owned enterprises, which tend to
be older and more capital intensive, the capital stock series was underestimated in the initial year. This
inflated their initial relative productivity level and their capital input growth rates.
The same explanation is consistent with the higher average productivity growth that is obtained when
all firms active in 1998 are dropped and the productivity growth calculations is limited to firms entering
our data during the sample period. It avoids problems estimating the initial capital stock, but does lead
to a different sample. On average, productivity growth is 0.99% higher per year.
Alternatively, we excluded all firms that reported a birth-year more than two years before the year they
are first observed in the sample. This drops the majority of firms active in 1998 and about three quarters
of newly observed firms in 1999. The fraction of newly observed firms that are indeed start-ups
gradually increases over time and stands at 60% by the end of the period.
The productivity performance of new entrants is markedly better, with an average annual growth rate of
12.93%. The average is almost 1 percent higher if the definition of entrant is tightened to having a birth
year at most one year prior to observed entry. Note that we average productivity growth over the entire
post-entry period. The increase is the combined result of the selected sample and of the greater weight
on observations later in the sample period, when growth was higher.
In both of these last two calculations, problems with the accurate measurement of the initial capital
stock are avoided, but life cycle patterns in the productivity evolution are likely to play a role. We
explore productivity dynamics over the firms’ life-cycle further in the next section.
A fourth and final ingredient in the productivity growth calculations that might matter is the relative
weight on employment and capital input growth.27 As mentioned earlier, we follow Hsieh and Klenow
(2009) and inflated the average wage share to half of value added to match the fraction in the national
accounts.

27

We conducted several additional robustness checks that had minor effects and we do not report full results.
Results are insensitive to the inclusion of firms with missing observations in intervening years; to the exclusion of
firms with less than 25 employees (7% of the sample), which are most likely to be selected into the sample based
on high productivity levels; or to the exclusion of firms that are only observed twice.

18

As capital input has grown more rapidly than labor input, this procedure leads to higher measured
productivity growth. If we suspect that labor costs are underreported, we should trust the higher
estimate for the wage share; if we suspect labor to claim a smaller share of value added in
manufacturing than in the rest of the economy, the average unadjusted share is slightly above one third,
we should trust the lower estimate. Results in Figure 4 illustrate that the magnitude of the adjustment is
to raise productivity growth by almost 1% per year: 8.70% (unadjusted) versus 9.69% (adjusted).
A related issue is that several firms do not report non-wage employment benefits. To the extent that
this is a reporting problem, the weight on their employment growth will be underestimated and that of
all other firms overestimated, as the average share is fixed at one half. Excluding non-wage benefits for
all firms results in a minor downward adjustment to productivity growth of 0.08% per year, suggesting
that firms that report benefits see their capital-labor ratio grow more rapidly than other firms.
In light of the importance of the issues discussed, we incorporate some of them in our productivity
growth calculations. In particular, we adjust the calculations for the fact that firms might underreport
price changes, for human capital accumulation and longer average working hours through the business
cycle, and for a lower weight of labor input in manufacturing. As the truth is likely in between our
benchmark assumptions and the extreme assumptions in Figure 4, we go half way on each adjustment.
In particular, we use the geometric average of output growth using the detailed and aggregate (14
sector) deflator; the geometric average of labor input growth based on employment and on wage costs;
and we only adjust the wage share half the way to one half. Each of these three corrections has a
downward effect on productivity growth. The results, at the bottom of Figure 4, indicate a preferred
productivity growth estimated based on a value added production function of 7.67% annually and 2.73%
for a gross output production function.

4.3 Entering and exiting firms
The results in the preceding section average across the growth rates of all enterprises, including
incumbents, new entrants, and firms about to exit the industry. Two important additional factors for
aggregate productivity growth are (i) where in the distribution the new firms are entering and where the
old ones are disappearing and (ii) how the productivity growth evolves over a firm's life cycle. These
topics are particularly important for China given the high observed rates of firm turnover reported in
Table 2.
The results of a simple OLS regression of firm-level productivity on a full set of industry-year dummies
and five post-entry dummies are reported in Table 6. Additional controls include ownership type,
dummies for coastal provinces, and a dummy for a founding year at most two years before the entry
year.
We report results for a number of alternative specifications. First, in column (1), we compare entrants to
all active firms and measure productivity using the Olley-Pakes methodology, which assumes a specific
parametric form for the production function. Firms enter slightly below the average productivity level of
19

incumbents (-2.4% in log points), but they improve rapidly. In the first full year post-entry they already
show a distinct advantage, +0.078, which declines only slightly in the following years.
[Table 6 approximately here]
In column (2), the same comparison is made, but using the non-parametric index number methodology
to construct productivity measures. Allowing for heterogeneity in technology, entrants enter at a much
higher productivity levels, 0.13 log points above the median (or 13.9%). In their second year this
advantage rises even further, but it then declines rapidly as firms predominantly expand the use of
inputs that they use most intensively.
Results for the same regressions but with productivity growth rates as the dependent variable are in
columns (3) and (4). The pattern over time for the two productivity measures turns out to be very
similar: a large above-average productivity boost after the initial entry year—5.4% or 4.6% higher
growth than incumbents—and much smaller differences, albeit still positive ones, in subsequent years.
The decline in relative productivity in years two to four post-entry is consistent with above average
productivity growth because of entry of even newer plants towards the higher end of the distribution
and the exit of the most poorly performing firms. The implicit comparison with the superior newest
entry cohorts is a drag on productivity levels of older entrants especially if the index number measures
are used. An additional reason why the growth regressions show a continued growth advantage of
recent entrants even though their productivity level advantage declines in columns (1) and (2) is that
surviving entrants are selected more on productivity growth than productivity level.
The next set of results, in columns (5) and (6), redefine the definition of entrants by retaining only firms
that report a birth-year of at most 2 years before the first year they are observed in the sample.28 The
main difference is that the initial productivity level in the first year is a lot lower, while the subsequent
pattern of rapid, above average growth and subsequent convergence is maintained. This makes perfect
sense as these firms are more likely to be operating for only part of the first year and have to fine tune
their operations initially.
Finally, in the last two columns entrants are compared to a more limited control group: the set of
incumbents that operate throughout the sample period. A difficulty interpreting the results in the first
six columns is that entrants see very large changes in productivity over their first couple of years. This is
even more pronounced for firms which are about to exit the industry. As a result, the comparison of a
specific cohort to a mixed group of firms with different production histories is not always
straightforward.

28

Recall that our sample only includes firms that sell at least 5 million RMB per year. Some new entrants have
been growing for a long time from a small base. In addition, the business registry for the universe of firms has been
improving over time, and fewer ‘old’ firms tend to be picked up later on.

20

Compared with the group of firms operating throughout the entire sample period, the relative
productivity of entrants is reduced throughout. Firms that manage to survive over the entire turbulent
period are clearly not a random group.29 The relative change of the post-entry coefficients over time,
capturing how an entry cohort’s relative position evolves, is remarkably similar in columns (7) and (8)
and columns (5) and (6).
The results also indicate that firms that survive for four or more years have converged almost
completely with those in the balanced panel. The t+4 coefficients in columns (7) and (8) are no longer
significantly different from zero. For the Olley-Pakes measure this is already true for the t+3 coefficient.
Surviving entrants seem to converge very rapidly to the productivity level of incumbents.
In all columns we observe an apparent overshooting in productivity level in the first few years postentry, which disappears over time. To some extent, this is merely a feature of the changing experience
of entrants over the sample period, which is explored in Figure 5. Here, coefficients like those in column
(8) that are estimated year by year are plotted over time.
[Figure 5 approximately here]
Over time, the initial productivity level of new firms is declining as captured by the thick dotted line.
Note that firms are only labeled “entrants” if in the year they are first observed they indicate a birth
year at most two years ago. As the Chinese market liberalized, one might have expected the entry
process to change. For example, in a model like Hopenhayn (1992) a lower productivity draw would still
lead a firm to enter the industry if fixed entry costs had been reduced. The greater market
opportunities, especially after WTO accession in 2001, could also lead to more experimentation and
more opportunistic entry.
If market selection weeds out the worst performing entrants, we expect the average productivity for
survivors in subsequent years to improve upon their entry-year productivity. This is indeed the case in
every year since 2002 and is especially pronounced in 2005. In contrast, in the first years of the sample
period the average performance of surviving entrants versus incumbents goes down over time, perhaps
because market potential was only one of several reasons for market entry.
An important pattern to note is that the relative initial productivity of entrants declines over time, but
this does not hold for productivity a few years after entry. Most pointedly, the relative performance of
entrants that manage to survive three or even four years sees a distinct upward trend. For the cohort

29

The difference between the full and balanced sample results is somewhat larger for the OP than for the IN
results. The reason is that firms in the balanced panel only make up 20% of observations and the parametric
production function estimates will mostly reflect the technology chosen by firms entering and exiting the sample.
This has two consequences. First, firms in the balanced sample are larger on average, while estimated scale
economies are decreasing. Second, those same firms tend to operate with more capital, which receives a lower
weight in the production functions estimated on the full sample. Both features lead to higher measured
productivity for firms in the balanced sample using the parametric estimates rather than the index numbers.

21

that entered in 1999, the performance three or four years onwards was below the productivity level of
incumbents (three or four years onwards). The 2002 entry cohort, on the other hand, outperformed
incumbents three or four years later on. The productivity advantage of the 2003 entry cohort relative to
incumbents even ballooned to 10% after only three years (in 2006), while the 2004 cohort surpassed
even that mark after only two years.
Productivity level and growth results for exiting firms are reported in the bottom panel of Table 6. There
are fewer surprises to note here. In the final year of operation, firms that subsequently exit are a lot less
productive than the average surviving firm. The orders of magnitude vary from -24.6% (-0.282 log
points) for the index number measure relative to the full sample to -34.5% for the Olley-Pakes measure
relative to the balanced sample firms.
These differences are very large and they open up mostly in the last couple of years of operation. Most
of the measures, except for the index number comparison with the balanced panel, show very little
difference four years before exit. Growth rate differentials in year t-4 are insignificant from zero as well.
At that point, the productivity of future exiting firms starts to deteriorate very rapidly. The results also
demonstrate that the index number comparisons, which adjust for differences in the importance of
labor and capital across firms, evolve much more smoothly than the Olley-Pakes measures that impose a
specific functional form on the production function. Especially for these struggling firms, this
methodological difference seems to matter a lot.

4.4 Aggregate productivity growth
Next, we investigate the relative contribution of incumbent firms and changes at the extensive margin—
entry and exit—for the evolution of aggregate productivity growth. The seminal contribution was the
productivity decomposition of Baily, Hulten, and Campbell (1992), which was improved for unbalanced
panels by Haltiwanger (1997). Defining the aggregate productivity level as
aggregate growth rate can be decomposed as

, the

(6)
where the last two terms represent the contribution of net entry and
firm i.

is the gross output share of

Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan (2001) construct various decompositions for the U.S. manufacturing
sector and note that the relative contribution of net entry was one of the most robust patterns. From
the many alternatives they report, we reproduce in the top-left panel of Table 7—labeled `Baily-Hulten22

Campbell-Haltiwanger'—the results for 1977-1987 that Bartelsman and Doms (2000) also report in their
survey article.
The above decomposition has generated some controversy. In particular, Petrin and Levinsohn (2006)
propose the following alternative:

(7)
There are three differences: (i) Value added weights are used instead of gross output weights. (ii) The
contribution of survivors is limited to firm-level growth, the so-called “within term”, excluding the
contribution of changes in weights. With some simple algebra, the first term in (6) for each survivor can
be written as
, and only the first term is
retained in (7). (iii) The productivity levels in the entry and exit terms are adjusted for the relative
productivity of firms at the time of entry or exit (τ), not by the average productivity level in the initial
period. Because
(z=n,x) is inherently unobservable, regression analysis is used to construct an
estimate.
Even though this decomposition has not been performed yet on (confidential) U.S. census data, we can
use published statistics from Foster, et al. (2001) to construct an approximate decomposition that at
least accounts for the second and third difference.30 To facilitate the comparison with China for which
we observe a shorter time period, all growth rates are expressed per year.
While the contribution of net entry increases for longer time horizons, aggregate productivity growth in
the United States in the decade from 1977 to 1987 is clearly driven by the experience of incumbents.
One reason is that new entrants enter at below average productivity and it takes time for the surviving
entrants to catch up. Another reason is that re-allocation of inputs and output share towards more
productive incumbents provide a strong ongoing productivity boost among continuing plants, a pattern
documented below.
[Table 7 approximately here]
For comparability, we perform the exact same calculations on the Chinese data, i.e. sticking with gross
output weights also in (7) and calculating TFPit using the same input elasticities for all firms (average

30

Comparing the two decompositions, we can write the modified ‘PL’ net entry (NE) term as [modified NE] = [usual
NE]/2 . The entry and exit dummies from
regressions in Foster, et al. (2001) are used to substitute the two terms in brackets.

23

input shares). The cumulative aggregate productivity growth of 0.369 (4.0% annually), is slightly higher
than the gross output production function results reported in Figure 3.31
The Chinese total growth largely exceeds the corresponding U.S. statistic, which only stands at 1.0% per
year over the full period or 1.5% over the higher growth period 1982-1987. If the changes in output
share among continuing firms are ignored and the productivity differences of entrants and exiting firms
at time of entry or exit are accounted for, according to the PL decomposition, the difference is much
smaller. The U.S. annual technical change of 0.8% is now almost one half of the Chinese 1.9%
performance. These numbers can be interpreted as welfare gains associated with technical change if
markets are competitive. Furthermore, the statistics are even more similar for the within term, the firmlevel productivity growth for incumbents. Over the entire period, the annual growth rate is 1.1% for
China and 0.7% for the US.
The most important difference between the Chinese and the U.S. results is the greater relative
importance of net entry for China.32 The exact magnitude of the difference depends on the time period
and decomposition chosen, but the direction is nearly always the same. Over the full sample period and
for the PL decomposition, which controls for the initial productivity advantage of entrants, net entry is
responsible for 0.8% of aggregate productivity growth per year; this represents 42% of the total, three
times as much as in the United States. If we include the initial advantage of entrants in their
contribution, as in the BHCH decomposition, their annual effect in China amounts to a staggering 2.7%
aggregate productivity growth annually, ten times the U.S. equivalent (0.27%), and more than half of
aggregate total TFP growth. The lower output share, but higher survival rate for U.S. entrants
contributes to this difference.
Even though new entrants tend to be more productive than the exiting firms they replace, they tend to
be small and will only account for a substantial fraction of output after several years. Even more than for
the United States, the contribution of net entry increases with the length of the time period. This is
particularly pronounced for the PL decomposition, which is intuitive as it controls for the higher
productivity of Chinese entrants at the time of entry.
The difference between the two decompositions is larger for China than for the United States. Entering
U.S. plants are estimated to be only 0.3% more productive than incumbents in the initial period (Foster,

31

These results are not directly comparable with those from Figure 3. The earlier numbers are year-on-year
productivity growth estimates averaged over the entire sample, and sample period. The current aggregate is the
change in the weighted average productivity level of all firms active in 1998 versus all firms active in 2006. What
happens in between is irrelevant now.
32
A potential concern is that firms with missing information may artificially introduce entry and exit into the
sample for China. The effect of this is likely to be marginal because we only use firms active in the first or last year
of the period over which we do the calculation. Alternative estimates, where we drop from the sample all
observations for a firm with any missing information in some year, are very similar.

24

et al. 2001, Table 10), while Chinese entrants already show a 9.4% productivity advantage.33 Similarly,
exiting U.S. plants are estimated to be 1.9% less productive than average, while the difference is 6% for
China.34
In addition, the impact of output share reallocations,
, which is added to
the continuing plants contribution in the first decomposition but not in the second, is only 0.9% in the
United States versus 2.3% in China. Over the sub-periods in the sample, this difference is even larger.
Petrin and Levinsohn (2006) note that this “between term” only contributes to welfare if factor or
product markets are not competitive, which Hsieh and Klenow (2009) argue is exactly the case in China.
A more direct way of looking at the impact of the allocation of inputs across firms of differing
productivity levels is provided in Figure 6, where we replicate Figure 1 from Bartelsman and Dhrymes
(1998) in the left panel. In an efficient economy we expect that resources are put to their most efficient
use. Some aggregate growth will result from above-average productive plants commanding a greater
share of inputs over time, which is exactly the case in the United States.
The graph shows the evolution of the unweighted productivity average and the aggregate productivity
level, both normalized by their level in the initial period. Log productivity is purged from time and fourdigit industry effects and exponentiated before aggregating. The plant-weight to construct the
aggregate level is the following input aggregate,
, but results are similar for output weights.
The gap between the two lines is the extent to which the input weight is being shifted towards more
productive plants.35 Results in the top graphs use residuals from a Cobb-Douglas production function
estimated with least squares. In the bottom graph, a Törnqvist index (Solow residual) for productivity is
constructed using plant-specific factor shares as input weights.
[Figure 6 approximately here]
The U.S. pattern is remarkable. The unweighted average slumps by 0.45% annually if the Cobb-Douglas
productivity measures are used and is unchanged for the corrected Solow Residual. A decline reflects
lower dispersion as the average of the log-productivity measures are normalized to zero in each year
and the exponential function is convex. The weighted average on the other hand, which corresponds to
the evolution of aggregate productivity, increases annually by 2% in the case of the Cobb-Douglas and
by 1.2% for the Solow Residual. Note that these effects are solely the result of changing input weights

33

This advantage is larger than both differences in Table 5 because we follow Foster, et al. (2001) and only include
year dummies, not industry-year dummies, and do not limit the comparison group to firms from the balanced
panel.
34
There are slight differences in China for the two periods. Between 1998 and 2002, entrants were 11.1% more
productive than incumbents, while exiting firms were 5.4% less productive. For the post-2002 period, the
percentages were 7.0 and -8.1%, respectively.
35
The productivity decomposition in Olley and Pakes (1996) for the U.S. telecommunications equipment illustrates
the same phenomenon. The gap between the two lines in Figure 4 corresponds to the importance of the
covariance term in the popular Olley-Pakes decomposition.

25

and are in addition to 0.8% and 0.1% average annual productivity increase common across plants. The
different evolution between the unweighted and weighted average can be the results of either larger
plants increasing their productivity advantage or of plants with the highest productivity level increasing
their weight over time. Other evidence of great persistence in relative productivity levels leads
Bartelsman and Dhrymes (1998) to prefer the latter explanation.
In the right panel of Figure 6 we plot the corresponding patterns for China (in black).36 The decline in the
unweighted average appears again, but is slightly less pronounced than in the United States for the top
measure. There is also no recovery towards the end of the period, suggesting a more persistent decline
in dispersion. Regression to the mean is one explanation; a tendency for entrants to have productivity
levels closer to the mean than surviving incumbents or exiting firms is a second. In addition, while the
mean of log productivity is normalized to zero, the median declines over time indicating a downward
shift in the mass of the distribution. While positive outliers survive, negative outliers disappear and the
upward shifted mean is re-normalized every year.
A more pronounced difference between the U.S. and Chinese experience is the vastly smaller
contribution to the aggregate productivity growth of inputs shifting to more productive firms. For the
Cobb-Douglas results, the reallocation of resources provides some positive effect, but the cumulative
effect over eight years is barely 4% (the difference between the dashed and solid black lines). For the
Corrected Solow Residuals, shifts in input weights are virtually unrelated to productivity differences. The
difference with the U.S. pattern is so large that we had to rescale the vertical axis by a factor of two for
China.
As a robustness check, we also construct the patterns for China on the balanced panel of firms operating
throughout the eight year period. The absence of entry and exit diminishes the decline in the
unweighted average, consistent with the explanations above, but the contribution of input reallocations
is scarcely more important.
In sum, we have shown that relative to the U.S. experience, productivity growth in China's
manufacturing sector is to a much greater extent due to changes at the extensive margin, entry and exit.
The absolute contribution of firm-level productivity growth is similar in both countries. Moreover,
aggregate growth is constrained by extremely limited efficiency-enhancing input reallocations. These
results confirm a wealth of anecdotal evidence that describes the continued support of less efficient
manufacturing firms with significant ties to the state.37 The comparison with the United States provides
some illustration of how much potential productivity growth is thus sacrificed.

36

Bartelsman and Dhrymes (1998) pool plants from three related two-digit industries and their Cobb-Douglas
results use the same input coefficient estimates for all. For China, we re-estimate the production function for each
two-digit industry.
37
In 2005, for example, 36 percent of all industrial SOEs were loss-making compared to 20 percent of all other nonstate firms with sales larger than 5 million RMB.

26

5. Conclusions
Drawing on an unbalanced panel of firms that covers most of China’s manufacturing sector, the purpose
of this paper has been to examine the dynamics of productivity growth over a period that spans China’s
entry into WTO. By all indications, productivity growth has been very rapid, a finding that appears to be
robust to a host of measurement issues. Improvements in productivity of “continuing firms”, either as a
result of restructuring efforts, or investments in capability building are an important part of the picture.
Equally, if not more important, are the gains to creative destruction, i.e. entry and exit, that China’s
decentralized reforms have increasingly allowed. However, these gains remain tempered by limitations
on efficiency-enhancing input reallocations to more productive firms that are constraining their growth.
These findings have important implications. First, they affirm the important role that policy liberalizing
entry as well as facilitating exit are playing in Chinese manufacturing. Both are likely to be very
important moving forward. Second, the run-up in productivity growth we estimate for the years after
2002 provides a potential explanation for the acceleration in manufacturing exports, which represent
between 25-30% of total manufacturing output. The rapid productivity growth also suggests that there
may have been more room for China to let the exchange rate appreciate than policy makers believed.38
And third, despite the dynamism we document, our results point to continued constraints on the growth
of some of the most productive of firms. Problems in the allocation of credit, and biases in favor of
larger firms with state-sector connections are a potential source. More work is needed to identify the
exact nature of these constraints.

38

Tightness in labor markets, especially in the coastal provinces, was sending similar signals. In the fall of 2007, for
example, turnover in labor in manufacturing firms in Guangdong was running as high as 50 percent.

27

Appendix: Algorithm to match firm observations over time
Our matching process can be divided into three stages.
Stage 1: Match the samples of two consecutive years
First, we match the firms by firm ID. Table A.1 reports for each year the percentage of firms that can be
matched by firm ID. The firm IDs are alpha-numeric. Most firms IDs are unique, however each year
between 10 and 30 firms have duplicate IDs. Before we matched the firm IDs, we changed all letters in
firm IDs to upper case. The difference in upper/lower case accounts for about 1-2% of the unmatched
firms.
Second, for those firms that cannot be matched by ID, we use additional information to link them. We
create new codes that use various combinations of firm name (in Chinese), name of legal person
representative (in Chinese), geographic code, industry code, founding year, phone number, address,
name of main product. As shown by Table A.1, this procedure enables us to match annually an
additional 1%-8% of all firms.
Stage 2: Match three consecutive years
Firms may disappear from the sample and reenter later. We tried to link the re-entrants to earlier years
(about 1000-3000 firms each year) using procedures similar to those described in stage 1. Consider the
following case: From stage 1, Firm A in Year 1 is not matched to any firm in Year 2. But in stage 2 it's
linked to Firm C in Year 3 that has already been matched to Firm B in Year 2. Then we can conclude that
Firm A and Firm B are the same firm.
Stage 3: Create a ten-year panel
We merged the files created in stage 2 to construct a ten-year panel.

Online Appendix
http://www.econ.kuleuven.be/public/n07057/China/

The following information is available in the online appendix:
1. Industry codes: files with the concordance of pre-2003 CIC, post-2003 CIC, and more aggregate IO
categories into a consistent 4-digit industry classification.
2. Deflators for outputs and inputs (3 alternatives: firm-level based 4-digit, 14-industry, 2-digit), capital
goods deflator (2 alternatives: Brandt-Rawski and official series)
3. Program used to link firms over time using ID and other identifying variables
4. Program to calculate the new capital stock series based on book values of capital, firm age, and
province-industry average investment growth rates
28

Bibliography
Ahn, S., K. Fukao, H. U. Kwon. “The internationalization and performance of Korean and Japanese firms:
An empirical analysis based on micro-data.” Seoul Journal of Economics, 17(4), Winter 2004, 439-482.
Aw, B. Y., X. Chen, and M. J. Roberts. “Firm-level evidence on productivity differentials and turnover in
Taiwanese manufacturing.” Journal of Development Economics 66(1), October 2001, 51-86.
Bai, C.-E., C.-T. Hsieh, and Y. Qian. “The return to capital in China.” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 2, 2006, 61-88.
Baily, M. N., C. Hulten, and D. Campbell. “Productivity dynamics in manufacturing plants.” Brookings
Papers: Microeconomics 4(1), 1992, 187-267.
Bartelsman, E. J. and P. J. Dhrymes. “Productivity dynamics: U.S. manufacturing plants, 1972-1986.”
Journal of Productivity Analysis 9(1), January 1998, 5-34.
Bartelsman, E. J. and M. Doms. “Understanding productivity: Lessons from longitudinal microdata.”
Journal of Economic Literature 38, September 2000, 569-594.
Brandt, Loren, Thomas Rawski, and John Sutton, “Industrial Development in China.” In Loren Brandt and
Thomas G. Rawski (Eds.), China’s Great Economic Transformation, New York: Cambridge University
Press, 2008, pp. 569-632.
Brandt, L. and X. Zhu. “Explaining China’s Growth.” Mimeo. University of Toronto. 2009.
Caves, D. W., L. R. Christensen, and E. W. Diewert. “The economic theory of index numbers and the
measurement of input, output, and productivity.” Econometrica 50(6), Nov. 1982a, 1393-1414.
Caves, D. W., L. R. Christensen, and E. W. Diewert. “Multilateral comparisons of output, input, and
productivity using superlative index numbers.” Economic Journal 92(365), March 1982b, 73-86.
Chow, G. C. and K.-W. Li, “China's economic growth: 1952-2010.” Economic Development and Cultural
Change 51(1), 2000, 247-256.
De Loecker, J. and J. Konings. “Job reallocation and productivity growth in an emerging economy.
Evidence from Slovenian manufacturing.” European Journal of Political Economy 22, 2006, 388-408.
Dougherty, Sean, Richard Herd and Ping He. “Has a private sector emerged in China’s industry? Evidence
from a quarter of a million Chinese firms.” China Economic Review. 18, 2007, pp. 309-334.
Eslava, M., J. Haltiwanger, A. Kugler, and M. Kugler.“ The effects of structural reforms on productivity
and profitability enhancing reallocation: Evidence from Colombia.” Journal of Development Economics
75, 2004, 333-71.
Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Krizan. “Aggregate productivity growth: Lessons from microeconomic
evidence.” In C. R. Hulten, E. R. Dean, and M. J. Harper (Eds.), New Developments in Productivity
Analysis, Volume 63 of NBER Studies in Income and Wealth, pp. 303-63. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson. “Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and Efficiency: Selection on
Productivity or Profitability?” American Economic Review 98(1), March 2008, 394-425.
Griliches, Z., and J. Mairesse. “Comparing Productivity Growth: An Exploration of French and U.S
Industrial and Firm Data.” European Economic Review 21, March–April 1983, 89–119.
29

Haltiwanger, J. C. “Measuring and analyzing aggregate fluctuations: The importance of building from
microeconomic evidence.” Federal Reserve Bank St. Louis Review 79(3), May-June 1997, 55-77.
Hopenhayn, H. A. “Entry, exit, and firm dynamics in long run equilibrium” Econometrica, 60(5),
September 1992, 1127-1150.
Hsieh, C.-T. and P. J. Klenow. “Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in China and India.” Working Paper,
Department of Economics, Stanford University, July 2007.
Islam, N., E. Dai, and H. Sakamoto. “Role of TFP in China's growth.” Asian Economic Journal 20(2), 2006,
127-159.
Jefferson, G. H., T.G. Rawski, and Y. Zhang. “Productivity growth and convergence across China’s
industrial economy.” Journal of Chinese Economic and Business Studies 6(2), May 2008, 121-140.
Naughton, B. “A political economy of china's economic transition.” In L. Brandt and T. Rawski (Eds.),
China's Economic Transition: Origins, Mechanisms, and Consequences. 2008, New York: Cambridge UP.
Olley, G. S. and A. Pakes. “The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications equipment industry.”
Econometrica 64(6), 1996, 1263-97.
Park, A., D. Yang, X. Shi, and Y. Jiang. “Exporting and firm performance: Chinese exporters and the Asian
financial crisis.” Review of Economics and Statistics (forthcoming) July 2006.
Pavcnik, N. “Trade liberalization, exit, and productivity improvement: Evidence from Chilean plants.”
Review of Economic Studies 69(1), January 2002, 245-76.
Petrin, A. and J. Levinsohn. “Measuring aggregate productivity growth using plant-level data.” Working
Paper, University of Minnesota, Department of Economics, April 2006.
Solow, R. M. “Technical change and the aggregate production function.” Review of Economics and
Statistics 39, 1957, 312-320.
Tybout, J. R. and M. D. Westbrook. “Trade liberalization and the dimensions of efficiency change in
Mexican manufacturing industries.” Journal of International Economics 39, 1995, 53-78.
Van Biesebroeck, J. “Firm size matters: Growth and productivity growth in African manufacturing.”
Economic Development and Cultural Change 53(3), March 2005, 545-84.
Van Biesebroeck, J. “Robustness of productivity estimates.” Journal of Industrial Economics 55(3),
September 2007, 529-569.
Van Biesebroeck, J. “The sensitivity of productivity estimates: Revisiting three important productivity
debates.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 26(3), July 2008, 321-338.
World Bank. Vietnam Development Report 2006: Business. Joint Donor Report to Vietnam Consultative
Group Meeting, Hanoi, December, 2007.
Young, A. “The tyranny of numbers: Confronting the statistical realities of the East Asian growth
experience.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(3), August 1995, 641-680.
Young, A. “Gold into base metals: Productivity growth in the People’s Republic of China during the
reform period.” Journal of Political Economy 111(6), 2003, 1220-1261.

30

Table 1A: Comparison of sample coverage with China Statistical Yearbook
(a) Firm-level data set
Number
Value
Year
of
added
1998
165,118
1.94
1999
162,033
2.16
2000
162,883
2.54
2001
169,030
2.79
2002
181,557
3.30
2003
196,222
4.20
2004
279,092
6.62
2005
271,835
7.22
2006
301,961
9.11

Sales

Output

Employment

Export

6.41
6.99
8.42
9.24
10.95
14.32
20.43
24.69
31.36

6.77
7.27
8.57
9.41
11.08
14.23
20.16
25.16
31.66

56.44
58.05
53.68
52.97
55.21
57.49
66.27
68.96
73.58

1.08
1.16
1.46
1.61
2.01
2.69
4.05
4.77
6.05

Net value of
fixed assets
4.41
4.73
5.18
5.45
5.95
6.61
7.97
8.95
10.58

(b) China Statistical Yearbook 2006 (Table 14-6) and China Statistical Abstract 2006
Above Scale Industrial Firms
Number
Value
Net value of
Year
Sales
Output Employment Export
of
added
fixed assets
1998
165,080
1.94
6.41
6.77
61.96
1.08
4.41
1999
162,033
2.16
6.99
7.27
58.05
1.15
4.73
2000
162,885
2.54
8.42
8.57
55.59
1.46
5.18
2001
171,256
2.83
9.37
9.54
54.41
1.62
5.54
2002
181,557
3.30
10.95
11.08
55.21
2.01
5.95
2003
196,222
4.20
14.32
14.23
57.49
2.69
6.61
2004
276,474
5.48
18.78
20.17
66.22
4.05
7.38
2005
271,835
7.21
24.46
25.16
67.85
4.79
8.81
2006
301,961
9.11
31.36
31.66
73.58
5.96
10.58

Table 1B: Comparison of sample coverage with 2004 Census
(a) Firm-level data set
Year
2004

Number
of firms
279,092

(b) Census
Number
Year
of firms
Above Scale Industrial Firms
110,977
1995
279,040
2004
Below Scale Industrial Firms
382,227
1995
2004 1,098,789
Fraction below scale
77.5%
1995
79.7%
2004

Sales
20.43

Output Employment
20.16

66.27

Sales

Output Employment

4.78
20.42

20.17

61.03
66.22

0.42
1.98
8.1%
8.8%

Original value
of fixed assets
4.05
12.54

Export

Export

Original value
of fixed assets

4.05

4.02
12.58

2.06

22.66
26.82

0.11

0.42
1.24

9.3%

27.1%
28.8%

2.5%

9.5%
9.0%

Notes: Above scale means SOEs and all other firms with sales above 5 million RMB. All values are denoted in
Trillion RMB and employment in millions of workers. All industrial firms are included, while the analysis in
the paper is limited to firms in the manufacturing sector.

Table 2: Evolution of the panel over time

1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

Active firms
Total
148,685
147,553
148,905
156,658
167,193
183,699
259,239
251,067
278,753

Destination
Continuing
Exiting
127,330
21,355
126,220
21,333
119,429
29,476
138,416
18,242
147,977
19,216
152,226
31,473
220,256
38,983
230,023
21,044

Origin
Incumbents
Entrants
127,330
126,220
119,429
138,416
147,977
152,226
220,256
230,023

20,223
22,685
37,229
28,777
35,722
107,013
30,811
48,730

Note: Firms that exit and later re-enter the sample are considered to be operating
throughout, even though we do not observe them.

Table 3: Number of firms and employment by ownership category
Number of Firms
2006
1998
Number Percent Number Percent
State

Employment (millions)

1998
Number Percent

2006

Number

Percent

53,396

35.9%

32,488

11.7%

25.4

55.1%

14.0

22.1%

Hybrid/collective 55,907

37.6%

20,456

7.3%

11.8

25.6%

4.0

6.3%

Private

13,333

9.0%

165,912

59.5%

2.4

5.2%

24.5

38.6%

Hong Kong,
Macau, Taiwan

15,472

10.4%

28,740

10.3%

3.8

8.2%

10.2

16.1%

Foreign

10,574

7.1%

31,157

11.2%

2.7

5.9%

10.7

16.9%

Total

148,682

100%

278,753

100%

46.1

100%

63.4

63.4m

Table 4: Number of observations with nonmissing input and output variables
Active firms
Total
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

148,685
146,101
147,253
154,324
165,861
181,079
258,945
251,061
278,753

Firms with missing, zero, or negative
Employment
Capital
Value added
(<=8)
5,121
12,243
13,444
3,349
10,837
5,796
2,542
9,666
9,393
2,424
7,261
3,810
2,328
8,156
3,590
2,036
6,580
2,474
5,009
14,539
6,709
2,302
10,555
2,396
2,362
13,458
3,163

Remaining observations
Balanced
All firms
panel
123,304
34,777
132,972
34,777
128,721
34,777
144,375
34,777
155,183
34,777
172,097
34,777
240,805
34,777
237,674
34,777
262,117
34,777

Table 5: Average TFP growth in different countries
country

study

Firm-level: value added production function
China
Slovenia
De Loecker-Konings (2006)
Vietnam
World Bank (2007)
U.S.
Baily-Hulten-Campbell (1992)
Chile
Pavcnik (2002)
U.S.
Baily-Hulten-Campbell (1992)
Firm-level: gross output production function
China
Eslava, et al. (2004)1
Colombia
Korea
Ahn-Fukao-Kwon (2004)
Taiwan
Aw-Chen-Roberts (2001)
Mexico
Tybout-Westbrook (1995)
U.S.
Haltiwanger (1987)
Japan
Ahn-Fukao-Kwon (2004)

period

sector

1998-2006
1994-2000
2001-2003
1982-1987
1979-1986
1982-1987

manufacturing
manufacturing
manufacturing
selected manufacturing
manufacturing
selected mfct, excl. 3533, 3711

TFP growth
0.095
0.085
0.073
0.031
0.028
0.019

1998-2006 manufacturing

0.026

1982-1998
1990-1998
1986-1991
1984-1990
1982-1987
1994-2001

0.047
0.035
0.021
0.019
0.017
0.003

manufacturing
manufacturing
9 manufacuturing sectors
manufacturing
manufacturing
manufacturing

Note: 1 The numerator in the productivity growth in the Eslava et al . (2004) paper refers to physical output,
i.e. controls for price differences. As productivity and prices are negatively correlated, more efficient firms
charge lower prices, this leads to a higher productivity growth measure than using revenue in the numerator.

Table 6: Productivity evolution
(a) Entering firms
Relative to:
Productivity:
Entrants:

t0 (entry)

full sample
level
all
OP
IN
(1)
(2)
-0.024
0.130
(0.003)

t+1
t+2
t+3
t+4

full sample
growth
all
OP
IN
(3)
(4)

(0.003)

full sample
level
only recent
OP
IN
(5)
(6)
-0.088
0.046

balanced panel
level
only recent
OP
IN
(7)
(8)
-0.146
-0.004

(0.004)

(0.005)

(0.004)

(0.006)

0.078

0.169

0.053

0.045

0.089

0.151

0.030

0.100

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.004)

(0.004)

(0.005)

(0.006)

0.071

0.131

0.021

0.011

0.076

0.134

0.017

0.084

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.004)

(0.005)

(0.006)

(0.006)

0.071

0.066

0.009

0.005

0.059

0.076

0.000

0.025

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.005)

(0.005)

(0.006)

(0.006)

0.062

0.034

0.015

0.012

0.052

0.046

-0.008

-0.006

(0.004)

(0.004)

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.007)

(0.007)

(b) Exiting firms
Relative to:

full sample

full sample

balanced panel

Productivity:

level

growth

level

t0 (exit)
t-1
t-2
t-3
t-4

OP
-0.359

IN
-0.282

OP
-0.163

IN
-0.173

OP
-0.424

IN
-0.331

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.004)

(0.004)

-0.061

-0.129

-0.014

-0.022

-0.125

-0.177

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.004)

(0.004)

-0.140

-0.111

-0.059

-0.062

-0.204

-0.160

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.004)

(0.004)

-0.200

-0.063

-0.040

-0.035

-0.264

-0.112

(0.003)

(0.004)

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.004)

(0.004)

0.037

-0.047

0.003

0.005

-0.029

-0.094

(0.004)

(0.004)

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.004)

(0.003)

Table 7: Decomposition of annual TFP Growth for Manufacturing Establishments
(a) United States
method:

Baily-Hulten-Campbell-Haltiwanger

Census
period
1977-87

Continuing Net
Total
plants
entry
Growth
0.010 0.008 (74%) 0.003 (26%)

1977-82
1982-87

0.005
0.015

0.004 (75%)
0.013 (86%)

0.001 (25%)
0.002 (14%)

Petrin-Levinsohn
Technical Continuing
plants
change
0.008
0.007 (86%)
0.003
0.012

0.003 (91%)
0.011 (93%)

Adjusted net
entry
0.001 (14%)
0.000 (9%)
0.001 (7%)

Source: The first set of statistics are from Bartelsman and Doms (2000), who took them from Foster, Haltiwanger, and
Krizan (2001). The second set of statistics are approximate results for the Petrin and Levinsohn (2006) decomposition
for the United States, calculated based on published statistics from Haltiwanger (1997) and Foster, et al. (2001).
Notes: In the BHCH decomposition, the 'Continuing plants' term is the sum of the within, between, and covariance
terms. In the 'net entry' term the productivity level of entrants and exiters is normalized by the aggregate initial
productivity level. Output weights are used. In the PL decomposition, the 'Continuing plants' term is limited to firmlevel growth (the within term in BHCH). The contribution of entrants and exiters is normalized by the average
productivity at the entry or exit point for those plants, which is obtained using regression analysis. Value added weights
are used, which are averaged over the initial and end period, such that entrants or exiters are weighted by half of their
value added share

(b) China
method:

Baily-Hulten-Campbell-Haltiwanger

Continuing Net
Census
Total
firms
entry
period
Growth
1998-2006 0.040
0 040 00.013
013 (33%) 0.027
0 027 (67%)
1998-2002
2002-2006

0.032
0.049

0.017 (53%)
0.026 (54%)

0.015 (47%)
0.022 (46%)

Source: Own calculations based on Chinese firm-level data

Petrin-Levinsohn
Technical Continuing
firms
change
0 019
0.019
00.011
011 (58%)
0.010
0.027

0.010 (97%)
0.021 (78%)

Adjusted net
entry
0 008 (42%)
0.008
0.000 (3%)
0.006 (22%)

Figure 1: Entry and Exit by Ownership Type
(a) Entry
40%
35%
30%

HMT & foreign

25%

private

20%

collective

15%

state

10%
5%
0%
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

(b) Exit
20%

15%
HMT & foreign
private

10%

collective
state
5%

0%
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

Figure 2: Total Factor Productivity growth
(unbalanced sample, value added weights, index numbers)

16%
14%
12%
10%
8%
6%
4%
2%
0%
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

Figure 3: TFP growth estimates calculated differently

14%

14%
Benchmark

Benchmark
12%

12%
Olley-Pakes
10%

10%

8%

8%

6%

6%

4%

4%

2%

2%

0%

0%
1998-2001

1998-2001

2001-2006

2001-2006

14%

14%

Benchmark

Benchmark
12%

12%
10%

Gross output

Unweighted

Balanced panel

10%

8%

8%

6%

6%

4%

4%

2%

2%

0%

0%
1998-2001

2001-2006

1998-2001

2001-2006

Note: The benchmark estimates always use the index numbers to calculate productivity (instead of the OlleyPakes parametric methodology); use value added weights (instead of unweighted averages); are calculated on
the full sample of firms (instead of the balanced panel); and use a value added production function (instead of
gross output).

Figure 4: Robustness of TFP growth estimates to a variety of assumptions
0%

2%

4%

6%

8%

10%

12%

9.69%

Benchmark

10.15%

Two-digit deflators

9.01%

14 sector deflators

7.38%

Wage bill as labor input

6.67%

Total labor cost as labor input

8.24%

Original capital stock

10.68%

Exclude initial (1998) firms

12.93%

Birthyear at most (entry-year - 2)

8.70%

Unadjusted wage share (< 0.5)

9.61%

Excl. benfits from wage share

7.67%

Preferred - Value added

Preferred - Gross output

14%

2.73%

Note: The sample for the calculations in bars 1-6 and 9-10 differs slightly from that in Figures 2 and 3 and
Table 5 earlier, as firms with some missing data are dropped throughout to make the samples comparable
across bars. Therefore the benchmark estimate of 9.69% is slightly higher than the 9.5% in Table 5. For
the same reason, the top and bottom percentile of productivity growth observations are not dropped either.
For the last two (“preferred statistics”) calculations, the sample is again identical to the sample in earlier
Figures and Tables.

Figure 5: Productivity-levels for new entrants versus incumbents
(Index numbers, only recently-founded firms)

0.2

0.1

0

-0.1
entry year

entry year +1

entry year +2

entry year +3

entry year +4
-0.2
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

Figure 6: Productivity residuals
(a) United States

(b) China
Cobb-Douglas
1.1

Mean (full sample)

Aggregate (full sample)

Mean (balanced)

Aggregate (balanced)

Log Index (1998=1)

1.05

.95

.9

Corrected Solow Residual

Log Index (1998=1)

1.1

Mean (full sample)

Aggregate (full sample)

Mean (balanced)

Aggregate (balanced)

1.05

.95

.9
98

Source: Bartelsman and Dhrymes (1998), Figure 1

99

00

01

02
Year

03

04

05

06

Source: Own calculations based on Chinese firm-level data

Notes: Cobb-Douglas productivity measures are calculated from a production function estimated by least squares. Solow
Residuals refer to a Tornqvist index number using the wage share as weight on labor input and the material share for
materials; in the United States a "capital share" is observed, while in China constant returns to scale are assumed. For both
measures, residuals are used, purging the productivity numbers from year effects and 4-digit industry effects. The dashed
lines are unweighted averages, the solid lines weigh plants or firms by their aggregate input (LαLKαKMαM) share.

Table A.1: Fraction of observations matched to previous year observations

1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

Matched by
firm ID
80.6
81.9
73.8
84.5
82.5
73.5
82.4
90.1

Matched by
other Info
4.1
2.4
4.6
2.9
4.0
8.0
1.7
1.5

Total
84.7
84.3
78.3
87.3
86.6
81.5
84.1
91.6

Table A.2 Comparison of capital stock estimates
Number
of firms
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

130,819
138,298
133,402
147,685
159,506
174,790
249,881
246,405
273,746
Number
of firms

1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

130,819
138,298
133,402
147,685
159,506
174,790
249,881
246 405
246,405
273,746

fa_net
sum
2.82
3.24
3.24
3.49
3.75
4.14
4.96
5.67
6.66

K/L
66.3
63.3
71.9
69.5
70.9
72.8
75.8
81.2
87.7

fa_net with official deflator
K/firm
21,548
23,436
24,294
23,661
23,592
23,672
19,833
23,025
24,319

Our benchmark
sum
3.72
4.20
4.16
4.43
4.60
5.00
5.88
6 56
6.56
7.41

K/L
79.4
77.8
86.8
82.5
83.6
84.9
86.0
91 6
91.6
96.3

K/firm
28,445
30,382
31,169
30,011
28,929
28,629
23,515
26 626
26,626
27,078

sum
2.84
3.28
3.24
3.48
3.73
4.02
4.57
5.15
5.70

K/L
66.8
64.0
71.9
69.2
70.4
70.8
69.9
73.7
75.0

K/firm
21,704
23,696
24,294
23,569
23,449
23,025
18,271
20,883
20,808

Our calculations with
official investment deflator
sum
K/L
K/firm
3.64
78.3
27,791
4.13
76.8
29,837
4.10
86.0
30,722
4.38
81.7
29,625
4.55
82.8
28,592
4.95
84.2
28,335
5.82
85.4
23,304
6 51
6.51
90 9
90.9
26 407
26,407
7.35
95.6
26,862

fa_original
sum
4.16
4.84
4.87
5.38
5.87
6.57
7.79
9.00
10.50

K/L
89.4
87.1
100.0
98.5
102.4
105.8
107.3
116.3
125.6

K/firm
31,770
34,962
36,489
36,413
36,880
37,566
31,166
36,528
38,381

Our calculations treating all
years as 1998 benchmark
sum
K/L
K/firm
3.64
78.3
27,791
4.00
72.0
28,955
3.83
78.4
28,722
4.03
73.5
27,271
4.20
73.4
26,373
4.53
73.8
25,909
5.20
73.9
20,804
5 82
5.82
77 8
77.8
23 604
23,604
6.53
81.1
23,862

Notes: The sum of capital is denominated in trillion RMB and capital per worker or per firm in thousands of RMB.
Firms with employment below 8 workers and with negative capital stocks or employment have been excluded.
"fa_original" represents fixed assets at original purchase prices. "fa_net" is "fa_original" less depreciation.

Table A.3: Potential bias in capital stock estimate
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

State-owned firms
0.308
0.311
0.308
0.304
0.293
0.313
0.297
0.328
0.361

Other firms
0.269
0.294
0.296
0.268
0.263
0.263
0.249
0.271
0.301

Relative bias
1.14
1.06
1.04
1.13
1.11
1.19
1.19
1.21
1.20

Note: The table reports the average difference in lnK in our benchmark estimate
and lnK in "fa_net with official deflator".

Table A.4: Transitions out of each ownership category

State
Hybrid/collective
Private
HMT/foreign
Total

1998-99

2002-03

2005-06

switch-out switch-in
4.7%
3.8%
8.6%
4.7%
11.0%
25.8%
2.8%
2.9%

switch-out switch-in
13.2%
11.4%
19.1%
6.9%
6.4%
14.0%
2.0%
2.5%

switch-out switch-in
21.0%
18.2%
21.7%
12.0%
4.7%
7.1%
2.2%
2.4%

6.4%

6.4%

9.7%

9.7%

7.8%

7.8%

Note: Switching-out percentages are relative to the number of firms in that category in the previous
year; switching-in percentages are relative to total firms in the category at the end.

Table A.5: Transitions between ownership categories by match type
2005-06 matches based on firm ID (230,027 firms)
State
State
ownership
Hybrid/collective
type
in
Private
HMT/ foreign
2005

79.5
4.7
3.0
0.6

Ownership type in 2006
Hybrid/
HMT/
Private
collective
foreign
2.8
16.9
0.8
79.0
16.1
0.2
1.0
95.5
0.5
0.1
1.3
98.0

Total
29,105 (12.9%)
20,262 (9.0%)
125,604 (55.5%)
51,304 (22.7%)

2005-06 matches based on other information (3,752 firms)
State
State
ownership
Hybrid/collective
type
in
Private
HMT/ foreign
2005

52.7
5.5
4.8
4.9

Ownership type in 2006
Hybrid/
HMT/
Private
collective
foreign
6.2
33.5
7.6
42.5
47.5
4.5
1.6
84.0
9.6
1.1
18.4
75.6

Total
565
381
2,356
450

(15.1%)
(10.2%)
(62.8%)
(12.0%)

Note: Compared to the ownership categories in Table 3, the firms owned by Hong Kong, Macau, and
Taiwan investors are grouped with foreign firms.

