                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      DOES HEALTH INSURANCE MAKE YOU FAT?

                                        Jay Bhattacharya
                                          Kate Bundorf
                                          Noemi Pace
                                          Neeraj Sood

                                       Working Paper 15163
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15163


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2009




We thank Michael Grossman and the participants at the NBER Conference on the Economics of Obesity
for helpful comments. Bhattacharya, Sood, and Bundorf thank the National Institute of Aging for
financial support on this project. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Jay Bhattacharya, Kate Bundorf, Noemi Pace, and Neeraj Sood. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Health Insurance Make You Fat?
Jay Bhattacharya, Kate Bundorf, Noemi Pace, and Neeraj Sood
NBER Working Paper No. 15163
July 2009
JEL No. H23,I1

                                               ABSTRACT

The prevalence of obesity has been rising dramatically in the U.S., leading to poor health and rising
health care expenditures. The role of policy in addressing rising rates of obesity, however, is controversial.
Policy recommendations for interventions intended to influence body weight decisions often assume
the obesity creates negative externalities for the non-obese. We build on earlier work demonstrating
that this argument depends on two important assumptions: 1) that the obese do not pay for their higher
medical expenditures through differential payments for health care and health insurance, and 2) that
body weight decisions are responsive to the incidence of medical care costs associated with obesity.
In this paper, we test the latter proposition – that body weight is influenced by insurance coverage
- using two approaches. First, we use data from the Rand Health Insurance Experiment, in which people
were randomly assigned to varying levels of health insurance, to examine the effect of generosity of
insurance coverage on body weight along the intensive coverage margin. Second, we use instrumental
variables methods to estimate the effect of type of insurance coverage (private, public and none) on
body weight along the extensive margin. We explicitly address the discrete nature of the endogenous
indicator of health insurance coverage by estimating a nonlinear instrumental variables model. We
find weak evidence that more generous insurance coverage increases body mass index. We find stronger
evidence that being insured increases body mass index and obesity.


Jay Bhattacharya                                      Noemi Pace
117 Encina Commons                                    University College London
Center for Primary Care                               Centre for International Health
and Outcomes Research                                 and Development
Stanford University                                   30 Guilford Street
Stanford, CA 94305-6019                               London WC1N 1EH
and NBER                                              n.pace@ucl.ac.uk
jay@stanford.edu
                                                      Neeraj Sood
Kate Bundorf                                          RAND Corporation
Health Research and Policy                            1776 Main Street
Stanford University                                   Santa Monica, CA 90407
HRP T108                                              and NBER
Stanford, CA 94305-5405                               neeraj_sood@rand.org
and NBER
bundorf@stanford.edu
Introduction

Adult obesity is a thorny problem. Several studies document rising obesity
prevalence in the U.S. (See Mokdad et al., 1999; Mokdad et al., 2003).
Economists have argued that the primary cause of increasing obesity
prevalence are: (1) a falling relative price of food; (2) a technologically-induced
shift away from physically demanding work; and (3) a decline in time spent on
food production at home (see Lakdawalla and Philipson, 2002; Cutler, Glaeser
and Shapiro, 2003; and Anderson, Butcher, and Levine 2003).1 As most view
these fundamental changes in the economy as desirable and would not want to
undo them, developing public policy to address the root causes of rising obesity
prevalence is difficult, if not entirely problematic.


Nevertheless, the health care and other costs associated with obesity are
enormous. For example, Wolf and Colditz (1994) estimate that over $68 billion
annually are lost annually in increased health care costs and job absenteeism
as a result of obesity in the U.S. The morbidity and accounting costs
associated with obesity have led public health experts (such as Nestle, 2003,
Brownell and Horgen, 2003, Sturm 2002) to advocate vigorous public
intervention, including regulation of fast food establishments and taxes on
nutritionally-questionable foods.


The economic justification for the sorts of policy interventions, such as taxes on
food, favored by some of these authors rests on the idea that when one person
becomes obese, many other people pay the cost. In economic jargon, there are
negative externalities from body weight decisions that lead to obesity. If
external costs are high, then public welfare can be improved by interventions
that change the incentives adults face when making decisions about
bodyweight. If external costs are small, then adults pay fully for their



1
  There are, of course, many other non-economic determinants of bodyweight, including genetic
predispositions to obesity and non-rational impulses (such as myopic decision making and lack of self-
control) that prevent optimal bodyweight control. These are unlikely explanations for the observed trends
in bodyweight, even if they help explain baseline levels. There is certainly no evidence that we are more
irrational or have different genes than our parents or grandparents.


                                                                                                            1
bodyweight decisions and public interventions aimed at decreasing bodyweight
can play only a limited role in improving public welfare.2


The main mechanism by which obesity imposes external costs is through
pooled health insurance. In a health insurance pool with inadequately risk-
adjusted premiums, one person’s increase in body weight really is everyone
else’s business, since obesity often leads to higher medical expenditures. In
this paper, we describe a model of this negative obesity externality associated
with health insurance.3 The main insight of this model is that measuring the
obesity externality involves more than just measuring the subsidy to obese
individuals induced by health insurance. The welfare loss due to the obesity
externality depends upon both the size of the subsidy and upon the extent to
which bodyweight decisions are distorted on the margin by the subsidy—that is,
does coverage with pooled health insurance cause enrollees to gain weight? If
the answer is no and there is no moral hazard of this sort caused by insurance
coverage, then the subsidy induced by one person’s obesity would simply
represent a transfer from the thinner individuals his insurance pool to the
obese person, with no net effect on social welfare.


Despite the importance of this parameter—the health insurance elasticity of
body weight—to the welfare economics of obesity, there has been scant work in
the economics literature on the topic. The one exception is a paper by
Markowitz and Rashad (2007) who find a zero elasticity of insurance coverage
on body weight or obesity rates. These authors rely on the size of a firm where
an individual works as an instrument for insurance coverage in their body
weight regressions. We extend this work along three dimensions. First, we
measure separate elasticities for the extensive margin (people gaining or losing
insurance altogether and the intensive margin (insurance becoming more
generous insurance). In principle, these elasticities may be different, and as we
show in the concluding section of the paper, they have different policy
implications. Second, we distinguish different elasticities for public and private


2
    Cawley (2004) provides a detailed discussion of possible market failures related to obesity.
3
    See Bhattacharya and Sood (2007) for a full description of this model.


                                                                                                   2
insurance coverage for our estimates of the elasticity along the extensive
margin. Finally, we adopt econometric methods that account for the discrete
nature of the insurance coverage variable.



1       Background

Americans are increasingly overweight or obese.4 The proportion of adults
classified as obese increased from 12.0% in 1991 to 20.9% in 2001 (Mokdad et
al., 1999; Mokdad et al., 2003). Obesity is associated with an increased risk for
a number of serious chronic conditions, including diabetes, hypertension, heart
disease, and stroke (Sturm, 2002). In this section, we provide a brief review of
the large literature on the consequences of obesity for expected health care
expenditures. We also provide a review of the smaller literature on the external
costs of obesity induced by health insurance.


1.1     Obesity and health care expenditures
Not surprisingly, expected health care expenditures are higher for obese
individuals than for normal weight individuals. A large number of studies
document this fact. The vast majority of these studies use convenience samples
consisting of individuals from a single employer or a single insurer (Elmer et al.
2004, Bertakis and Azari 2005, Burton et al. 1998, Raebel et al 2004). There
are also studies of obesity related medical expenditure differences in an
international setting. Both Sander and Bergemann (2003), in a German setting,
and Katzmarzyk and Janssen (2004), in a Canadian setting, find higher medical
expenditures for obese people.


There are a few studies that use nationally representative data. Finkelstein, et
al. (2003) use data from the linked National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) and
Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS). They estimate that annual medical
expenditures are $732 higher for obese than normal weight individuals. From


4
  Body mass index (BMI) is the standard of bodyweight in the medical literature. BMI is weight, measured
in kilograms, divided by height, measured in meters, squared. Individuals with a BMI between 25 and 30
are considered overweight, while those with a BMI of 30 or more are considered obese (National Institute
on Health, 1998). Henceforth, we use BMI and bodyweight interchangeably.


                                                                                                       3
an accounting viewpoint, approximately half of the estimated $78.5 billion in
medical care spending in 1998 attributable to excess bodyweight was financed
through private insurance (38%) and patient out-of-pocket payments (14%).
Sturm (2002), using data from the Health Care for Communities (HCC) survey,
finds that obese individuals spend $395 per year more than non-obese
individuals on medical care. Thorpe et al (2004) also use MEPS data, but they
are interested in how much of the $1,100 increase between 1987 and 2000 in
per-capita medical expenditures is attributable to obesity. Using a regression
model to calculate what per-capita medical expenditures would have been had
1987 obesity levels persisted to 2000, they conclude that about $300 of the
$1,100 increase is due to the rise in obesity prevalence.


This is a large literature, which space constraints prevent us from surveying in
more detail. The many studies that we do not discuss here vary considerably in
generality—some examine data from a single company or from a single
insurance source—though they all reach the same qualitative conclusion that
obesity is associated with higher medical care costs.5


1.2     External costs of obesity associated with health insurance
Despite the extensive literature on medical expenditure differences, very few
studies attempt to estimate the degree to which health insurance coverage leads
to subsidies for the obese. Some studies have attempted to estimate how much
of obesity related medical costs are subsidized by public insurance. Finkelstein,
Ruhm and Kosa (2005), in a literature review of the causes and consequences of
obesity, estimate that “the government finances roughly half the total annual
medical costs attributable to obesity. As a result, the average taxpayer spends
approximately $175 per year to finance obesity related medical expenditures
among Medicare and Medicaid recipients.” To arrive at this conclusion, they
rely on a study by Finkelstein, Fiebelkorn, and Wang (2004), who calculate
state and federal level estimates of Medicare and Medicaid expenditures
attributable to obesity. Another study, conducted by Daviglus et al (2004),


5
 Some of the studies we reviewed, but arbitrarily do not discuss here include Bungam et al. (2003); Musich
et al. (2004); Quesenberry, Jr. et al. (1998); Thompson et al. (2001); and Wang et al. (2003).


                                                                                                        4
links together data from a sample of Chicago area workers in the labor force
between 1967-73, to Medicare claims records from the 1990s. They estimate
substantial obesity related differences in Medicare expenditures. For example,
women workers who were obese between 1967 and 1973 spent $176,947 in the
1990s on Medicare, while analogous non-obese, non-overweight female workers
spent $100,431 in undiscounted costs. Obese male workers spent $125,470,
while non-obese non-overweight male workers spent $76,866.


However, estimating how much of obesity related medical costs are financed by
public insurance is merely an accounting exercise and not sufficient for
calculating the true economic subsidy for obesity. Conceptually, calculating the
size of the subsidy also requires estimating payments by obese and non-obese
individuals for enrolling in health insurance in addition to the expected benefits
of enrollment. Roughly speaking, obese and non-obese people alike pay for
Medicare when they are under 65 and spend (receive benefits) when they are
older.6 Since obese people work, earn, are taxed, and die at different rates than
non-obese people, looking at Medicare expenditure differences alone will paint a
misleading picture of the Medicare subsidy for the obese.


Calculating the obesity subsidy induced by private insurance also requires
estimating both payments for health insurance and medical expenditures.
Since private insurance is typically provided in an employment setting, it is not
enough to look at premiums for health insurance paid by employers and
employees.7 The key question is whether employers adjust the cash wages of
obese workers with health insurance in order to account for the higher cost of
insuring these workers. Although theory predicts that employers would have
incentives to do so (Rosen 1986), in practice, it is not clear that they would be




6
  For example, McClellan and Skinner (1999, 2005) and Bhattacharya and Lakdawalla (2005), in
estimating Medicare progressivity, estimate lifetime profiles of tax receipts for Medicare as well as
Medicare expenditures.
7
  For employees enrolling in the same insurance plan, premiums do not depend upon bodyweight (see
Keenan et al., 2001), so in that case, there are no obesity related payment differences. However, when
employers offer multiple health plans, obese workers may tend to select into a different set of plans than
their thinner colleagues. In that case, premiums may differ.


                                                                                                             5
able to make these adjustments.8 According to Gruber (2000), “...the problems
of preference revelation in this context are daunting; it is difficult in reality to
see how firms could appropriately set worker specific compensating
differentials.”


As is the case with Medicare, however, there is very little research on obesity
related payment differences in a private insurance settling. An important
exception is Bhattacharya and Bundorf (2005), who find some evidence that
obese workers receive lower pay than non-obese workers primarily at firms that
provide health insurance.


In related work, Keeler et al (1989) and Manning et al. (1991), using data from
the RAND Health Insurance Experiment (RAND HIE) and from the National
Health Interview Survey (NHIS), report estimates of lifetime medical costs
attributable to physically inactivity (rather than obesity): “At a 5 percent rate of
discount, the lifetime subsidy from others to those with a sedentary life style is
$1,900.” Though they label this estimate the “external cost of physical
inactivity,” like the rest of the literature they focus on physical inactivity related
medical expenditure differences, while ignoring payment differences that occur
outside experimental settings in their calculation of the subsidy.


2        A Model of the Social Costs of Obesity

The model timeline in Figure 1 illustrates the basic setup of the model. Each
consumer starts with an initial endowment of weight W0. This endowment
might be seen as reflecting the consumer’s genetic propensity to be overweight


8
  The literature on medical expenditure associated obesity costs has a parallel and often intersecting
literature on the labor market productivity costs associated with obesity (often these latter costs are called
“indirect” costs of obesity). The theory of compensating wage differentials has important implications for
whether these labor market costs are external; that is, whether obese individuals pay for lower productivity
levels (such as through more sick days) associated with their bodyweight, or someone else pays. This
theory suggests that obese workers will pay for lower productivity through reduced wages. The economics
literature on obesity related wage differences—for example, Register and William (1990), Pagan and
Davila (1997), and Cawley (2000)—unanimously finds that obese workers earn lower wages than their
thinner colleagues, and that these differences are equal to or greater than the wages differences that would
arise from measurable productivity differences. Hence, both theory and evidence suggest that these
“indirect” costs of obesity are not external.


                                                                                                             6
or obese, and in any case it cannot be chosen by the consumer. In the first
stage consumers decide how much weight to lose, ω . Weight loss (exercising,
dieting) gives consumers some disutility but has two associated benefits: (1) it
increases productivity, consequently raising consumer income and (2) it
improves health (more precisely, it decreases the probability of falling sick).9
Falling sick entails additional medical care expenditures, but since consumers
are insured, they are reimbursed for all of these additional medical care
expenditures. In the second stage, nature reveals a health shock with i = 1…N
points of support.10 Each type of health shock entails additional medical
expenses, M i . Consumers first observe this health shock and then decide how

much to consume. The consumers’ problem is to maximize expected utility by

jointly choosing weight change ( ω ) and a consumption plan {Ci }i =1 for each of
                                                                                      N


the N possible health states:


                          N
    (1)     maxN EU = ∑ π i (W0 − ω )U ( Ci ) − Φ (ω )
          ω ,{Ci }i =1    i =1

where U ( Ci ) represents utility from consumption; π i (W0 − ω ) is the probability

of health state i given weight (W0 − ω ) ; Ci is the consumption in health state i;

and, Φ (ω ) is the disutility from weight loss.


We divide our analysis now into two cases: (1) health insurance pools risk
across people with heterogeneous risk (so that premiums do not change with
bodyweight); and (2) people pay the risk-adjusted premiums for their own
bodyweight. The primary difference between these cases manifests itself in
consumer budget constraints.


2.1       Risk pooling


9
  The model can also be interpreted as a model of weight gain, with a reinterpretation of the source of
disutility from this gain (diminished body image, perhaps). The main point is that a change in weight away
from the optimum choice induces disutility.
10
   The results of the model are similar when health shocks are permitted to be continuous, but the solution
technology is less transparent.


                                                                                                         7
In this case, health risk is pooled across people of different bodyweight. As long
as the pool size is large enough, a single individual’s medical expenditures will

have a negligible effect on the common premium, P , charged to everyone in the
pool. Hence, from the point of view of each individual, premiums are taken as
fixed, and the budget constraint is:


 (2)    I (W0 + ω ) = Ci + P ∀i


In (2), I (W0 + ω ) is the income earned by an individual who weighs W0 + ω . By

allowing income to depend upon weight, we are modeling the effect of health on
labor market productivity. We assume that I ′ (.) > 0 .


The budget constraint specifies that in each health state i, income equals
expenditures on consumption and health insurance premiums. An immediate
consequence of (2) is that consumption is identical in each health state, which
makes sense since consumers are fully insured against medical expenditures.


The consumer’s problem is to maximize expected utility, (1), subject to the
budget constraint, (2). We solve the consumer’s problem using standard
discrete numerical programming methods. In the first step, taking the amount
of weight and as given, we calculate the optimal demand for consumption in
each health state. Inputting the optimal consumption plan in the utility
function gives the maximum utility attainable in each health state. In the
second stage, we choose weight to maximize expected utility given optimal
consumption in each health state.


Plugging the budget constraint into (1), we reformulate the consumers’ problem
in the second stage:


 (3)    max EU = U ( I (W0 − ω ) − P ) − Φ (ω )
         ω




                                                                                    8
The first order condition for the consumer’s maximization problem is:



     (4)        (              ) ((         ) )          ( )
            − I ′ W0 − ω * U ′ I W0 − ω * − P − Φ′ ω * = 0



Here, ω * is the consumer’s optimal weight in the pooling case. The first term in
equation (4) is the marginal gain from weight loss; it is entirely due to the
marginal increase in income from increased productivity arising from weight
loss (scaled by the marginal utility of consumption). In equilibrium, consumers
will lose weight until the marginal gain from weight loss equals the marginal
disutility from weight loss.


If the insurance market is in competitive equilibrium, then premiums will be
actuarially fair. They will equal the expected medical expenses for individuals
in the insurance pool:



                           (      )
                    N
     (5)    P = ∑ π i W0 − ω * M i
                    i =1



Equation (4) also shows that since consumers are fully insured against medical
expenses, the only incentive for weight loss is the increase in income due to
weight loss. Thus, when insurance premiums do not depend on weight,
consumers do not view the reduction in medical expenditures as an additional
benefit of weight loss when making decisions about bodyweight. Insurance
induces a form of moral hazard with respect to weight loss incentives since the
benefits of weight loss are not fully internalized by the consumer. As a
consequence, weight loss creates a positive externality for everyone else in the
insurance pool, since it lowers their health insurance premiums.11 Because
this benefit is not fully captured by the consumer losing the weight, insured
people will tend to lose less weight than would be optimal. By contrast, the
productivity benefits of weight loss are fully internalized as changes in
productivity lead to an increase in consumer income.

11
     This argument is developed in more detail in Appendix A.


                                                                                   9
2.2    Risk-adjusted insurance
We now turn to the case where health insurance premiums adjust to reflect the
weight choice of consumers. In contrast to the previous case, where the
premium is taken as fixed, consumers now face a risk-adjusted schedule of
health insurance premiums that depends upon their own bodyweight. In the
context of employer provided insurance this could be achieved by wage
reductions for obese employees, or simply by offering premium rebates to
individuals who lose weight. In this case, the budget constraint is given by:


 (6)    I (W0 − ω ) = Ci + P (W0 − ω ) ∀i


Here, P (W0 − ω ) is the health insurance premium for an individual who weighs

W0 − ω . Again, if the insurance market is competitive, premiums will be
actuarially fair. Hence, they will be an increasing function of weight, reflecting
the increase in expected medical expenses:


                      ⎛ N                   ⎞
 (7)    P (W0 − ω ) = ⎜ ∑ π i (W0 − ω ) M i ⎟
                      ⎝ i =1                ⎠


The consumers’ problem in this case can be reformulated as:


 (8)    max EU = U ( I (W0 − ω ) − P (W0 − ω ) ) − Φ (ω )
         ω



The first order condition for the consumer’s maximization problem is:



 (9)
          ⎣  (          )     (         ) ((
                                         ⎦                  ) (      ))     ( )
        − ⎡ I ′ W0 − ω ** − P′ W0 − ω ** ⎤ U ′ I W0 − ω ** − P W0 − ω ** − Φ′ ω ** = 0



Here, ω ** is the consumer’s optimal weight in the risk-adjusted case. Clearly,

(9) is necessary for ω ** to be individually optimal, but whether it is also socially



                                                                                         10
optimal depends upon what is meant by social optimality. Suppose EU is the
expected utility of the representative consumer in the economy, and all

individuals start with the same initial weight, W0. In that (unrealistic) case, ω **
can be said to be socially optimal, since the full social costs of bodyweight
decisions are internalized. In the Appendix, we consider a more realistic case
where W0 differs across individuals in the population. We show that, aside from

transfers that do not depend upon final weight, W0 − ω ** , equation (9) is a

necessary condition for the social optimum.


It is instructive to compare the first order condition in (9) with the analogous
condition in (4) when there was a single risk pool. Both equations have a single

term reflecting the marginal costs of weight loss: Φ′ (.) . However, equation (9)

has two terms, I ′ (.) and P′ (.) , reflecting the marginal benefit of weight loss

accruing from an increase in productivity and a decrease in the health
insurance premium. By contrast, equation (4) has only a single term reflecting

the marginal productivity benefit of weight loss: I ′ (.) . Thus, when premiums

reflect individual health risk, consumers have two incentives for weight loss—
productivity gains and lower health insurance premiums. In this case, there is
no moral hazard induced by health insurance and consumer bodyweight
decisions.


2.3    Deadweight loss from the obesity externality
In this section, we show that the size of the loss in social welfare from the
obesity externality under pooled premiums depends upon both the fact that
expected health expenditures are higher for the obese and also upon how
responsive people would be in their weight loss decisions to a switch from
pooled to risk-adjusted premiums. This calculation is important because, while
there is a lot of empirical evidence that obese people are more likely to have
higher medical care expenditures than non-obese people, there is no empirical
evidence on whether pooled insurance causes obesity or weight gain. Whether
the rise in obesity prevalence is a public health crisis, or merely a private crisis
for many people, depends on the evidence on both quantities.


                                                                                     11
We start with the expression for expected utility, evaluated at the optimum
under risk-adjusted insurance:



 (10)      ( )       ((         ) (
        EU ω ** = U I W0 − ω ** − P W0 − ω ** − Φ ω **  )) ( )

We have imposed the condition that consumption does not vary with health
outcome since consumers are fully insured under both cases.


Next, we consider a first order Taylor series approximation of (10) around ω * ,
which is optimal weight loss under pooled insurance:


                             ∂EU
 (11)      ( )        ( )
        EU ω ** ≈ EU ω * +
                              ∂ω    ω*
                                      ( ω   **
                                                 − ω*   )

The deadweight loss (DWL) from the obesity externality is the change in
expected utility resulting from pooling. Equation (11) suggests an
approximation to this quantity:


                                         ∂EU
 (12)              ( )        ( )
        DWL = EU ω ** − EU ω * ≈
                                          ∂ω     ω*
                                                      Δω



Here, Δω ≡ ω ** − ω * is difference between optimal weight under risk-adjusted and
pooled risk cases. Since weight is socially optimal in the risk-adjusted case, Δω
also reflects the degree to which weight choice differs from socially optimal
when pooling pertains.


Using a first order Taylor series approximation, the dead weight loss (DWL) in
expected utility terms due to the obesity externality is:




                                                                                   12
              { ((           ) (
 (13) DWL ≈ U ′ I W0 − ω * − P W0 − ω *      )) ⎡⎣− I ′ (W
                                                         0       )    (       )      ( )}
                                                             − ω * + P′ W0 − ω * ⎤ − Φ′ ω * Δω
                                                                                 ⎦


Substituting the first order condition in equation (4) in equation (13) yields a
simple expression for the dead weight loss from the obesity externality:


 (14)                  (       )
        DWL ≈ U ′ (.) P′ W0 − ω * Δω


Equation (14) shows that the deadweight loss is proportional to two crucial
factors: the extent to which bodyweight deviates from the optimal due to pooled
health insurance when individuals do not bear the full medical care costs of
obesity, Δω , and the responsiveness of medical care expenditures to changes in

          (        )
weight, P′ W0 − ω * . The dead weight loss from the obesity externality is zero if

individual weight choice does not respond to subsidies for obesity or if medical
expenditures do not change with bodyweight.



                               (         )
While several estimates of P′ W0 − ω * are available from the public health and

economics literatures there is no work that quantifies Δω . To estimate Δω ,
ideally we would like to know: (1) bodyweight under pooled insurance when the
consumer is shielded from the medical care costs of obesity and (2) under risk-
adjusted premiums when the individual faces the full medical care costs of
obesity. Unfortunately, we can observe the former but not the latter as very few
insurance plans risk rate insurance premiums based on obesity. Therefore, to
estimate the latter quantity we rely on two other margins that affect the extent
to which individuals bear the medical care costs of obesity. First, we examine
whether consumers with more generous insurance, who are partially shielded
from medical care costs of obesity, are heavier than those with less generous
insurance. Next we examine, the effect of insurance status on the extensive
margin, that is, whether the uninsured, who face the full medical care costs of
obesity, are lighter than the insured.




                                                                                          13
3        The Intensive Margin: Increasing Generosity of Coverage
Using data from the Rand Health Insurance Experiment (HIE), we are able to
examine the effect of health insurance on body weight when people are
randomly assigned to different levels of insurance coverage (the intensive
margin). In the HIE, which was conducted in six areas of the country during
the late 1970s and early 1908s, approximately 2,000 non-elderly families were
assigned to differing levels of insurance coverage.12 The purpose of the HIE was
to determine the effects of patient cost sharing on medical care utilization and
health. The participants were assigned to different fee-for-service plans that
varied along two dimensions: the coinsurance rate (the fraction of billed
charges paid by patients) and the maximum dollar expenditure (the maximum
amount a family would spend on covered expenditures during a twelve month
period). The coverage was comprehensive in the sense that it included nearly
all types of medical care. Participants remained enrolled in their assigned plan
and were followed for either three (70%) or five years.


The plans were characterized by four different coinsurance percentages – 0
(often referred to as “free care”), 25%, 50%, and 95% - and three levels of
maximum out of pocket spending – 5%, 10%, and 15% of family income up to a
maximum of $1000. In one plan, the MDE was set at $150 per individual and
$450 per family (often referred to as the “individual deductible plan”).13 In this
plan, the coinsurance rate was 95%. In our empirical work, we categorize plans
based on their coinsurance rate and control for the MDE.14 We categorize the
individual deductible plan separately due to the more complicated structure of
the MDE.




12
   This description of the HIE is based on information from Newhouse and the Insurance Experiment
Group, 1993.
13
   The HIE also included an analysis of the effects of enrolling in an HMO on the study outcomes. Because
it is difficult to measure the generosity of an HMO relative to a FFS plan, we drop these enrollees from the
analysis.
14
   The coinsurance rate was constant across different types of services with one exception. In one plan, the
coinsurance rate was 25% for all services except outpatient mental health and dental, which had a 50%
coinsurance rate. We include this plan in the 25% coinsurance rate group.


                                                                                                         14
In order to minimize participation bias, the investigators offered a participation
incentive. The participation incentive for a given family was defined as “the
maximum loss risked by changing to the experimental plan from existing
coverage”, and was intended to ensure that families were equally likely to
participate independent of their prior health insurance status and the plan to
which they were assigned


The study collected data on demographic and socioeconomic characteristics of
enrollees as well as health status and medical care utilization both at baseline
and during the experiment. This information included enrollee height and
weight both at baseline and at exit, and we use these measures to calculate
BMI at each point in time for each enrollee. We limit our analysis to adults
(age>=21) and drop observations with missing data for key control variables
(age, education, family income, race, gender, marital status, and self reported
health status).


Table 1 presents data on body weight by plan type. We find no evidence of
statistically significant differences by plan type in body weight, as measured by
either BMI or obesity status, either at entry or at exit. In addition, we find no
evidence of differences across the plans in changes in these measures. The
directions of the differences between plans in changes in BMI, however, are
consistent with the hypothesized effect. In other words, enrollees in the free
plan experienced the largest change in BMI over the study period (0.59) and the
difference in change in BMI between the free plan (0.59) and the 25%
coinsurance plan (0.33) is statistically significant at p<=0.06.15 The results are
less consistent for the indicator of becoming obese. In this case, the differences
across plans based on their level of cost sharing are not consistent across
plans.




15
   This finding is consistent with results reported by the HIE which find that, while the difference in
weight/height^2 at exit between enrollees in the free plan and enrollees in the other plans was not
statistically significant, the direction of the effect favored the cost sharing plans (page 198, Newhouse and
the Insurance Experiment Group, 1993).


                                                                                                           15
In Appendix Table 1, we document some differences across the plans in enrollee
characteristics despite random assignment. In particular, average family
income varies across the plans, and correspondingly, the participation incentive
as well. In addition, enrollee assignment to plans is not balanced by site.


In Table 2, we determine whether the estimates of the effects of plan cost-
sharing are influenced by these differences by controlling for them in
multivariate models. The multivariate models also allow us to control for the
enrollees’ maximum dollar expenditure. We estimate models with two different
dependent variables: BMI change per year (to control for differences across
enrollees in their enrollment period) and an indicator of whether an individual
became obese during the study period. We estimate three versions of each
model. In the first, we control for plan characteristics only (the dummy variable
indicating the coinsurance rate and the MDE). In the second, we add the
controls for individual characteristics presented in Appendix Table 1. In the
third, we control for both individual characteristics and aspects of study design
including the site and the enrollee’s participation incentive. We estimate the
models using least squares. The results from the model of the probability of
becoming obese are similar when we estimate a maximum likelihood logit
model.


The results from the multivariate models are substantively similar to those from
the unadjusted comparisons (Table 2). While people randomly assigned to
plans with cost sharing experienced a smaller annual change in BMI during the
experiment relative to those assigned to the free plan, the effect is statistically
significant only in the case of the plan with the 25% coinsurance rate. And in
this case, the effect is quite small. A 0.175 reduction in BMI represents less
than 1% of BMI at entry among this group. Correspondingly, we do not find
consistent evidence of differences by plan type in the probability of becoming
obese during the study period. The direction of the effect varies by plan and
none of the estimates are statistically significant.

4        The Extensive Margin: Insured vs. Uninsured




                                                                                      16
While the Rand data allow us to examine the responsiveness of body weight to a
change in the generosity of coverage, the fact that everyone in the experiment
had health insurance coverage leaves open the possibility of an effect along the
extensive margin. In other words, the responsiveness of body weight to any
insurance relative to none may be greater than the responsiveness to changes
in the generosity of that coverage.


4.1   Methods
We use instrumental variables (IV) regressions to estimate the causal effects of
private and public insurance coverage on body weight as measured by BMI and
obesity status. If our instruments are valid, IV methods purge the estimates of
confounding due to observable and unobservable characteristics. We first
estimate linear instrumental variables model estimated via two stage least
squares. These models are widely used and a powerful tools in such contexts.
However, for nonlinear and limited dependent variable models in general, the
linear IV model may either be inappropriate or not work well in practice.
Specifically, in our case, although the outcomes of interest are either binary or
linear, the endogenous regressors (dummy variables for private and public
insurance) are limited dependent variables. A linear IV model would treat the
endogenous regressors as if they were linear and unrelated, when in fact the
insurance choices are mutually exclusive and exhaustive.


To address the discrete nature of our data, we next estimate a nonlinear
instrumental variables model using latent factors to account for selection on
unobservables. Our model respects the multinomial nature of the endogenous
regressors as well as the binary or linear nature of the outcome. Specifically,
we assume that the endogenous regressors have a multinomial logit form, while
the outcome equations have logit and normal (linear) forms respectively. Then,
latent factors are incorporated into the equations to allow for unobserved
influences on insurance choice to affect outcomes and their joint distribution
specified (Deb and Trivedi, 1997).




                                                                                  17
The main computational problem is that the joint distribution, which involves a
multidimensional integral, does not have a closed form solution. This difficulty
can be addressed using simulation-based estimation. Using normally
distributed random draws for the latent variables, a simulated likelihood
function for the data is defined and its parameters estimated using a Maximum
Simulated Likelihood Estimator. Because of the complexity of our model and
the large sample size, standard simulation methods are quite slow. Therefore,
we adapt an acceleration technique that uses quasi-random draws based on
Halton sequences. The formulation, estimation methods and exposition borrows
heavily from Deb and Trivedi (2004).


The model is represented by 2 sets of equations. In the first set of equations,
the insurance choices (private, public or uninsured) are represented by a
multinomial logit model. The second equation, representing the outcome, is
modeled as OLS (BMI as outcome) or logit (obese status as outcome) model. In
this model, the choice of insurance and outcome are linked because insurance
choices are regressors in the outcome module and because there are common
unobservable (latent) factors.


Let y * denote the propensity underlying the observed values of outcome, y (in

the case of BMI, y * = y ). Let private and public be a binary variables
representing public and private insurance coverage. The outcome equation is
formulated as:


(15)   y * = xβ + γ 1 private + γ 2 Public + λ1l pvt + λ 2 l pub + ε


Where, x is a set of exogenous covariates and β , γ 1 , and γ 2 are parameters
associated with the exogenous covariates and insurance variables. The error
term is partitioned into ε , an independently distributed random error, and
latent factors l pvt and l pub which denote unobserved characteristics common to

individual’s choice of insurance and outcome of that individual. λ1 and λ2 are
factor loadings or parameters associated with the latent factors that capture the


                                                                                  18
degree of correlation between unobserved determinants of insurance choice and
outcomes.


The transformation from y * given in (15) to the observed random variable y is

through an appropriate distribution function f such that:

(16)      Pr( y * = y | x, Pvt , Pub, l pvt , l pub ) = f ( xβ + γ 1 Pvt + γ 2 Pub + λ1l pvt + λ 2 l pub )


In the case of the binary outcome, f is assumed to be the extreme value
distribution function, that is, the outcome equation is a logit model. In the
linear case f is the identity link.


Following the multinomial logit framework (McFadden, 1980, p. S15), the
probability of choosing in private insurance, public insurance or remaining
uninsured is formulated as:
       Pr( private = 1 | z , l pvt ) = g ( zα pvt + δ 1l pvt )
(17) Pr( public = 1 | z , l public ) = g ( zα pub + δ 1l pub )
       Pr( private = 0, public = 0 | z , ) = 1 − Pr( private = 1 | z , l pvt ) − Pr( public = 1 | z , l public )
where z denotes exogenous covariates in the insurance choice model. We
denote covariates in this site-choice module by z and covariates in the outcome
equation by x to highlight the fact that they contain the instrumental variables
in the empirical analysis. We use the extreme value distribution for g so that
the model for insurance coverage is a multinomial logit.


Because the latent factors l pvt and l pub enter both choice of insurance (17) and

outcome (16) equations, they capture the unobserved factors that induce self-
selection into insurance and are also correlated with unobservable factors
related to outcomes. Under these assumptions, the joint distribution of
selection and outcome variables, conditional on the common latent factors, is
simply the product of the functions described in equations (16) and (17).




                                                                                                               19
The problem in estimation arises because the common latent factors l pvt and l pub

are unknown. We assume that these latent factors are normally distributed.
Given this assumption the latent factors can be can be integrated out of the
joint density. For example, the joint density of observing outcome y and Pvt = 1
equals:

       Pr( y* = y, private = 1| x, z ) =
(18)
       ∫ f ( xβ + γ   1   private + γ 2 public + λ1l pvt + λ2l pub ) g ( zα pvt + δ1l pvt )φ (l pvt )dl pvt

Cast in this form, the unknown parameters of the model may be estimated by
maximum likelihood. The main computational problem is that the integral in
equation (18) does not have, in general, a closed form solution. But this
difficulty can be addressed using simulation-based estimation (Gourieroux and
Monfort, 1996) to numerically integrate equation (18). Because of the
complexity of our model, standard simulation methods are quite slow.
Therefore, we adapt an acceleration technique that uses quasi-random draws
based on Halton sequences (Bhat, 2001; Train, 2002).We maximize the
simulated likelihood using a quasi-Newton algorithm.


4.2     Data and Instruments
Data
The primary data source for our analysis is the National Longitudinal Survey of
Youth (NLSY). The NLSY includes a nationally representative sample of 12,686
people aged 14-22 years in 1979 who were surveyed annually until 1994, and
biennially through 2004. Our study uses NLSY data from 1989-2004. We
exclude the years prior to 1989 as well as 1991 because the survey did not
collect information on health insurance status in those years. We further
restrict the sample, excluding pregnant women. After these restrictions, 79; 876
person-year observations (40; 223 male and 39; 653 female) were eligible to be
included in the study sample.
Instruments
We use the two sets of instruments for insurance choice. The first set of
instruments captures the distribution of firm size in every state and year. These
data are obtained from the Statistics of U.S. Businesses (SUSB) available online



                                                                                                              20
at http://www.sba.gov/advo/research/data.html. We use these data to
construct 2 instruments at the state-year level: (1) percentage of workers
employed in firms with 100 to 499 employees, (2) percentage of workers
employed in firms with 500 or more employees. These instruments would be
valid under 2 conditions. First, they should be strong predictor private
insurance coverage. Second, they should affect weight choice only through their
effect on insurance choice. In the next section, we show that the instruments
are strong predictors of private insurance as large firms are more likely to cover
employees. The second assumption cannot be directly tested, however, it seems
unlikely that changes in firm size distribution within a state (our models have
state fixed effects) would be related to weight choices, except through insurance
coverage. However, one important caveat is that it is possible that obese
workers might prefer to live in states with larger firms to enjoy the benefits of
pooled health insurance at these firms. To the extent that this is true, our IV
estimates will overestimate the effects of insurance on bodyweight and obesity.


The second instrument captures generosity of Medicaid coverage. There has
been a significant expansion of Medicaid eligibility during this period and there
is significant variation across states in the pace at which these expansions have
occurred. Prior research documents a strong association between Medicaid
expansions and public insurance coverage. We use data from several years of
CPS to construct this instrument. First, we regress a binary variable for
Medicaid coverage on detailed information on demographics, family
composition, income, and state*time fixed effects. The state*time fixed effects
measure the generosity of Medicaid coverage in each state and year after
controlling for other important determinants of Medicaid coverage. We posit
that these state*time fixed effects essentially capture differences in Medicaid
eligibility rules or enforcement of these rules. We use these fixed effects to
create a predicted probability of Medicaid coverage for a standardized
population and use these predicted probabilities as an instrument for public
insurance coverage. Again, our instrument is valid if variation in our measure
of Medicaid eligibility within a state in not correlated with unobserved
determinants of obesity within a state. For example, our IV estimates would be



                                                                                    21
biased upwards if deteriorating economic conditions increased obesity rates and
also prompted states to expand Medicaid eligibility.


Finally, we also explored using state marginal income tax rates as an
instrument for insurance coverage. The rational why one might choose to use
taxes as an instrument is that since employer sponsored health insurance
premiums are exempt from state and federal payroll taxes, the subsidy for
employer sponsored insurance is greater in states with higher marginal income
taxes. Consequently, states with higher marginal income tax rates should have
a higher proportion of persons having employer provided insurance.
Unfortunately, this was not true empirically. We found no significant
relationship between state marginal income tax rates and insurance coverage.


Other explanatory variables
We include several other explanatory variables including race, age, gender,
income, afqt scores and year fixed effects. All these variables are plausibly
exogenous and important predictors of weight and insurance choices. In
addition, in our preferred specifications we include state fixed effects to control
for all time invariant differences across states. This is important as our
instruments are measured at the state level.




4.3    Results
Table 3 presents the results from the second stage of the 2SLS regressions.
Appendix Table 2 presents the first stage results. The aim of these regressions
is to estimate the causal effect of public and private insurance on BMI and
obesity. The first model presents results from the regression model without
state fixed effects. The results show that both private and public insurance
have no statistically significant effect on BMI. The point estimates for both
public and private insurance are positive but are estimated imprecisely. This is
despite the strong predictive power of the instruments in the first stage (F-stat =
139]. The next model includes state fixed effects to capture time invariant
differences across states. The point estimates from this model are implausibly



                                                                                  22
large and very imprecisely estimated. The results indicate that public and
private insurance coverage reduce BMI by 3.8 and 7.7 points respectively.
However, despite these large point estimates these estimates are statistically
insignificant. These are classical symptoms of the weak instruments problem.
In this specification the instruments are weak predictors of insurance coverage
[F-Stat 2.9]. The last models present results from models with obese status as
the outcome variable. The results are consistent with the BMI model. Public
and private insurance coverage have no statistically significant effect on obesity
and the point estimates from the specification with state fixed effects are
implausibly large.


Table 4 and Appendix Table 3 present the results from the results from the MLE
models. These models are our preferred specification. As discussed earlier they
have several advantages over the 2SLS models. The results from the first model
show that both public and private insurance have a statistically significantly
effect on BMI. The results indicate that private insurance increases BMI by 1.3
points and public insurance increases BMI by 2.1 points. Both these effects are
quite large and are precisely estimated. For example the effects of private
insurance on BMI are similar to moving from the highest AFQT quartile to the
lowest AFQT quartiles or moving from less than 8 years of education to more
that 12 years of education. The second model includes state fixed effects. The
results are virtually unchanged. The last two models use obesity as an outcome
model. The results from these regressions are consistent with the BMI models –
both public and private insurance increase obesity.


5   Conclusion


Our results indicate that health insurance does indeed make you fat. While the
evidence that more generous private insurance leads to increases in body
weight is somewhat weak, primarily because the magnitude of the estimated
effect is quite small, our estimates of the effect of having insurance, either
public or private, are larger and more precise.




                                                                                 23
While other authors have come to a different conclusion using a similar
approach (Markowitz and Rashad 2007), we demonstrate that the difference is
likely due to the method of estimation. When we estimate the model using two-
stage least squares, which does not account for the discrete nature of the
endogenous indicator of health insurance, our estimates are similar in the
sense that we find little evidence that body weight is elastic with respect to
insurance coverage. Adopting an alternative maximum likelihood method of
estimation, which handles explicitly the discrete endogenous variable, we reach
a different conclusion. Body weight is responsive to health insurance coverage.
The estimate is both relatively large in magnitude and precise, and does not
vary across the different model specifications.


Our estimates suggest that, by insulating people from the costs of obesity-
related medical care expenditures, insurance coverage creates moral hazard in
behaviors related to body weight. These effects are larger in public insurance
programs where premiums are not risk adjusted and smaller in private
insurance markets where obese might pay for incremental medical care costs in
the form of lower wages (Bhattacharya and Bundorf 2005). By contrast, our
estimates also suggest that making insurance more generous has no effect on
body weight. Taken together, these findings indicate that providing incentives
for healthy behaviors, especially among those with public coverage, might
improve social welfare.




                                                                                 24
References

Anderson PM, Butcher KF, and Levine PB. “Maternal Employment and
      Overweight Children,” Journal of Health Economics. 2003. 22(3):477-504.

Stigler GS and Becker GS “De Gustibus non est Disputandum.” American
       Economic Review. 1977. 67:76-90.

Bernheim BD and Rangel A “Addiction and Cue-Triggered Decision Processes”
     NBER Working Paper #9329, 2002.

Bernheim BD and Rangel A “Behavioral Public Economics: Welfare and Policy
     Analysis with Non-Standard Decision-Makers.” NBER Working Paper
     #11518, 2005.

Bertakis KD; Azari R. “Obesity and the Use of Health Care Services” Obesity
      Research, 2005, 13(2):372-379.

Bhattacharya J and Bundorf K. “The Incidence of the Healthcare Costs of
      Obesity” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #11303,
      2005

Bhattacharya J and Lakdawalla D, “Does Medicare Benefit the Poor?”
      forthcoming at Journal of Public Economics, 2005

Brownell K and Horgen KB. Food Fight : The Inside Story of the Food Industry,
     America's Obesity Crisis, and What We Can Do About It. New York:
     McGraw-Hill, 2003.

Bungam, T; Satterwhite, M; Jackson, AW and Morrow, JR. "The Relationship of
     Body Mass Index, Medical Costs, and Job Absenteeism." American
     Journal of Health Behavior, 2003, 27(4), pp. 456-62.

Burton, WN; Chen, CY; Schultz, AB and Edington, DW. "The Economic Costs
      Associated with Body Mass Index in a Workplace." Journal of
      Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 1998, 40(9), pp. 786-92.

Caplin A and Leahy J “The Social Discount Rate.” NBER Working Paper #7983,
      2000.

Cawley, J. "An Instrumental Variables Approach to Measuring the Effect of
      Bodyweight on Employment Disability." Health Services Research, 2000,
      35(5 Pt 2), pp. 1159-79.

Cawley J. “An Economic Framework for Understanding Physical Activity and
      Eating Behaviors” American Journal of Preventive Medicine.
      2004,27(3S):117-125.




                                                                              25
Cohen JW, Machlin SR, Zuvekas SH, et al. "Health care expenses in the United
     States, 1996," Rockville MD: Agency for Health Care Research and
     Quality, MEPS Research Finding #12.

Cutler D, Glaeser E, and Shapiro J. “Why Have Americans Become More
       Obese?” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 2003, 17(3):93-118.

Dannenberg AL; Burton DC; Jackson RJ. “Economic and Environmental Costs
     of Obesity: The Impact on Airlines” American Journal of Preventive
     Medicine, 2004, 27(3).

Daviglus ML; Liu K; Yan LL; Pirzada A; Manheim L; Manning W; Garside DB;
      Wang R; Dwyer AR; Greenland P; Stamler J. “Relation of Body Mass
      Index in Young Adulthood and Middle Age to Medicare Expenditures in
      Older Age” JAMA, 2004, 292(22):2243-2749.

Drewnowski A “Obesity and the Food Environment: Dietary Energy Density and
     Diet Costs” American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2004, 27(3S):154-
     162.

Drewnowski A; Darmon N. “Food Choices and Diet Costs: An Economic
     Analysis” Journal of Nutrition, 2005, 135(4):900-4.

Ehrlich I and Becker GS. "Market Insurance, Self-Insurance, and Self-
       Protection." Journal of Political Economy, 1972, 80(July/August), pp. 623-
       48.

Elmer PJ; Brown JB; Nichols GA; Oster G “Effects of Weight Gain on Medical
      Care Costs” International Journal of Obesity, 2004, 28:1365-73.

Finkelstein, EA; Flebelkorn, IC and Wang, G. "National Medical Spending
      Attributable to Overweight and Obesity: How Much, and Who's Paying?"
      Health Affairs, 2003, pp. W3-219-26.

Finkelstein, EA; Flebelkorn, IC and Wang, G. “State-Level Estimates of Annual
      Medical Expenditures Attributable to Obesity” Obesity Research, 2004,
      12(1):18-24

Finkelstein EA; Ruhm CJ; Kosa KM “Economic Causes and Consequences of
      Obesity.” Annual Review of Public Health, 2005, 26:239-57.

Flegal KM; Graubard BI; Williamson DF; Gail MH. “Excess Deaths Associated
       With Underweight, Overweight, and Obesity” JAMA. 2005;293:1861-
       1867.

Goldman, SM. “Intertemporally Inconsistent Preferences and the Rate of
     Consumption.” Econometrica, 1979, 47(3):621–626.

Grossman M.. “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health.”
     Journal of Political Economy. 1972. 82:223-255.


                                                                              26
Gruber J. "Health Insurance and the Labor Market," A. J. Cuyler and J. P.
     Newhouse, Handbook of Health Economics. Elsevier, 2000, 645-700.

Gruber J. "The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits." American Economic
     Review, 1994, 84(3), pp. 622-41.

Gruber J and Koszegi B. “Is Addiction Rational? Theory and Evidence.”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116(4):1261–1303.

Gruber J and Koszegi B. “Tax Incidence When Individuals are Time-
     Inconsistent: The Case of Cigarette Excise Taxes.” Journal of Public
     Economics, 2004.

Katzmarzyk PT; Janssen I “The Economic Costs Associated with Physical
     Inactivity and Obesity in Canada: An Update” Canadian Journal of
     Applied Physiology, 2004, 29(1):90-115.

Keeler EB; Manning WG; Newhouse JP; Sloss EM; Wasserman J. “The External
       Costs of a Sedentary Lifestyle” American Journal of Public Health, 1989,
       79:975-81.

Keenan, Patricia Seliger; Buntin, Melinda J. Beeuwkes; McGuire, Thomas G.
     and Newhouse, Joseph P. "The Prevalence of Formal Risk Adjustment in
     Health Plan Purchasing." Inquiry, 2001, 38(Fall), pp. 245-59.

Laibson DI. Hyperbolic Discounting and Consumption. Ph.D. thesis,
      Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1994

Lakdawalla D and Philipson T. (2002) “The Growth of Obesity and Technological
     Change: A Theoretical and Empirical Examination,” NBER Working Paper
     #8946.

Manning WG; Keeler EB; Newhouse JP; Sloss EM; Wasserman J. The Costs of
     Poor Health Habits. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1991.

McClellan M and Skinner J. (1999) “Medicare reform: who pays and who
      benefits?” Health Affairs, 18(1):48-62.

McClellan M and Skinner J. (2005) “The Incidence of Medicare.” J Public
      Economics. forthcoming..

Mokdad, A.H.; Serdula, M.K.; Dietz, W.H.; Bowman, B.A.; Marks, J.S. and
     Koplan, J.P. "The Spread of the Obesity Epidemic in the United States,
     1991-1998." JAMA, 1999, 282(16), pp. 1519-22.

Mokdad, Ali H.; Ford, Earl S.; Bowman, Barbara A.; Dietz, WIlliam H.; Vinicor,
     Frank; Bales, Virginia S. and Markes, James S. "Prevalence of Obesity,
     Diabetes, and Obesity-Related Health Risk Factors, 2001." JAMA, 2003,
     289(1), pp. 76-79.


                                                                              27
Musich, S; Lu, C; McDonald, T; Champagne, LJ and Edington, DW.
      "Association of Additional Health Risks on Medical Charges and
      Prevalence of Diabetes within Body Mass Index Categories." American
      Journal of Health Promotion, 2004, 18(3), pp. 264-68.

National Institute on Health. "Clinical Guidelines on the Identification,
      Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults: The
      Evidence Report," National Heart, Lunch and Blood Institute in
      cooperation with The National Istitute of Diabetes and Digestive and
      Kidney Diseases, 1998.

Nestle M. Food Politics: How the Food Industry Influences Nutrition and
       Health, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2003.

Newhouse, J. P. (1993). Free for All? Lessons from the RAND Health Insurance
     Experiment, Harvard University Press.

O’Donoghue T and Rabin M. “Doing It Now or Later?” American Economic
     Review, 1999, 89(1):103–124.

Pagan, JA and Davila, A. "Obesity, Occupational Attainment, and Earnings."
      Social Science Quarterly, 1997, 78(3), pp. 756-70.

Phelps ES and Pollak RA. “On Second-Best National Saving and Game-
      Equilibrium Growth.” Review of Economic Studies, 1968, 35:185–199.

Quesenberry, C. P., Jr.; Caan, B. and Jacobson, A. "Obesity, Health Services
     Use, and Health Care Costs among Members of a Health Maintenance
     Organization." Archives of Internal Medicine, 1998, 158(5), pp. 466-72.

Raebel MA; Malone DC; Conner DA; Xu S; Porter JA; Lanty FA. “Health Services
      Use and Health Care Costs of Obese and Non-obese Individuals” Archives
      of Internal Medicine, 2004, 164:2135-2140.

Register CA and Williams DR “Wage Effects of Obesity Among Young Workers”
       Social Science Quarterly, 1990, 71(1):130-41.

Rosen, Sherwin. "The Theory of Equalizing Differences," O. Ashenfelter and R.
      Layard, Handbook of Labor Economics. Elsevier Science Publishers, 1986,

Samuelson P. “The Pure Theory of Public Expenditures,” Review of Economics
     and Statistics, 1954. 36(4):350-356.

Sander B; Bergemann R. “Economic Burden of Obesity and its Complications in
      Germany.” European Journal of Health Economics, 2003, 4(4):248-53.

Sturm, R. "The Effects of Obesity, Smoking, and Drinking on Medical Problems
      and Costs." Health Affairs, 2002, 21(2), pp. 245-53.



                                                                               28
Thompson, D; Brown, JB; Nichols, GA; Elmer, PJ and Oster, G. "Body Mass
     Index and Future Healthcare Costs: A Retrospective Cohort Study."
     Obesity Research, 2001, 9(3), pp. 210-18.

Thorpe KE; Florence CS; Howard DH; Joski P. “The Impact of Obesity on Rising
      Medical Spending” Health Affairs, 2004, Web Exclusive W4:480-486.

Wang, F; Schultz, AB; Musich, S; McDonald, T; Hirschland, D and Edington,
      DW. "The Relationship between National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
      Weight Guidelines and Concurrent Medical Costs in a Manufacturing
      Population." American Journal of Health Promotion, 2003, 17(3), pp. 183-
      89.

Wolf AM and Colditz GA. “The Cost of Obesity.” Pharmacoeconomics, 1994,
      5(Suppl 1):34-37.




                                                                           29
Appendix A: A Characterization of the Social Optimum

In this section, we derive necessary conditions characterizing the socially
optimal level of weight loss for a society of j = 1…J individuals. Each has the
following expected utility, taken from equation (1):

                      N
(A-1)                        (
        EU j = ∑ π i W0 j − ω j U Cij − Φ ω j) ( )            ( )
                      i =1


We define total social welfare,                          , as the sum of expected utilities over all
individuals in the society:

               J
(A-2)       = ∑ γ j EU j
              j =1


In (A-2), γ j represents the Pareto weight that individual j has in the social
welfare function. In the social budget constraint, total income equals total
expenditures on consumption plus total medical expenditures over all
individuals. Both income and the distribution of medical expenditures depend
upon bodyweight decisions:

        J    ⎧            N                                                ⎫
(A-3)          I W(
        ∑ ⎨ 0 j j ∑ π i W0 j − ω j
                   − ω −             )           (            )( M i + Cij )⎬ = 0
        j =1 ⎩           i =1                                              ⎭

Equation (A-3) builds in our assumption that expectations about the
distribution of medical expenditures in the population correspond to the
observed distribution of expenditures.

The social problem is to pick consumption and bodyweight for all individuals in
every state of the world — Cij , ω j         {            } ∀i, j   — to maximize            subject to the social
budget constraint. To this end, we construct the following Lagrangian function,
where λ is the multiplier associated with the social budget constraint, (A-3):

              J       N
                                 (               ) ( )
        L = ∑∑ γ jπ i W0 j − ω j U Cij − γ j Φ ω j                  ( )
              j =1 i =1
(A-4)
                             J ⎧                N                                       ⎫
                                         (           )
                        − λ ∑ ⎨ I W0 j − ω j − ∑ π i W0 j − ω j (          )( M i + Cij )⎬
                            j =1 ⎩             i =1                                     ⎭

There are two sets of first order conditions:

         ∂L
(A-5)
        ∂Cij
                             ( )
             = γ jU ′ Cij + λ = 0 ∀i, j , and




                                                                                                                30
         ∂L      N

        ∂ω j
                                  (
             = −∑ π i′ W0 j − ω j γ jU Cij − γ j Φ′ ω j       )         ( )                      ( )
                i =1
(A-6)
                           ⎛                   N                                                                   ⎞
                                      (
                       + λ ⎜ I ′ W0 j − ω j + ∑ π i′ W0 j − ω j    )                 (             )( M i + Cij ) ⎟ = 0   ∀j
                           ⎝                  i =1                                                                 ⎠

An immediate implication of (A-5) is that at the social optimum, each individual
j in the society must set his (or her) consumption level to the same value, say
C *j , across all the N different health states:

(A-7)   Cij = C *j ∀i, j

Applying (A-7) to (A-6) yields the following:


          ( ( )                               ) ∑ π ′ (W
                                                  N
        − γ jU C *j + λ C *j                                  i        0j                )
                                                                            − ω j − γ j Φ′ ω j    ( )
                                                  i =1
(A-8)
                           ⎛                   N                   ⎞
                                      (                            )
                       + λ ⎜ I ′ W0 j − ω j + ∑ M iπ i′ W0 j − ω j ⎟ = 0 ∀j                  (           )
                           ⎝                  i =1                 ⎠

                       N                                                                          N
By definition,         ∑ π i (W0 j − ω j ) = 1, so we have ∑ π i′ (W0 j − ω j ) = 0 .                                          Furthermore,
                       i =1                                                                       i =1
differentiating equation (7), which defines the risk-adjusted premium,
  (            )
P W0 j − ω j , yields the fact that:

                                              N
           (                  )
(A-9) P′ W0 j − ω j = −∑ π i′ W0 j − ω j M i ∀j .         (                      )
                                          i =1


These equations and (A-5) permit a further simplification of equation (A-8):

               ( )
(A-10) −Φ′ ω j − U ′ C *j         ( ) ( I ′ (W                    0j         )
                                                                       − ω j − P′ W0 j − ω j (           )) = 0   ∀j

Hence, the social optimum requires each individual to equate the marginal
(utility) costs of weight loss with the marginal (utility) benefits from the weight
loss—an increase in income and a reduction in expected medical costs.

One feasible allocation that meets (A-10) would set consumption for each
individual equal to income, less the risk-adjusted premium given weight:

                   (                      )
(A-11) C *j = I W0 j − ω j − P W0 j − ω j ∀j          (                      )



                                                                                                                                          31
It is easy to show that this allocation would be optimal for some distribution of
                   { }                                      { }
initial bodyweight, W0 j , and some set of Pareto weights, γ j . In this
allocation, there are no transfers between individuals with different initial
bodyweights. Other optimal and feasible allocations are possible, but these
would involve fixed transfers between individuals that do not depend upon final
bodyweight (though they might depend upon initial bodyweight). Optimal
                                  { }
transfers would clearly vary with γ j , though all optimal allocations would
need to obey condition (A-10).




                                                                                32
                                Figure 1: Model Timeline




       Choose weight loss: ω            Choose consumption: C




                                                                           time

Initial Weight W0,   Insurance Starts                     Insurance Ends
received             Earn Income        Health Observed




                                                                                  33
Table 1: Study Population Characteristics by Plan Assignment

                                              All              Free               25%             50%             95%          Individual

N                                           2,461               824                  492             167       442                    536
BMI at Entry                                         24.79         24.80            24.70           24.89           24.73            24.89
                                                    (4.53)        (4.45)           (4.81)          (4.02)          (4.41)           (4.63)
BMI at Exit                                          25.31         25.39            25.03           25.43           25.31           25.40
                                                    (4.78)        (4.64)           (4.76)          (4.63)          (5.16)           (4.76)
BMI Change                                            0.52          0.59             0.33            0.55            0.58             0.51
                                                    (2.45)        (2.46)           (2.16)          (2.42)          (2.75)           (2.44)
BMI Change Per Year                                   0.15          0.16             0.10            0.15            0.17             0.15
                                                    (0.74)        (0.74)           (0.62)          (0.66)          (0.86)           (0.74)
Obese at Entry                                        0.12          0.12             0.12            0.13            0.11             0.13

Obese at Exit                                        0.14             0.14           0.13            0.16            0.12               0.15

Became Obese                                         0.04             0.04           0.03            0.06            0.04               0.05

Note: Used chi-square test for categorical variables and t-test of mean relative to free for continuous variables. No differences are
statistically significant.




                                                                                                                                               34
Table 2: The Effect of Insurance Coverage on Body Weight and Obesity - Randomized Health Plan Assignment

                                                                 BMI Change Per Year                     Became Obese
                                                                (1)        (2)     (3)            (1)          (2)        (3)
25% Coinsurance Rate                                          -0.109    -0.175   -0.179        -0.005       -0.012     -0.016
                                                              [1.48]   [2.20]* [2.25]*         [0.23]       [0.57]     [0.71]
50% Coinsurance Rate                                          -0.062    -0.139   -0.132         0.025        0.016      0.007
                                                              [0.64]    [1.36]   [1.26]        [0.92]       [0.56]     [0.24]
95% Coinsurance Rate                                          -0.032    -0.111   -0.114            0         -0.01     -0.015
                                                              [0.40]    [1.28]   [1.31]        [0.00]       [0.41]     [0.61]
Individual Deductible                                         -0.037    -0.071   -0.079          0.01        0.007      0.004
                                                              [0.72]    [1.33]   [1.45]        [0.68]       [0.46]     [0.25]
Maximum $ Expenditure                                            0          0       0              0            0          0
                                                              [0.70]    [1.65]   [1.93]        [0.35]       [0.18]     [0.73]
Constant                                                       0.161     0.442    0.39          0.051        0.168      0.197
                                                             [6.32]**   [1.92]   [1.66]       [2.88]**     [2.59]**   [2.95]**
Includes Individual Controls                                                X       X                           X          X
Includes Site Effects and Participation Incentive                                   X                                      X
Observations                                                   2441      2441     2441          2441         2441       2441
R-squared                                                        0        0.01    0.01            0           0.01       0.01
Absolute value of t statistics in brackets
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                                 35
Table 3: Effect of Public and Private Insurance on BMI and Obesity: 2SLS Results

                      BMI-No State FE            BMI-State FE          Obese-No State FE       Obese-State FE
                                  std                       std
                    coefficient  error       coefficient   error      coefficient std error coefficient std error
Public Ins.             0.7002    1.2298        -3.8172   10.7426        -0.0840     0.0931    -0.1239     0.7831
Private Ins.            0.9065    0.7741        -7.7786     4.8906        0.0168     0.0570    -0.4573     0.3595
Year == 1990            0.2208    0.0765         0.2926     0.1095        0.0119     0.0056     0.0151     0.0077
Year == 1992            0.5856    0.0889         0.5303     0.1086        0.0330     0.0066     0.0300     0.0077
Year == 1993            0.7054    0.1047         0.4364     0.3817        0.0415     0.0078     0.0188     0.0272
Year == 1994            0.7935    0.1091         0.6006     0.3900        0.0485     0.0082     0.0298     0.0279
Year == 1996            0.9836    0.1129         0.8122     0.2803        0.0525     0.0085     0.0378     0.0200
Year == 1998            1.2102    0.1216         1.2379     0.2245        0.0708     0.0092     0.0687     0.0162
Year == 2000            1.6074    0.1339         1.7121     0.1918        0.0999     0.0102     0.1041     0.0139
Year == 2002            1.7830    0.1506         1.6174     0.2067        0.1029     0.0114     0.0919     0.0148
Year == 2004            1.8644    0.1740         1.5763     0.2957        0.1091     0.0132     0.0889     0.0212
Age                     0.3858    0.0652         0.4975     0.1064        0.0230     0.0049     0.0284     0.0077
Age Square             -0.0039    0.0009        -0.0051     0.0013       -0.0002     0.0001    -0.0003     0.0001
Nonwhite                1.3416    0.0657         1.0474     0.4127        0.0789     0.0050     0.0556     0.0295
Male                    0.8224    0.0857         0.4774     0.6630       -0.0151     0.0065    -0.0214     0.0484
Educ 0 to 8 yrs         1.1532    0.2615        -1.1703     1.2250        0.0732     0.0188    -0.0633     0.0890
Educ 8 to 12 yrs        0.4730    0.0959        -0.4040     0.5038        0.0322     0.0072    -0.0222     0.0363
Income ($000s)         -0.0007    0.0002         0.0013     0.0012       -0.0001     0.0000     0.0001     0.0001
AFQT Quartile 1         1.0038    0.2004        -0.8140     1.1223        0.0666     0.0149    -0.0549     0.0801
AFQT Quartile 2         0.6752    0.1019        -0.1584     0.4249        0.0397     0.0075    -0.0106     0.0309
AFQT Quartile 3         0.3557    0.0658         0.0390     0.1703        0.0215     0.0050     0.0023     0.0124
Constant               14.8588    1.2164        20.5830     3.4176       -0.4152     0.0910    -0.0761     0.2477




                                                                                                                    36
Table 4: Effect of Public and Private Insurance on BMI and Obesity: MLE Results

                      BMI-No State FE            BMI-State FE          Obese-No State FE       Obese-State FE
                    coefficient std error    coefficient std error    coefficient std error coefficient std error
Private Ins.              1.269     0.093          1.309     0.094          0.847     0.245      0.987      0.311
Public Ins.               2.092     0.151          2.190     0.154          0.667     0.205      0.873      0.264
Year == 1990              0.214     0.076          0.217     0.076          0.125     0.053      0.130      0.056
Year == 1992              0.586     0.089          0.583     0.089          0.318     0.060      0.332      0.066
Year == 1993              0.667     0.092          0.655     0.092          0.366     0.064      0.376      0.072
Year == 1994              0.751     0.098          0.744     0.098          0.406     0.067      0.420      0.076
Year == 1996              0.957     0.108          0.956     0.108          0.443     0.075      0.462      0.086
Year == 1998              1.187     0.120          1.187     0.120          0.544     0.082      0.565      0.095
Year == 2000              1.593     0.133          1.594     0.133          0.718     0.095      0.752      0.116
Year == 2002              1.777     0.149          1.783     0.149          0.762     0.107      0.803      0.132
Year == 2004              1.849     0.170          1.851     0.170          0.806     0.118      0.848      0.144
Age                       0.378     0.064          0.376     0.064          0.190     0.036      0.196      0.039
Age Square               -0.004     0.001         -0.004     0.001         -0.002     0.000     -0.002      0.001
Nonwhite                  1.308     0.050          1.325     0.052          0.482     0.044      0.531      0.065
Male                      0.906     0.041          0.918     0.041          0.028     0.038      0.048      0.044
Educ 0 to 8 yrs           1.199     0.156          1.166     0.155          0.598     0.106      0.638      0.131
Educ 8 to 12 yrs          0.470     0.049          0.505     0.049          0.244     0.040      0.286      0.053
Income ($000s)           -0.001     0.000         -0.001     0.000         -0.004     0.002     -0.004      0.002
AFQT Quartile 1           0.965     0.077          0.877     0.078          0.476     0.067      0.454      0.079
AFQT Quartile 2           0.694     0.065          0.650     0.066          0.327     0.047      0.316      0.054
AFQT Quartile 3           0.366     0.057          0.345     0.058          0.180     0.036      0.170      0.039
Constant                14.671      1.089        14.494      1.093         -7.108     0.830     -7.508      1.052




                                                                                                                    37
Appendix Table 1: RAND Enrollees Demographic and Health Status Covariates are Balanced at Start of Experiment

                                                All         Free            25%                50%              95%          Individual
N                                                 2,461        824               492             167               442             536
Age (Years)                                        37.36       37.85           36.91              38.35           37.35           36.70
                                                (11.18)     (11.51)         (10.69)            (11.16)          (11.14)         (11.14)
Education (Years of School Completed)              12.34       12.15           12.48              12.47            12.41           12.39
                                                  (3.03)      (3.20)          (2.91)             (3.07)           (2.87)          (3.00)
Family Income (Year Preceding Enrollment)         11524       11135           11879 *            12993 **         11654           11229
                                                 (5772)      (5734)          (5785)             (5825)           (5791)          (5710)
Participation Incentive Offered at Enrollment   461.17       175.32         702.81 **           811.14 **        733.22 **       345.40
                                                   (370)       (238)           (281)              (324)            (348)           (211)
Race - White                                        0.88      0.87              0.87             0.92             0.86            0.88
Race - Black                                       0.11       0.12             0.11             0.07             0.13            0.11
Race - Other                                       0.01       0.01             0.02             0.01             0.01            0.01
Married                                            0.80       0.81             0.81             0.83             0.77            0.79
Female                                             0.54       0.54             0.53             0.56             0.57            0.53
Self Reported Health Status - Excellent            0.45       0.45             0.45             0.49             0.46            0.45
Self Reported Health Status - Good                 0.43       0.42             0.43             0.40             0.43            0.45
Self Reported Health Status - Fair                 0.09       0.10             0.10             0.10             0.09            0.07
Self Reported Health Status - Poor                 0.02       0.03             0.01             0.02             0.02            0.02
Self Reported Health Status - Missing              0.01       0.01             0.01               -              0.01            0.00




                                                                                                                                   38
Appendix Table 2: First Stage Results for 2SLS models

                            Public-No State FE     Public-State FE     Private-No State FE    Private-State FE
                          coefficient std error coefficient std error coefficient std error coefficient std error
% in firms 0 to 499           0.5466      0.0981    0.2126     0.2822     2.3617     0.1736     0.8901     0.4992
% in firms 500+              -0.0248      0.0315    0.1117     0.1035     0.7434     0.0558     0.3727     0.1831
Pr. Medicaid Enrollment       0.2074      0.0125    0.0650     0.0233    -0.2722     0.0221    -0.1143     0.0412
Year == 1990                  0.0030      0.0038    0.0034     0.0038     0.0057     0.0067     0.0058     0.0066
Year == 1992                 -0.0127      0.0044   -0.0037     0.0046     0.0080     0.0077    -0.0008     0.0082
Year == 1993                  0.0240      0.0045    0.0345     0.0048    -0.0395     0.0079    -0.0454     0.0085
Year == 1994                  0.0190      0.0048    0.0334     0.0054    -0.0276     0.0084    -0.0358     0.0095
Year == 1996                 -0.0027      0.0053    0.0168     0.0063    -0.0108     0.0094    -0.0242     0.0111
Year == 1998                 -0.0045      0.0057    0.0081     0.0066    -0.0024     0.0100    -0.0045     0.0116
Year == 2000                 -0.0117      0.0061   -0.0019     0.0075    -0.0020     0.0109     0.0026     0.0133
Year == 2002                 -0.0144      0.0067   -0.0004     0.0079    -0.0252     0.0118    -0.0259     0.0139
Year == 2004                 -0.0124      0.0075    0.0083     0.0091    -0.0401     0.0133    -0.0431     0.0161
Age                           0.0024      0.0028    0.0026     0.0028     0.0115     0.0050     0.0115     0.0050
Age Square                    0.0000      0.0000    0.0000     0.0000    -0.0001     0.0001    -0.0001     0.0001
Nonwhite                      0.0384      0.0021    0.0452     0.0022    -0.0489     0.0037    -0.0604     0.0038
Male                         -0.0581      0.0018   -0.0591     0.0018    -0.0099     0.0031    -0.0093     0.0031
Educ 0 to 8 yrs               0.0444      0.0058    0.0486     0.0058    -0.2875     0.0103    -0.2891     0.0103
Educ 8 to 12 yrs              0.0314      0.0021    0.0330     0.0021    -0.1177     0.0037    -0.1217     0.0037
Income ($000s)                0.0000      0.0000    0.0000     0.0000     0.0000     0.0000     0.0000     0.0000
AFQT Quartile 1               0.0991      0.0032    0.1016     0.0032    -0.2578     0.0057    -0.2532     0.0057
AFQT Quartile 2               0.0166      0.0028    0.0166     0.0028    -0.1049     0.0049    -0.1000     0.0050
AFQT Quartile 3               0.0039      0.0026    0.0040     0.0026    -0.0393     0.0046    -0.0363     0.0046
Constant                     -0.2159      0.0550   -0.2087     0.0954     0.1500     0.0973     0.4747     0.1688
F-statistic                        139.14                2.91                 120.51                 4.52




                                                                                                                    39
Appendix Table 3: First Stage Results for MLE models

                           Public-No State FE     Public-State FE     Private-No State FE    Private-State FE
                                         std
                          coefficient  error   coefficient std error coefficient std error coefficient std error
% in firms 0 to 499          30.8556    2.4072     4.3208     7.6902    19.1894     1.3751     7.3312     3.9023
% in firms 500+               4.3796    0.7933     1.6022     2.7916     5.2915     0.3981     2.9991     1.4132
Pr. Medicaid Enrollment       4.4842    0.3433     2.6147     0.6278    -0.9681     0.1700    -0.5031     0.3142
Year == 1990                  0.3162    0.1116     0.3262     0.1127     0.0007     0.0489     0.0050     0.0492
Year == 1992                 -0.0120    0.1262     0.1355     0.1351    -0.1021     0.0582    -0.1165     0.0621
Year == 1993                  0.4193    0.1160     0.6246     0.1271    -0.2763     0.0581    -0.2648     0.0642
Year == 1994                  0.3185    0.1244     0.6093     0.1416    -0.2482     0.0632    -0.2332     0.0726
Year == 1996                 -0.0108    0.1413     0.3621     0.1672    -0.3029     0.0729    -0.3035     0.0868
Year == 1998                  0.0382    0.1503     0.3687     0.1769    -0.3046     0.0795    -0.2501     0.0929
Year == 2000                 -0.0818    0.1633     0.2923     0.2035    -0.4447     0.0911    -0.3552     0.1108
Year == 2002                 -0.2835    0.1747     0.1370     0.2090    -0.7410     0.1012    -0.6743     0.1184
Year == 2004                 -0.3777    0.1922     0.2090     0.2387    -0.9700     0.1175    -0.8876     0.1392
Age                           0.0110    0.0744     0.0206     0.0756     0.0283     0.0390     0.0292     0.0393
Age Square                    0.0005    0.0010     0.0003     0.0011    -0.0001     0.0006    -0.0001     0.0006
Nonwhite                      0.6359    0.0498     0.7414     0.0523    -0.1566     0.0274    -0.2274     0.0287
Male                         -1.2173    0.0510    -1.2798     0.0518    -0.8610     0.0600    -0.8638     0.0606
Educ 0 to 8 yrs              -0.4444    0.1125    -0.3718     0.1149    -1.3949     0.0734    -1.4182     0.0736
Educ 8 to 12 yrs              0.0239    0.0614     0.0572     0.0630    -0.6009     0.0330    -0.6471     0.0330
Income ($000s)               -0.0001    0.0000    -0.0001     0.0000     0.0001     0.0000     0.0001     0.0000
AFQT Quartile 1               1.2465    0.1160     1.3352     0.1183    -1.0656     0.0556    -1.0274     0.0574
AFQT Quartile 2               0.8320    0.1115     0.8737     0.1136    -0.6747     0.0432    -0.6411     0.0441
AFQT Quartile 3               0.6693    0.1125     0.6819     0.1140    -0.3459     0.0416    -0.3292     0.0420
Constant                    -11.4118    1.4551    -6.5811     2.5957    -3.4054     0.7344    -0.8305     1.3061




                                                                                                                   40
