                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  HETEROGENEITY AND CYCLICAL UNEMPLOYMENT

                                            Mark Bils
                                         Yongsung Chang
                                          Sun-Bin Kim

                                       Working Paper 15166
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15166


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2009




We thank Evgenia Dechter for her excellent research assistance; we than Mark Aguiar, Ricardo Lagos,
Iourii Manovskii, Richard Rogerson, and Randy Wright for helpful suggestions. Kim acknowledges
financial support from the Korea Research Foundation Grant (MOEHRD) KRF-2007-332-B0060.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Mark Bils, Yongsung Chang, and Sun-Bin Kim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Heterogeneity and Cyclical Unemployment
Mark Bils, Yongsung Chang, and Sun-Bin Kim
NBER Working Paper No. 15166
July 2009
JEL No. E2,E32

                                            ABSTRACT

We model worker heterogeneity in the rents from being employed in a Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides
model of matching and unemployment. We show that heterogeneity, reflecting differences in match
quality and worker assets, reduces the extent of fluctuations in separations and unemployment. We
find that the model faces a trade-off--it cannot produce both realistic dispersion in wage growth across
workers and realistic cyclical fluctuations in unemployment.


Mark Bils                                          Sun-Bin Kim
Department of Economics                            Department of Economics
University of Rochester                            Korea University
Rochester, NY 14627                                Anam-dong Seongbuk-gu
and NBER                                           Seoul Korea, 136-701
bils@troi.cc.rochester.edu                         sunbink@korea.ac.kr

Yongsung Chang
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
ychang14@mail.rochester.edu
1. Introduction

Shimer (2005), Hall (2005), Costain and Reiter (2008), and Gertler and Trigari (2009)
each argue that matching models with flexible wages fail to explain business cycle
fluctuations–the models generate much more procyclical wages and much less cycli-
cal unemployment and job finding rates than observed. But, as discussed by Costain
and Reiter, Mortensen and Nagypal (2007), and Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008), this
negative conclusion rests on an assumption that employment renders substantial eco-
nomic rents relative to the monetary, home production, and leisure benefits to not
being employed in the market. For example, Hagedorn and Manovskii, by allowing the
payout to unemployment to replace 95% that of employment, are able to rationalize
the cyclical volatility of unemployment under the matching model with flexible wages
and exogenous separations. So establishing the rents from employment is key to judg-
ing how well the matching model captures cyclical fluctuations. Judging the size of
these rents a priori is problematic as they reflect, not only direct payments, but also
individuals’ valuations of leisure and home production.
   We shed light on this question by considering endogenous separations. We introduce
heterogeneity in reservation wages into a business cycle model of separations, matching,
and unemployment. As in Mortensen and Pissarides (1994), we allow workers to face
shocks to their employment matches, with bad draws possibly leading to endogenous
separations. We depart from Mortensen and Pissarides by allowing for diminishing
marginal utility in consumption—necessary for wealth to affect labor supply—and for
imperfect insurance as in Aiyagari (1994)—which affects workers’ reservation wages. As
a result, willingness to trade work for search depends on the worker’s wealth. Workers
with lower savings, reflecting bad past earnings shocks, are less willing to separate.
The heterogeneity in match quality and assets jointly determine the distribution of
rents to being employed. In turn, this distribution drives both the level and cyclicality
of unemployment.
   We find a trade-off between generating realistic dispersion in wage growth across


                                           1
workers and generating realistic cyclical fluctuations in unemployment. For instance,
with a high replacement rate, such as suggested by Hagedorn and Manovskii, the model
can generate reasonable average rates of separation and unemployment only if shocks to
match quality are extremely small; so small that wages changes within jobs are an order
of magnitude smaller than suggested by empirical studies. With Shimer’s calibrated
replacement rate of 40%, by contrast, substantial shocks to match quality are required
to match average turnover and unemployment rates. We find that match shocks on
this order of magnitude are much more consistent with the estimated behavior of cross-
sectional dispersion of wages and wage growth found in micro data. With reasonable
match quality shocks, selection through endogenous separations yields few matches
with quality near the threshold for destruction. In turn, this reduces the responses in
separations and unemployment to aggregate shocks. Thus we conclude that the search
and matching model, calibrated to reasonable match shocks and separation rates, fails
to capture the cyclicality of unemployment.
   The model is presented in the next section then calibrated in Section 3. In Section
4 we examine the model’s steady-state features. We show that both a high replace-
ment rate and little heterogeneity, in match quality and assets, are key for producing
an economy with many workers with low rents from employment—the scenario that
generates a large response of unemployment to aggregate shocks. We require our bench-
mark economy to exhibit realistic separation and unemployment rates and reasonable
dispersions in wage rates of wage growth. In turn, this requires a relatively low replace-
ment rate and significant match quality shocks. We consider an alternative economy
that matches the average unemployment with a high replacement rate, but it requires
extremely small shocks to match quality.
   The model’s cyclical predictions are presented in Section 5. The model can gener-
ate a very cyclical unemployment rate, but only if there is little dispersion in match
quality. With little cross-sectional dispersion there is an important spike up in sepa-
rations at the onset of a downturn. Secondly, again for low dispersion, the rents to
vacancy creation are highly procyclical. Thirdly, the model generates a new avenue for


                                            2
cyclicality in unemployment—in response to higher expected unemployment duration,
separations become skewed toward workers with higher assets and higher reservation
match qualities. Because these workers generate smaller expected surplus to employers,
this acts to further depress vacancy creation in a recession. However, for our bench-
mark model that displays reasonable dispersions in match wages and wage growth, we
find that separations, vacancies, and unemployment all exhibit much less cyclicality
than seen in the data.
    Besides Mortensen and Pissarides (1994), an antecedent to our model is Chang
and Kim (2006, 2007). They show that the cross-sectional distributions of wealth
and worker productivity play a critical role in determining the elasticity of aggregate
labor supply in a competitive equilibrium. Nakajima (2007), Shao and Silos (2007), and
Krusell, Mukoyama, and Sahin (2008) have also recently adopted diminishing marginal
utility in consumption and imperfect risk sharing into the Mortensen-Pissarides model.1
However, only Shao and Silos allow for heterogeneous productivity; and none of these
authors allows for endogenous separations.
    Our finding on the trade-off between the cross-sectional wage dispersion and the
cyclicality of unemployment is in the same spirit as Hornstein, Krusell, and Violante
(2007) who show that, with substantial dispersion in wage offers, the Dimanond-
Pissarides-Mortensen model implies unemployment durations that are far higher than
seen in the data. While both Hornstein, Krusell, Violante (2007) and our work highlight
the importance of wage dispersion in a matching model setting, we, as in Mortensen
and Pissarides (1994), abstract from dispersion in initial match qualities and any effect
of that dispersion on unemployment duration. We focus on the shocks to productivity
and wages within matches, which is central for separations, whereas Hornstein, Krusell
   1
     Other papers that entertain wealth effects in modeling search include Pissarides (1987), Gomes,
Greenwood, and Rebelo (2001), and Hall (2006). Haefke and Reiter (2006) generate dispersion in
reservation wages, while maintaining linear utility and no match-specific productivity, by assuming
heterogeneity in individuals’ value of home production. Several papers (Darby, Haltiwanger, and
Plant, 1985, Baker, 1992, and Pries, 2007) have argued that lower job-finding rates during recessions
may reflect a compositional shift toward workers who display lower job-finding rates. But these papers
impose this shift exogenously, whereas our model, by allowing for wealth effects, predicts such a shift
in recessions toward unemployed workers with high reservation match qualities.



                                                  3
and Violante (2007) focus on the dispersion in initial match offerings.2




2. Model
We build on the model of cyclical unemployment in Mortensen and Pissarides (1994).
We depart from Mortensen and Pissarides by letting workers be risk averse–necessary
for wealth effect to affect labor supply, face a borrowing constraint, and value leisure,
distinct from goods consumption, from being unemployed.



2.1. Environment

There is a continuum of infinitely-lived workers with total mass equal to one. Each
worker has preferences defined by
                                     ∞
                                     X             ½                   ¾
                                               t       c1−γ
                                                        t   −1
                                E0         β                   + B · lt ,
                                     t=0
                                                         1−γ

where 0 < β < 1 is the discount factor, and ct (> 0) is consumption. The parameter
B denotes the utility from leisure when unemployed. lt is 1 when unemployed and
otherwise zero. In Mortensen and Pissarides (1994), and many extensions, there is no
valuation of leisure; so a marginal rate of substitution between leisure and consumption
is not defined. Here the marginal rate of substitution (c−γ /B ) is decreasing in c.
This provides the basis for a worker’s reservation match quality to be increasing in
consumption and thereby savings.
       Each period a worker either works (employed) or searches for a job (unemployed).
A worker, when working, earns wage w. If unemployed, a worker receives an unem-
ployment benefit b. Each can borrow or lend at a given real interest rate r by trading
the asset a. But there is a limit, a, that one can borrow; that is at > a. Real interest
   2
     An advantage of our focus, we would argue, is that it is easier to identify that movements in
wages within matches (jobs) are empirically important, than to identify the importance of dispersion
in initial match offerings, separate from individual effects.



                                                          4
rate r is determined exogenously to fluctuations in this particular economy (small open
economy).
       There is also a continuum of identical agents we refer to as entrepreneurs (or firms).
Entrepreneurs have the ability to create job vacancies with a cost κ per vacancy. En-
trepreneurs are risk neutral, diversifying ownership of their investments across many
vacancies and across economies, and maximize the discounted present value of profits
                                         X∞ µ       ¶t
                                                1
                                      E0               πt .
                                         t=0
                                              1 + r

       There are two technologies in this economy, one that describes the production of
output by a matched worker-entrepreneur pair and another that describes the process
by which workers and entrepreneurs become matched. A matched pair produces output

                                           yt = zt xt ,

where zt is aggregate productivity and xt is idiosyncratic match-specific productivity,
i.e., match quality. Both aggregate productivity and idiosyncratic productivity evolve
over time according to Markov processes, respectively P r[zt+1 < z 0 |zt = z] = D(z 0 |z)
and P r[xt+1 < x0 |xt = x] = F (x0 |x). For newly formed matches, idiosyncratic produc-
tivity starts at the mean value of the unconditional distribution, which is denoted by
x̄.3
       The number of new meetings between the unemployed and vacancies is determined
by a matching function
                                      m(v, u) = ηu1−α v α ,

where v is the number of vacancies and u is the number of unemployed workers. The
matching rate for an unemployed worker is p(θ) = m(v, u)/u = ηθα , where θ = v/u is
   3
    With dispersion in initial match quality, then workers will turn down some new matches. This
would, everything else equal, increase unemployment duration and the average rate of unemployment.
Hornstein, Krusell, and Violante, 2007, examine the tension between generating reasonable wage dis-
persion and average unemployment duration in a calibrated Diamanond-Mortensen-Pissarides model.
Therefore, to maintain the target rate of unemployment, this extension would require a lower value
of unemployment (parameter B) for our calibrated model. We expect this would further reduce the
model’s ability to produce cyclical fluctuations in unemployment.


                                                5
the vacancy-unemployment ratio, the labor market tightness. The probability that a
vacant job matches with a worker is q(θ) = m(v, u)/v = ηθα−1 .
       A matched worker-firm constitutes a bilateral monopoly. We assume the wage is set
by bargaining between the worker and firm over the match surplus. This is discussed
in the next subsection. The match surplus reflects the value of the match relative to
the summed worker’s value of being unemployed and the entrepreneur’s value of an
unmatched vacancy, which is zero in equilibrium. There are no bargaining rigidities;
separations are efficient for the worker-firm pair, occurring if and only if match surplus
falls below zero.
       The timing of events can be summarized as follows.

   1. At the beginning of each period matches from the previous period’s search and
         matching are realized. Also, aggregate productivity z and each match’s idiosyn-
         cratic productivity x are realized.

   2. Upon observing x and z, matched workers and entrepreneurs decide whether
         to continue as an employed match. Workers breaking up with an entrepreneur
         become unemployed. There is no later recall of matches.

   3. For employed matches, production takes place with the wage reflecting worker-
         firm bargaining. Also at this time, unemployed workers and vacancies engage in
         the search/matching process.



2.2. Value functions

Consider a recursive representation, where W , U , J, and V denote respectively the
values for the employed, unemployed, a matched entrepreneur, and a vacancy. All value
functions depend on the measures of workers. Two measures capture the distribution
of workers: µ(a, x) and ψ(a), respectively, represent the measures of employed workers
and unemployed workers during the period.4 The evolution of these measures is given
   4
    Let A and X denote sets of all possible realizations of a and x, respectively. Then µ(a, x) is
defined over σ-algebra of A × X while ψ(a) is defined over σ-algebra of A.

                                                6
by T, i.e., (µ0 , ψ 0 ) = T(µ, ψ, z). For notational convenience, let s = (z, µ, ψ).
   ¿From the model discussion, it follows that the worker’s value of being employed is
                          ½                                                     ¾
                                                   0 0 0         0    0
        W (a, x, s) = max
                       0
                           u(ce ) + βE [max{W (ae , x , s ), U (ae , s )}| x, s] , (1)
                           ae

subject to
                                     ce = (1 + r)a + w − a0e ,

                                              a0e ≥ a .

The value of being unemployed, recalling that p(θ) is the probability that an unem-
ployed worker matches, is
                ½                                                                     ¾
                                            0    0                     0        0
 U (a, s) = max
             0
                  u(cu )+β(1−p(θ(s)))E [U (au , s )| s]+βp(θ(s))E [W (au , x̄, s )| s] , (2)
              au

subject to
                                     cu = (1 + r)a + b − a0u ,

                                              a0u ≥ a ,

where u(cu ) includes the leisure value B from being unemployed.
   For an entrepreneur the value of a matched job is:

             J(a, x, s) = zx − w(a, x, s) + βE [max{J(a0e , x0 , s0 ), V (s0 )}| x, s] .       (3)

The value of a vacancy is:
                                 Z
                1                                            e 0)+    1
  V (s) = −κ +     q(θ(s))           E [J(a0u , x̄, s0 )|s] dψ(au        (1 − q(θ(s)))V (s0 ) , (4)
               1+r                                                   1+r
where recall that κ is the vacancy posting cost and q(θ) is the probability that a vacancy
           e 0 ) denotes the measure of unemployed workers at the end of a period after
is filled. ψ(au

decisions on asset accumulation are made.



2.3. Wage Bargaining

The setting allow for bilateral bargaining between a matched vacancy and worker. We
follow much of the literature in assuming that wages reflect a Nash bargaining solution,

                                                  7
such that
                         ¡                           ¢1 ¡                       ¢1
                  argmax W (a, x, s; w) − U (a, s; w) 2 J(a, x, s; w) − V (s; w) 2                                   (5)
                        w

for all (a, x, s).5
       The Nash solution generates a wage that is increasing in a worker’s assets, reflecting
that being unemployed is less painful for a worker with greater assets. (Below see
Figure 1.) In turn, this makes the vacancy creation decision depend on the assets of
the unemployed. We believe these features potentially generalize to settings with wage
posting by firms and directed search by workers. For instance, Acemoglu and Shimer
(1999) model directed search by risk averse workers. They show that the distribution of
posted wages exhibits a higher mean, with longer queues, if workers are less risk averse,
as then workers are less willing to take lower wages in order to raise the probability
of employment. We would expect increased assets for the unemployed, for given risk
aversion, to exhibit comparative statics in this same direction in their setting.



2.4. Evolution of measures

The measures for workers employed and unemployed, µ(a, x) and ψ(a), evolve as fol-
lows.
                                    Z     Z
              0     0       0
             µ (A , X ) =                        1{x0 ≥x∗ (a0 ,s0 ),a0 =a0e (a,x,s)} dF (x0 |x)dµ(a, x)da0 dx0
                                  A0 ,X 0 A,X
                                              Z Z                                                                ,   (6)
                                                                                       0    0
                                + p (θ(s))             1{x0 =x̄,a0 =a0u (a,s)} dψ(a)da dx
                                              A0 A
                                    Z Z
                    ψ 0 (A0 ) =                 1{x0 <x∗ (a0 ,s0 ),a0 =a0e (a,x,s)} dF (x0 |x)dµ(a, x)da0
                                    A0 A,X
                                                         Z Z                                                         (7)
                                                                                           0
                                 + (1 − p (θ(s)))                1{a0 =a0u (a,s)} dψ(a)da
                                                         A0 A
for all A0 ⊂ A and X 0 ⊂ X .
   5
    Rubinstein (1982) demonstrates in a stationary environment that the Nash solution can be in-
terpreted as the outcome of a noncooperative game with sequential offers. In our stochastic setting
without linear utility this interpretation does not literally hold (Coles and Wright, 1998.) We adopt
the Nash solution, however, partly for comparability with the related literature.

                                                                8
2.5. Equilibrium

The equilibrium consists of a set of value functions, W (a, x, s), U (a, s), J(a, x, s), a set
of decision rules for consumption ce (a, x, s), cu (a, s), asset holdings a0e (a, x, s), a0u (a, s),
and separating x∗ (a, x, s), the wage schedule w(a, x, s), the labor-market tightness θ(s),
and a law of motion for the distribution, (µ0 , ψ 0 ) = T(µ, ψ, z). Equilibrium is defined
by the following.

   1. (Optimal Savings): Given θ, w, µ , ψ, and T, a0 solves the Bellman equations for
      W , U , J and V in (1), (2), (3), and (4).

   2. (Optimal Separation): Given W , U , J, V , µ, ψ, and T, x∗ satisfies J(a, x∗ , s) = 0.

   3. (Nash Bargaining): Given W , U , J and V , w satisfies J(a, x, s) = (W (a, x, s) −
      U (a, s)) × u0 (ce (a, x, s))−1 .

   4. (Free Entry): Given w, x∗ , J, µ, ψ, and T, the vacancies are posted until V = 0.

   5. (Rational Expectations): Given a0e , a0u and x∗ , the law of motion for distribution
      (µ0 , ψ 0 ) = T(µ, ψ) is described in (6) and (7).




3. Model Calibration
We calibrate our model in order to present its predictions for business cycle fluctuations.
But, prior to considering business cycles, in Section 4 we display the model’s steady-
state features, in particular showing how the heterogeneity of worker’s match quality
and assets determine the distribution of rents to employment.



3.1. The benchmark economy

We consider two calibrated models that yield the same steady-state rates of separations
and unemployment, but differ sharply in their predictions for the average level, and


                                                 9
dispersion, in match rents. Our benchmark calibration reflects nontrivial rents to
employment that reflect dispersion in wages due to differences in match quality. These
rents are roughly consistent both with the dispersion observed for wage growth within
matches (e.g., Topel and Ward, 1992) and with the dispersion for wage levels that
has been attributed to match effects estimated on matched employer, employee data
(Woodcock, 2008). We also describe an alternative calibration that is designed to
generate sizable cyclical fluctuations—large enough to match the observed volatility of
aggregate unemployment in the data. But this calibration hinges on having almost no
dispersion in match quality, which requires extremely small dispersion in wage growth
within matches.
   Starting with preferences, we assume a relative risk aversion parameter γ equal to
one. We choose a monthly discount factor β of 0.995 and an annualized real interest rate
of 6%. These together generate average assets equal to 18 months of labor earnings,
which is about the median ratio of net worth to family earnings we calculate from
the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) data. (See Bils, Chang, and
Kim, 2007, for more details on statistics derived from the SIPP.) We set the borrowing
constraint to six, so approximately six month labor income, as we see few households
in the SIPP with unsecured debt exceeding this amount.
   The key outcomes we target are the average rates of unemployment and separations.
We target an average unemployment rate of 6% and a monthly separation rate of 2%.
(A separation rate of 2% is consistent with what we see for the SIPP data.) These rates
for unemployment and separations imply a steady-state job finding rate, of 31%, a rate
consistent with transition hazards reported by Meyer (1990). The vacancy posting
cost κ is chosen so that the vacancy-unemployment ratio (θ) is normalized to 1 in the
steady state. The matching technology is Cobb-Douglas; m(v, u) = .31 v α u1−α hits the
steady-state finding rate. We set the matching power parameter α to 0.5.
   Remaining to calibrate are the payouts to being unemployed, which are unemploy-
ment insurance b and leisure utility B, and the magnitude of match-specific shocks.
These are key determinants of rates of separations and unemployment. If unemploy-


                                          10
ment is made more attractive, everything else equal, this clearly leads to higher sep-
aration and unemployment rates. We calibrate our benchmark economy to generate
rents to employment comparable to that in Shimer (2005). To do so, we first consid-
ered a special case of our model that, like Shimer’s, has linear utility and no match-
quality shocks or endogenous separations—separations occur exogenously at a rate of
2% monthly. We follow Shimer by calibrating unemployment insurance to b = 0.4, with
B = 0. That economy generates capitalized value of a matched job (J) of 1.65, that
is, a little over one and half months of match output. This in turn directly implies a
vacancy creation cost κ of 0.52 (half of a month’s output). We calibrate our benchmark
economy to exhibit the same size of values, J = 1.65 and κ = 0.52. Keeping b = 0.4,
we find this requires a value for leisure of B = 0.15. That is, a consumer views this
leisure comparably, in terms of flow utility, to 15% higher consumption.
       Greater match-quality shocks, like higher replacement rates, create more separa-
tions and higher average unemployment. We set the persistence of the match-specific
shock to be quite high, ρx = 0.97, to accord with the high persistence typically esti-
mated for individual wage earnings.6 Finally, we set the standard deviation of these
match-quality shocks in order achieve the target separation and unemployment rates
of 2 and 6%. This dictates σx = 0.13. These shocks to match quality produce a plau-
sible match to individual earnings data. In particular, they are consistent with the
dispersion in the growth rate of wages within job matches reported by Topel and Ward
(1992). Topel and Ward examine quarterly wages for full-time workers based on earn-
ings reported to Social Security for the primary job. We highlight the Topel and Ward
study because of its use of administrative data, which should minimize the impact of
measurement error. They report a cross-sectional standard deviation of wage-growth
relative to four quarters prior, within job matches, of 19%. We calculate the growth
rate in the same fashion, that is quarterly wages relative to four quarters earlier for the
   6
    For example Topel and Ward (1992), discussed in the text to follow, estimate an annual auto-
correlation for the growth rate in wage earnings within job matches of −0.33. When we produce the
same statistic, based on wage growth within matches, our calibrated models (all versions) generate a
value of −0.27.



                                                11
same employer match, for our calibrated model economies. For our benchmark econ-
omy the standard deviation of this growth rate is 18%, quite close to that reported by
Topel and Ward.
       Our benchmark model generates a standard deviation of wage levels across workers,
reflecting differences in match quality, that also equals 18%. This figure is more difficult
to relate directly to the empirical literature. Woodcock (2008) allows for individual,
employer, and match components in explaining dispersion in earnings for a matched
employer-employee sample and finds an important match component. Woodcock’s
estimated standard deviation for the match component in earnings is 28%. This figure
is larger than wage dispersion of 18% for our benchmark model with important match
shocks.7 But, more to the point, it is far, far greater than the dispersion in wages
produced by the high-volatility economy that we describe next.



3.2. The high-volatility economy

For contrast, we consider a cyclically sensitive economy calibrated so that, in response
to aggregate shocks to productivity, it exhibits a standard deviation of quarterly un-
employment rate that is 9.5 times that in productivity—where 9.5 reflects the ratio of
these standard deviations reported by Shimer (2005).
       To achieve this targeted cyclicality, while maintaining an average rate of 6% un-
employment, we free up the leisure value of unemployment B and the variability of
match-quality shocks σx , keeping other parameters at their benchmark values.8 The
economic payoffs while unemployed are key, not only to the average rate of unemploy-
ment, but also to its cyclical volatility (Hagedorn and Manovskii, 2008, and Mortensen
and Nagypal, 2007)—less surplus to employment increases cyclical volatility of vacan-
cies and unemployment. By contrast, greater volatility of match-specific productivity
   7
    The dispersion in wages for our model partially reflects dispersion in assets, as wages are increasing
in assets. But most of the wage dispersion for the model reflects differences in match quality.
   8
    It requires a very slightly different discount factor (β = 0.9949, versus 0.9948 for the benchmark)
to hit average asset holding of 18 months earnings.



                                                   12
(higher σx ) has opposite impacts on the level versus cyclical volatility of unemploy-
ment. Greater match-quality shocks create more separations and higher average unem-
ployment, but actually reduce the cyclical volatility of separations and unemployment.
With greater match-quality shocks, workers become sorted over time into matches with
significant match surplus. This makes their separations less responsive to cyclical fluc-
tuations in productivity. Because the level of unemployment is increasing in both B
and σx , but its cyclicality responds oppositely to the two parameters, we can maintain
unemployment’s average rate of 6%, while increasing its cyclicality, by appropriately in-
creasing B in conjunction with decreasing σx . We find that the combination B = 0.51,
σx = 0.014 produces a standard deviation of unemployment that is 9.5 times that for
productivity. We show that this economy, though generating realistic cyclicality, yields
implausibly little cross-sectional dispersion for wage growth within matches.
   Table 1 summarizes the calibrated parameters with values employed for both the
benchmark and high-volatility economies.




4. Steady-state Statistics and the Distribution of Match
   Rents
We present statistics for the model’s steady state to illustrate how a worker’s assets
and match quality determine his wage, reservation match quality, and the surplus from
employment. We focus on the distribution of surplus from employment because this
is key in determining cyclicality of separations, vacancy creation, and unemployment
for the model. We contrast the distribution of rents to employment from our bench-
mark model to those for the economy calibrated to generate high cyclical volatility in
unemployment.
   Starting with the benchmark economy, Figure 1 displays the values of the wage,
W − U, and J as functions of a worker’s assets. These relations are illustrated for
three different values for match quality x. Higher values of match quality are directly
associated with higher wages and capitalized value of employment W , while irrelevant


                                           13
for U . So both W − U and J correspondingly increase with match quality. Focusing on
assets, both W and U increase with assets. But having low assets particularly lowers
the value of being unemployed, resulting in a lower bargained wage. Figure 1 displays
this positive relation between assets and wages. Both W − U and J (reflecting the
higher wage) decrease in worker assets. The sharpest positive relation of the wage to
assets, and opposite reaction in J, is concentrated at the very low end of assets, near
or below zero.9 Focusing on firm rents J, we see that high assets lessens the expected
rents of hiring a worker. In turn this provides a channel from assets, specifically the
assets of the unemployed, to vacancy creation—high assets among the unemployed,
everything else equal, reduces desired vacancies. This implies the cyclicality of assets
for the unemployed will influence (oppositely) the cyclicality of vacancy creation.
       The top panel of Figure 2 presents the distribution of assets separately for employed
and unemployed workers. The model succeeds in generating a fairly wide dispersion in
assets, given workers differ only in the history of the quality of employment matches
and history of unemployment durations. Because the unemployed draw down assets
to maintain consumption, they exhibit average assets of 21% less than the employed
(14.7 compared to 18.1). The unemployed exhibit lower consumption, by 9%, than
the employed. The bottom panel of Figure 2 displays how a worker’s critical value
for match quality x∗ depends positively on assets—the critical match quality increases
with assets throughout the range of relevant asset holding. Projecting this policy for
x∗ on the distribution for assets in the top panel of Figure 2 yields the distribution for
x∗ . This distribution exhibits a standard deviation of 3.3%.
       Statistics for unemployment, turnover, and assets for the benchmark economy are
presented in Table 2. The table reports that the cross-sectional standard deviation of
(ln)wages is 18%. As discussed under calibrating, the standard deviation of annual
wage growth within a match (calculated to parallel the treatment in Topel and Ward)
   9
    The assumptions of Nash bargaining and a coefficient of risk aversion of one imply that J equals
W − U times the worker’s consumption. For this reason J decreases less than W − U with worker
assets. This is more relevant at low asset levels, where consumption responds more to assets. For
instance, for x = 1, an increase in assets from 0 to 5 yields a drop in J of about two-thirds that in
W − U.


                                                 14
also equals 18%.
   Figure 3 presents the distribution of workers’ ln(wages) relative to the critical wage,
ln(w∗ ), at which the worker is indifferent to separating. (w∗ is the bargained wage
associated with critical match quality x∗ .) This difference, ln(w) − ln(w∗ ), reflects the
flow rents associated with the employment match. These rents are significant for the
benchmark economy, averaging 26%. If we consider a drop in match quality sufficient
to reduce the wage by 10%, holding w∗ unaffected, this would induce only about
16% of workers to separate. The standard deviation across workers of the differential
ln(w)−ln(w∗ ) equals 17.8%. This dispersion is largely driven by dispersion in the wage,
not the reservation wage (w∗ ), and in turn reflects the dispersion in match quality, x.
Recall that ln(wages) has a standard deviation of 18.0%. By contrast ln(w∗ ) has
standard deviation of only 1.5%.
   The magnitude of the differential ln(w) − ln(w∗ ) is key to the economy’s cyclical
volatility. A negative aggregate shock induces only a small response in separations
if few workers display wages close to the reservation wage w∗ . Greater dispersion
in ln(w) − ln(w∗ ), absent search frictions, implies a less elastic aggregate labor supply
response to aggregate shocks—in a search and matching model this is manifested by less
response in separations. Secondly, a drop, say of one percent, in aggregate productivity
represents a much smaller percentage hit to the expected payout to filling a vacancy
if the average rents to employment are large. Therefore, considerable rents, such as
depicted for the benchmark economy in Figure 3, will act to reduce the cyclicality of
both separations and vacancy creation.
   By contrast, the high-volatility economy displays much less dispersion in match
quality and smaller rents to employment. Results for this model economy are given
in Figures 4 and 5. The top panel of Figure 4 presents the distribution of assets
separately for employed and unemployed workers; the bottom panel displays how a
worker’s critical match quality x∗ depends on assets. Compared to the benchmark
economy, the high-volatility economy generates a smaller dispersion of assets and, as a
result, a smaller dispersion of x∗ —the standard deviation of x∗ is 0.8% for this economy,


                                            15
compared to 3.3% for the benchmark.
       Statistics for the high-volatility economy are presented in the right-most column of
Table 2. For the high volatility economy assets and consumption differ little between
the employed and unemployed. Reflecting the small shocks to match quality, this
economy exhibits a cross-sectional standard deviation for (ln)wages of only 1.9%, which
we view as unreasonably small. Similarly, the high-volatility economy displays very
little dispersion for rates of wage growth within matches. The simulated model data
display a cross-sectional standard deviation for wage growth within matches (calculated
to parallel Topel and Ward’s treatment) also of only 1.9%. That is a full order of
magnitude smaller than reported by Topel and Ward.
       Figure 5 presents the distribution of workers’ ln(wages) relative to reservation wage
ln(w∗ ). In order to match cyclical volatility of employment, this economy must exhibit
a highly elastic aggregate labor supply. This is reflected in a distribution for the
differential ln(w)−ln(w∗ ) that is limited to near zero—it averages only 3.0% for workers,
with a standard deviation equal to only 1.8%.10 A drop in match quality sufficient to
reduce the wage by 10%, holding w∗ unaffected, would induce nearly 100% of workers
to separate. Thus, while we are able to generate large cyclical fluctuations with this
model, we highlight that there is a severe tradeoff—achieving high cyclical volatility
requires implausibly little dispersion in wages from match quality.




5. Business cycle predictions
We next characterize the business cycles properties of the model in response to ex-
ogenous shifts in aggregate productivity, contrasting results for the benchmark and
high-volatility economies. For aggregate monthly productivity shocks we use ρz = 0.95
and σz = 0.0077. This yields a time series for (logged) TFP, after quarterly averaging
and HP filtering, with autocorrelation of 0.84 and standard deviation of 2%. These
  10
    As with the benchmark economy, this dispersion is driven by dispersion in the wage, not w∗ . The
standard deviation of ln(w∗ ) is only 0.6 percent. The correlation between ln(w) and ln(w∗ ) is 0.24.
For the benchmark economy that correlation is 0.14.


                                                 16
coincide with the statistics reported by Shimer (2005) for U.S. quarterly labor produc-
tivity. We focus on discussing relative volatilities and correlations in describing the
model results.
      With aggregate fluctuations, productivity z and the measures of workers, µ and ψ,
are state variables for agents’ optimization problems, as separation decisions depend
on subsequent matching probabilities. These, in turn, depend on the next period’s
measures of workers. Because it is not possible to keep track of the evolution of
these measures, we employ Krusell and Smith’s (1998) “bounded rationality” method
which approximates the distribution of workers by a limited number of its moments.
In particular, we assume that agents make use of the average asset holdings of the
economy and the fraction of workers who are employed. (The computational appendix
gives more detail.). We generate 12,000 monthly periods for a model economy. After
dropping the first 3,000 observations, we compute quarterly values, take logs, and apply
Hodrick-Prescott filter to produce the business cycle statistics.11
      Key statistics are highlighted in Table 3. In addition to our benchmark and high-
volatility economies, for comparison the table provides results for a model with linear
utility, exogenous separations, and no shocks to match quality. We refer to this, in
Column 2, as the Shimer model because it is similar to the model calibrated in Shimer
(2005). Also for comparison, the first column reports the comparable statistics reported
by Shimer for quarterly U.S. data for 1951-2003, where note that all standard deviations
are expressed relative to that for labor productivity. Shimer points out that the natural
log of the unemployment series exhibits volatility, measured by standard deviation, that
is 9.5 times that in labor productivity, whereas for his calibrated model unemployment
displays lower volatility by a factor of about one half. Comparing results for our
Shimer model in Column 2 to the data essentially replicates this finding—here the
relative standard deviation of unemployment to productivity falls short of the data by
a factor of 16.
      The cyclical results for our benchmark economy are given in Column 3. The volatil-
 11
      We use H-P smoothing parameter of 105 to be comparable to Shimer’s treatment.



                                                17
ity of unemployment falls very far short of that in the data; its standard deviation is
only one-eighth that observed for the data. Although unemployment is twice as volatile
as for the Shimer economy, this increased volatility largely reflects the impact of fluc-
tuations in separations. Volatility of the finding rate, as with the Shimer economy, falls
far short of that for the data. Vacancies are actually less volatile for our model than for
the Shimer economy. This reflects the model’s predicted increase in separations during
contractions which, in turn, encourages vacancy creation. The standard deviation of
vacancies is only 0.6 for the model, compared to the data’s 10.1, and the correlation
with the unemployment rate is only −0.39, compared to −0.89 for the data. Thus
the model generates only a weak Beveridge curve relative to the Shimer model, and
especially relative to the data.
   Separations are both volatile and countercyclical for the model: the standard de-
viation for separations is nearly equal that for unemployment, while the correlation
between the rates of separations and unemployment is 0.54. (Separations lead the cy-
cle for the model economy, and so are more highly correlated, 0.85, with the change
in unemployment rate.) The correlation between Shimer’s data measure of separa-
tions and unemployment is even higher at 0.71; but separations for the data show a
considerably lower standard deviation than that for unemployment.
   We turn now to our high-volatility model, with results given in the last column of
Table 3. The model by construction generates observed volatility in unemployment. Its
standard deviation for unemployment is eight times that produced by our benchmark
model. Because it exhibits many workers with little employment surplus, separations
are much more volatile than for the benchmark model—the standard deviation of
separations is 9 times higher. This model also generates much more cyclical vacancies.
This primarily reflects that expected surplus of matches is only about one-tenth that
for the benchmark economy. In other words, workers are highly concentrated at the
margin. Therefore, a shock to aggregate productivity wields a much bigger percentage
impact on expected surplus of matching. The high-volatility economy also generates
a considerable skewing of separations during downturns toward workers with higher


                                            18
assets. This shift toward workers with higher assets and higher reservation wages in
recessions further drives down the value of vacancy creation. (This channel for volatility
is distinctive to our model having both risk aversion and endogenous separations.) To
separately quantify the impact of this channel, we constructed a version of our high-
volatility model where separations are exogenous, but display the same time series
properties as the economy with endogenous separations.12 We find that the selection of
workers into the unemployment pool by assets increases the volatility of unemployment
by about 12%.
       Despite matching cyclical volatility of unemployment, the high-volatility economy
displays the qualitative shortcomings of our benchmark model. In particular, separa-
tions are far too cyclical relative to vacancies. This model generates an even weaker
Beveridge curve correlation between unemployment and vacancies, −0.16, than the
benchmark economy. Finally, we repeat that this model can achieve its cyclicality for
unemployment only by displaying a cross-sectional dispersion for wages of just 1.9%.
Related to this, it generates a cross-sectional standard deviation in wage growth within
matches (calculated as in Topel and Ward) of only 1.9%. We view this as implausible
as it is an order of magnitude less than reported by Topel and Ward.13




6. Conclusions
We have introduced worker heterogeneity, in worker assets and match quality, into
a model of separations, matching, and unemployment. We emphasize the trade-off
between producing realistic dispersion in wages or realistic cyclical fluctuations in un-
  12
    We first estimate a two-variable VAR for productivity and the separation rate on data simulated
from our model with endogenous separations, where the separation rate depends on current and
lagged productivity as well as its own lag. We then employ the estimated VAR to generate shocks for
separations as well as productivity for the model simulations.
  13
    We also considered an intermediate calibration employing a value for B that generates a replace-
ment rate for the unemployed of 70%. This replacement rate is comparable to that employed by Hall
(2005b) and by Costain and Reiter (2008). For this intermediate case, the cross-sectional standard
deviation of wage growth within matches is still only 7.8%, so well below that reported by Topel and
Ward. More importantly, the standard deviation for unemployment only rises modestly compared to
the benchmark case, and falls short of that in the data by a factor of five.

                                                19
employment. We can generate very high cyclicality of unemployment, comparable to
U.S. data, if shocks to match quality are extremely small and payouts to unemployment
are high. But we find this simultaneously implies very little cross-sectional dispersion
in wage growth within matches. We consider this implausible, given estimates from mi-
cro data of dispersion in wage growth within jobs (especially Topel and Ward). With
lower payouts to unemployment, comparable to Shimer’s calibration, and consider-
able match productivity shocks, we can generate a realistic dispersion in rates of wage
growth. But then the model falls drastically short in capturing cyclical fluctuations in
unemployment of the magnitude displayed by the data.
   How might the model be extended to overcome this conflict between realistic wage
dispersion and realistic unemployment cyclicality, while maintaining wage flexibility?
This requires that the model produce little dispersion in the rents to employment,
despite considerable dispersion in wages due to shocks to match productivity. One
way to achieve this would be to modify the environment to generate a strong inverse
relationship between a worker’s match quality and the worker’s marginal utility of
consumption. Our model, because it assumes no insurance and limited borrowing, does
generate higher consumption, and lower marginal utility of consumption, for workers
who exhibit higher match wages. But we anticipate that breaking the link between
match productivity and rents to employment would require extreme assumptions on
preferences and/or the availabiltiy of asset markets.




                                          20
A. Computational Algorithm
A.1. Steady-State Equilibrium

In steady state, the aggregate productivity z is constant at its mean and the measures
of workers µ and ψ are invariant over time. Computing the steady-state equilibrium
amounts to finding i) the value functions W (a, x), U (a) and J(a, x), ii) the decision
rules a0e (a, x), a0u (a) and x∗ (a), iii) the wage schedule w(a, x), iv ) the labor market
tightness θ, v ) the time-invariant measures µ(a, x) and ψ(a) that satisfy the equilibrium
conditions given in subsection 2.5. The detailed computational algorithm for steady
state equilibrium is as follows.

  1. Discretize the state space A × X over which the value functions and wages are
      computed. The stochastic process for the idiosyncratic productivity is approxi-
      mated by the first-order Markov process of which transition probability matrix
      is computed using Tauchen’s (1986) algorithm.

  2. Assume an initial value of θ0 .

  3. Given θ0 , we solve the Nash bargaining and individual optimization problems to
      approximate wages, value functions, and decision rules in the steady state, which
      will be used to compute the time-invariant measures.

       (a) Assume an initial wage schedule w0 (a, x; θ0 ) for each (a, x) node.

      (b) Given w0 (a, x; θ0 ), solve for the worker’s value functions, W (a, x; w0 ) and
           U (a; w0 ), using equations (1) and (2) in the text. The value functions are
           approximated using the iterative method. The utility maximization prob-
           lems in the worker’s value functions are solved through the Brent method.
           The decision rules a0e (a, x; w0 ), a0u (a; w0 ) and x∗ (a; w0 ) are obtained at each
           iteration of the value functions.

       (c) Compute wages that satisfy the definition of J(a, x, w0 ) in (3) and the Nash
           bargaining solution in (5) in the text. Specifically, we solve for w1 (a, x; θ0 )


                                              21
          for each (a, x) node that satisfies
                                                            £                           ¤
              w1 (a, x; θ0 ) = zx − J(a, x; w0 ) + β(1 − λ)E max{J(a0e , x0 ; w0 ), 0}|x ,

          where J(a, x; w0 ) is computed using the first order condition for the Nash
          bargaining problem in (5):
                               µ     ¶
                          0      1−α £                           ¤
                 J(a, x; w ) =         W (a, x; w0 ) − U (a; w0 ) ce (a, x; w0 ).
                                  α

      (d) If w1 (a, x; θ0 ) and w0 (a, x; θ0 ) are close enough to each other, then move on
          to the step 4 to compute invariant measures and the corresponding labor
          market tightness, θ1 . Otherwise, go back to the step 3a with a new guess
          for the wage schedule:

                        w0 (a, x; θ0 ) = ζw w1 (a, x; θ0 ) + (1 − ζw )w0 (a, x; θ0 ).

  4. Using the converged decision rules a0e (a, x; w0 ), a0u (a; w0 ) and x∗ (a; w0 ) given the
     converged wage schedule w0 (a, x; θ0 ) from the step 3b and 3a, compute the time-
     invariant measures µ(a, x; θ0 ) and ψ(a; θ0 ) by iterating the laws of motion for
     measures given in (6) and (7). Then, compute the labor market tightness θ1 that
     satisfies the free-entry condition using equation (4) and the converged measures:
                                         Z
                                                          e 0 ; θ0 ).
                              κ = βq(θ ) J(a0u , x̄; θ0 )dψ(a
                                       1
                                                             u



  5. If θ1 and θ0 are close enough to each other, then we found the steady state.
     Otherwise, go back to the step 3 with a new guess for the labor market tightness:

                                     θ0 = ζθ θ1 + (1 − ζθ )θ0 .



A.2. Equilibrium with Aggregate Fluctuations

Approximating the equilibrium in the presence of aggregate fluctuations requires us
to include the aggregate productivity, z, and the measures of workers, µ and ψ, as

                                              22
state variables for agents’ optimization problems. In order to make match separation
decisions at the end of a period, agents need to know their matching probabilities in the
next period, p(θt+1 ) and q(θt+1 ), which in turn depends on the next period’s measures
of workers, µt+1 (a, x) and ψt+1 (a). The laws of motion for the measures are given in
equations (6) and (7). It is impossible to keep track of the evolution of these measures.
We employ Krusell-Smith’s (1998) “Bounded Rationality” method which approximates
the distribution of workers by a number of its moments. We assume that agents in the
economy make use of two first moments of the measures: the average asset holdings
                     R              R
of the economy, K = a dµ(a, x) + a dψ(a), and the number of employed workers,
     R
E = dµ(a, x). Let ŝ denote a vector of aggregate state variables in the approximation
of equilibrium with fluctuations. Then ŝ = (K, E, z). In addition we assume that the
agents use log-linear rules in predicting the current θ, the future K and the future E.

  1. Guess a set of prediction rules for the equilibrium labor market tightness (θ)
     in the current period, the average asset of the economy (K 0 ) and the number
     of employed workers (E 0 ) in the next period. This step amounts to setting the
     coefficients of the log-linear prediction rules:

                        log θ = b0θ,0 + b0θ,1 log K + b0θ,2 log E + b0θ,3 log z

                      log K 0 = b0K,0 + b0K,1 log K + b0K,2 log E + b0K,3 log z

                      log E 0 = b0E,0 + b0E,1 log K + b0E,2 log E + b0E,3 log z.

     As is the case in the steady state computation, we approximate the stochastic
     process for the aggregate productivity by the first-order Markov process of which
     transition probability matrix is computed using Tauchen’s (1986) algorithm.

  2. Given these prediction rules, we solve the individual optimization and wage bar-
     gaining problems. This step is analogous to step 3 in the steady state computa-
     tion, so we omit the detailed description of computational procedure. However,
     the dimension of state variables is now much larger: (a, x, ŝ). Computation of
     the conditional expectations involves the evaluation of the value functions not on

                                              23
     the grid points along K and E dimensions since K 0 and E 0 are predicted by the
     log-linear rule above. We polynomially interpolate the value functions along the
     K dimension when necessary.

  3. We generate a set of artificial time series data {θt , Kt , Et } of the length of 9,000
     periods. Each period, these aggregate variables are calculated by summing up
     50,000 workers’ decisions on asset accumulation and match separation, which are
     simulated using the converged value functions, W (a, x, ŝ), U (a, ŝ), and J(a, x, ŝ),
     the decision rules, a0e (a, x, ŝ), a0u (a, ŝ) and x∗ (a, ŝ) from the step 2, and the as-
     sumed prediction rules for θ, K 0 and E 0 from the step 1.

  4. We obtain the new values for the coefficients (b1 ’s) in the prediction functions
     through the OLS using the simulated data from the step 3. If b0 and b1 are close
     enough to each other, then we find the (limited information) rational expectations
     equilibrium with aggregate fluctuations. Otherwise, go back to the step 1 with a
     new guesses for the coefficients in the prediction functions:

                                    b0i,j = ζb b1i,j + (1 − ζb )b0i,j ,

     where i = θ, K, E and j = 0, · · · , 3.

   The converged prediction rules and their accuracy, measured by R2 , for the bench-
mark calibration with h = 1 are as follows.

   • Prediction for labor market tightness in the current period:

       log θ = 1.934 − 0.05810 log K + 0.4220 log E + 0.14804 log z,            R2 = 0.9971

   • Prediction for average asset holdings in the next period:

       log K 0 = 0.0096 + 0.9965 log K − 0.0071 log E + 0.0457 log z,           R2 = 0.9999

   • Prediction for number of employed workers in the next period:

      log E 0 = −0.0182 − 0.0015 log K + 0.6361 log E + 0.0276 log z,            R2 = 0.9538

   Overall, the estimated prediction rules are fairly precise as R2 ’s are close to 1, while
the prediction rule for average asset holdings provides the highest accuracy.

                                               24
References
 [1] Acemoglu, Daron and Robert Shimer, 1999, “Efficient Unemployment Insurance,”
    Journal of Political Economy, 107, 893-928.

 [2] Aiyagari, R. S., 1994, “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Savings,”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(3), 659-683.

 [3] Baker, 1992, “Unemployment Duration: Compositional Effects and Cyclical Vari-
    ability,” American Economic Review, 82(1), 313-21.

 [4] Bils, Mark, Yongsung Chang, and Sun-Bin Kim, 2007, “Comparative Advantage
    and Cyclical Unemployment,” NBER Working Paper, No. 13231.

 [5] Chang, Yongsung, and Sun-Bin Kim, 2006, “From Individual to Aggregate Labor
    Supply: A Quantitative Analysis Based on a Heterogeneous Agent Macroecon-
    omy,” International Economic Review, 47(1), 1-27.

 [6] Chang, Yongsung, and Sun-Bin Kim, 2007, “Heterogeneity and Aggregation: Im-
    plications for Labor-Market Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, 97 (5),
    1939-1956.

 [7] Coles, Melvyn, and Randall Wright, 1998, “A Dynamic Equilibrium Model of
    Search, Bargaining, and Money,” Journal of Economic Theory, 78(1), 32-54.

 [8] Costain, James S. and Michael Reiter, 2008, “Business Cycles, Unemployment In-
    surance, and the Calibration of Matching Models,” Journal of Economic Dynamics
    and Control, 32(4), 1120-1155.

 [9] Darby, Michael R., John C. Haltiwanger and Mark W. Plant, 1985, “Unem-
    ployment Rate Dynamics and Persistent Unemployment under Rational Expecta-
    tions,” American Economic Review, 75(4), 614-37.

[10] Gertler, Mark, and Antonella Trigari, 2009, “Unemployment Fluctuations With
    Staggered Nash Wage Bargaining,” Journal of Political Economy, 117(1), 38-86.

                                        25
[11] Gomes, Joao, Jeremy Greenwood, and Sergio Rebelo, 2001, “Equilibrium Unem-
    ployment,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 48, 109-152.

[12] Haefke, Christian, and Michael Reiter, 2006, “Endogenous Labor Market Partici-
    pation and the Business Cycle,” IZA Discussion Paper 2029.

[13] Hagedorn, Marcus and Iourii Manovskii, 2008, “The Cyclical Behavior of Equi-
    librium Unemployment and Vacancies Revisited,” American Economic Review,
    98(4), 1692-1706.

[14] Hall, Robert E., 2005, “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Sticki-
    ness,” American Economic Review, 95(1), 50-65.

[15] Hall, Robert E., 2005b , “Job Loss, Job Finding, and Unemployment in the U.S.
    over the Past Fifty Years,” Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff ed. NBER Macroe-
    conomics Annual, No. 20, MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.

[16] Hornstein, Andres, Per Krusell, and Gian Luca Violante, 2007, “Frictional Wage
    Dispersion in Search Models: A Quantitative Assessment,” NBER Working Paper
    No. W13674.

[17] Krusell, Per, Toshi Mukoyama, and Aysegul Sahin, 2008, “Labor-Market Matching
    with Precautionary Savings and Aggregate Fluctuations,” manuscript.

[18] Krusell, Per, and Anthony Smith, 1998, “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the
    Macroeconomy,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, 867-896.

[19] Mortensen, D., and Pissarides, C., 1994, “Job Creation and Destruction in the
    Theory of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 61(3), 397-415.

[20] Mortensen, D., and Nagypal, Eva, 2007, “More on Unemployment and Vacancy
    Fluctuations,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 10(3), 327-347.

[21] Nakajima, Makoto, 2007, “Business Cycles in the Equilibrium Model of Labor
    Search and Self-Insurance,” manuscript.

                                        26
[22] Pries, Michael J., 2006, “Worker Heterogeneity and Labor Market Volatility in
    Matching Models” Review of Economic Dynamics, forthcoming.

[23] Rı́os-Rull, J.-V., 1999, “Computation of Equilibria in Heterogeneous-Agents Mod-
    els,” R. Marimon and A. Scott, eds., Computational Methods for the Study of
    Dynamic Economies, New York: Oxford University Press.

[24] Rubinstein, Ariel, 1982, “Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model,” Economet-
    rica, 50(1), 97-110.

[25] Shao, Enchuan and Pedro Silos, 2007, “Individual Risk and the Cyclical Behavior
    of Unemployment and Vacancies,” Working Paper 2007-5, Federal Reserve Bank
    of Atlanta.

[26] Shimer, Robert, 2005, “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and
    Vacancies,” American Economic Review, 95(1), 25-49.

[27] Sider, H., 1985, “Unemployment Duration and Incidence: 1968-1982,” American
    Economic Review, 75, 461-72.

[28] Tauchen, G., 1986, “Finite State Markov-Chain Approximations to Univariate and
    Vector Autoregressions,” Economics Letters, 20, 177-181.

[29] Topel, Robert H. and Michael P. Ward, 1992, ”Job Mobility and the Careers of
    Young Men,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 439-479.

[30] Woodcock, Simon, 2008, ”Match Effects,” manuscript, Simon Frazier University.




                                         27
 Table 1: Parameter Values for Benchmark and High-Volatility Economies

Parameter                     Description                    Benchmark    High-
                                                                         volatility

    γ       Relative risk aversion                               1         same
    r       Real interest rate (annualized)                     6%         same
   β        Discount factor                                   0.9948      0.9949
   a        Borrowing constraint                                -6.0       same
   θ        Steady state v/u ratio (normalized)                  1         same
   α        Matching technology m(v, u) = .313 vαu1-α           0.5        same
   κ        Vacancy posting cost                               0.522      0.0785
   b        Unemployment benefit                                0.4        same
   Β        Utility from leisure                               0.15        0.506
   ρx       Persistence of idiosyncratic productivity ln x     0.97        same
   σx       Standard deviation of innovation to ln x           13.0%      1.38%
                    Table 2: Steady-state Statistics for Benchmark
                           and High-Volatility Economies

                                                                Benchmark    High-
                                                                            volatility

     Unemployment rate                                             6%         Same
     Separation rate                                               2%         Same
     Finding rate                                                 31%         Same
     Average assets for employed                                  18.1        17.9
     Average assets for unemployed                                14.7        18.1
     Standard deviation, assets                                   15.1         8.6
     Average consumption for employed                             1.19        1.07
     Average consumption for unemployed                           1.09        1.056
     Standard deviation, ln(wage)                                 18.0%       1.9%



Notes: See Table 1 for parameter values for two calibrations.
    Table 3: Business Cycles for Benchmark and High-Volatility Economies

                                              U.S. Data      Shimer      Benchmark          High-
                                                                                           volatility

Standard deviation (relative to
productivity) for
   ─ Unemployment rate                           9.5           0.6            1.2             9.6
   ─ Separation rate                             3.8            0             1.0             8.4
   ─ Finding rate                                5.9           0.7            0.5             3.8
   ─ Vacancy rate                                10.1          1.0            0.6             3.1
Correlation with unemployment rate
for:
   ─ Separation rate                             0.71           0            0.54            0.50
   ─ Finding rate                               -0.95         -0.83          -0.89           -0.93
   ─ Vacancy rate                               -0.89         -0.60          -0.39           -0.16



  Notes: Variables are in natural log form, e.g., unemployment rate refers to ln(unemployment
  rate). Standard deviations are relative to productivity. Statistics for U.S. data are from Shimer
  (2005) which reflects the deviations from the H-P trend with smoothing parameter of 105 for
  1951 to 2003. See Table 1 for parameter values for the two calibrations. The simulated data are
  also based on the deviation from the H-P trend with smoothing parameter 105. The productivity
  shock used in the simulation exhibits the same persistence and standard deviation to the U.S.
  quarterly data reported in Shimer (2005).
                 Figure 1: Benchmark Economy: Wages and Value Functions

                         Panel A: Wages
             1
                                          x=0.87
                                          x=1
       0.95                               x=1.18
wage




         0.9


       0.85


         0.8
          −20        0     20     40      60       80
                             assets
  Panel B: Employment vs. Unemployment Values                       Panel C: Matched Firm Value
             5                                               2.5
                                          x=0.87                                           x=0.87
             4                            x=1                 2                            x=1
                                          x=1.18                                           x=1.18
                                                             1.5
             3
       W−U




                                                              1
                                                        J




             2
                                                             0.5
             1                                                0

             0                                              −0.5
             −20     0     20     40      60       80         −20     0      20    40     60        80
                             assets                                           assets
Figure 2: Benchmark Economy: Asset Distributions and Reservation Match Productivity

                                −3
                             x 10        Panel A: Asset Distributions for Employed and Unemployed
                       2.5
                                                                                                    Employed
                        2                                                                           Unemployed


                       1.5

                        1

                       0.5

                        0
                        −10          0          10        20         30          40        50        60           70
                                                                    asset
                                         Panel B: Worker Assets and Reservation Match Productivity
                       1.8
                                                                                                          x*(a)
                       1.6

                       1.4
        productivity




                       1.2

                        1

                       0.8

                       0.6

                       0.4
                        −20              0           20        40           60        80        100           120
                                                                    asset
Figure 3: Benchmark Economy: Distribution of Surplus Match Quality (ln w − ln w∗ )

      0.35




       0.3




      0.25




       0.2




      0.15




       0.1




      0.05




        0
             0   0.1      0.2       0.3        0.4    0.5       0.6      0.7
                                     ln w − ln w*
                                      Figure 4: High-volatility Economy

                         −3
                      x 10    Panel A: Asset Distributions for Employed and Unemployed
                3.5
                                                                                         Employed
                 3                                                                       Unemployed
                2.5

                 2

                1.5

                 1

                0.5

                 0
                 −10              0            10         20          30           40                  50
                                                         asset
                              Panel B: Worker Assets and Reservation Match Productivity
               1.05
                                                                                               x*(a)

                 1
productivity




               0.95


                0.9


               0.85
                 −20          0           20        40           60        80        100           120
                                                         asset
Figure 5: Distribution of Surplus Match Quality (ln w − ln w∗ ): High Volatility Economy

       0.35
                                                                High−volatility Economy
                                                                Benchmark Economy

        0.3




       0.25




        0.2




       0.15




        0.1




       0.05




          0
              0    0.1       0.2       0.3        0.4     0.5            0.6              0.7
                                        ln w − ln w*
