NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES
Eric M. Leeper
Michael Plante
Nora Traum
Working Paper 15160
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15160

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2009

We thank Timothy Cogley, Shu-Chun S. Yang, and participants at a presentation at the Reserve Bank
of New Zealand for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Eric M. Leeper, Michael Plante, and Nora Traum. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Dynamics of Fiscal Financing in the United States
Eric M. Leeper, Michael Plante, and Nora Traum
NBER Working Paper No. 15160
July 2009
JEL No. C11,E32,E62
ABSTRACT
Dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models that include policy rules for government spending,
lump-sum transfers, and distortionary taxation on labor and capital income and on consumption expenditures
are fit to U.S. data under a variety of specifications of fiscal policy rules. We obtain several results.
First, the best fitting model allows a rich set of fiscal instruments to respond to stabilize debt. Second,
responses of aggregate variables to fiscal policy shocks under rich fiscal rules can vary considerably
from responses that allow only non-distortionary fiscal instruments to finance debt. Third, based on
estimated policy rules, transfers, capital tax rates, and government spending have historically responded
strongly to government debt, while labor taxes have responded more weakly. Fourth, all components
of the intertemporal condition linking debt to expected discounted surpluses---transfers, spending,
tax revenues, and discount factors---display instances where their expected movements are important
in establishing equilibrium. Fifth, debt-financed fiscal shocks trigger long lasting dynamics so that
short-run multipliers can differ markedly from long-run multipliers, even in their signs.¸

Eric M. Leeper
Department of Economics
304 Wylie Hall
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405
and NBER
eleeper@indiana.edu
Michael Plante
Department of Economics
105 Wylie Hall
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405
mplante@indiana.edu

Nora Traum
Department of Economics
105 Wylie Hall
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405
ntraum@indiana.edu

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES
ERIC M. LEEPER, MICHAEL PLANTE, AND NORA TRAUM

1. Introduction
Countries around the world combatted the recession and financial crisis of 2007-2009 with
aggressive fiscal actions, both to stimulate demand with lower taxes and higher government
spending and to recapitalize banks through a variety of financial “rescue” plans. In the
United States, the actions will raise the federal government fiscal deficit to over 13 percent
of GDP in 2009. The Congressional Budget Office projects that these fiscal efforts together
with the Obama administration’s ambitious federal budget will push federal debt held by the
public from 40 percent to 80 percent of GDP by 2019 [Congressional Budget Office (2009)].
Large run-ups in government debt have placed issues of fiscal financing on policy makers’
front burners.
Rational expectations imply that economic agents’ beliefs about how debt innovations are
financed by fiscal instruments play a crucial role in determining the resulting equilibrium and
evolution of endogenous variables. Even in a simple real business cycle model, the impulse
responses of economic variables following both fiscal policy and non-policy shocks depend
on what fiscal instrument finances debt [Leeper and Yang (2008)]. Understanding which
fiscal instruments have historically responded to debt and how quickly they have done so is
essential to accurately predict the impacts of fiscal policy.
Although many theoretical conclusions about the effects of debt financing exist, empirical
research that estimates how debt-financing policies affect the economy is scarce.1 Except
for recent work by Chung and Leeper (2007), the identified VAR literature has ignored this
issue.2 Estimated dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models typically specify simple
Date: July 7, 2009. We thank Timothy Cogley, Shu-Chun S. Yang, and participants at a presentation
at the Reserve Bank of New Zealand for helpful comments. Department of Economics, Indiana University
and NBER, eleeper@indiana.edu; Department of Economics, Indiana University and Ball State University,
mplante@indiana.edu; Department of Economics, Indiana University, ntraum@indiana.edu.
1
Theoretical examples include Ricardian equivalence [Barro (1974)], “unpleasant monetarist arithmetic”
[Sargent and Wallace (1981)], and the fiscal theory of the price level [Leeper (1991), Sims (1994), Woodford
(1995), and Cochrane (1999)].
2
Though see Favero and Giavazzi (2007) for a study that examines how including debt affects inferences
from a VAR.
1

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

2

fiscal policies in ways that are unlikely to capture the dynamic interactions present in data
[Kamps (2007), Ratto, Roeger, and in’t Veld (2006), and Coenen and Straub (2004)].
This paper uses Bayesian methods to estimate and evaluate a dynamic stochastic general
equilibrium (DSGE) model that incorporates a rich description of fiscal policy, including nontrivial debt dynamics. The paper’s core contribution lies in its detailed specification of fiscal
policy instruments and dynamic adjustments of fiscal instruments in response to the level of
economic activity and to the state of government debt. We specify policy rules for capital,
labor, and consumption taxes, government spending, and lump-sum transfers. The rules
allow contemporaneous responses to output (“automatic stabilizers”) and dynamic responses
to government debt. By estimating a DSGE model that incorporates a rich description of
fiscal policy, we are able to estimate how government debt has been financed historically and
examine how adjustments in each fiscal instrument has affected the observed equilibrium.
Several recent papers employ Bayesian techniques to estimate fiscal policy rules and to
understand the economic effects of fiscal policy [Forni, Monteforte, and Sessa (2009), Kamps
(2007), Ratto, Roeger, and in’t Veld (2006), and Coenen and Straub (2004)]. However, most
of this literature has focused on modeling exogenous fiscal policy, where deficits are financed
by lump-sum transfer adjustments. A series of papers demonstrates that in real business
cycle-style models it can be seriously misleading to set aside debt dynamics by ignoring
distortionary fiscal financing [for example, Baxter and King (1993), Sims (1998), and Leeper
and Yang (2008)].
We estimate four versions of the model: all four fiscal instruments—government spending, lump-sum transfers, and capital and labor taxes—adjust to stabilize debt; only capital
and labor taxes adjust; only government spending adjusts; only lump-sum transfers adjust.
Model specification tests imply that U.S. time series strongly prefer the more complex model
in which all four instruments stabilize debt.
The paper reports present-value multipliers for each of the fiscal instruments and shows
that they can differ dramatically across the various model specifications. Because inferences
about policy effects depend strongly on the underlying fiscal rules, the finding underscores
the importance of modeling fiscal financing dynamics. Moreover, these dynamics can be quite
long lasting—its takes 20 to 25 years to restore intertemporal fiscal balance after shocks to
capital taxes, consumption taxes, or transfers; it can take 40 years or more to restore balance
after labor tax or government spending shocks. Because of these low-frequency dynamics,
short-run and long-run multipliers can differ markedly.
With estimates of the model’s “deep parameters” in hand, it is possible to conduct counterfactual experiments that alter policy rules, holding private parameters fixed at their estimated values. We address three counterfactual questions: (1) How do the impacts of fiscal

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

3

shocks change if future policies respond to debt more or less gradually than they have historically? (2) How do fiscal multipliers change when, instead of the historical sources of
financing for debt, we imagine that only future capital taxes adjust? (3) What are the longrun consequences of enhanced “automatic stabilizers?” Answers to questions like these can
help guide policy choices.
This paper complements a large-scale global modeling effort underway at the International
Monetary Fund to estimate DSGE models that incorporate fiscal policy rules that allow for
both distortionary and non-distortionary sources of fiscal financing by focusing on simpler
models that are more easily interpretable and emphasizing fresh implications that spring
from explicit modeling of government debt dynamics.3
Our results are subject to an important caveat: they do not include the interactions
between monetary and fiscal policies that tend to arise in practice, and certainly occurred
in response to the recent recession. Recent work finds that fiscal multipliers can change
dramatically when monetary policy is passive, failing to satisfy the Taylor principle, or when
the central bank’s interest rate instrument is at or near the zero lower bound [for example,
Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2009), Cogan, Cwik, Taylor, and Wieland (2009),
Davig and Leeper (2009), or Eggertsson (2009)]. On the other hand, by abstracting from
nominal considerations, this paper puts empirical flesh on the multipliers that Uhlig (2009)
calculates in a calibrated model.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the estimated model, our assumptions regarding fiscal policies, and the technique used to solve the model. Section 3
outlines the techniques we use to estimate the model, and our assumptions regarding prior
distributions. Section 4 summarizes the estimation results while section 5 reports some
counterfactual exercises. Section 6 concludes.
2. The Models
The model economy is a neoclassical growth model extended to include intertemporal investment adjustment costs, variable capacity utilization, and external habit formation. The
economy consists of a representative household, a representative firm, and the government.
There are nine transitory shocks in the economy, denoted by ut ’s, including two preference
shocks, an investment-specific shock, neutral technology shock, and shocks to fiscal instruments.
2.1. Households. The representative household derives utility from consumption, ct , relative to a habit stock. We assume that the habit stock is given by a fraction of aggregate
3

Some example of papers flowing from the IMF effort include Laxton and Pesenti (2003), Botman, Laxton,
Muir, and Romanov (2006), and Kumhof and Laxton (2008a,b).

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

4

consumption from the previous period hCt−1 where h ∈ [0, 1]. The household derives disutility from hours worked, lt. In addition, there is a general preference shock, ubt , that affects
the household’s intertemporal substitution and a preference shock specific to labor supply
ult . Specifically, the household maximizes the intertemporal utility function

∞
1+κ 
X
1
1−γ
l lt
t b
Et
β ut
(ct − hCt−1 )
− ut
1−γ
1+κ
t=0

where γ, κ ≥ 0 and β ∈ (0, 1). The shocks ubt and ult follow AR(1) processes given by
ln(ubt ) = (1 − ρb ) ln(ub ) + ρb ln(ubt−1 ) + σb bt , bt ∼ N(0, 1)

(1)

ln(ult )

(2)

l

l

l

= (1 − ρ ) ln(u ) + ρ

ln(ult−1)

+

σl lt ,

lt

∼ N(0, 1)

The household’s flow budget constraint is given by
(1 + τtc )ct + it + bt = (1 − τtl )wt lt + (1 − τtk )Rkt vt kt−1 + Rt−1 bt−1 + zt

(3)

Total income and wealth consists of labor income, capital income, lump-sum transfers from
the government, zt , and interest bearing government bonds. These assets can be used for
consumption, investment in physical capital it, and for purchasing more government bonds.
Capital income is given by the return on the effective amount of capital services supplied
to firms in period t, vtkt−1 , where vt measures capacity utilization in period t. One-period
government debt outstanding at time t, bt, pays a gross interest rate of Rt . τtc , τtl , and τtk
are tax rates on consumption, labor income, and capital income.
The law of motion for capital is given by

 i 
ut i t
it
kt = (1 − δ(vt))kt−1 + 1 − s
it−1

(4)

ln(uit) = (1 − ρi ) ln(uit ) + ρi ln(uit−1 ) + σiit , it ∼ N(0, 1)

(5)

 i 
ut it
Following Smets and Wouters (2003) and Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005), s it−1
it
is a cost of adjustment incurred if the household varies its investment level from the level
in the previous period. The function s(·) has the following properties at steady state:
s(1) = s0(1) = 0 and s00(1) > 0. In addition, the adjustment cost is subject to a specific
efficiency shock uit which follows the AR(1) process
Owners of physical capital can control the intensity with which the capital stock is utilized.
We assume that increasing the intensity of capital utilization entails a cost in the form of a
faster rate of depreciation. Following Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2008), we adopt a quadratic
form for the function δ:
δ2
δ(vt) = δ0 + δ1(vt − 1) + (vt − 1)2
(6)
2
The household maximizes utility subject to its budget constraint, (3), and the law of
motion for capital, characterized by (4) and (6).

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

5

2.1.1. Firms. The representative firm rents capital and labor from the household to maximize profit given by
α
uatkt−1
lt1−α − wt lt − Rkt vtkt−1
(7)
where α ∈ [0, 1] and uat denotes a neutral technology shock that is assumed to follow the
AR(1) process
ln(uat) = (1 − ρa ) ln(ua) + ρa ln(uat−1 ) + σaat , at ∼ N(0, 1)

(8)

α
Total output at period t is given by yt = uat kt−1
lt1−α . From the solution to the firm’s problem,
wages and capital rental are given by

wt =

(1 − α)yt
,
lt

Rkt vt =

αyt
kt−1

(9)

2.1.2. Fiscal Policy. The government budget constraint is
Bt + τtk Rkt vt kt−1 + τtl wtLt + τtc Ct = Rt−1 Bt−1 + Gt + Zt

(10)

where Gt is government expenditure and Xt represents the aggregate level of any variable x.
Fiscal policy follows rules that embed three features. First, there may be some “automatic
stabilizer” component to movements in fiscal variables. This is modeled as a contemporaneous response to deviations of output from steady state. Second, all instruments except
consumption taxes are permitted to respond to the state of government debt. Third, since
fiscal policy makers often consider changes in tax rates jointly, we allow shocks affecting one
tax rate to also affect other tax rates contemporaneously. In terms of log deviations from
steady state, the policy rules are:
Ĝt = −ϕg Ŷt − γg B̂t−1 + ugt ,
τ̂tk
τ̂tl
τ̂tc

= ϕk Ŷt + γk B̂t−1 +
=
=

φkl ult

ϕl Ŷt + γl B̂t−1 + φlk ukt
φkc ukt + φlc ult + uct ,

ugt = ρg ugt−1 + σg gt ,
+

φkc uct

+

ukt ,

+ φlc uct + ult ,
uct = ρc uct−1

Ẑt = −ϕZ Ŷt − γZ B̂t−1 + uzt ,

+

ukt

=

ult =
σc ct ,

(11)
ρk ukt−1

ρl ult−1

+

+

σk kt ,

σl lt ,

uzt = ρZ uzt−1 + σZ zt ,

(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)

where hats denote log-deviations of variables and each of the ’s is distributed N(0, 1).
Consumption taxes are taken follow an exogenous process because U.S. federal consumption taxes are mostly excise taxes on specific goods (gasoline, tobacco, etc.) and are used
mainly for special funds. Thus, they do not adjust to changes in current output or government debt.
The other fiscal instruments follow rules that allow response to the cyclical position of the
economy (ϕi ≥ 0 for i = {g, k, l, z}) and to changes in the level of government debt (γi ≥ 0
for i = {g, k, l, z}). To capture the persistent nature of exogenous changes in instruments,
we allow the shocks to be serially correlated (ρi ∈ [0, 1] for i = {g, k, l, z}). In addition we

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

6

augment the fiscal rules with i.i.d. error terms (it for i = {g, k, l, z}) to capture unexpected
changes in policy. Parameters φij for i, j = {k, l, c} controls how much unpredicted movement
in one tax rate is due to an exogenous shock to another tax rate.
2.2. Market Equilibrium and Model Solution. The final goods market is in equilibrium
if aggregate production equals aggregate demand for consumption and investment by the
household and government
Yt = Ct + It + Gt

(16)

The capital rental market and labor market are in equilibrium if both the first-order conditions for the household and the firm are satisfied. In addition, any equilibrium must satisfy
the transversality conditions for debt and capital accumulation. Note that equilibrium implies xt = Xt for any variable x.
Equilibrium conditions and their log-linearizations around the deterministic steady state
are given in appendix A. The log-linearized model is solved using Sims’s (2001) gensys
algorithm. The solution is of the form:
xt = G(Θ)xt−1 + M(Θ)t,

t ∼ N(0, I)

(17)

where Θ denotes the vector of structural parameters to be estimated and xt denotes the
vector of model variables at time t.
3. Estimation
We report results from estimates of four models that differ in which fiscal instruments
are permitted to respond to debt: four fiscal instruments—government spending, lump-sum
transfers, and capital and labor taxes—adjust; only capital and labor taxes adjust; only
government spending adjusts; only lump-sum transfers adjust.
Models are estimated with U.S. quarterly data from 1960Q1 to 2008Q1. We use nine
time series: real consumption, real investment, hours worked, real government debt, real
government spending, real capital tax revenues, real labor tax revenues, real consumption
tax revenues, and real government transfers. Appendix B describes the data construction.
We detrend the logarithm of each variable with a linear trend. Let yt denote the vector
of observables and define the following measurement equation relating observables to model
variables
yt = Hxt

(18)

Using this mapping between observables and model variables, we estimate the model using
Bayesian methods. First, we use Chris Sims’s optimization routine csminwel to maximize the
log posterior function, which combines the priors and the likelihood of the data. Then we use

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

7

the random walk Metropolis-Hastings algorithm to sample from the posterior distribution.4
When performing the optimization routine, we initialize the posterior mode search with
parameter values drawn at random from the prior densities. We perform several—at least
50—searches for the mode from different starting values to determine if more than one mode
exists. In all the models, the searches for the posterior mode almost always converged to the
same parameter values and likelihood value.5 After running the MH algorithm, we perform
diagnostics to ensure convergence of the MCMC chain.6
3.1. Priors and Calibrated Values. Table 1 presents the values assigned to the calibrated
parameters (which can be viewed as very strict priors). These values were kept fixed because
our data set is demeaned and cannot pin down many steady state values in the estimation
procedure. The discount factor, β, is set to equal 0.99, which implies an annual steady state
interest rate of 4 percent. We set α equal to 0.3, which implies a labor share of 70 percent.
We assume that the annual steady state depreciation rate is 10 percent, which implies that
δ0 equals 0.025. We calibrate the parameter δ1 to ensure that capacity utilization, v, equals
unity in the steady state. In addition, the steady state tax rates and the ratios of government
spending and debt to output are set equal to the mean values of our data set.
Tables 2 and 3 shows the prior distributions for the remaining parameters, and figures
1 and 2 plot the probability density functions that correspond to these priors. We assume
that the parameters are independent a priori. The priors are similar to those commonly
used in the literature [see Smets and Wouters (2003), Forni, Monteforte, and Sessa (2009),
and An and Schorfheide (2007) for examples]. The means were set at values that correspond
with estimates of other studies in the literature and the standard errors were set so that
the domain covers a reasonable range of parameter values, including values estimated by
previous studies.
For the preference parameters, a Gamma distribution is assumed for the coefficients of risk
aversion γ and of Frisch elasticity κ, with means of 1.75 and 2, respectively, and a standard
deviation for both parameters equal to 0.5, so that both prior masses are concentrated on
values higher than a logarithmic specification. The habit coefficient h, whose mean is set at
4A

sample of 5,000,000 draws was created with the first 250,000 used as a burn-in period and every 200th
thinned. The posterior mode and the inverse Hessian at the posterior mode resulting from the optimization
procedure were used to define the transition probability function. A step size of 0.3 resulted in acceptance
rates between 34 percent and 38 percent.
5The few exceptions were simply cases where the numerical optimization procedure failed to converge to
any value. In addition, since we initialize the MH algorithm with the posterior mode and Hessian, we checked
the gradient and the conditioning number of the Hessian at the mode and plotted slices of the likelihood
around the mode. These details appear in an estimation appendix available upon request.
6Diagnostics include trace plots, verifying the chain is well mixed (i.e. has low serial correlations in sample
draws), and performing Geweke’s (2005, pp. 149-150) Separated Partial Means tests. All results appear in
an estimation appendix available upon request.

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

8

0.5, is distributed according to a Beta distribution with a standard deviation of 0.2. The
capital utilization adjustment coefficient δ2 , whose means is set at 0.7, is distributed according to a Gamma distributions with standard deviations of 0.5. This gives the prior density
the most mass at values that are less than one, which is consistent with the estimates of
Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2008). Beta distributions are chosen for the autoregressive coefficients (all ρj ’s) as well, with means and standard deviations set at 0.7 and 0.2, respectively.
The standard deviations of the innovations are assumed to be distributed as Inverse Gamma.
The investment adjustment coefficient, s00, has a Gamma distribution with a mean of 5 and
standard deviation equal to 0.25.7
The priors for the fiscal parameters were chosen to be fairly diffuse and cover a reasonably
large range of parameter values. The fiscal responses to government debt (the γi ’s) are
assumed to have a Gamma distribution with a mean of 0.4 and standard deviation of 0.2 (so
that they will range approximately between 0 and 1.25). The fiscal instruments’ elasticities
with respect to output (the ϕi ’s) are assumed to have Gamma distributions. The mean of
the government spending elasticity is 0.07 and its standard deviation is 0.05 while the mean
of the transfer elasticity is 0.2 and its standard deviation is 0.1. These values ensure the
domains cover the range of values estimated by past research [see Blanchard and Perotti
(2002), Giorno, Richardson, Roseveare, and van den Noord (1995), and Yang (2005) for
examples]. Blanchard and Perotti’s (2002) estimates of the elasticity of tax revenue with
respect to output inform the priors over ϕk and ϕl . They report that a 1 percent increase
in output leads to a 2.08 percent increase in tax revenue based on 1947:1-1997:4 U.S. data,
which implies roughly a 1 percent increase in the average tax rate. Since we incorporate
Social Security taxes in our labor tax revenue data, the labor tax rate elasticity is expected
to be a value below this average because Social Security taxes are capped and are regressive.
Thus, we set the labor tax rate elasticity to have a mean and standard deviation of 0.5 and
0.25, and the capital tax rate elasticity to have a mean and standard deviation of 1 and 0.3.
The parameter measuring the co-movement between the capital and labor tax rate shocks
(φkl ) is assumed to have a Normal distribution with a mean of 0.25 and a standard deviation
of 0.1. Yang (2005) estimates φkl to be 0.26. The parameters measuring the co-movement
between the capital and consumption tax rate shocks and between the labor and consumption
tax rate shocks (φkc and φlc ) are assumed to have a Normal distribution with a mean of 0.05
and a standard deviation of 0.1. To our knowledge, there is no past research estimating φkc

7Prior

to estimation, we performed an analysis similar to An and Schorfheide (2007) to investigate the
identifiability of parameters. We randomly drew several sets of parameter values from the prior distributions,
simulated data, and investigated the ability to recover the underlying parameters using our estimation
strategy. Results (available from the authors upon request) suggest that the Frisch elasticity parameter, κ
is not well identified. In addition, γ, κ, and s00 seem to be correlated. Our tight prior on s00 is a reflection of
its weak identifiability.

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

9

and φlc . Given that consumption taxes in our U.S. data set are mainly excise taxes used for
special funds, we do not expect these values to be large.
4. Estimation Results
Tables 2-3 report the means and 5 and 95 percentiles of the posterior distribution for
each of the four models estimated. With the exception of the comovement terms between
consumption and labor/capital taxes, all parameters are estimated to be away from zero.
Interestingly, the non-policy parameter estimates are about the same across the various
model specifications and are similar to estimates in the literature. With the exception of the
investment specific shock and preference shock, all the persistent shocks are estimated to
have an autoregressive parameter which is higher than the mean of 0.7 assumed in the prior
distribution. Our estimate of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (1/γ) is less than
one, and the external habit stock is estimated to be about 50 percent of past consumption.8
The estimate of the Frisch elasticity κ is around 2.
Turning to the policy parameter estimates, the results indicate that several distortionary
fiscal instruments have played an important role in financing debt innovations. Although the
response of lump-sum transfers to debt innovations is the highest, the responses of capital
tax rates and government spending are also important. In contrast, it appears that labor
taxes have not responded strongly to debt. The results also show that capital tax rates have
had a highly procyclical response to the level of aggregate output, while labor tax rates are
less responsive. Transfers have responded to the level of aggregate output, but the estimate
here is slightly smaller than that used in previous studies; Perotti (2004), for example, uses
a value of −0.15 in his VAR estimation strategy. Finally, we find that exogenous changes to
capital and labor tax rates affect the two rates simultaneously (φkl ∈ [0.1, .25]), suggesting
that typical tax legislation tends to change both tax rates. In contrast, exogenous changes
to consumption tax rates do not affect the capital or labor tax rates.
4.1. Impulse Responses. Figures 3-7 plot the impulse responses following a temporary
1 percent exogenous increase in each fiscal instrument. The solid line is generated with
the mean estimates of the posterior distribution, while the dashed lines give the 5th and
95th percentiles based on the posterior distributions. Each row compares the responses of
a variable across the various estimated models, while each column reports responses within
a model. The last column shows the fiscal impacts of the best fitting model where all fiscal
instruments respond to debt.
8The

results suggest the posterior of habit is quite similar to its prior. However, we estimated a different
version of the model where we changed the prior on habit formation to be a beta distribution with a mean
of 0.7 and standard deviation of 0.2, and in this case, the posterior estimates of the habit stock were almost
identical to the ones reported here (estimates in an additional estimation appendix available upon request).

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

10

Figure 3 illustrates the responses of output, consumption, investment, and government
debt following a 1 percent shock to government spending. As is standard in a RBC-style
model, an increase in government spending reduces wealth, increasing work effort and output
on impact. Government spending crowds out investment and its negative wealth effect leads
consumption to decline. However, these effects can be quickly reversed depending on how the
government debt is financed. For instance, when only capital and labor taxes are expected
to increase in the future to support the expansion in debt, the return on future capital and
labor is lowered (second column). Households cut back on investment and hours worked,
causing output to fall below its initial steady state level within two years of the initial
fiscal expansion; output remains well below its steady state level for over 10 years. A similar
result also occurs in Forni, Monteforte, and Sessa (2009), which also allows only distortionary
taxes to respond to debt innovations in a new Keynesian model. In contrast, when lumpsum transfers or a combination of all the fiscal instruments are allowed to respond to debt
innovations, output remains above its steady state level throughout its transition period
(first and fourth columns).9
Impacts of a 1 percent increase in the capital tax rate appear in figure 4. Standard
theory suggests that when capital taxes increase, investment, labor, and output decrease
immediately while consumption rises as agents sacrifice investment for consumption [see
Baxter and King (1993), Braun (1994) and Leeper and Yang (2008)]. In the estimated
models, the responses of variables can differ dramatically from these conventional effects.
For instance, for all four models considered, consumption decreases on impact following a
capital tax increase. This reduction occurs because exogenous changes to capital and labor
taxes are correlated; when capital taxes increase, labor taxes increase as well, which causes
households to work and consume less.
The path of investment also differs qualitatively depending on which fiscal instruments
respond to debt. If capital and labor taxes are expected to decrease in order to offset
the reduction in debt, investment rises above its steady state level and remains positive
throughout the transition path (second column). The increase in investment and hours
worked (not pictured), increase output above its steady state level. In this case the capital
tax rate (not pictured) actually drops below its original steady state level after approximately
three years before it returns to its steady state. The resulting increase in tax revenues is
more than enough to offset the change in debt, allowing the capital tax rate to fall and
further spur investment and output.
Figure 5 reports the effects of a 1 percent increase in the labor tax rate. In all cases, the
responses of output and consumption are conventional: higher labor taxes lead households
9This

result is, in part, model specific and might not hold if transfers were distortionary. However, the
results suggest that which combination of fiscal instruments responds to debt is central for the paths of
aggregate variables. Even under alternative model specifications, this general feature will hold.

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

11

to reduce their labor supply, reducing disposable income and consumption. Reduction in labor supply lowers output. On impact, one might expect investment to decline as well, since
the return to capital falls as households decrease their labor supply. However, the impulse
responses demonstrate that this prediction depends crucially on which fiscal instruments adjust to debt innovations. In fact, all three models that allow distortionary fiscal instruments
to adjust to debt do not rule out the possibility of investment increasing on impact (since
a positive response is within the probability bands of the impulse responses). When taxes
adjust to debt, investment increases with the mean response peaking at 1 percent above
steady state (second column). In this case, capital taxes actually decrease on impact. This
decrease is brought about by the capital tax rate response to output, which declines on impact. Capital taxes then continue to be consistent with declining debt, increasing the return
to investment.
Effects of higher consumption taxes, shown in figure 6, are similar. They tend to lower
consumption, but raise investment. When distorting instruments stabilize debt, output rises
within a couple of years. Output falls when transfers alone adjust to debt.
Figure 7 illustrates the responses to a 1 percent increase in lump-sum transfers. Because
lump-sum transfers are non-distortionary in our model, the responses of output, consumption, and investment are driven entirely by agents’ expectations of how the resulting increase
in debt will be financed. For instance, if government spending decreases to finance the higher
debt, investment falls for about 5 years before rising (third column); when taxes are expected
to rise, investment falls markedly over the entire forecast horizon (second column).
4.2. Posterior Odds Comparisons. The results of the previous section suggest that assumptions about which fiscal instruments adjust to debt innovations play critical roles in
determining the transition paths of variables in response to fiscal shocks. Which scenarios
are favored by the data? We use Bayes factors to evaluate the relative model fit, calculating
the log-marginal data density using Geweke’s (1999) modified harmonic mean estimator, as
outlined in An and Schorfheide (2007). As explained by Fernandez-Villaverde and RubioRamirez (2004), the Bayes factor is the ratio of the probabilities from having observed the
data given each model, as reflected by the marginal data densities. The Bayes factor is a
measure of the evidence provided by the data in favor of one model over another.
Table 4 displays the log-marginal data density and Bayes factor for the four models already
discussed plus a fifth model in which only transfers respond to debt and the countercyclical
parts of policy, as well as the correlation among shocks to tax rates, are shut down (labeled
Addendum in the table). The results suggest that the models with a response of transfers
to changes in debt (γz > 0) fit better than the models without the transfer-debt response.10
Richer models that include more complex fiscal adjustment perform better than the simpler
10In

the present model, transfers are lump-sum. This finding could change if transfers were not neutral.

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

12

models, even though the Bayes factor discriminates against complex models with more parameters. This can be seen by comparing the fit of the model where transfers adjust with
and without the output responses and tax comovement terms, the last model whose Bayes
factor is listed in the table.
The log marginal likelihood difference between the model where only lump-sum transfers
adjust to debt and the model that allows all fiscal variables to respond to debt is 7. This
number can be interpreted as reporting that to prefer the model in which only transfers
adjust, one would need to have a prior probability for the transfers-only model that is 1,097
(= exp[7]) times larger than our prior over the model in which all instruments adjust. The
common theoretical practice of ignoring debt financing by assuming that lump-sum transfers
clear the government budget is not favored by the data. The results also suggest that we
would need a prior probability for the model in which only taxes adjust that is 148 (= exp[5])
times larger than our prior over the model in which only government spending adjusts. In
fact, the model allowing only taxes to adjust to debt seems to be the least favored by the
data. Similar studies that estimate fiscal policy rules allow either only lump-sum transfers or
only distortionary taxes to adjust to debt [for example, Forni, Monteforte, and Sessa (2009),
Kamps (2007), Ratto, Roeger, and in’t Veld (2006), and Coenen and Straub (2004)]. The
comparisons here suggest that the data prefer specifications that allow lump-sum transfers,
distortionary taxes, and government spending to adjust.
Fit deteriorates sharply when only transfers adjust but countercyclical aspects of policy
behavior and correlation among tax shocks are eliminated (Addendum in table 4). This
specification essentially treats government spending and tax rates as exogenous processes, a
practice that is common when generating theoretical predictions about fiscal impacts.

4.3. Present-Value Multipliers. Quantitative effects of fiscal shocks are frequently summarized by fiscal multipliers for output, consumption, and investment. Following Mountford
and Uhlig (2009), we report present-value multipliers, which are preferred over impact multipliers because they embody the full dynamics associated with fiscal disturbances and they
properly discount macroeconomic effects in the future. The present value of additional output over a k-period horizon that is generated by a change in the present value of government
spending is calculated as

P Qj
−1
Et kj=0
R
i=0 t+i ∆Yt+j


Present-Value Multiplier(k) =
P
Qj
−1
Et kj=0
R
i=0 t+i ∆Gt+j

Tables 5 and 6 report the results. Note that the present-value multiplier at k = 1 is equal
to the impact multiplier at period one; impact multipliers are widely reported in empirical
studies [for example, Blanchard and Perotti (2002), Forni, Monteforte, and Sessa (2009)].

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

13

When all fiscal instruments respond to debt, as in table 5, present-value multipliers tend
to be modest; no multiplier exceeds 1. Government spending multipliers for output are
substantially lower that those obtained in loosely identified empirical studies, which frequently are around 1.5 [Blanchard and Perotti (2002), Monacelli and Perotti (2008), Romer
and Bernstein (2009)], but are comparable to those from real business cycle models [Uhlig (2009)].11 Spending multipliers for consumption are uniformly negative, a result that is
standard in real models, but has recently received much attention [Gali, Lopez-Salido, and
Valles (2007), Ravn, Schmitt-Grohe, and Uribe (2007), Monacelli and Perotti (2008), Davig
and Leeper (2009)]. In contrast to Uhlig’s (2009) calibrated results, we find that in the best
fitting model there is no tendency for tax multipliers to be larger than spending multipliers,
except that in our estimates, higher transfers reduce output.
Present-value multipliers change dramatically when only capital and labor taxes react to
stabilize debt, as table 6 reports. First, it is commonplace for long-run multipliers to have
a different sign from short-run multipliers [see also Judd (1985), Sims (1998), Leeper and
Yang (2008), Uhlig (2009)]. Higher government spending stimulates output for a couple of
years, but as taxes rise, output falls and the long-run present-value multiplier is sharply
negative. Lower capital taxes only weakly raise output in the short run; after a couple of
years output reverses and is below steady state until eventually returning back to steady
state. Because there is a brief time (25 quarters in the table) where output has already
increased above steady state and capital tax revenue are still above steady state, multiplier
is positive. Eventually, though, capital taxes must adjust to the lower level of debt and drop
below steady state. At this point, capital tax revenues drop below steady state and the very
long run the present value multiplier is strongly negative. Second, as the output multiplier
of −3.70 demonstrates (second panel of table 6), capital tax multipliers can be very large
indeed in the long run.12

4.4. Present-Value Financing. We turn now to the forward-looking aspect of government
finance. We calculate the present-value decompositions of debt to calculate what combination
of adjustments in the expected paths of fiscal policy instruments and discount rates rationalize the observed value of government debt. We also examine how adjustments depend on
the nature of the fiscal policy shock. In log-linearized form, the government’s present-value
11As

noted in the introduction, the introduction of nominal considerations, including nominal rigidities,
and monetary policy behavior can change the size of multiplier dramatically [Christiano, Eichenbaum, and
Rebelo (2009), Cogan, Cwik, Taylor, and Wieland (2009), Davig and Leeper (2009), or Eggertsson (2009)].
12Variance decompositions suggest that fiscal policy shocks contribute little to the cyclical variability of
aggregate non-policy variables, but fiscal variables are affected by all policy and non-policy shocks, reflecting
the influence of each fiscal instruments’ response to output and debt. Forni, Monteforte, and Sessa (2009)
obtain similar results.

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

14

relation is

B̂t = Et

∞
X
j=1

β

j



Tk
B



k
T̂t+j

+



Tl
B



l
T̂t+j

+



Tc
B



c
T̂t+j

 
 

G
Z
1
−
Ĝt+j −
Ẑt+j − R̂t+j−1
B
B
β

(19)
k
l
c
where the unsubscripted variables denote steady state values and T̂t+j
, T̂t+j
, and T̂t+j
denote
total revenues due to capital, labor, and consumption taxes. This expression decomposes
fluctuations in real debt into expected changes in the components of net-of-interest surpluses,
at constant discount rates, and expected changes in real discount rates.

The present-value decompositions for the best fitting model, in which all fiscal instruments
adjust to stabilize debt, are listed in table 7. The table shows each of the present-value
components in (19) following a shock to each of the exogenous processes when the shock is
calibrated to raise or lower debt by one unit of the final good. Different shocks are financed
very differently in present-value terms. When the components have the same sign as the
change in debt, the component is expected to move to support the change in debt; when the
signs differ, the component is expected to move against stabilizing debt.
For the capital and labor tax shocks, both the discount rate and the present value of surpluses move to support debt. With a capital tax shock, most of the work is done by changes
in the present value of surpluses, whereas for labor taxes, the discount rate contributes
more. In contrast, following a shock to government spending, the present value of surpluses
alone moves to support debt, with taxes, spending, and transfers changes offsetting each
other. The discount rate, on the other hand, resists present-value balance. Similar results
hold for a technology, general preference, or labor preference shock. Following a shock to
transfers, most of the present-value balancing is done by surpluses. While the same is true
for consumption tax shocks, the discount rate tends to move against present-value balance.
Interestingly, an investment-specific shock generates movements in the discount rate that
support debt, while the surplus resists present-value balance.
For each type of shock, taxes, spending, and transfers experience sizeable but offsetting
movements in present value. Interestingly, none of the fiscal policy instruments consistently
move to support the innovation in debt in all cases. All instruments can move to support or
offset debt innovations, depending on the shock.
Figure 8 displays the present-value funding horizons of government debt innovations for
various fiscal shocks using the best fitting model in which all fiscal instruments respond
to debt. The figure can answer the question, “What fraction on a 1-unit innovation in
government debt in quarter t, due to each of the five fiscal shocks, is financed by period
t + K, where K is determined by the quarters on the x-axis?” The figure, therefore, reports

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

the truncated sum over horizon K, denoted by P Vt (K), and defined by
 

 
K
X
1
S
j
P Vt (K) = Et
β
Ŝt+j −
R̂t+j−1
B
β
j=1

15

(20)

where S is the steady state net-of-interest surplus and Ŝt+j denotes percentage deviations of
the surplus from steady state.
As the figure makes clear, it takes many years for fiscal adjustments to restore presentvalue balance. Debt innovations induced by consumption taxes, capital taxes, or transfers
are fully financed after 20 to 25 years. Government spending and labor tax shocks, however,
can take 40 or more years to be fully financed. Over shorter horizons up to two years, serial
correlation in the shocked policy instrument worsens the fiscal stance in the sense that the
sum in (20), truncated at K ≤ 8, moves farther from the value of B̂t .
4.5. Sensitivity Analysis: Subsample Estimates. This section examines posterior mode
estimates for various sub-samples in order to investigate the stability of the full sample estimates. The first subsample, 1976Q1-2008Q1, eliminates the 1973-75 recession from the
sample as well as the Tax Reduction Act of 1975 passed to provide a one-time tax rebate
to stimulate the economy. The second subsample, 1989Q1-2008Q1, ignores the initial effects
of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, which changed the structure of income and corporate income tax rates. Finally, the last subsample, 1993Q1-2008Q1, starts after the recession of
1990Q3-91Q1 and begins with the implementation of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
Act of 1993. Table 8 compares the modes of the posterior distributions over these periods.
The estimates of the structural parameters vary slightly across the subsamples. The
results are consistent with Smets and Wouters (2007) in that habit formation seems to
increase in the later subsamples and the capacity utilization parameter increases over the
1989Q1-2008Q1 subsample.13 The most significant differences between the three subsamples
are the coefficients for the fiscal instruments’ responses to debt. Labor tax rates responded
more strongly to debt, while transfers responded less strongly over the subsamples. The
results suggest that in the last fifteen years capital taxes have had the strongest response to
debt.
5. Counterfactual Fiscal Experiments
Given estimates of the model’s “deep parameters,” we can consider counterfactual questions that ask how fiscal impacts might change under policies that are different from history.
13Because

the subsample dates considered in Smets and Wouters (2007) differ slightly from those considered here and Smets and Wouters use a different specification of capacity utilization, comparisons between
our results and theirs should be made with caution.

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

16

All three sets of counterfactuals use the private parameters from the best fitting model in
which all instruments respond to debt and then intervene in various ways on the policy rules.
5.1. Speed of Fiscal Adjustments. We consider alternative scenarios in which we scale
all fiscal adjustment parameters up or down to increase or decrease the speed of adjustment
of future policies to government debt. Fiscal policy rules become
Ĝt = −ϕg Ŷt − µγg B̂t−1 + ugt ,

(21)

τ̂tk = ϕk Ŷt + µγk B̂t−1 + φkl ult + φkc uct + ukt ,

(22)

τ̂tl = ϕl Ŷt + µγl B̂t−1 + φkl ukt + φlc uct + ult ,

(23)

τ̂tc = φkc ukt + φlc ult + uct ,

(24)

Ẑt = −ϕZ Ŷt − µγZ B̂t−1 +

uzt .

(25)

where µ ∈ (0.05, 3.0) is the scaling parameter. µ = 0.05 is the slowest speed of adjustment consistent with equilibrium. Setting µ = 1 (vertical lines in the figure) reproduces the
multipliers for the posterior mean. When µ < 1, fiscal adjustments are slower and debt accumulates more rapidly; µ > 1 accelerates fiscal adjustments, ensuring less debt accumulation.
Figure 9 compares present-value multipliers for output for each of the fiscal shocks—
government spending, capital taxes, labor taxes, and transfers—under alternative sets of the
fiscal adjustment parameters. Present-value multipliers are expressed as a function of the
scaling parameter µ at various horizons: at impact (solid lines, horizon = 1) and at quarters
5 (dotted-dashed lines), 10 (dashed lines), and 25 (dotted lines).
Government spending multipliers are smaller at every horizon when fiscal adjustment accelerates, a pattern that also applies to labor tax multipliers (two left-hand panels). When
capital tax shocks are financed more rapidly the multiplier decline, but only at shorter horizons. Medium-run present-value multipliers (25-quarter horizon) display a non-monotonic
pattern at very slow speeds of adjustment, before actually rising with the speed of adjustment
once µ > 0.25.
5.2. Alternative Financing Schemes. The patterns that emerge from figure 9, in which
all instruments adjust, can change in important ways when only a single instrument takes
on the burden of stabilizing debt. The second counterfactual exercise varies both the source
of fiscal financing—restricting it to adjustment by only a single instrument—and the speed
of adjustment. We also eliminate the correlation among tax shocks estimated in the best
fitting model.
Figure 10 reports present-value multipliers for output from changes in government spending, labor tax rates, and capital tax rates. The figure extends the forecast horizon to 50 years
in order to highlight the differences between short-to-medium-run multipliers and long-run
multipliers. The counterfactual allows capital taxes, labor taxes, or government spending to

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

17

adjust one at a time. Slower adjustment (solid lines) scales the parameter on debt in the
rule for the adjusting instrument by setting µ = 0.5, while faster adjustment (dashed lines)
scales the parameter by setting µ = 2.0 in the policy rules (21)-(23).
When future capital taxes alone stabilize debt, slower adjustment raises government spending multipliers at shorter horizons, but at the cost of smaller multipliers over longer horizons
(top left panel). Regardless of the speed of adjustment, when capital taxes back debt that is
issued to finance government spending, the present-value multiplier rapidly turns negative
and can easily exceed −1.0. When labor taxes adjust, on the other hand, there appears to
be no tradeoff: slower adjustment raises the government spending multiplier over the entire
50-year horizon.
If government spending adjusts to debt following an increase in either capital or labor tax
rates, interesting non-monotonicities set in (second and third panels on left). In the short
run, slower adjustment enhances multipliers, but over longer horizons, slower adjustment
reduces the present-value multipliers for taxes. In the case of labor tax shocks, multipliers
change sign, with the sign change occurring much sooner when debt stabilization is rapid.
Labor tax multipliers change sign very quickly when capital taxes adjust to debt, with
higher labor taxes lowering output only briefly (second panel on right). In the medium and
long runs, higher labor taxes raise output substantially because capital taxes are persistently
lower to satisfy the government’s present-value relation. Finally, when labor taxes stabilize
debt following a shock to capital taxes, the present-value multiplier is uniformly larger when
labor taxes adjust more slowly (bottom right panel).
5.3. Enhanced “Automatic Stabilizers”. The final counterfactual exercise examines the
consequences of increasing or decreasing the “automatic stabilizer” aspect of the fiscal rules—
the ϕ coefficients on contemporaneous output in policy rules (11), (12), (13), and (15).
Specifically, we ask how the government spending present-value multiplier for output changes
when capital taxes alone adjust to stabilize debt, as in the top left panel of figure 10, and
the degree of “automatic” responsiveness of fiscal variables to output fluctuations changes.
Figure 11 reports the present-value multipliers for four different settings of the ϕ coefficients: no automatic response (dashed line); estimated responses (solid line); twice the
estimated responses (dotted line); three times the estimated responses (dotted-dashed line).
Stronger “automatic stabilizers,” which may help to reduce the short-run fluctuations induced by various shocks, impose a long-run cost. In this example, higher government spending initially raises output, which under the estimated policies, raises capital and labor taxes
and lowers transfers.
But in this scenario, higher expected taxes on capital quickly reverse the initial stimulus
to output. Naturally, “automatic stabilizers” are symmetric: when output falls, the declines

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

18

in tax revenues and increases in government expenditures are amplified, reducing future
surpluses still more. Capital taxes, therefore, must rise more sharply to stabilize debt.
Stronger countercyclical responses exacerbate the decline in future surpluses and require
more dramatic tax hikes, which drive output still lower. This counterfactual shows that
short-run countercyclical fiscal behavior can make the long-run multiplier for government
spending dramatically different.
6. Concluding Remarks
Even a casual observer of the fiscal policy process acknowledges that it is immensely
complex. The estimates from the model with the best fit to data make this point precise:
shocks that raise government debt outstanding trigger dynamic reactions in government
spending, capital and labor taxes, and transfer payments that can take many decades to
play out fully. The practice of examining the macroeconomic consequences of fiscal changes
without also studying the resulting debt dynamics and subsequent fiscal adjustments is
sharply at odds with time series data.
Three central messages emerge from the estimates:
(1) Assumptions about which fiscal instruments may adjust to stabilize debt are very
important for the ultimate impacts of changes in fiscal policy.
(2) The speed at which government debt is stabilized following a fiscal disturbance plays
a critical role in determining the effects of the shock on the macro economy.
(3) Because debt-financed fiscal changes trigger very long-lived dynamics, even in completely conventional models, short-run impacts can differ sharply from long-run effects, even being of different signs.
Although the dynamic interactions among policy variables in the estimated models are
complex, understanding these complexities is just the first step in understanding how fiscal
policy affects the economy. Introducing non-neutral transfer payments [Blanchard (1985),
Weil (1987), Forni, Monteforte, and Sessa (2009)], a distinction between productive and
unproductive government spending [Aschauer (1989), Baxter and King (1993)], monetary
policy behavior [Leeper and Sims (1994), Kim (2000)], and the possibility of fiscal foresight
[Leeper, Walker, and Yang (2009)], is a short list of further complications worthy of modeling
attention.

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

19

Appendix A. Derivations of Model Equations
This appendix derives of the log-linearized model used for estimation.

A.1. Equilibrium Conditions. Define qt =

µt
.
λt

βRtubt+1 (Ct+1 − hCt )−γ
ubt (Ct − hCt−1 )−γ
=
E
t
c
1 + τtc
1 + τt+1

(A.1)

ult L1+κ
(1 + τtc ) = (Ct − hCt−1 )−γ (1 − τtl )(1 − α)Yt
t

(A.2)

ubt+1(Ct+1 − hCt )−γ (1 − τtc )
qt = βEt b
c
ut (Ct − hCt−1 )−γ (1 + τt+1
)



K αYt+1
(1 − τt+1 )
+ qt+1 [1 − δ(vt+1)]
Kt

(A.3)

αYt (1 − τtk )
= qt[δ1 + δ2(vt − 1)]
vt Kt−1

(A.4)

(


 i
2 )
i
u
I
u
I
λ
t
t+1
t+1 t+1
1 = qt [1 − st (·)] − s0t (·) t
+ βEt
qt+1 s0t+1 (·)
It−1
λt
It

(A.5)

Yt = Ct + Gt + It

(A.6)


 i 
ut I t
It
Kt = [1 − δ(vt)]Kt−1 + 1 − s
It−1

(A.7)

Bt + Ttk + Ttl + Ttc = Rt−1 Bt−1 + Gt + Zt

(A.8)

Ttk = τtk αYt

(A.9)

Ttl = τtl (1 − α)Yt

(A.10)

Ttc = τtc Ct

(A.11)

Yt = uat (vtKt−1 )α (Lt )1−α

(A.12)

Equations (A.1)-(A.12) along with the fiscal policy rules, equations (11)-(15) in the text and
the shock processes defined in the text, equations (1), (2), (5), and (8), define a competitive
equilibrium.

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

20

A.2. Steady State.
q = 1, v = 1
1
R=
β
1
− (1 − δ0 )
β
Rk =
1 − τk
δ1 = Rk (1 − τ k )
I = δ0 K
Y , K, C, and L can be solved from the following set of equations:
Y (1 − sg ) = C + δ0K
Y
Rk
(1 + τ c )L1+κ

= K α L1−α
αY
=
K
= (C − hC)−γ (1 − τ l)(1 − α)Y

where sg = G/Y ∈ (0, 1). Finally, Z can be solved for from the government budget constraint:


1−β
k
l
c
sb
Z = τ αY + τ (1 − α)Y + τ C − Y sg +
β
where sb = B/Y ∈ (0, 1).
A.3. Log-Linearized System.
ûbt −

γ(1 + h)
γh
τc
τc
γ
c
c
Ĉt +
Ĉt−1 −
τ̂
=
R̂
−
Et τ̂t+1
+Et ubt+1 −
EtĈt+1 (A.13)
t
t
c
c
1−h
1−h
1+τ
1+τ
1−h

τc
τl
γ
γh
c
τ̂
=
Ŷ
−
τ̂tl −
Ĉt +
Ĉt−1
(A.14)
t
t
c
l
1+τ
1−τ
1−h
1−h
γ
γ(1 + h)
τc
γh
τc
c
b
Et Ĉt+1 +
Ĉt −
E
τ̂
−
û
−
Ĉ
+
τ̂tc
q̂t =Et ûbt+1 −
t
t−1
t+1
t
c
c
1−h
1−h
1+τ
1−h
1+τ
Y
Y
Y
k
+ β(1 − τ k )α Et Ŷt+1 − β(1 − τ k )α K̂t − βτ k α Et τ̂t+1
K
K
K
− βδ1Et v̂t+1 + β(1 − δ0)Et q̂t+1
(A.15)


τk
δ2
Ŷt −
τ̂tk − K̂t−1 = q̂t + 1 +
v̂t
(A.16)
k
1−τ
δ1
1
q̂t − (1 + β)Iˆt + Iˆt−1 + βEtIˆt+1 − ûit + βEtûit+1 = 0
(A.17)
00
s (1)
ûlt + (1 + κ) L̂t +

Y Ŷt = C Ĉt + GĜt + I Ît

(A.18)

K̂t = (1 − δ0 )K̂t−1 + δ1 v̂t + δ0Iˆt

(A.19)

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

B B̂t+τ k αY (τ̂tk +Ŷt )+τ l (1−α)Y (τ̂tl +Ŷt )+τ c C(τ̂tc +Ĉt ) =

21

B
B
R̂t−1 + B̂t−1 +GĜt +Z Ẑt (A.20)
β
β

Ŷt = ûat + αv̂t + αK̂t−1 + (1 − α)L̂t

(A.21)

These equations, along with the exogenous processes given by equations (1), (2), (5), (8),
and (11)-(15) in the text, comprise the set of equations used to solve the model using Sims’s
(2001) algorithm.
Appendix B. Data Construction
Unless otherwise noted, all data are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis’ NIPA. All
data in levels are nominal values. Nominal data are converted to real values by dividing by
the GDP deflator.
P: The GDP deflator for personal consumption expenditures (line 2 in Table 1.1.4)
M: The St. Louis adjusted monetary base. Quarterly rates are computed as averages
of monthly rates.
Consumption Tax Revenues. The consumption tax revenues, T c , include excise taxes
and customs duties (lines 5 and 6 in NIPA Table 3.2).
Consumption Tax Rates. The average consumption tax rate is defined as
τc =

Tc
C − T c − Tsc

where C is personal consumption expenditure on nondurable goods (table 1.1.5 line 4) and
on services (table 1.1.5 line 5) and Tsc is state and local sales taxes (table 3.3 line 12).14
Capital and Labor Tax Rates. Following Jones (2002), first the average personal
income tax rate is computed:
IT
τp =
W + PRI/2 + CI
where IT is personal current tax revenues (table 3.2 line 3), W is wage and salary accruals
(table 1.12 line 3), PRI is proprietors’ income (table 1.12 line 3), and CI is capital income.
Capital income is defined as rental income (table 1.12 line 12), corporate profits (table 1.12
line 13), interest income (table 1.12 line 18), and PRI/2.
The average labor income tax rate is computed as:
τl =
14Quarterly

τ p(W + P RI/2) + CSI
EC + P RI/2

data for sales taxes is not available until 1958. From 1947 to 1957, the annual values are used
for all four quarters.

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

22

where CSI is contributions for government social insurance (table 3.2 line 11) and EC is compensation of employees (table 1.12 line 2). The average capital income tax rate is calculated
as:
τ pCI + CT
τk =
CI + P T
where CT is taxes on corporate income (table 3.2 line 7) and PT is property taxes (table 3.3
line 8).15
Capital and Labor Tax Revenues. The capital and labor tax revenues are constructed
by multiplying the average tax rate and tax base.
Government Expenditure. Government expenditure, G, is defined as government consumption expenditure (table 3.2 line 20), government gross investment (table 3.2 line 41),
and government net purchases of non-produced assets (table 3.2 line 43), minus government
consumption of fixed capital (table 3.2 line 44).
Transfers. Transfers, TR, are defined as net current transfers, net capital transfers, and
subsidies (table 3.2 line 31), minus the tax residual. Net current transfers are defined as
current transfer payments (table 3.2 line 21) minus current transfer receipts (table 3.2 line
15). Net capital transfers are defined as capital transfer payments (table 3.2 line 42) minus
capital transfer receipts (table 3.2 line 38). The tax residual is defined as current tax receipts
(table 3.2 line 2), contributions for government social insurance (table 3.2 line 11), income
receipts on assets (table 3.2 line 12), and the current surplus of government enterprises (table
3.2 line 18), minus total tax revenue, T (consumption, labor, and capital tax revenues).
Government Debt. Government debt, B, is defined as:
Bt = NB − Seigniorage + Bt−1
where Seigniorage is defined as Mt − Mt−1 and NB is net borrowing. Net borrowing is
computed using the NIPA deficits concept, specifically as G + INT + T R − T , where INT
is interest payments (table 3.2 line 28).16
Hours Worked. Hours worked is constructed from the following variables:
H: Nonfarm Business, All Persons, Average Weekly Hours Duration : index, 1992 =
100, Seasonally Adjusted. (from U.S. Department of Labor, PRS85006023).
15Although

τk and τl are computed using quarterly data, quarterly data for property taxes is not available
until 1958. For 1947 to 1957, the annual values are used for all four quarters.
161947:1 debt is not calculated with this definition, but is set at the value of the Cox and Hirschhorn
(1983) market value of debt for 1947:1. The Cox-Hirschhorn debt series is not used in general since the series
is not consistent with NIPA’s net borrowing definition. However, the correlation between the debt series
in this paper and the Cox-Hirschhorn debt series, which is maintained and updated at the Federal Reserve
Bank of Dallas, is approximately 0.998

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

23

Emp: Civilian Employment: Sixteen Years & Over, measured in thousands, Seasonally
Adjusted. (from U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, CE16OV).
Turned into an index where 1992:3 = 100.
Hours worked are then defined as
N=

H ∗ Emp
100

Definitions of Observable Variables. The observable variable X is defined by making
the following transformation to variable x:


x
X = ln
∗ 100
Popindex
where
Popindex: index of Pop, constructed so that 1992:3 = 1.
Pop: Civilian noninstitutional population, ages 16 years and over, Seasonally Adjusted.
Number in thousands (from U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics), LNS10000000.
and x = consumption, investment, hours worked, government spending, labor tax revenues,
capital tax revenues, consumption tax revenues, government debt, and transfers.

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

Parameter
β
δ0
α
G/Y
B/Y
τk
τl
τc

Value
0.99
0.025
0.30
0.0922
0.3396
0.184
0.223
0.028

Table 1. Calibrated Parameters for Estimated Model

24

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES
Parameter
Risk aversion γ

Prior Distribution
Density Mean St. Dev.
G
1.75
0.50

25

Mean (5 & 95 Percentiles) of Posterior Distribution
All Adjust
Spending Adjust
Tax Adjust
Transfer Adjust
2.7
2.68
2.67
2.68
(2.1, 3.4)
(2.1, 3.3)
(2.1, 3.3)
(2.1, 3.3)

Frisch elasticity κ

G

2.00

0.50

1.9
(1.4, 2.6)

2.0
(1.4, 2.6)

2.0
(1.4, 2.6)

1.8
(1.3, 2.5)

Habit formation h

B

0.50

0.20

0.5
(0.4, 0.6)

0.5
(0.4, 0.6)

0.5
(0.4, 0.6)

0.49
(0.4, 0.59)

Investment adj. cost s00

G

5.00

0.25

5.5
(5.1, 5.9)

5.5
(5.1, 5.9)

5.5
(5.2, 5.9)

5.5
(5.1, 5.9)

capital util. cost δ2

G

0.70

0.50

0.29
(0.2, 0.42)

0.28
(0.2, 0.40)

0.29
(0.2, 0.42)

0.28
(0.2, 0.42)

Gov. spend debt coeff. γg

G

0.40

0.20

0.23
(0.15, 0.31)

0.24
(0.17, 0.32)

-

-

Cap. tax debt coeff. γtk

G

0.40

0.20

0.39
(0.28, 0.51)

-

0.39
(0.27, 0.5)

-

Labor tax debt coeff. γtl

G

0.40

0.20

0.049
(0.019, 0.09)

-

0.052
(0.022, 0.092)

-

Transfer debt coeff. γz

G

0.40

0.20

0.5
(0.41, 0.59)

-

-

0.5
(0.4, 0.6)

Cap. tax Y coeff. ϕtk

G

1.00

0.30

1.7
(1.2, 2.1)

1.4
(0.99, 1.8)

1.6
(1.2, 2.0)

1.4
(0.98, 1.8)

Labor tax Y coeff. ϕtl

G

0.50

0.25

0.36
(0.16, 0.61)

0.36
(0.16, 0.6)

0.33
(0.14, 0.56)

0.38
(0.16, 0.65)

Gov. spend Y coeff. ϕg

G

0.07

0.05

0.034
(0.0064, 0.084)

0.033
(0.0063, 0.082)

0.031
(0.0059, 0.077)

0.033
(0.0059, 0.084)

Transfer Y coeff. ϕz

G

0.20

0.10

0.13
(0.049, 0.24)

0.11
(0.043, 0.21)

0.11
(0.042, 0.2)

0.13
(0.048, 0.25)

Cap./Labor co-term φkl

N

0.25

0.10

0.19
(0.14, 0.24)

0.15
(0.11, 0.2)

0.19
(0.14, 0.23)

0.15
(0.11, 0.2)

Cap./Cons. co-term φkc

N

0.05

0.10

0.024
(-0.025, 0.074)

0.047
(-0.0014, 0.1)

0.025
(-0.023, 0.073)

0.049
(-0.0035, 0.1)

Labor/Cons. co-term φlc

N

0.05

0.10

-0.028
(-0.077, 0.018)

-0.027
(-0.073, 0.02)

-0.029
(-0.075, 0.018)

-0.026
(-0.076, 0.024)

Table 2. Selected prior and posterior distributions for the various models estimated.

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES
Parameter
Tech. AR coeff. ρa

Prior Distribution
Density Mean St. Dev.
B
0.70
0.20

26

Mean (5 & 95 Percentiles) of Posterior Distribution
All Adjust Spending Adjust Tax Adjust Transfer Adjust
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
(0.94, 0.98)
(0.94, 0.98)
(0.94, 0.98)
(0.94, 0.98)

Pref. AR coeff. ρb

B

0.70

0.20

0.66
(0.62, 0.69)

0.66
(0.62, 0.69)

0.66
(0.62, 0.69)

0.66
(0.62, 0.70)

Labor AR coeff. ρl

B

0.70

0.20

0.99
(0.97, 0.99)

0.99
(0.97, 0.99)

0.99
(0.97, 0.99)

0.98
(0.96, 0.99)

Inv. AR coeff. ρi

B

0.70

0.20

0.55
(0.47, 0.64)

0.53
(0.45, 0.62)

0.52
(0.44, 0.61)

0.58
(0.49, 0.66)

Gov. spend AR coeff. ρg

B

0.70

0.20

0.97
(0.95, 0.99)

0.97
(0.95, 0.99)

0.97
(0.94, 0.99)

0.96
(0.93, 0.98)

Cap. tax AR coeff. ρtk

B

0.70

0.20

0.93
(0.9, 0.97)

0.91
(0.88, 0.95)

0.94
(0.9, 0.97)

0.91
(0.87, 0.93)

Labor tax AR coeff. ρtl

B

0.70

0.20

0.97
(0.95, 0.99)

0.97
(0.95, 0.99)

0.97
(0.95, 0.99)

0.97
(0.94, 0.99)

Cons. tax AR coeff. ρtc

B

0.70

0.20

0.93
(0.89, 0.97)

0.93
(0.89, 0.97)

0.93
(0.9, 0.97)

0.93
(0.9, 0.97)

Transfer AR coeff. ρz

B

0.70

0.20

0.94
(0.91, 0.98)

0.97
(0.94, 0.99)

0.97
(0.94, 0.99)

0.95
(0.91, 0.98)

Tech std σa

IG 1

1

4

0.62
(0.58, 0.68)

0.63
(0.58, 0.68)

0.62
(0.58, 0.68)

0.62
(0.57, 0.68)

Pref. std σb

IG 1

1

4

7
(6.4, 7.7)

7
(6.4, 7.7)

6.9
(6.3, 7.6)

7
(6.4, 7.8)

Labor std σl

IG 1

1

4

2.8
(2.3, 3.5)

2.9
(2.3, 3.5)

2.9
(2.3, 3.5)

2.8
(2.2, 3.4)

Inv. std σi

IG 1

1

4

6.4
(5.7, 7.2)

6.2
(5.6, 7)

6.2
(5.5, 6.9)

6.6
(5.8, 7.5)

Gov. spend std σg

IG 1

1

4

3.1
(2.8, 3.3)

3.1
(2.8, 3.3)

3.1
(2.9, 3.4)

3.1
(2.9, 3.4)

Cap. tax std σtk

IG 1

1

4

4.4
(4.1, 4.7)

4.6
(4.3, 4.9)

4.4
(4.1, 4.7)

4.6
(4.2, 5)

Labor tax std σtl

IG 1

1

4

3
(2.8, 3.2)

3
(2.8, 3.2)

3
(2.8, 3.2)

3
(2.8, 3.3)

Cons. tax std σtc

IG 1

1

4

4
(3.8, 4.4)

4
(3.8, 4.3)

4
(3.8, 4.4)

4
(3.7, 4.4)

Transfer std σz

IG 1

1

4

3.4
(3.1, 3.7)

3.9
(3.6, 4.2)

3.9
(3.6, 4.2)

3.4
(3.1, 3.7)

1: The parameters for the Inverse Gamma distribution correspond to s and ν where f (x|s, ν) = ν s Γ−1 (s)x−s−1 exp

−ν
x

.

Table 3. Selected prior and posterior distributions for the various models estimated.

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

Model Specification
All fiscal instruments adjust
Only government spending adjusts
Only taxes adjust
Only transfers adjust
Addendum
Only transfers adjust,
no output response or tax comovements

27

Log Marginal Bayes Factor Relative to
Data Density Model Where All Adjust
−68
1.0
−97
exp[29]
−102
exp[34]
−75
exp[7]

−86

Table 4. Model Fit Comparisons

exp[18]

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

28

Government Spending Present-Value Multipliers
Variable 1 quarter 5 quarters 10 quarters 25 quarters
∞
PV(∆Y )
0.64
0.43
0.33
0.20
0.03
PV(∆G)
PV(∆C)
PV(∆G)

−0.26

−0.34

−0.35

−0.40

−0.60

PV(∆I)
PV(∆G)

−0.10

−0.23

−0.32

−0.40

−0.36

Capital Tax Present-Value Multipliers
Variable 1 quarter 5 quarters 10 quarters 25 quarters
∞
PV(∆Y )
−0.18
−0.26
−0.33
−0.50
−0.72
PV(∆T k )
PV(∆C)
PV(∆T k )

−0.076

−0.11

−0.11

−0.19

−0.47

PV(∆I)
PV(∆T k )

−0.11

−0.30

−0.47

−0.64

−0.60

Labor Tax Present-Value Multipliers
Variable 1 quarter 5 quarters 10 quarters 25 quarters
∞
PV(∆Y )
−0.19
−0.19
−0.19
−0.19
−0.21
PV(∆T l)
PV(∆C)
PV(∆T l)

−0.17

−0.26

−0.29

−0.33

-0.37

PV(∆I)
PV(∆T l)

−0.02

−0.03

−0.04

−0.05

−0.04

Transfers Present-Value Multipliers
Variable 1 quarter 5 quarters 10 quarters 25 quarters
∞
PV(∆Y )
−0.02
−0.16
−0.28
−0.46
−0.59
PV(∆Z)
PV(∆C)
PV(∆Z)

0.01

0.07

0.13

0.18

0.12

PV(∆I)
PV(∆Z)

−0.03

−0.09

−0.15

−0.23

−0.23

Table 5. Present-value fiscal multipliers when all fiscal instruments respond
to debt. Mean estimates of posterior draws from best fiting model in which
all fiscal instruments—government spending, capital taxes, labor taxes, and
transfers—adjust to stabilize debt.

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

29

Government Spending Present-Value Multipliers
Variable 1 quarter 5 quarters 10 quarters 25 quarters
∞
PV(∆Y )
0.59
0.32
0.14
−0.21
−0.99
PV(∆G)
PV(∆C)
PV(∆G)

−0.24

−0.28

−0.27

−0.33

−0.89

PV(∆I)
PV(∆G)

−0.17

−0.40

−0.59

−0.88

−1.10

Capital Tax Present-Value Multipliers
Variable 1 quarter 5 quarters 10 quarters 25 quarters
∞
PV(∆Y )
−0.14
−0.20
−0.18
0.42
−3.70
PV(∆T k )
PV(∆C)
PV(∆T k )

−0.10

−0.14

−0.18

−0.52

−0.83

PV(∆I)
PV(∆T k )

−0.04

−0.06

0.01

0.94

−2.90

Labor Tax Present-Value Multipliers
Variable 1 quarter 5 quarters 10 quarters 25 quarters
PV(∆Y )
−0.14
−0.12
−0.04
0.22
PV(∆T l)

∞
0.92

PV(∆C)
PV(∆T l)

−0.19

−0.30

−0.34

−0.36

0.06

PV(∆I)
PV(∆T l)

0.05

0.17

0.31

0.58

0.87

Transfers Present-Value Multipliers
Variable 1 quarter 5 quarters 10 quarters 25 quarters
∞
PV(∆Y )
−0.07
−0.19
−0.33
−0.64
−1.40
PV(∆Z)
PV(∆C)
PV(∆Z)

0.04

0.10

0.14

0.11

−0.38

PV(∆I)
PV(∆Z)

−0.11

−0.30

−0.46

−0.75

−0.98

Table 6. Present-value fiscal multipliers when only capital and labor taxes
respond to debt. Mean estimates of posterior draws from model in which only
taxl instruments—capital and labor tax rates—adjust to stabilize debt.

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

Variable
at

ct

lt

it

G
−9.68 14.39
17.04
2.26
k
T
10.14
2.02 −19.61 −3.85
l
T
19.18 −11.39 −35.52 −5.96
c
2.10
−0.49 −4.27 −0.26
T
Z
−26.42 39.9
46.43
6.11
R
3.68 −43.43 −3.07 2.70
Surplus −4.68 44.43
4.07 −1.70
∆B
−1
+1
+1
+1

Shock
gt
−24.55
7.54
1.85
−0.42
17.23
−0.65
1.65
+1

k

l

30

c

τt
τt
τt
zt
−2.30 −4.95 −2.70 3.08
5.90 −4.41 −1.77 3.12
2.01
22.98 −2.74 0.25
−0.01 −0.36 13.65 0.02
−6.49 −13.97 −7.58 −5.49
−0.11 −0.29 0.14
0.02
−0.89 −0.71 −1.14 0.98
−1
−1
−1
+1

Table 7. Present-value financing using the mean estimates of posterior draws
from the model where all fiscal instruments respond to debt. Shocks normalized to raise or lower debt by 1 unit. Rows for G, T k , T l , T c , and Z sum to
Surplus; rows for R and Surplus sum to ∆B.

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

γ
κ
h
s00
δ2
ρa
ρc
ρl
ρi
ρg
ρτ k
ρτ l
ρτ c
ρz
γg
γτ k
γτ l
γz
ϕτ k
ϕτ l
ϕg
ϕz
σa
σc
σl
σi
σg
στ k
στ l
στ c
σz
φkl
φkc
φlc

1976Q1-2008Q1 1989Q1-2008Q1 1993Q1-2008Q1
Mode
SD
Mode
SD
Mode
SD
2.3
0.46
2.4
0.47
2.5
0.57
1.8
0.4
2.1
0.45
1.9
0.43
0.52
0.079
0.5
0.095
0.69
0.085
5.4
0.26
5.3
0.25
5.2
0.25
0.4
0.13
0.5
0.23
0.35
0.17
0.96
0.02
0.9
0.033
0.85
0.056
0.65
0.033
0.63
0.041
0.52
0.052
0.98
0.015
0.98
0.02
0.97
0.024
0.69
0.063
0.85
0.048
0.73
0.078
0.97
0.02
0.98
0.021
0.96
0.036
0.91
0.033
0.88
0.06
0.8
0.085
0.93
0.033
0.94
0.037
0.91
0.055
0.90
0.038
0.9
0.053
0.73
0.1
0.87
0.046
0.83
0.07
0.85
0.072
0.12
0.056
0.58
0.13
0.38
0.16
0.21
0.1
0.38
0.18
0.91
0.25
0.17
0.07
0.21
0.09
0.18
0.1
0.18
0.06
0.13
0.07
0.24
0.1
1.4
0.059
1.2
0.32
0.9
0.26
0.2
0.11
0.3
0.16
0.4
0.22
0.035
0.034
0.03
0.033
0.035
0.038
0.13
0.075
0.15
0.084
0.13
0.073
0.52
0.034
0.55
0.048
0.56
0.053
6.7
0.54
7.7
0.71
7.1
0.76
2.5
0.39
2.2
0.33
3.1
0.57
6.3
0.8
7.2
1.8
4.4
0.87
2.8
0.17
2.7
0.21
3.2
0.29
4.7
0.29
4.5
0.36
4.3
0.39
2.5
0.16
2.5
0.21
2.89
0.26
4.3
0.27
3.4
0.28
2.8
0.26
2.8
0.18
3.1
0.26
2.4
0.21
0.12
0.035
0.15
0.043
0.22
0.051
0.0074
0.04
0.03
0.05
0.07
0.05
0.052
0.036
0.026
0.051
0.035
0.055

Table 8. Subsample Estimates. Posterior modes and standard deviations.

31

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

γ

κ

1.5

1.5

1

1

h

s

8
2

6
4

0.5
0

0.5
0

2

0

4

0

2

4

4
2
2

0

0.5

1

2

1
0.5
1

ψ

2

0.5

1

0

10

0

0.5

1

1.5

0

kc

10

10

10

0.2

0.4

0.6

0

−0.2

0

0.2

0.3

lc

5

0

0.1
φ

20

0

0

φ

kl

1

1

20

20

0.5

0.5
ψg

20

0

7

5
0

3

6

10

10

0

5

15

φ

z

4

γl

5
4
3
2
1
0

0

ψl

1.5

1

1

20

ψk

10
8
6
4
2
0.5

0.5

10
8
6
4
2

γz

0

0

γk

10
8
6
4
2
1

0

γg

6

0

1

2

δ2
8

32

0.2

0

−0.2

0

Figure 1. Prior (dashed black) vs. posterior (solid blue) distributions. Posterior distributions are from the model where all fiscal instruments adjust to
debt.

0.2

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

ρa

ρb

33

ρl

ρi
10

40

20

40

20

10

20

0

0.6

0.8

1

0

0

0.5

ρg

1

5

0

0.6

ρtk

1

0

0.5

1

ρtc

40

30

20

20
20

20

10

0

0.6

0.8

1

10

0

0.6

0.8

ρz

1

0

0.6

σa

30

0.8

1

0

0.6

σb

20

2

10

1

0.8

1

σl
1.5

20

1

10

0.5

0

0.6

0.8

1

0

0

2

σ

0

4

0

2

σ

i

4

6

8

0

g

tk

1.5

1

1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

4

6

8

0

0

2

4

6

8

0

0

2

4

4

6

8

6

8

tl

1.5

2

2

σ

1.5

0

0

σ

1.5

0

0

ρtl

30
40

0.8

6

8

0

0

2

4

Figure 2. Prior (dashed black) vs. posterior (solid blue) distributions. Posterior distributions are from the model where all fiscal instruments adjust to
debt.

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

Transfers Adjust
Output

Taxes Adjust
Output

Gov. Spending Adjusts
Output

0.2
0.2

0.1

0.1

All Instruments Adjust
Output

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0

0
−0.1

0
0

5

10

−0.2

0

Transfers Adjust
Consumption

5

10

−0.1

−0.05

−0.05

0

−0.1

−0.1

−0.05

−0.15

−0.15

−0.1

−0.2

−0.2

5

10

0

−0.1
−0.2
−0.3

−1.5

−0.4

−2

0

5

5

10

10

5

10

−0.05
−0.1

0

5

10

0

Gov. Spending Adjusts
Investment

5

10

All Instruments Adjust
Investment
0

−0.5

0

−0.2

−1

−0.2

−0.4

−0.4
−0.6

−0.6
0

5

10

0

Taxes Adjust
Debt

5

10

0

Gov. Spending Adjusts
Debt

10

3
2

0

All Instruments Adjust
Consumption

0.2

Transfers Adjust
Debt
4

−0.1

0

Taxes Adjust
Investment
0

10

0.05

Transfers Adjust
Investment
0

5
Gov. Spending Adjusts
Consumption

0

0

0

Taxes Adjust
Consumption

0

5

10

All Instruments Adjust
Debt

15

3

10

2

5

1

5

1
0

34

0

5

10

0

0

5

10

0

0

5

10

0

0

5

Figure 3. Estimated impulse responses to a 1 percent increase in government
spending shock. The solid line is the mean impulse response; the dashed lines
are the 5 percent and 95 percent posterior intervals. X-axis measures years.

10

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

Transfers Adjust
Output

Taxes Adjust
Output

0

Gov. Spending Adjusts
Output

0.1

All Instruments Adjust
Output

0.05

0.05

−0.05

0

0

0
−0.1

−0.05
−0.05

−0.05
0

5

10

−0.1

0

Transfers Adjust
Consumption

5

10

−0.1

0

Taxes Adjust
Consumption

5

10

−0.1

0

0

0

0

−0.05

−0.02

−0.02

−0.05

−0.1

−0.04

−0.04

−0.1

10

0

Transfers Adjust
Investment

5

10

0

Taxes Adjust
Investment

5

10

−1

0.2

−0.4

0

−0.6

5

10

Transfers Adjust
Debt

0

−1

−2

−2

−4

−3

−6

−4

−8

0

5

5

10

−0.6
0

Taxes Adjust
Debt
0

10

10

−0.4

0

0

5

−0.2

−0.2
0

0

All Instruments Adjust
Investment

−0.2

0.4

10

0.2

0.6

−0.5

−0.06

Gov. Spending Adjusts
Investment
0

0

5
All Instruments Adjust
Consumption

0.05

5

0

Gov. Spending Adjusts
Consumption

0.02

0

35

5

10

0

Gov. Spending Adjusts
Debt

5

10

All Instruments Adjust
Debt

0

1

−5

−1

0

−2
0

5

10

−10

0

5

10

−3

0

5

Figure 4. Estimated impulse responses to a 1 percent increase in the capital
tax rate. The solid line is the mean impulse response; the dashed lines are the
5 percent and 95 percent posterior intervals. X-axis measures years.

10

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

Transfers Adjust
Output

Taxes Adjust
Output

0

Gov. Spending Adjusts
Output

0.4

−0.05

−0.2

All Instruments Adjust
Output

0.1

0

0.05

0.2

−0.1

0
0

−0.15
0

5

10

−0.2

0

5

10

−0.05

0

0

−0.1

−0.1

0

5

10

All Instruments Adjust
Consumption

−0.05
−0.1
−0.15
−0.2
−0.25
0

Transfers Adjust
Investment

5

10

−0.05
−0.1
−0.15
0

Taxes Adjust
Investment

5

10

−0.2

0

Gov. Spending Adjusts
Investment

2
−0.1

10

0

−0.2
10

5
Gov. Spending Adjusts
Consumption

−0.1

5

−0.1

Taxes Adjust
Consumption
0.1

0

−0.05

−0.05

Transfers Adjust
Consumption
0

36

5

10

All Instruments Adjust
Investment

0.5

0.2

1.5

−0.2

1

−0.3
−0.4

0.5

−0.5

0

0

5

10

−0.2
0

Transfers Adjust
Debt
0

−2

−5

−4

−10

−6

−15

5

5

10

−0.5

0

Taxes Adjust
Debt

0

0

0

0

10

0

5

5

10

0

Gov. Spending Adjusts
Debt

10

0

−5

−1

−10

−2

−15

−3
0

5

10

All Instruments Adjust
Debt

0

−20

5

10

−4

0

5

Figure 5. Estimated impulse responses to a 1 percent increase in the labor
tax rate. The solid line is the mean impulse response; the dashed lines are the
5 percent and 95 percent posterior intervals. X-axis measures years.

10

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

Transfers Adjust
Output

Taxes Adjust
Output

0.01

Gov. Spending Adjusts
Output

All Instruments Adjust
Output

0.04
0.02

0

0.01

0.01

0.02

0
0

−0.01
0
−0.02

37

0

5

10

−0.01

−0.01
0

Transfers Adjust
Consumption

5

10

0

Taxes Adjust
Consumption

5

10

0

Gov. Spending Adjusts
Consumption

0.02

5

10

All Instruments Adjust
Consumption

0

0.01

0.01
0

0

0

−0.02

−0.01

−0.01
−0.02
−0.02
−0.03

−0.02

−0.04
0

5

10

−0.04

0

Transfers Adjust
Investment

5

10

0

Taxes Adjust
Investment

0.1

0.3

0.05

0.2

5

10

−0.03

0

Gov. Spending Adjusts
Investment

5

10

All Instruments Adjust
Investment

0.1

0.1

0.05

0.05

0
0
−0.05

0.1

0

5

10

0

0

−0.05
0

Transfers Adjust
Debt

5

10

−0.1

0

Taxes Adjust
Debt

0

10

0

5

10

10

−0.2

−1

−0.4
−2

−1.5
−2

5

0

−1

−1.5

0

All Instruments Adjust
Debt

0

−0.5

−1

−0.05

Gov. Spending Adjusts
Debt

0

−0.5

5

0

5

10

−3

−0.6
0

5

10

−0.8

0

5

Figure 6. Estimated impulse responses to a 1 percent increase in the consumption tax rate. The solid line is the mean impulse response; the dashed
lines are the 5 percent and 95 percent posterior intervals. X-axis measures
years.

10

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

Transfers Adjust
Output

Taxes Adjust
Output

Gov. Spending Adjusts
Output

All Instruments Adjust
Output

1

0
−0.05
−0.1
−0.15
−0.2
−0.25

−0.1

0.5

−0.2

0

−0.3

−0.5
−1

−0.4
0

5

10

−0.5

0

Transfers Adjust
Consumption
0.2

0.5

0.1

0

0

−0.5

−0.1

−1

−0.2

0

5

5

10

−0.05

0

Taxes Adjust
Consumption

1

10

5

10

0

5

10

All Instruments Adjust
Consumption
0.08
0.06

0.2

0.04
0.02

0.1

0
0

5

10

0

0

Taxes Adjust
Investment

5

10

−0.02

0

Gov. Spending Adjusts
Investment

0

0.5

−1

0

−2

−0.5

−3

−1

5

10

All Instruments Adjust
Investment
0.1
0

0.5

−0.1

0
−0.5

−0.2
−0.3

0

5

10

0

Transfers Adjust
Debt

5

10

4
2

5

10

5

10

−0.4

4

15

20

3

15

5

0

0

5

10

10

2

10

5

5
All Instruments Adjust
Debt

25

0

0

Gov. Spending Adjusts
Debt

20

10

0

0

Taxes Adjust
Debt

6

0

−0.1

Gov. Spending Adjusts
Consumption
0.3

Transfers Adjust
Investment
1

−1

38

1
0

5

10

0

0

5

Figure 7. Estimated impulse responses to a 1 percent increase in transfers.
The solid line is the mean impulse response; the dashed lines are the 5 percent
and 95 percent posterior intervals. X-axis measures years.

10

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

39

2.5

Labor taxes
2

Consumption taxes
Capital taxes

1.5

1

0.5

0

−0.5

−1

Government spending
−1.5

Transfers

−2

−2.5

−3

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Figure 8. Government debt funding horizons for fiscal shocks using the mean
estimates of posterior draws from the model where all fiscal instruments respond to debt. The x-axis units are quarters.

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

Government Spending Increase

40

Capital Tax Increase

0.8

Horizon = 1

0.7

−0.2

0.6
−0.3

Horizon = 5

0.5
0.4

−0.4

Horizon = 10

0.3

Horizon = 25

−0.5

0.2
0.1

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

0

0.5

Speed of Adjustment (µ)

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

2.5

3

Speed of Adjustment (µ)

Labor Tax Increase

Transfers Increase

−0.15

0
−0.1

−0.2

−0.2
−0.25
−0.3
−0.3

−0.4

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

Speed of Adjustment (µ)

2.5

3

−0.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

Speed of Adjustment (µ)

Figure 9. Present-value fiscal multipliers for output at various horizons, as
a function of the speed of adjustment of future fiscal variables for shocks to
government spending, capital taxes, labor taxes, and transfers. Vertical line at
µ = 1 is best fitting parameters; µ < 1 reduces speed at which debt is retired;
µ > 1 increases speed at which debt is retired. X-axis measures quarters.

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

PV G Multipliers: τk Adjusts

41

PV G Multipliers: τl Adjusts
0.6

0

Slower Adjustment
0.4

−1

−2

Faster Adjustment

0.2
0

50

100

150

200

0

0

PV τl Multipliers: G Adjusts

50

100

150

200

PV τl Multipliers: τk Adjusts
1.5

0.2
0.1

1

0

0.5

−0.1

0

−0.2
0

50

100

150

200

−0.5

0

PV τk Multipliers: G Adjusts

50

100

150

200

PV τk Multipliers: τl Adjusts

0
−0.1

−0.1

−0.2

−0.2

−0.3

−0.3
−0.4

−0.4
0

50

100

150

200

−0.5

0

50

100

150

Figure 10. Present-value fiscal multipliers for output as a function of the
speed of adjustment of future fiscal variables and which single fiscal variable
responds to debt. Uses parameters from best fitting model where all fiscal
instruments adjust to debt, but changes fiscal rules so that only a single instrument adjusts and tax shocks are uncorrelated. Slower adjustment (solid
lines) scales the relevant fiscal parameter by 0.5; faster adjustment (dashed
lines) scales relevant fiscal parameter by 2.0. X-axis measures quarters.

200

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

42

0.5

0

No automatic stabilizers
−0.5

Estimated automatic stabilizers
2 × estimated
automatic stabilizers
−1

3 × estimated
automatic stabilizers

−1.5

−2

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

Figure 11. Present-value government spending multipliers for output as a
function of the degree of “automatic” responsiveness of fiscal variables to contemporaneous output fluctuations when only capital taxes adjust to stabilize
debt. Uses parameters from best fitting model where all fiscal instruments adjust to debt. No automatic response (dashed line); estimated responses (solid
line); twice the estimated responses (dotted line); three times the estimated
responses (dotted-dashed line). X-axis measures quarters.

180

200

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

43

References
An, S., and F. Schorfheide (2007): “Bayesian Analysis of DSGE Models,” Econometric
Reviews, 26(2-4), 113–172.
Aschauer, D. A. (1989): “Is Public Expenditure Productive?,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 23(2), 177–200.
Barro, R. J. (1974): “Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?,” Journal of Political Economy,
82(6), 1095–1117.
Baxter, M., and R. G. King (1993): “Fiscal Policy in General Equilibrium,” American
Economic Review, 83(3), 315–334.
Blanchard, O. J. (1985): “Debts, Deficits, and Finite Horizons,” Journal of Political
Economy, 93(2), 223–247.
Blanchard, O. J., and R. Perotti (2002): “An Empirical Characterization of the
Dynamic Effects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 117(4), 1329–1368.
Botman, D., D. Laxton, D. Muir, and A. Romanov (2006): “A New-Open-EconomyMacro Model for Fiscal Policy Evaluation,” IMF WP/06/45.
Braun, R. A. (1994): “Tax Disturbances and Real Economic Activity in the Postwar
United States,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 33(3), 441–462.
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities
and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy,
113(1), 1–45.
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2009): “When Is the Government
Spending Multiplier Large?,” Manuscript, Northwestern University.
Chung, H., and E. M. Leeper (2007): “What Has Financed Government Debt?,” NBER
Working Paper No. 13425.
Cochrane, J. H. (1999): “A Frictionless View of U.S. Inflation,” in NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 1998, ed. by B. S. Bernanke, and J. J. Rotemberg, pp. 323–384. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Coenen, G., and R. Straub (2004): “Non-Ricardian Households and Fiscal Policy in an
Estimated DSGE Model of the Euro Area,” Manuscript, European Central Bank.
Cogan, J. F., T. Cwik, J. B. Taylor, and V. Wieland (2009): “New Keynesian versus
Old Keynesian Government Spending Multipliers,” Manuscript, Stanford University.
Congressional Budget Office (2009): An Analysis of the President’s Budgetary Proposals for Fiscal Year 2010, vol. June. CBO, Washington, D.C.
Cox, W. M., and E. Hirschhorn (1983): “The Market Value of U.S. Government Debt:
Monthly, 1942-1980,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 11(2), 261–272.
Davig, T., and E. M. Leeper (2009): “Monetary-Fiscal Policy Interactions and Fiscal
Stimulus,” Manuscript, Indiana University.

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

44

Eggertsson, G. (2009): “Can a Tax Cut Deepen the Recession?,” Manuscript, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York.
Favero, C. A., and F. Giavazzi (2007): “Debt and the Effects of Fiscal Policy,” Manuscript, IGIER (Universita’ Bocconi).
Fernandez-Villaverde, J., and J. F. Rubio-Ramirez (2004): “Comparing Dynamic
Equilibrium Economies to Data: A Bayesian Approach,” Journal of Econometrics, 123(1),
153–187.
Forni, L., L. Monteforte, and L. Sessa (2009): “The General Equilibrium Effects
of Fiscal Policy: Estimates for the Euro Area,” Journal of Public Economics, 93(3-4),
559–585.
Gali, J., J. D. Lopez-Salido, and J. Valles (2007): “Understanding the Effects of
Government Spending on Consumption,” Journal of the European Economic Association,
5(1), 227–270.
Geweke, J. (1999): “Using Simulation Methods for Bayesian Econometric Models: Inference, Development, and Communication,” Econometric Reviews, 18(1), 1–73.
(2005): Contemporary Bayesian Econometrics and Statistics. John Wiley and Sons,
Inc., Hoboken, NJ.
Giorno, C., P. Richardson, D. Roseveare, and P. van den Noord (1995): “Estimating Potential Output, Output Gaps and Structural Budget Balances,” Economic
Working Papers No. 152, OECD.
Jones, J. B. (2002): “Has Fiscal Policy Helped Stabilize the Postwar U.S. Economy?,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 49(4), 709–746.
Judd, K. L. (1985): “Short-Run Analysis of Fiscal Policy in a Simple Perfect Foresight
Model,” Journal of Political Economy, 93(2), 298–319.
Kamps, C. (2007): “Dynamic Scoring in an Estimated DSGE Model of the U.S. Economy,”
Manuscript, European Central Bank.
Kim, J. (2000): “Constructing and Estimating a Realistic Optimizing Model of Monetary
Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 45(2), 329–359.
Kumhof, M., and D. Laxton (2008a): “The Global Integrated Monetary Fiscal Model,”
Manuscript, International Monetary Fund.
(2008b): “A Party Without a Hangover? On the Effects of U.S. Government
Deficits,” Manuscript, International Monetary Fund.
Laxton, D., and P. Pesenti (2003): “Monetary Policy Rules for Small, Open, Emerging
Economies,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(5), 1109–1146.
Leeper, E. M. (1991): “Equilibria Under ‘Active’ and ‘Passive’ Monetary and Fiscal Policies,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 27(1), 129–147.
Leeper, E. M., and C. A. Sims (1994): “Toward a Modern Macroeconomic Model Usable
for Policy Analysis,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1994, ed. by S. Fischer, and J. J.
Rotemberg, pp. 81–118. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

DYNAMICS OF FISCAL FINANCING IN THE UNITED STATES

45

Leeper, E. M., T. B. Walker, and S.-C. S. Yang (2009): “Fiscal Foresight and
Information Flows,” NBER Working Paper No. 14630.
Leeper, E. M., and S.-C. S. Yang (2008): “Dynamic Scoring: Alternative Financing
Schemes,” Journal of Public Economics, 92(1-2), 159–182.
Monacelli, T., and R. Perotti (2008): “Fiscal Policy, Wealth Effects, and Markups,”
NBER Working Paper No. 14584.
Mountford, A., and H. Uhlig (2009): “What Are the Effects of Fiscal Policy Shocks?,”
forthcoming in Journal of Applied Econometrics.
Perotti, R. (2004): “Estimating the Effects of Fiscal Policy in OECD Countries,” Manuscript, IGIER-Universita’ Bocconi.
Ratto, M., W. Roeger, and J. in’t Veld (2006): “Fiscal Policy in an Estimated
Open-Economy Model for the Euro Area,” European Commission Economic Papers No.
266.
Ravn, M. O., S. Schmitt-Grohe, and M. Uribe (2007): “Explaining the Effects of
Government Spending Shocks on Consumption and the Real Exchange Rate,” NBER
Working Paper No. 13328.
Romer, C., and J. Bernstein (2009): The Job Impact of the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Plan. Obama Transition Team, Washington, D.C., January 9.
Sargent, T. J., and N. Wallace (1981): “Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic,”
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 5(Fall), 1–17.
Schmitt-Grohe, S., and M. Uribe (2008): “What’s ‘News’ in Business Cycles?,” NBER
Working Paper No. 14215.
Sims, C. A. (1994): “A Simple Model for Study of the Determination of the Price Level
and the Interaction of Monetary and Fiscal Policy,” Economic Theory, 4(3), 381–399.
(1998): “Econometric Implications of the Government Budget Constraint,” Journal
of Econometrics, 83(1-2), 9–19.
(2001): “Solving Linear Rational Expectations Models,” Journal of Computational
Economics, 20(1-2), 1–20.
Smets, F., and R. Wouters (2003): “An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 1(5),
1123–1175.
(2007): “Shocks and Frictions in U.S. Business Cycles: A Bayesian DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review, 97(3), 586–606.
Uhlig, H. (2009): “Some Fiscal Calculus,” Manuscript, University of Chicago.
Weil, P. (1987): “Love Thy Children: Reflections on the Barro Debt Neutrality Theorem,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 19(3), 377–391.
Woodford, M. (1995): “Price-Level Determinacy Without Control of a Monetary Aggregate,” Carneige-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 43, 1–46.
Yang, S.-C. S. (2005): “Quantifying Tax Effects Under Policy Foresight,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 52(8), 1557–1568.

