NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AUTOMOBILES ON STEROIDS:
PRODUCT ATTRIBUTE TRADE-OFFS AND TECHNOLOGICAL PROGRESS IN THE AUTOMOBILE SECTOR
Christopher R. Knittel
Working Paper 15162
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15162

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2009

This paper has benefitted from conversations with Severin Borenstein, K.G. Duleep, David Greene,
Jonathan Hughes, Mark Jacobsen, Doug Miller, David Rapson, Ken Small, Anson Soderbery, Dan
Sperling, Nathan Wilmot, Frank Wolak and Catherine Wolfram, as well as seminar participants at
UC Davis and the UC Energy Institute. Omid Rouhani and Anson Soderbery provided excellent research
assistance. Financial support from the California Air Resource Board and the Institute of Transportation
Studies is gratefully acknowledged. I am grateful to K.G. Duleep for providing me with data. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Christopher R. Knittel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Automobiles on Steroids: Product Attribute Trade-Offs and Technological Progress in the
Automobile Sector
Christopher R. Knittel
NBER Working Paper No. 15162
July 2009
JEL No. L5,L62
ABSTRACT
New car fleet fuel economy, weight and engine power have changed drastically since 1980. These
changes represent both movements along and shifts in the "fuel economy/weight/engine power production
possibilities frontier". This paper estimates the technological progress that has occurred since 1980
and the trade-offs that manufacturers and consumers face when choosing between fuel economy, weight
and engine power characteristics. The results suggest that if weight, horsepower and torque were held
at their 1980 levels, fuel economy for both passenger cars and light trucks could have increased by
nearly 50 percent from 1980 to 2006; this is in stark contrast to the 15 percent by which fuel economy
actually increased. I also find that once technological progress is considered, meeting the CAFE standards
adopted in 2007 will require halting the observed increases in weight and engine power characteristics,
but little more; in contrast, the standards recently announced by the new administration, while certainly
attainable, require non-trivial "downsizing". I also investigate the relative efficiencies of manufacturers.
I find that US manufacturers tend to be above the median in terms of their passenger vehicle fuel efficiency
conditional on weight and engine power, and are among the top for light duty trucks; Honda is the
most efficient manufacturer for both passenger cars, while Volvo is the most efficient manufacturer
of light duty trucks. However, I also find that over time, US manufacturers' relative efficiency in both
passenger cars and light trucks has degraded. These results may provide insight into their current financial
troubles.

Christopher R. Knittel
University of California, Davis
Department of Economics
One Shields Ave
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
crknittel@ucdavis.edu

1

Introduction

Within the US, the transportation sector accounts for over 30 percent of greenhouse gas emissions.
Despite this, the US has done little over the past 25 years to incentivize increases in passenger
automobile fuel economy. Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) Standards for passenger cars
have not increased since 1990. For light trucks and SUVs, they have grown by only 10 percent
since 1990.1 While CAFE standards increased substantially for passenger vehicles from 1978 to
1990 (from 18 MPG to 27.5 MPG), consumers shifted to SUVs—treated as light duty trucks under
CAFE. Because of this shift, the resulting sales-weighted CAFE standard has changed little over
since 1983.
In contrast to Europe, US policy-makers have also been reluctant to incentivize carbon reductions through either gasoline or carbon taxes. The lack of tax policies combined with lower oil
prices led to a 30 percent reduction in real gasoline prices from 1980 to 2004. While rapid increases
in gas prices appear to have led to a shift to fuel economy from 2006 to 2007, gasoline prices did
not include the externality costs of climate change and other externalities.2
The lack of either pricing mechanisms or standards has meant US fleet fuel economy has been
stagnant despite apparent technological advances. From 1980 to 2004 the average fuel economy of
the US new passenger automobile fleet increased by less than 6.5 percent. During this time, the
average horsepower of new passenger cars increased by 80 percent, while the average curb weight
increased by 12 percent. Changes in light duty trucks have been even more pronounced. Average
horsepower increased by 99 percent and average weight increased by 26 percent from 1984 to 2004.
The change within passenger cars and light trucks hides much of the story. In 1980 light trucks sales
were roughly 20 percent of total passenger vehicles sales; in 2004, they were over 51 percent. Figure
1 highlights much of the within-vehicle class changes that have occurred over this time through the
lens of a single model. The figure plots weight, horsepower, torque and fuel economy for Honda
Accord over time.3 The attributes of a Honda Accord have changed significantly over the past
1

Much of this increase occurred during a time when consumers where shifting to more fuel efficient vehicles because
of market forces. CAFE standards for light trucks were 20 MPG in 1990, 20.7 MPG from 1996 to 2004, and are
currently 22.2 MPG. Therefore, over 68 percent of the increase occurred after 2004.
2
See Busse, Knittel and Zettelmeyer (2009) for a detailed study of how gas prices affected fuel economy. These
changes are also evident in the aggregate data, new car fleet fuel economy increased rapidly from 2004 to 2007,
increasing by roughly 10 percent, a period where gasoline prices increased by over 70 percent.
3
I chose the Accord because it is one of the few model name’s that is present in every year. The figure uses the
average values of these variables across all Accord models that are offered. It looks similar if I use the min, max or
median.

1

2200

80

2400

100

Horsepower
120

Weight (lbs)
2600
2800

140

3000

160

3200

Figure 1: Changes in the Honda Accord Attributes over Time

1985

1990

1995
Year

2000

2005

1980

1985

1990

1995
Year

2000

2005

1980

1985

1990

1995
Year

2000

2005

1980

1985

1990

1995
Year

2000

2005

24

100

150

Fuel Econoomy (mpg)
26
28
30

Torque (ft lbs)
200
250

32

300

1980

26 years. Weight has increased by over 50 percent, while horsepower has nearly tripled! After an
initial increase in fuel economy, during the run up in CAFE standards and high gasoline prices of
the early 1980s, fuel economy decreased as gas prices also fell. The period of relatively constant
fuel economy and increases in both weight and power illustrate that potential fuel economy gains
have given way to more weight and power.
These changes in vehicle characteristics are driven by consumer preferences and shifts in the
“weight/power/fuel economy production possibilities frontier”—the trade-off between fuel economy,
engine power and weight. The different 2009 Honda Accord four door sedans offered in the US
and UK serve as a frame of reference. Two engines are offered in the US, a 2.4 liter 4-cylinder
and a 3.5 liter V-6. The 2.4 liter has a maximum horsepower of 177 hp, while the 3.5 liter has
a maximum horsepower of 271 hp. In the UK where gas prices are substantially higher, three
engines are offered: a smaller 2.0 liter gasoline 4-cylinder, a 2.4 liter gasoline 4-cylinder, and a 2.2
liter diesel 4-cylinder. The gasoline engines are rated at 154 hp and 170 hp, respectively.4 The
4

The 2.4 liter in the UK achieves higher horsepower through a higher compression ratio.

2

diesel engine is rated at 148 hp. The two countries use different fuel economy “test cycles”, so the
fuel economy ratings are not directly comparable, but for completeness the US models achieve a
combined fuel economy of 24 MPG and 22 MPG for the 2.2 liter and the 3.5 liter models with
automatic transmissions, respectively. The UK models with automatic transmissions achieve 31
MPG (2.0 liter gasoline engine), 27 MPG (2.4 liter gasoline engine) and 37 MPG (2.2 liter diesel
engine).5 The variation in engines offered across the two countries suggests that manufacturers are
able to move along some sort of production possibilities frontier and where they choose to be on
this frontier is driven by either consumer preferences or the regulatory environment.
A large literature focuses on estimating consumer preferences for fuel economy and power characteristics measured as either horsepower, torque or acceleration.6 The goal of this paper is to
better understand the technological trade-offs that manufacturers and consumers face when choosing between fuel economy, weight and engine power characteristics, as well as how this production
possibilities frontier (PPF) has changed over time. The results serve as a guide as to how the
market may respond to increases in CAFE standards or a carbon tax, as well as how far regulatory
standards can push fleet fuel economy.
Using detailed model-level data from 1980 to 2006, the results suggest that if weight, horsepower
and torque were held at their 1980 levels, fuel economy for both passenger cars and light trucks
could have increased by nearly 50 percent from 1980 to 2006; this is in stark contrast to the 15
percent by which fuel economy actually increased. Technological progress was fastest during the
early 1980s, a period where CAFE standards were rapidly increasing and gasoline prices were high.
This is consistent with the results of Newell, Jaffe, and Stavins (1999) and Popp (2002) which find
that the rate of energy efficiency innovation depends on both energy prices (Newell, Jaffe, and
Stavins and Popp) and regulatory standards (Newel, Jaffe, and Stavins).
The trade-off between weight and fuel economy suggests that, for passenger cars, fuel economy
increases by over 4 percent for every 10 percent reduction in weight. On average, fuel economy
increases by 2.6 percent for every 10 percent reduction in horsepower. The effect of torque is less
precisely estimated. For light duty trucks, weight reductions of 10 percent are associated with
5

This converts imperial gallons to US gallon equivalents. These data are “adjusted” fuel economy measures
reflecting the EPAs recent change in ratings. The data used for the analysis and the data relevant for CAFE
standards are “unadjusted”.
6
For example, see such seminal papers as Goldberg (1995) and Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995). Typically, the
influence of gasoline prices is not the focus of these papers. Two exceptions are Klier and Linn (2008) and Sawhill
(2008).

3

increases in fuel economy of 3.5 percent, a 10 percent increase in torque is correlated with a 3
percent increase in fuel economy, while the association with horsepower is not precisely estimated.
The results shed light on how difficult it will be to meet the CAFE standards passed by the
Bush Administration and those recently proposed by the Obama Administration. The Bush CAFE
standards call for an economy-wide average fuel efficiency of 35 MPG by 2020; the Obama standards
call for an average fuel economy of 35.5 MPG by 2016. I calculate different methods for complying
with the two standards by taking into account (a) technological progress, (b) the trade-off between
fuel economy and weight and engine power characteristics and (c) the passenger car to light truck
ratio. I find that meeting the Bush standards will not require large behavioral changes, but will
require halting the rate of growth in engine power and weight. In particular, if we continue with
the average rate of technological progress, the standard can be met by reducing the increase in
weight and engine power that has occurred since 1980 by less than 50 percent.7 Alternatively,
shifting the car to truck ratio back to levels observed in the 1990s will suffice. The results also
suggest that reducing weight and engine power characteristics to their 1980 levels along with rates
of technological progress that were typical during the increases in CAFE standards in the early
1980s, fleet fuel economy could reach over 50 MPG by 2020.
Meeting the Obama standards will require “downsizing” of fleet attributes; although the standards are certainly attainable. With average rates of technological progress, new vehicle fleet fuel
economy can reach 35.5 MPG by shifting the car/truck mix to their 1980 levels while at the same
time reducing the weight and power characteristic gains since 1980 by 25 percent. Alternatively,
the car/truck mix can remain constant, but weight and power reduced to their 1980 levels. A mixture of these two extremes is also possible. With rapid technological progress along with aggressive
shifts in the car/truck mix and downsizing, fleet fuel economy can reach nearly 46 MPG by 2016.
The empirical model also yields firm-specific estimates of “efficiency”, defined as the relative
ability of a given manufacturer to extract fuel economy from a vehicles with a given level of weight,
horsepower, torque and a variety of other characteristics. For passenger cars, the top four firms
are Honda, Toyota, GM and Nissan, respectively. Honda’s fuel economy is nearly 7 percent greater
than a comparable Ford passenger car; 13 percent greater than a comparable Hyundai. Across
the entire sample, US manufacturers tend to be above the median. Korean manufacturers fair the
7
If we infer causality for the above trade-offs, this can be met by either altering the makeup of existing vehicles or
shifting which vehicles are purchased. If the above trade-offs are viewed as simply correlations, then this represents
shifting which vehicles, among those vehicles that are already offered, are purchased.

4

worst, among “non-exotic” manufacturers; and German manufacturers tend to lie below US manufacturers. Interestingly, relative efficiency changes significantly for light duty trucks. While Ford
lags behind Honda, Nissan and Toyota in relative fuel economy for passenger cars and GM behind
Honda and Toyota, they outperform Nissan and Toyota in light truck fuel economy. Over time,
however, the relative position of US firms in both passenger cars and light trucks has diminished.
The drop in US productivity may provide insight into their current financial troubles.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the theoretical and
empirical models. Section 3 discusses the data. Section 4 provides graphical evidence of both tradeoffs and technological progress. In Section 5, I discuss the empirical results, including estimated
trade-offs, technological progress and compliance strategies for the new CAFE standards. Section
6 estimates alternative models and investigates robustness. In Section 7, I provide evidence that
the results are not driven by either within-year or cross-year changes in how much manufacturers
spend on engine technology. Section 8 investigates heterogeneity across manufacturers. Finally,
Section 9 concludes the paper.

2

Theoretical and Empirical Models

The goal of the empirical work is to estimate the technical relationship between vehicle weight,
engine power and fuel economy—which I refer to as a production possibilities frontier (PPF)—and
how this PPF shifts out over time. I begin by discussing an estimation strategy when vehicles are
completely described by four characteristics: weight, horsepower, torque and fuel economy. I then
discuss how relaxing these assumptions may introduce bias and provide empirical support that this
bias is small in Section 6.
Let the production possibilities frontier at time t be represented by a(t)T (wit , hpit , tqit , mpgit ),
where wit is the vehicle’s weight, hpit its horsepower, tqit its torque and mpgit its fuel economy.
Given a(t)T (wit , hpit , tqit , mpgit ) the function that relates fuel economy of a vehicle on the PPF to
the other characteristics is given as follows:

∗
mpgit
= max : (mpgimt , wimt , hpimt , tqimt ) ∈ a(t)T (wit , hpit , tqit , mpgit )
mpgit

(1)

The maximum fuel economy that a vehicle can achieve, given its weight, horsepower and torque
can be represented as:
5

∗
mpgit
= a(t)f (wit , hpit , tqit )

(2)

I focus on this relationship and how it has shifted over time.

2.1

Additional Factors

The discussion above assumes the PPF is a function of only fuel economy, horsepower, torque
and weight. In practice, a number of factors may influence the PPF. Perhaps, the most notable
is the cost devoted to technologies that influence the PPF. A firm can shift out the PPF, within
a year or over time, by using more expensive technologies. Omitting expenditures on technology
from the empirical model may lead to two sources of bias. First, if the goal is to estimate how
the PPF has changed over time, holding how much is devoted to technologies that influence the
PPF fixed, then the estimated shifts out in the PPF will be biased. The direction of the bias
is unknown. If firms have increased the amount spent on these technologies over time, then the
shifts will reflect the sum of technological progress and this increase. In contrast, if firms have
reduced expenditures on technology over time, the shifts will understate technological progress.
The second source of bias may come from within year variation in the cost devoted to technologies
if this variation is correlated with one of the characteristics. This would bias the estimates of the
engineering relationship between fuel economy and engine power or weight. Here, I briefly discuss
why these biases are small and provide detailed evidence in Section 7.
I provide two sources of evidence that suggest the shifts in the PPF will understate technological
progress. The first relies on existing literature, while the second, discussed in detail in Section 7,
shows that the results are robust to controlling for proxies for expenditures on technology. A
number of papers have used hedonic pricing models to show that price indexes for automobiles
have fallen over time; although the recent analyses have focused on vehicles outside of the US. For
example, Matas and Raymond (2008) find that Spanish real automobile prices fell from 1981 to
2005 by 40 percent. Requena-Silvente and Walker (2008) and Dalen and Bodie (2004) find similar
results for the UK and Netherlands, respectively. If the amount spent on technologies that shift
the PPF out within a year is positively correlated with the real price of automobiles, then these
studies would suggest that the estimated technological progress is biased downward.
Furthermore, I also note that for much of the analysis assuming shifts in the PPF reflect
only technological progress is not required. Specifically, I use the estimates to answer two related
6

questions. One, how would fuel economy today compare to fuel economy in 1980 if we have held
size and power constant? And two, how would new fleet fuel economy look in the future if we were
to reduce vehicle attributes and continue to progress at rates observed in the data? Insofar as the
observed progression captures both shifts in the PPF due to technological progress and increases
in how much firms are devoting to technology, the results should be interpreted in this light.
That is, statements regarding how fleet fuel economy in 2006 would change if we had kept vehicle
characteristics the same, and projections of fleet fuel economy in the future, can still be accurately
made if we continue with the observed changes in both the PPF and technology expenditures. The
second concern is that the variation in fuel economy/engine power/weight technology expenditures
on technology is correlated with attributes. The robustness analysis in Section 7 suggests that this
is not the case.
Besides the cost devoted to technologies that influence the PPF, other factors also alter the
relationship between fuel economy, engine power and weight. For example, vehicles with manual
transmissions are able to achieve higher fuel economy than automatic transmissions, conditional
on weight and engine power. Turbochargers also increase fuel efficiency. Insofar as my data allow,
I control for a number of these factors, labelled as Xit ; I discuss these variables below.

2.2

Sources of the Shifts

Shifts in the PPF represent not only increases in engine technology, but other advances such as
advances in transmissions, aerodynamics, rolling resistance, etc. Since the early 1980s, a number
of fuel economy/power technologies have become prevalent in vehicles. On the engine side, large
efficiency gains have been captured through fuel injection, as opposed to carburetors. In contrast
to an engine in the 1980s, the typical engine today has the camshaft—the apparatus that lifts the
valves as it rotates—above the engine head. This eliminates friction causing pushrods and rockers.
In addition, the majority of engines today have multiple camshafts, allowing for multiple valves
per cylinder are now possible (more than two); many also have variable valve timing technologies.
Multiple valves allow for the smoother flow of both the fuel/air mixture and exhaust in and out
of the cylinder, while variable valve timing allows for the timing of the valve lift to adjust to
driving conditions.8 Turbochargers or superchargers also increase the efficiency of an engine by
using a turbine, spun by either the engine’s exhaust (turbocharger) or the rotation of the engine’s
8

Chon and Heywood (2000) find that multiple valves increase fuel efficiency two to five percent above two-valve
designs, while variables valve timing increases fuel efficiency by roughly two to three percent.

7

crankshaft (supercharger), to force air into the engine. This allows for a smaller displacement while
holding horsepower constant.9 Most recently, cylinder deactivation and hybrid technology are now
beginning to be utilized. Hybrid technologies use both an gasoline engine and electric motor (with
a battery) to propel the vehicle. Whne there is sufficient stored electricity, the car runs solely on
the electric motor. During times when the vehicle is coasting, the electric motor runs in reverse,
thereby recharging the battery. Cylinder deactivation deactivates a set of cylinders during times
when power is not needed.
Transmissions have also become more efficient through by utilizing more speeds, variable transmissions and torque converter lock-up. Increasing the number of speeds allows the engine to operate
at more efficient speeds. Variable speed transmissions have a continuous number of speeds allowing
the engine’s RPMs to keep relatively constant. Torque converter lockups reduce the efficiency losses
by fixing the torque converter to the drivetrain at highway speeds. Front wheel drive increases fuel
efficiency by having the engine closer to the wheels receiving power and by often having the engine
turned 90 degrees so that the rotation of the engine mirrors the rotation of the wheels. Finally,
advanced materials, tire improvements and advances in aerodynamics and lubricants have also lead
to technological improvements.
The penetration of a number of these technologies since 1975 is plotted in Figures 2 and 3.10
Figure 2 focuses on engine-related technologies, while Figure 3 focuses on other parts of the drivetrain. Figure 2 illustrates that compared to the typical vehicle built in 1980, a vehicle today is
likely to be fuel injected, have more than two valves per cylinder and have variable valve timing.
While turbochargers and superchargers have not penetrated the market nearly as much as these
other technologies, their use has also increased. Finally, hybrid technologies have also increased in
recent years. The diffusion of non-engine drivetrain technologies has also been rapid. Front wheel
drive, torque converter lock-ups (for vehicles with an automatic transmission) and transmissions
with at least four gears became commonplace in the early 1980s and essentially standard by 1990.
By 2006, we also find that nearly 70 percent of vehicles had a transmission with at least five speeds;
continuous transmissions have also entered the market.
A number of technologies are also “waiting in the wings”. These include advances in hybrid
9

Ecker, Gill, and Schwaderlapp (2000) finds that supercharging diesel engines can yield fuel efficiency improvements
as large as 10 percent when combined with variable valve timing.
10
Data from all variables, other than transmission speeds is taken from http://www.epa.gov/otaq/fetrends.htm.
Data for transmission speeds are taken from the model-level data used in this paper.

8

technology, plug in hybrids, camless engines, further reductions in engine friction, higher voltage
electrical systems and improved air conditioning.11

2.3

Empirical Specification

I model a(t) non-parametrically in the sense that shifts in the PPF, relative to the base year, can
take any value in a given year. Functional form assumptions are made regarding f (.). Technological
progress is modeled as “input” neutral in the sense that it is multiplicative to the function relating
fuel economy and power and weight. I begin the analysis by focusing on two functional forms:
Cobb-Douglas and translog. Section 6 relaxes both of these assumptions. A mean zero error term,
it , captures additional characteristics of the vehicle that are assumed to be uncorrelated with the
other right hand side variables
Under the Cobb-Douglas and translog assumptions, fuel economy is modeled, respectively, as:

∗
ln mpgit
= Tt + β1 ln wit + β2 ln hpit + β3 ln tqit + βj Xit + it

(3)

and,

∗
ln mpgit
= Tt + β1 ln wit + β2 ln hpit + β3 ln tqit + γ1 (ln wit )2 + γ2 (ln hpit )2 + γ3 (ln tqit )2

+ δ1 ln wit ln hpit + δ2 ln wit ln tqit + δ3 ln hpit ln tit + βj Xit + it

3

(4)

Data

I use model-level data on nearly all vehicles sold within the United States and subject to CAFE
standards. Therefore, the analysis omits vehicles that have a gross vehicle weight in excess of 8500
pounds which are exempt from CAFE regulation; the results should be interpreted in this light,
reflecting the progress and trade-offs associated with vehicles with curb weights below 8500 pounds.
Fuel economy data come from NHTSA and are supplemented with data from Automobile News
and manufacturer websites. The data report a weighted average of city and freeway fuel economy,
11

For a discussion of the cost of these potential technologies and their impact on fuel economy see, for example,
Greene and Duleep (1993), DeCicco and Ross (1996) and DeCicco, An, and Ross (2001).

9

weight, maximum horsepower and maximum torque.12 The weight measures for cars and trucks
differ. For passengers cars, the data report the curb weight—the weight of the vehicle unloaded. For
light duty trucks the weight measure is the weight, including the vehicle’s own, in which the vehicle
is rated to carry. In addition, data are available on fuel type, aspiration type (e.g., turbocharger),
transmission type, and engine size.13
Whether to include these additional covariates depends on the question of interest. If one
was interested in understanding how much more efficient a normally aspirated, gasoline passenger
car with an automatic transmission, conditional on its weight, horsepower and torque, is today
compared to in 1980, we would want to include not only weight, horsepower, torque, but also all
of the additional variables. If instead one was interested in knowing how much more efficient is a
vehicle today, compared to in 1980, allowing for changes in engine size, aspiration-rates, fuel types,
etc., then the additional variables should be omitted. That is, if a portion of technological advances
is coming from advances in turbo equipment, fuel shifting or the ability to extract more power from
smaller engines, we would not want to include the other covariates, thereby allowing the year effects
to absorb these advances. It seems fairly clear that one would not want to condition on engine
size; the other variables are not so clear. However, while we would want to omit those variables
that represent endogenous technological responses by manufacturers, we do want to control for
characteristics that move where we on the PPF that are chosen by consumers. In what follows,
I present results both including all of the variables and results when I include only transmission
and fuel type. They are broadly consistent with each other, but as expected omitting the other
variables tend to imply slightly larger technological advances.
In addition to these variables, I impute a vehicle’s 0-60 acceleration time using the following
equation from the EPA’s Light-Duty Automotive Technology and Fuel Trends: 1975 to 2007 :

t = F (HP/W T )−f

(5)

I use the EPA’s values for F and f: 0.892 and 0.805 for automatic transmissions and 0.967 and 0.775
for manual transmissions. Given the flexibility of the empirical models, I never use acceleration in
12
Horsepower and torque are closely related. In fact, at a given RPM, horsepower=torque*RPM/5250. Because
the maximum values used in the analysis occur at different RPM levels, there is still information in each. The results
are robust to including only one of the two measures.
13
Fuel economy is measured as a weighted average of city fuel economy (55 percent) and highway fuel economy (45
percent).

10

the econometric analysis, but it is a useful variable to compare across time.14
Finally, a number of the empirical models will include manufacturer fixed effects. Given the
variety of ownership changes over the sample, I take steps to construct a stable definition of manufacturers. For example, I keep Mercedes and Chrysler separate throughout the sample.
I take a few steps to uncover errors in the data. Specifically, I exclude all vehicles that have
missing observations and observations with torque exceeding 2000 ft lbs15 , observations with fuel
economy below 5 MPG and observation with fuel economy above 70MPG (except for the Honda
Insight). An observation therefore becomes a vehicle that is offered.

4

Summary Statistics and Graphical Evidence

Before estimating econometric models of the PPF, I provide summary statistics and graphical
analyses of both the trade-offs and shifts in the PPF.
Table 1 reports the summary statistics for vehicles across the entire sample and separately for
1980 and 2006. It is important to note that these statistics represent what cars were available;
they differ from the new vehicle fleet summary statistics since the fleet summary statistics are sales
obviously weighted. The average fuel economy for passenger cars is just under 28 MPG for the
entire sample. The least fuel efficient vehicle has a fuel economy of 8.7 mpg (the 1990 Lamborghini
Countach), while the most fuel efficient vehicle is the 2000 Honda Insight at 76.4 MPG. The average
fuel economy of automobiles offered was over 27 MPG in 2006, while it was under 23 MPG in 1980.
This represents an increase of roughly 18.5 percent.
The average car has a curb weight of over 3000 pounds. Weight has increased by nearly 14
percent over the sample; remarkably, horsepower has more than doubled over this time, while
torque has increased by over 45 percent. All of these gains have occurred with smaller engines.
Fewer diesel engines are offered now, compared to in 1980, while the percentage of turbocharged and
supercharged vehicles has increased. A similar number of manual transmissions are offered in the
two periods. Acceleration has increased by nearly 40 percent over this time period. These changes
are similar to changes in the new passenger car fleet from 1980 to 2004 (thus, sales weighted).
14

Because the analysis uses the natural log of each variable, acceleration is implicitly controlled for.
This omits 5.1 percent of the sample, 97 percent of these are due to missing data. From looking at the data, it
appears as though the RPM level at the maximum torque level and torque are reversed for some of these observations.
As a frame of reference, the 2006 Dodge Viper has a maximum torque of 712 ft lbs; the Lamborghini Diablo has 620
ft lbs of torque.
15

11

For the fleet, fuel economy increased by 19.8 percent; weight increased by 13 percent; horsepower
increased by 80 percent; diesel penetration went from 4.2 percent to 0.3 percent, due in large part to
increasing limits on particulate matter emissions; the percent of cars with either a turbocharger or
supercharger increased from 1.0 percent to 5.9 percent; and the percentage of manual transmission
went from 30 percent to 20 percent.
Among vehicles that are offered, the increases in fuel economy for light duty trucks have surpassed passenger vehicles, an increase of over 35 percent. Weight gains have been similar to
passenger vehicles. Horsepower has increased by 70 percent, torque by 15 percent. Acceleration
has not increased as much, but has increased by over 25 percent. Fleet data are available for light
duty trucks for fuel economy from 1980 to 2004 and for other attributes from 1984 to 2004. For
the actual fleet, over these time periods, fuel economy increased by 15.7 percent, weight increased
by 26 percent, horsepower increased by 99 percent, diesel penetration went from 2.8 percent to 2.5
percent, the percent of cars with either a turbocharger increased from 0.4 percent to 1.5 percent
and the percentage of manual transmission went from 41.8 percent to 7.0 percent.
The simple summary statistics hide a lot of the changes that have taken place. Figures 4 through
6 plot the probability distributions for fuel economy, horsepower and acceleration for both passenger
cars and light duty trucks in 1980 and 2006, respectively. For fuel economy, the distribution for
passenger cars has not only shifted out, but has become more symmetric. That is while the mode
has increased, a larger fraction of offered cars are below this mode than in 1980. The same is also
true for light duty trucks, but the distribution remains left skewed. Horsepower today has a much
larger right tail than in 1980. Finally, acceleration has shown much larger advances in passenger
cars compared to light duty trucks reflecting the smaller weight gains in passenger cars compared
to trucks.
Next, I present graphical evidence of the trade-offs that exist between fuel economy and other
automobile attributes and the technological progress that took place from 1980 to 2006. Figure
7 plots fuel economy against weight separately for 1980 and 2006 for passenger cars. For visual
ease, I truncate fuel economy above 50 MPG. A lowess smoothed non-parametric line is also fitted
through the data. The figure suggests that a 3000 pound passenger car gets roughly 10 more MPG
in 2006, compared to 1980. These increases are roughly constant over the weight distributions. At
the mean fuel economy in 1980, this reflects a 45 percent increase. Similarly, Figure 8 suggests
that a passenger car with 200 horsepower gets roughly 10 more MPG in 2006 than in 1980; as with
12

weight the shift in the “isoquant” is fairly parallel. Finally, Figure 9 plots fuel economy torque for
passenger cars. While the shift is not as large, it also appears parallel, roughly 8 miles per gallon
for a given level of torque.
To confirm that similar trade-offs exist for light duty trucks, Figures 10 through 12 repeat
the exercise for light duty trucks. Two things are worth noting. First, while the shifts remain
substantial, they do not appear to be as large. Second, the shift is not as constant across the
attributes when compared with passenger cars. These figures motivate the econometric model
which allows for non-parallel shifts by including higher order variables of the characteristics.

5

Econometric Results

Tables 2 and 3 report the fuel economy production possibilities frontier estimates for passenger
cars; Tables 4 and 5 report the results for light trucks. For brevity, I omit the standard errors
associated with the year effects; all of which are statistically significant at the 1 percent level.16
The models vary the amount of control variables and fixed effects. Before discussing the specific
results, I describe each model. Models 1 through 3 assume a Cobb-Douglas functional form in
weight and engine power characteristics, and vary the set of other covariates. Model 1 includes a
full set of technology indicator variables—e.g., manual transmission, diesel fuel, turbocharger and
supercharger. Model 2 adds fixed manufacturer effects to Model 1. Model 3 omits the turbocharger
and supercharger indicator variables. Again, the rationale is that if some of the technological
progress is coming from better turbocharger or supercharger technologies leading to their greater
use, then we want this to be included in the technology fixed effects. Models 4 through 6 repeat
these variations assuming a translog functional form. Reported standard errors are clustered at the
manufacturer level.

5.1

Trade-Offs

To understand the trade-offs between fuel economy and other vehicle characteristics I focus on
Model 3, which includes the Cobb-Douglas terms, fixed manufacturer effects and indicator variables for whether the vehicle has a manual transmission or uses diesel fuel.17 As the standard
16

Figures 14 and 17 include 95 percent confidence intervals for Model 3 for passenger cars and light trucks, respectively
17
As Tables 2 and 3 indicate Model 3 explains a large portion of the variation in log fuel economy. If we decompose
this into within-year fit, the average within-year R-square for passenger cars is 0.71, for light trucks it is 0.59.

13

errors for Models 4 thru 6 indicate, the translog functional form over-parameterizes the production
possibilities frontier. While the flexibility is useful to understand robustness, it makes elasticity
calculations noisy.
The Cobb-Douglas results imply that, ceteris paribus, a ten percent decrease in weight is associated with a 4.26 percent increase in fuel economy. Large efficiency gains are also correlated with
lowering horsepower; all else equal, a ten percent decrease in horsepower is associated with a 2.57
percent increase in fuel economy. The relationship between fuel economy and torque is small and
not precisely estimated; a ten percent increase in torque is correlated with a 0.77 percent increase
in fuel economy. Interpreting changes in fuel economy for a change in only one of these variables
is difficult, since they are strongly correlated and jointly determined.18 For the compliance strategy calculations below, I use the empirical distribution of sales-weighted data to capture these
correlations.
The trade-offs are similar for light duty trucks. The key difference is that torque replaces
horsepower as the most significant engine power characteristic. Increases in weight of 10 percent
are associated with reduction in fuel economy of 3.55 percent, slightly smaller than with passenger
cars. On average, fuel economy decreases by 3.13 percent when torque increases by 10 percent; the
effect of horsepower is not precisely estimated. Notice that the sum of the horsepower and torque
coefficients—the most correlated of the three variables—is larger with light duty trucks than with
passenger vehicles, 0.376 compared to 0.308, implying larger fuel economy gains from reducing
engine power characteristics for light duty trucks. In contrast, larger increases in fuel economy are
associated with weight reductions for passenger vehicles.
Finally, the coefficients associated with manual transmissions and diesel engines suggest fuel
economy savings for these two attributes. Their sign and magnitudes are consistent with noneconometric engineering estimates. The gains from a manual transmission are between 3 and 5
percent for passenger cars and 4.5 percent for light duty trucks. These are consistent with matched
vehicles estimates. However, it also appears to be the case that the efficiency gains from manual
transmissions have fallen over time as automatic transmission technology has increased; this increase
would be reflected in the technology fixed effects.
The increase in fuel efficiency from diesel technology is between 19 and 23 percent and 24 to 27
18

For passenger cars, the pair-wise correlations are 0.71 for weight and horsepower, 0.82 for weight and torque and
0.91 for horsepower and torque. For light trucks, they are 0.53 for weight and horsepower, 0.67 for weight and torque
and 0.80 for horsepower and torque.

14

percent for passenger cars and light duty trucks, respectively. These gains reflect both the increase
in thermal efficiency of diesel engines—the ability to convert the BTUs in the fuel to useful energy,
rather than heat—and the fact that diesel fuel has a greater energy content.19 The key difference
in the two technologies is that diesel engines replace a spark plug with much higher compression
ratios—the ratio of the cylinder volume when the piston is at its lowest point to when it is at its
highest point.20 With higher compression ratios the heat from the compressed air combined with
the more combustible diesel fuel is sufficient to ignite the air/fuel mixture. The higher compression
rates lead to efficiency gains.
While estimates of the theoretical gains in thermal efficiency vary, as do the engineering estimates of the gains in practice, Isuzu estimates that the thermal efficiency of gasoline vehicles is
between 25 and 30 percent, while the thermal efficiency of diesel engines is between 35 and 42
percent.21 These estimates suggest a minimum efficiency gain of 17 percent and a maximum gain
of 68 percent. At their average levels, the efficiency gain is 40 percent. Accounting for the higher
energy content would imply efficiency gains near the low end of this range. The larger increases in
fuel efficiency for light duty trucks is consistent with anecdotal evidence that the gains from diesel
technology are largest for larger, more powerful, engines.22

5.2

Technological Progress

The technological progress estimates are very similar across models. For passenger cars, the CobbDouglas models yield slightly higher estimates of progress and the models are robust to including
manufacturer fixed effects or the turbocharger and supercharger indicator variables. Tables 3 and 5
report the coefficients for passengers cars and light duty trucks, respectively. I focus on summarizing
the estimates graphically. Figure 13 plots the estimated technological progress for passenger cars
across all models. All of the models imply that, conditional on weight and power characteristics,
fuel economy is over 45 percent greater in 2006, compared to 1980. The results are also tightly
estimated. Figure 14 plots the estimates and 95 percent confidence interval for Model 3; the other
19

The higher energy content also translates to a proportional increase in greenhouse gas emissions. The
EPA reports that a gallon of gasoline has 124,000 BTUs, while a gallon of diesel has 139,000 BTUs.
http://www.eia.doe.gov/kids/energyfacts/.
20
Another difference is that the fuel is injected later in a diesel engine, while in a gasoline engine the air/fuel
mixture is sucked in as the piston drops after the previous cycle.
21
www.isuzu.co.jp/world/technology/clean/
22
A likely reason diesel engines become more prevalent, the larger the vehicle (e.g., heavy-duty diesel trucks, trains,
ships, etc.).

15

models yield similar confidence intervals. The rate of progress was greatest early in the sample—a
time when gasoline prices were high and CAFE standards were rapidly increasing. To see this,
Figure 15 plots the annual rate of technological progress from Model 3 and percentage change in
passenger car CAFE standards.
The results are also robust across models when considering light duty trucks; by the end of
the sample, the estimates across passenger cars and light duty trucks are similar. Figure 16 plots
the estimated technological progress for light trucks. All of the models imply that, conditional
on weight and power characteristics, fuel economy is over 42.8 percent greater in 2006, compared
to 1980. As with passenger cars, the rate of progress was greatest early in the sample (Figure
19); however unlike passenger cars, technological progress has not been monotonic for light trucks,
leading to a flatter curve during the 1990s and a more rapid rate of progress later in the sample.23
The correlation between technical progress and high gasoline prices and the adoption of CAFE
standards is consistent with a small literature that finds regulatory standards and energy prices
affects innovation. Newell, Jaffe, and Stavins (1999) find a similar result using product level data for
room and central air conditioners. Specifically, they find that electricity prices affect technological
progress for both central and room air conditioners, and room air conditioner efficiency standards
also increased technological progress. In contrast, they do not find an effect of natural gas prices
on gas water heater efficiency. Popp (2002) finds similar results using patent counts related to
energy efficiency and energy prices. Popp uses patent counts from 11 classifications related to
either energy supply or energy demand from 1970 to 1994. He finds a positive relationship between
patents counts and energy prices (measured as dollars per BTU, across all sectors).
23

These estimates are somewhat larger compared to two related papers in the engineering literature. Lutsey and
Sperling (2005) who yearly fleet average observations to decompose annual fuel economy changes from 1975 to 2004
by regressing fleet average fuel economy on estimates of engine and drivetrain efficiency, aerodynamic drag and rolling
resistance, fleet average weight and fleet average acceleration. Using their estimates they calculate that fuel economy
would have been 12 percent higher from 1987 to 2004 if weight, size and acceleration were held constant; my results
imply a gain of roughly 22 percent. Given that they use proxies for engine efficiency, drag and rolling resistance, the
coefficients from the their regression may be biased downward because of attenuation bias. This would in turn lead
to smaller potential efficiency gains. Chon and Heywood (2000) analyze only engine technological progress and find
that from 1984 to 1999 “brake mean effective pressure”—the average pressure applied to the piston during an engine’s
power stroke—grew at an average rate of 1.5 percent per year. Because the fixed year effects capture improvements
throughout the vehicle, it is not surprising that the progress in one component of this, the engine, is smaller than the
aggregate.

16

5.3

CAFE Standard Compliance Strategies

The Bush Administration recently adopted new CAFE standards that will increase fleet fuel economy to 35 MPG by 2020. The Obama Administration has more recently announced tougher CAFE
standards that call for a 35.5 MPG average by 2016. Using the results I calculate how fleet fuel
economy changes in 2020 and 2016 with respect to (a) changes in technological progress, (b) the
trade-offs between fuel economy, weight and power, and (c) changes in the passenger car/light duty
truck mix to change.24
I assume three levels of technological progress: none, a rate of progress equal to the average
annual rate estimated and a rate equal to the 75th percentile. I use data on changes in fleet
characteristics to construct sensible movements along the fuel economy and weight/power level
curve. Data on weight and horsepower are available from 1980 to 2004 for passenger cars and from
1984 to 2004 for light duty trucks. Using these data I measure the average yearly increase for
these variables and extrapolate to 1980 to 2006. Because horsepower and torque are so correlated,
I use the ratio of the increase in torque and the increase in horsepower in my data and assume
the same ratio exists for the sales weighted increase in torque. For example, for passenger cars
the implied increase for horsepower from 1980 to 2006 is 89 percent. Among cars that are offered,
it is 123 percent, while the increase in torque is 46 percent. To construct the assumed increase
in sales-weighted torque, I use (46/123)*89 percent. The resulting assumptions for passenger cars
is an increase in weight of 14.1 percent from 1980 to 2006, 89.3 percent for horsepower and 33.5
percent for torque. For light trucks, the assumed increases are 35.4 percent, 144.9 percent and 31.8
percent for weight, horsepower and torque, respectively. I also analyze how fuel efficiency would
evolve if engine power and weight continued to grow at their average rates over this time period.
Using the assumptions regarding the increases in vehicle attributes from 1980 to 2006, I can
vary how close fleet characteristics are to their 1980 levels. To construct reasonable changes in the
car/truck mix, I report results from the mix in 2006, 43.4 percent cars, and incrementally increase
24

I abstract away from two changes to how the new CAFE standards will be implemented. The new standards
will be “footprint” based. That is, it creates car specific standards based on footprints and the compliance will be
met such that a firm’s weighted sum of the difference between the car-specific standard and the actual level must be
positive. While many details are yet to be determined, presumably the shape of the footprint function will be adjusted
such that fleet fuel economy will reach the reported levels of 35 and 35.5 MPG, respectively. A second change that
makes the compliance strategies more relevant is that trading will be allowed. Therefore, the constraint will act as an
industry-wide constraint and the fuel economy across all manufacturers is the relevant number of interest. Second,
the Obama standards will be implemented through the Clean Air Act and will account for greenhouse gas emissions
that are also emitted through such sources as the vehicle’s air conditioning system. In talking with industry sources,
air conditioner improvements may lead to greenhouse gas emission reduction of roughly three percent.

17

this to 80 percent passenger cars—the level in 1980.
Table 6 summarizes new vehicle fleet fuel economy in 2020 across changes in these three dimensions; the table reports results using the trade-off estimates from Model 3. Shading reflects
meeting the 2020 standards. The first set of rows assume zero technological progress over the 14
years from 2006 to 2020. The columns allow engine power and weight to continue to grow at their
average rates (third column), stay at their current levels (fourth column) and move progressively
closer to their 1980 levels (columns five through seven). The zero growth, zero reduction and zero
mix shift reports the average new fleet fuel economy in 2006 across passenger cars and light duty
trucks—25.8 MPG. The first row implies that if we were to continue with the same car/truck mix,
we could increase fuel economy to over 33 MPG by reducing size and power to their 1980 levels.
Shifting to just over 60 percent passenger cars, from the 43.4 mix in 2006, while also reverting to
1980 power and weight achieves the new CAFE standards. In contrast, if we continued with the
same car/truck mix and the same rate of growth in engine power and weight, fuel economy would
fall to 18.1 MPG in 2020.
Once we allow for technological progress, the 2020 standards appear easy to meet provided
we do not continue along the same growth path for engine power and weight. I present two sets
of results. The first assumes that the average rate of technological progress for cars and trucks
holds from 2006 to 2020 (1.76 and 1.78 percent for cars and trucks, respectively). The second
assumes that firms progress at a rate equal to the 75th percentile over the data (2.24 percent and
2.38 percent, respectively). Using the average rate of progress and keeping vehicle size and power
attributes constant, we can meet the standard by shifting to 65 percent cars. Alternatively, we can
move 25 percent towards the size and power of 1980 vehicles. If we progress at a rate equal to the
75th percentile over 1980 to 2006, we meet the standard without shifting of size/power attributes
or the car/truck mix. Rapid technological progress combined with shifts to cars and “downsizing”
results in an average fuel economy of over 51 MPG.
Table 7 reports new vehicle fleet fuel economy in 2016. The panel with zero technological
progress does not change. Unlike the weaker Bush standards, the Obama standards will require
moderate “downsizing” of vehicle characteristics—either shifts to more passenger cars or reducing
weight and engine power characteristics near their 1980 levels. With average technological progress
for cars and trucks and no shifting of the car/truck mix, we can only meet the standards with
weight and engine power levels equal to their 1980 levels; changing only the car/truck mix does
18

not achieve the standard. More rapid technological progress makes the standards easier to achieve,
but still requires changes in fleet characteristics, either through the car/truck mix or weight and
engine size.
There are a number of reasons to prefer the upper levels of technological progress. Recall
progress was most rapid during the run up of CAFE standards in the early 1980s, a time when real
gas prices were roughly equal to those of today. For passenger cars, CAFE standards tightened
from their inception in 1978 to 1985; they went from 18 mpg to 27.5. CAFE standards actually
decreased to 26 mpg from 1986 to 1988. During this period of increasing CAFE standards, the
average estimated progress for passenger cars is 3.07 percent. This is well above the 75th percentile.
For light truck CAFE standards, the initial increase in the standard stopped in 1987. During this
time, the estimated rate of progress is 2.12 percent per year, roughly equal to the 75th percentile.
Using these rates of progress leads to two additional compliance strategies for the newest CAFE
standards, compared to the average rate of progress, while the standards adopted under the Bush
Administration met by simply stopping the observed increases in engine power and weight.

6

Alternative Estimators

The previous models implicitly assume that the “trade-off” coefficients remain constant over time.
One concern is that this masks aspects of technological progress that change these trade-offs.
Because the above trade-off coefficients will represent the average trade-offs across all years in the
data (appropriately weighted), if the trade-offs in later years are not as large, technological progress
may be biased downwards.25 I relax this assumption in two ways and discuss the results at the end
of the section.

6.1

Oaxaca/Blinder-Type Decomposition

Blinder (1973) and Oaxaca (1973) note that the estimates of the effect of a dummy variable, race
in their case and year in my case, in a model where the remaining coefficients are assumed to be
constant, will also capture changes in the coefficients associated with the other right hand side
variables if the mean of these variables differ across the two samples. They also note that the
25
If the mean weight, horsepower, etc. are the same in both time periods, then the year effects will correctly
represent the average increase in fuel economy. However, if the trade-offs become less severe and the average of these
characteristics in the later years is larger than in the earlier years, then they year effects will underestimate the true
increase. As discussed above, the characteristics have indeed increased over time.

19

estimated effect from turning on or off the indicator variable depends on which set of coefficients
you “hold constant”. In many cases, there is no obvious group of coefficients to hold fixed; in my
case since we are interested in asking what the fuel economy of current vehicles would be if they
were produced using the technology available in 1980, a natural choice is to use the coefficients
from the beginning of the sample to estimate the fuel economy of a given vehicle in 2006 using the
technology in 1980.
To implement this, I estimate Models 3 and 6 using data from only first three years of the
sample.26 Using these coefficients, I fit fuel economy for the remaining observations and calculate
the difference between actual fuel economy and the fitted value.27 The difference measures technological progress using the estimated trade-offs in the first three years of the sample, therefore it
accounts for relaxation of these trade-offs.

6.2

Matching Estimator

As a second robustness check, I estimate a propensity score matching model. Matching models are
often used to estimate a treatment effect when there is selection on observables. By comparing an
observation in the “treatment group” with one in the “control” group which has a very similar ex
ante probability of being in the treatment group, as measured by the propensity score, the estimate
will be consistent in the presence of selection on observables.
To reframe technological progress within standard uses of matching estimators, to estimate
technological progress from 1980 to 2006, we are interested in how the fuel economy of a vehicle
built in 2006 would change if the characteristics of the vehicle, in terms of weight, engine power,
etc., did not change, but the vehicle used the technology available in 1980. We can define the
“treatment”, Wi = 1, as using 2006’s technology; Wi = 0 implies using 1980’s technology. If we
define the log of fuel economy for vehicle, i, as yi , we want to estimate:

4yi = yi (Wi = 1) − yi (Wi = 0)
26

(6)

There is a power/bias trade-off. Using only the first year will minimize any bias, but yields noisier coefficients
on some of the translog coefficients. While the results are robust to using only the first year, I include the first three
years for more precision. The estimated technological progress for 1981 and 1982 therefore becomes the year effects
associated with these years. The results are robust to moving this cut-off around.
27
If we were interested in the heterogeneity of this estimate across all vehicles in a given year, X, a better measure
may be the fitted values of these vehicles from a regression using the data from X. Since I only report the mean
across all vehicles doing this would yield the same measure.

20

We can then summarize the sample average treatment effect as:

4yi = SAT E =

1 X
yi (Wi = 1) − yi (Wi = 0)
N

(7)

More important is the average treatment effect for the treated which measures how much more
fuel efficient the average vehicle in 2006 is compared to if these same vehicles were produced using
technology from 1980:

4yi |Wi = 1 = SAT T =

1 X
yi (Wi = 1) − yi (Wi = 0)
N1

(8)

i|Wi =1

where N1 is the 2006 sample.
Of course, we cannot view the actual counterfactual as we never see a 2006 Honda Accord being
made with 1980 technology. The matching estimate uses “similar” vehicles in 1980 to compare
to the 2006 vehicle as a way to impute the fuel economy of the 2006 Honda Accord using 1980
technology. If we had only fuel economy and, say, weight, this would be a simple estimator. We
would choose the m closest cars, in terms of weight, to the 2006 Honda Accord and calculate the
average difference in fuel economy across the 2006 Honda Accord and the “control group”. Multiple
attributes requires reducing these to a single index using some norm; the propensity score does this.
Given a set of vehicles made in two years, say 1980 and 2006, the propensity score is defined as
the probability a given vehicle is produced in 2006, conditional on a set of attributes, P r(Wi = 1|Xi ).
I estimate the propensity score by estimating a probit model where the dependent variable is one
if the vehicles is built in 2006 and zero if built in 1980. Using this, for a given vehicle in 2006 the
“control group” is the average fuel economy of the closest four vehicles as measured by the fitted
probability from the probit, i.e., the four closest matches to the 2006 vehicle.
To estimate the propensity score Hirano, Imbens, and Ridder (2003) suggests being as flexible
as possible; I include the set of translog variables from Model 6 as conditioning variables and use the
nearest four vehicles as matches. Abadie and Imbens (2002) show that unless matches are perfect,
the estimates will be biased. I adopt their bias-correction procedure that uses the relationship
between the estimated treatment effect and the propensity score to adjust comparisons that do not
match perfectly. I use the Cobb-Douglas set of co-variates for the bias correction.28 I also correct
28

Abadie and Imbens (2002) also use a smaller set of covariates for the bias correction term. I have found that
using the translog set yields unrealistically large estimates of progress.

21

the standard errors to account for heteroskedasticity.

6.3

Results from Alternative Estimators

Columns 8 and 9 of Tables 3 and 5 report the technological progress estimates from these two
alternative estimators for passenger cars and light trucks, respectively. Both the Oaxaca/Blindertype (OB) and matching model estimates largely agree with the more parametric models. Three
of the four models yield larger estimates of than the previous models. For passenger cars, the
OB estimates imply technological advances between 42.7 and 61.8 percent by 2006; these estimates
bookend the previous results. For light duty trucks, both OB estimates are larger than the previous
models. The matching models tend to yield noisier estimates, but are still consistent with the
previous models. For passenger cars, progress is estimated to be 47.6 percent by 2006 for passenger
cars and 68.2 percent for light duty trucks.
Combined these results suggest that using the parametric models yields conservative estimates
for the technological progress.

7

Robustness to Vehicle-Specific Technology Expenditures

I estimate three additional models that shed light on whether the technological progress and tradeoff estimates above are biased due to movements in vehicle-specific technology expenditures either
within a year or over time. The first model includes vehicle-specific relative prices within a given
year on the right hand side. Tables 8 and 9 report the trade-off and technological progress estimates
for passenger cars, respectively, while Tables 10 and 11 report the trade-off and technological
progress estimates for light duty trucks, respectively.
If the degree of technology adoption is correlated with the other right hand side variables, we
would expect the trade-off estimates to changes once price was included on the right hand side,
since vehicles prices re likely positively correlated with technology adoption.29 This does is not the
case. For the Cobb-Douglas specification, the trade-off estimates are extremely similar across both
passenger cars and light duty trucks. For passenger cars, the largest change is less than 0.03 (the
coefficient associated with horsepower), while the largest change for trucks is less than 0.01 (the
29

I use the model’s MSRP. For 381 of the 27,185 observations price is not available.

22

coefficient associated with weight). The translog specification is more difficult to interpret since
the right hand side variables are so correlated, so I focus on the estimates of technological progress.
The estimates of technological progress also change little when we account for relative prices.
For the Cobb-Douglas model, the estimated technological gains by 2006 are 44.8 percent, compared
to 47.4 percent when the relative price is omitted for passenger cars, and 45.9 percent compared
to 46.3 percent when price is omitted for light duty trucks. For the translog model, once relative
prices are included, the gains by 2006 change from 45.7 percent to 41.0 percent for passenger cars
and from 43.4 percent to 42.0 percent for light trucks.
In both the Cobb-Douglas and translog models, relative prices are negatively correlated with
fuel economy and the effect is small. The Cobb-Douglas model suggests that a doubling of price
is correlated with a 2.7 percent reduction in fuel economy for passenger cars and a 1.8 percent
reduction for light trucks; this effect is significant at the 5 percent level for cars, but is statistically
insignificant for trucks. The translog model suggests that a doubling of price is correlated with
a 5.3 percent reduction in fuel economy for passenger cars and a 3.4 percent reduction for light
trucks; this effect is significant at the 1 percent level for cars, but again is statistically insignificant
for trucks.
The second model includes the log of the real price on the right hand side. If shifts in the
PPF capture increases in how much manufacturers are spending on technology over time, we would
expect that including the real price would reduce the technological progress estimates. Given the
inclusion of fixed year effects, the within year trade-off estimates are identical to those when we
include relative prices, so I only discuss the technological progress estimates. For the Cobb-Douglas
model, the estimated technological gains by 2006 is 46.4 percent, compared to 47.4 percent when
the real price is omitted for passenger cars. For light trucks it is 47.0 percent compared to 46.4
percent when price is omitted. For the translog model, the coefficient for passenger cars changes
from 45.8 percent (base model) to 44.0 percent and increases from 43.4 percent to 43.9 percent for
light trucks.
The final model is similar in nature and compares the relative fuel economy of base and “luxury”
brands offered by the same manufacturer. That is, I compare the relative efficiency of Acura v.
Honda, Ford v. Lincoln, GM v. Cadillac, Infiniti v. Nissan and Toyota v. Lexus. For passenger
cars, the luxury brand is correlated with lower fuel economy and once again the coefficient is
small. For light trucks the coefficient is also small and the correlation is not statistically significant.
23

Interestingly, despite the fact that this model uses only five manufacturers, the estimated trade-offs
change very little. Again focusing on the Cobb-Douglas results, the largest change for passenger
cars is less than 0.02 (weight). The coefficients change slightly more for light trucks, but the changes
remain below 0.08. The estimated efficiency gains are also similar. For passenger cars, the degree
of technological progress by 2006 changes from 47.4 to 45.9 percent and from 45.8 to 43.9 percent
for the Cobb-Douglas and translog models, respectively. For light trucks, the estimates change
from 46.4 to 45.8 percent and from 43.4 to 42.6 percent for the Cobb-Douglas and translog models,
respectively
All three of these extensions to the base models suggest that prices have a small negative
correlation with fuel economy and that the estimated technological progress is largely unaffected.
This supports the view that the the shifts in the PPF represent technological progress. The small
and often statistically insignificant association between price and fuel economy, conditional on
weight and engine power and the small change in the trade-off estimates also suggests that the bias
in the trade-off estimates is likely to be small.

8

Manufacturer Heterogeneity

In this section, I investigate whether there is firm heterogeneity in terms of their ability to generate
fuel economy from a vehicle of a certain engine power level and weight. Using a particular firm as
the “baseline”, the manufacturer fixed effects measure how much more or less fuel economy another
manufacturer is able to achieve, conditional on a particular level of engine power and weight.30
The estimates for passenger cars are plotted in Figure 20 ranked from lowest to highest. I omit
the eleven least efficient firms from the graph, which are the “exotic” manufacturers, as well as
Yugo. (Omitting these firms from the regressions does not change the results.) To see whether the
rank of firms has changed over time, I estimate separate coefficients for the first half of the sample,
the entire sample and the second half. US manufacturers perform reasonably well. GM is among
the top in terms of extracting fuel efficiency from a given weight, HP and torque. Chrysler and
Ford—the firm set to the “numeraire”—outperform a number of other firms, including many of the
German and Korean manufacturers.
30

The fixed effects will also capture manufacturer heterogeneity in technology use. However, I note that the order
remains largely unchanged when I include either relative or real prices on the right hand side.

24

These results also inform us as to how the relative positions of firms change over time. While
the rankings are fairly stable from the first to the second half of the sample, the results suggest
that Honda has increased its relative efficiency a large amount. Using the first half of the data,
Hondas achieve 3.1 percent greater fuel economy compared to Ford. This increases to 9.3 percent
in the second half. The drop in Ford’s efficiency relative to Honda is not unique. The vast majority
of firms improve their position relative to Ford. Of the 25 manufacturers for which their is a fixed
effect estimate in both time periods, 85 percent increase relative to Ford; 80 percent of non-exotic
firms increase their relative efficiency. This pattern also holds for GM and Chrysler. Eighty percent
of the firms increase their position relative to GM; 64 percent of non-exotics. Eighty-one percent of
manufacturers increase their relative position compared to Chrysler; 76 percent among non-exotics.
These results may provide some insight into the financial conditions of US firms.
Next I compare firm-level efficiency across passenger cars and light duty trucks in Figure 21,
ranked by the light truck fixed effect. The estimates are ranked by the firms’ light truck efficiency;
the rankings change considerably. Honda, Toyota and Nissan rank higher than US manufacturers
for passenger cars (Nissan and GM are effectively equal), but the three Japanese manufacturers
trail GM when building light duty trucks, while only Honda surpasses Ford. At a first glance, these
results suggest that the decision of US manufacturers to focus on light truck sales may have been
a good one. However, a further cut of the data suggests that this is not the case. Figure 22 plots
the estimated fixed effects from estimating Model 3 using the first and second halves of the data.
While across the entire sample, GM and Ford are among the best in terms of fuel efficiency, over
time their relative positions have diminished. Firms such as Audi, Toyota, Honda and Subaru have
made large gains relative to US manufacturers. Across all manufacturers, 86 percent of the firms
increase their relative position compared to Ford; all of the firms increased their position relative
to GM, while 43 percent did so relative to Chrysler.

9

Conclusions

This paper estimates the trade-offs that consumers and manufacturers face when choosing between
fuel economy, vehicle size and vehicle power, as well as the technological advances that have occurred
over these dimensions from 1980 to 2006. The results imply that if we were to have kept vehicle
size and power at their 1980 levels, fuel economy would have been nearly 50 percent higher in 2006.
The results also generate a variety of potential compliance strategies for the new CAFE stan25

dards adopted by both the Bush and Obama administrations. The findings suggest that the Bush
CAFE standards would have done little to push manufacturers and consumers to smaller, less powerful cars, or away from SUVs and back into passenger cars. In contrast the Obama standards will
require shifts to smaller, less powerful cars and fewer SUVs.
The empirical model generates estimates of manufacturers’ relative ability to obtain fuel economy conditional on weight and engine power. Somewhat surprisingly, I find that US manufacturers
fair well compared to other manufacturers in the production of passenger cars. While Honda, Toyota and Nissan perform well, GM outperforms Nissan, while Ford outperforms most non-Japanese
manufacturers. In addition, when considering light trucks, GM outperforms all three Japanese
manufacturers, while Ford trails only Honda. However, the results also suggest that the US advantage subsides during the second half of the sample. This suggests that one driver of their recent
financial troubles may be losing ground to their competitors when it comes to fuel economy, weight
and engine power.

26

References
Abadie, A., and G. Imbens (2002): “Simple and Bias-Corrected Matching Estimators,” Mimeo,
Harvard University.
Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (1995): “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,”
Econometrica, 63(4), 841–890.
Blinder, A. S. (1973): “Wage Discrimination: Reduced Form and Structural Variables,” Journal
of Human Resources, 8, 436–455.
Chon, D. M., and J. B. Heywood (2000): “Performance Scaling of Spark-Ignition Engines:
Correlation and Historical Analysis of Production Engine Data,” SAE paper no. 2000-01-0565.
Dalen, J. v., and B. Bodie (2004): “Quality-corrected Prce Indices: The Case of the Dutch New
Passenger Car Market 1990-1999,” Applied Economics, 34, 1169–1197.
DeCicco, J., F., F. An, and M. Ross (2001): Technical Options for Improving Fuel Economy
of US Cars and Lght Trucks, by 2010-2015. American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy,
Washington, D.C.
DeCicco, J., and M. Ross (1996): “Recent Advances in Automotive Technology and the CostEffectiveness of Fuel Economy Improvement,” Transportation Research D, 1(2), 79–96.
Ecker, H. J., D. Gill, and M. Schwaderlapp (2000): “Downsizing of Diesel Engines: 3Cylinder/4-Cylinder,” SAE paper no. 2000-01-0990.
Goldberg, P. K. (1995): “Product Differentiation and Oligopoly in International Markets: The
Case of the U.S. Automobile Industry,” Econometrica, 63(4), 891–951.
Greene, D. L., and K. Duleep (1993): “Costs and Benefits of Automotive Fuel Economy
Improvement: A Partial Equilibrium Analysis,” Transportation Research, 27(A), 217–235.
Hirano, K., G. Imbens, and G. Ridder (2003): “Efficient Estimation of Average Treatment
Effects using the Estimated Propensity Score,” Econometrica, 71, 1161–1189.
Klier, T., and J. Linn (2008): “The Price of Gasoline and the Demand for Fuel Efficiency:
Evidence from Monthly New Vehicles Sales Data,” University of Illinois at Chicago.

27

Lutsey, N., and D. Sperling (2005): “Energy Efficiency, Fuel Economy, and Policy Implications,” Transportation Research Record, 1941, 8–17.
Matas, A., and J.-L. Raymond (2008): “Hedonic prices for cars: an application to the Spanish
car market, 1981-2005,” Applied Economics, pp. 1–18.
Newell, R. G., A. B. Jaffe, and R. N. Stavins (1999): “The Induced Innovation Hypothesis
and Energy-Saving Technological Change,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(3), 941–975.
Oaxaca, R. (1973): “Male-Female Wage Differentials in Urban Labor Markets,” International
Economic Review, 14(3), 693–709.
Popp, D. (2002): “Induced Innovation and Energy Prices,” American Economic Review, 92(1),
160–180.
Requena-Silvente, F., and B. Walker (2008): “Calculating Hedonic Price Indices with Unobserved Product Attributes: an Application to the UK Car Market,” Applied Economics, pp.
1–18.
Sawhill, J. W. (2008): “Are Capital and Operating Costs Weighted Equally in Durable Goods
Purchases? Evidence from the US Automobile Market,” University of California, Berkeley.

28

Appendix
1

Tables

Passenger Cars
Variable
Fuel Economy
Curb Weight
HP
Torque
Acceleration
Liters
Diesel
Manual
Supercharged
Turbocharged
Sample Size

Mean
27.90
3019.45
157.14
238.71
10.56
2.77
0.03
0.38
0.01
0.11
14337

Std. Dev.
6.43
593.70
76.97
105.16
2.52
1.15
0.18
0.49
0.11
0.31

Min
8.70
1450.00
48.00
69.40
3.03
1.00
0
0
0
0

Max
76.40
6200.00
660.00
1001.00
20.75
8.30
1
1
1
1

Mean in 1980
22.89
3041.64
110.63
226.29
13.14
3.41
0.07
0.35
0.00
0.03
507

Mean in 2006
27.11
3455.04
247.02
329.67
8.08
3.22
0.01
0.35
0.05
0.15
572

Light Trucks
Fuel Economy
Curb Weight
HP
Torque
Acceleration
Liters
Diesel
Manual
Supercharged
Turbocharged
Sample Size

20.76
3835.90
160.37
296.01
12.13
4.06
0.05
0.33
0.00
0.01
12805

4.65
915.72
53.76
90.95
2.34
1.33
0.21
0.47
0.05
0.11

9.90
0.00
48.00
76.60
4.89
1.20
0
0
0
0

45.10
6700.00
500.00
750.00
28.19
8.30
1
1
1
1

16.81
3877.33
138.59
304.48
13.16
4.72
0.02
0.42
0.00
0.00
669

22.80
4427.68
236.52
351.21
9.65
3.95
0.00
0.17
0.01
0.03
470

Table 1: Summary Statistics

29

30

Model 1
-0.401**
(0.047)
-0.315**
(0.047)
-0.030
(0.038)

Model 3
-0.426**
(0.030)
-0.251**
(0.044)
-0.057
(0.037)

Table 2: Trade-Off Estimates for Passenger Cars

Model 2
-0.390**
(0.032)
-0.257**
(0.040)
-0.077*
(0.033)

Model 4
Model 5
0.435
0.193
(1.250)
(1.270)
ln(HP)
-3.032**
-3.596**
(0.868)
(0.733)
ln(Torque)
0.277
0.524
(0.764)
(0.622)
ln(Weight)2
-0.213+
-0.173
(0.114)
(0.114)
ln(HP)2
-0.219*
-0.140*
(0.103)
(0.055)
ln(Torque)2
-0.053
0.001
(0.123)
(0.065)
ln(Weight)*ln(HP)
0.543**
0.564**
(0.149)
(0.137)
ln(Weight)*ln(Torque)
-0.030
-0.104
(0.106)
(0.126)
ln(HP)*ln(Torque)
0.105
0.042
(0.195)
(0.061)
Manual
0.034**
0.045**
0.047**
0.038**
0.048**
(0.006)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.005)
Diesel
0.194**
0.211**
0.228**
0.262**
0.254**
(0.019)
(0.020)
(0.026)
(0.019)
(0.025)
Turbocharged
0.026*
0.050**
0.016*
0.051**
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.007)
(0.009)
Supercharged
0.061**
0.037**
0.060**
0.040*
(0.019)
(0.013)
(0.020)
(0.016)
Year Fixed Effects?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Manufacturer Fixed Effects? No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Observations
14423
14423
14423
14423
14423
R-squared
0.834
0.878
0.848
0.845
0.888
Notes: ** denotes significance at the one percent level, * at the five percent level, and + at the 10 percent level.
Standard errors are clustered at the manufacturer level.

ln(Weight)

Yes
Yes
14423
0.854

Model 6
-0.038
(1.256)
-3.433**
(0.806)
0.495
(0.714)
-0.162
(0.117)
-0.191**
(0.061)
-0.044
(0.067)
0.550**
(0.154)
-0.088
(0.142)
0.127*
(0.059)
0.049**
(0.005)
0.277**
(0.033)

31

Model 1

5.4%
9.2%
13.1%
15.6%
18.1%
20.8%
21.6%
24.0%
24.7%
26.3%
27.4%
28.6%
31.5%
33.4%
36.3%
37.4%
38.2%
39.4%
38.9%
39.7%
40.8%
42.3%
44.0%
44.8%
45.8%
48.5%

Year

1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

5.4%
9.1%
12.7%
15.1%
17.4%
20.3%
21.1%
23.1%
23.8%
25.2%
26.2%
27.4%
30.2%
31.9%
34.8%
35.6%
36.7%
38.2%
38.2%
39.4%
40.3%
41.9%
43.2%
43.8%
45.0%
47.4%

Model 2
5.2%
8.8%
12.4%
14.5%
16.7%
19.1%
19.8%
22.2%
22.7%
24.4%
25.4%
26.4%
29.4%
31.2%
33.9%
34.9%
35.8%
37.1%
36.5%
37.3%
38.5%
39.9%
41.8%
42.7%
44.0%
46.3%

Model 4
5.1%
8.7%
12.1%
14.3%
16.4%
19.1%
20.0%
22.1%
22.7%
24.1%
25.1%
26.2%
28.8%
30.5%
33.2%
34.2%
35.3%
36.8%
37.0%
38.2%
39.2%
40.7%
42.1%
42.5%
43.8%
45.7%

Model 5
5.1%
8.8%
12.1%
14.5%
16.7%
19.3%
20.2%
22.2%
22.8%
24.1%
25.1%
26.1%
28.5%
30.2%
32.9%
33.7%
35.0%
36.6%
36.7%
37.9%
39.0%
40.5%
42.0%
42.6%
43.9%
45.7%

Model 6
5.3%
9.0%
12.5%
14.5%
16.7%
19.1%
19.5%
21.8%
22.3%
23.6%
24.3%
25.3%
28.5%
30.1%
32.9%
33.4%
34.4%
35.5%
34.7%
35.5%
36.5%
37.7%
39.2%
39.8%
40.4%
42.7%

OB Cobb-Douglas

Table 3: Technological Progress Estimates for Passenger Cars

5.4%
9.3%
12.9%
15.4%
17.8%
20.7%
21.5%
23.4%
24.2%
25.4%
26.4%
27.5%
30.2%
31.8%
34.7%
35.4%
36.6%
38.2%
38.2%
39.2%
40.4%
41.9%
43.2%
43.9%
45.2%
47.3%

Model 3
5.2%
8.9%
12.5%
14.6%
17.0%
20.0%
20.7%
23.4%
24.2%
26.9%
28.2%
29.6%
33.2%
36.2%
39.3%
40.1%
41.6%
43.9%
43.8%
44.7%
46.9%
49.5%
52.4%
54.3%
57.7%
61.8%

4.1%
8.1%
12.4%
14.1%
17.9%
20.7%
21.8%
24.3%
24.3%
25.8%
26.5%
27.7%
30.8%
32.1%
34.9%
34.7%
35.9%
36.8%
36.9%
37.8%
39.1%
40.7%
42.2%
43.4%
44.9%
47.6%

OB - Translog Matching Model

32

Model 3
-0.355**
(0.043)
-0.063
(0.042)
-0.313**
(0.054)

Table 4: Trade-Off Estimates for Light Duty Trucks

Model 2
-0.355**
(0.040)
-0.063
(0.042)
-0.313**
(0.056)

Model 4
Model 5
ln(Weight)
0.092
1.228
(1.706)
(1.289)
ln(HP)
-1.699*
-1.973**
(0.743)
(0.545)
ln(Torque)
-0.377
-0.433
(1.116)
(0.858)
ln(Weight)2
-0.188+
-0.236**
(0.101)
(0.067)
2
ln(HP)
0.017
0.064
(0.169)
(0.156)
ln(Torque)2
-0.408**
-0.386*
(0.120)
(0.138)
ln(Weight)*ln(HP)
0.035
0.002
(0.115)
(0.093)
ln(Weight)*ln(Torque)
0.436**
0.404**
(0.149)
(0.113)
ln(HP)*ln(Torque)
0.215
0.224
(0.305)
(0.286)
Manual
0.045**
0.044**
0.044**
0.044**
0.042**
(0.011)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.012)
(0.008)
Diesel
0.269**
0.245**
0.246**
0.279**
0.252**
(0.022)
(0.019)
(0.024)
(0.020)
(0.016)
Turbocharged
0.003
0.004
0.015
0.026
(0.051)
(0.058)
(0.041)
(0.048)
Supercharged
-0.054
-0.020
-0.062
-0.028
(0.053)
(0.055)
(0.046)
(0.044)
Year Fixed Effects?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Manufacturer Fixed Effects?
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Observations
12572
12572
12572
12572
12572
R-squared
0.760
0.791
0.746
0.772
0.802
Notes: ** denotes significance at the one percent level, * at the five percent level, and + at the 10 percent level.
Standard errors are clustered at the manufacturer level.

Model 1
-0.362**
(0.052)
-0.040
(0.043)
-0.283**
(0.048)

Yes
Yes
12572
0.760

Model 6
1.180
(1.346)
-1.954**
(0.557)
-0.441
(0.853)
-0.232**
(0.072)
0.061
(0.155)
-0.382*
(0.137)
0.004
(0.093)
0.400**
(0.112)
0.224
(0.284)
0.042**
(0.008)
0.255**
(0.019)

33

Model 1

6.9%
10.1%
12.8%
12.7%
13.4%
15.5%
15.7%
18.5%
18.6%
19.8%
19.7%
23.0%
22.8%
25.4%
25.3%
25.7%
29.5%
28.8%
30.8%
33.2%
30.1%
31.0%
33.2%
37.4%
42.5%
45.1%

Year

1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

6.7%
9.7%
11.7%
11.1%
11.9%
14.3%
14.8%
17.8%
18.3%
19.6%
19.8%
22.9%
22.9%
25.3%
25.6%
25.9%
30.3%
29.1%
31.9%
34.5%
31.3%
32.2%
33.8%
38.4%
43.5%
46.3%

6.7%
9.7%
11.7%
11.1%
11.9%
14.3%
14.8%
17.8%
18.3%
19.6%
19.8%
22.9%
22.9%
25.3%
25.6%
25.9%
30.3%
29.1%
31.9%
34.5%
31.3%
32.2%
33.8%
38.4%
43.5%
46.3%

Model 3
6.6%
9.7%
12.6%
12.8%
12.8%
14.8%
15.2%
18.3%
18.2%
19.6%
19.5%
22.5%
22.3%
25.0%
24.9%
27.4%
30.9%
28.7%
31.1%
32.1%
29.2%
29.8%
31.9%
35.5%
40.3%
42.8%

Model 4
6.3%
9.3%
11.3%
11.0%
11.4%
13.8%
14.5%
17.7%
18.1%
19.5%
19.7%
22.5%
22.5%
24.9%
25.2%
27.3%
31.5%
28.9%
31.9%
33.2%
30.0%
30.6%
32.0%
35.8%
40.4%
43.2%

Model 5
6.3%
9.3%
11.3%
11.1%
11.4%
13.8%
14.5%
17.7%
18.1%
19.6%
19.7%
22.5%
22.5%
25.0%
25.2%
27.4%
31.5%
28.9%
31.9%
33.2%
30.0%
30.6%
32.0%
35.9%
40.5%
43.3%

Model 6
6.6%
9.3%
12.0%
12.5%
13.0%
15.2%
15.7%
19.2%
19.4%
20.9%
21.0%
24.8%
24.5%
27.6%
27.9%
28.5%
33.0%
31.7%
34.2%
36.7%
33.8%
34.9%
37.2%
41.9%
47.3%
50.1%

OB Cobb-Douglas

Table 5: Technological Progress Estimates for Light Duty Trucks

Model 2
5.2%
7.5%
10.2%
10.5%
11.0%
12.9%
13.8%
18.4%
18.0%
19.6%
20.1%
23.7%
23.4%
26.7%
27.3%
34.4%
37.0%
33.1%
36.0%
37.9%
35.8%
37.4%
40.6%
46.6%
52.9%
55.1%

4.3%
5.8%
10.1%
12.1%
13.3%
15.6%
17.8%
23.7%
20.9%
24.3%
24.4%
30.2%
30.1%
34.1%
33.3%
39.7%
48.8%
42.1%
49.7%
47.1%
48.4%
51.2%
58.4%
68.7%
80.3%
68.2%

OB - Translog Matching Model

34
Cars 50%
Cars 60%
Cars 70%
Cars 80%

75 Percentile Advance

75 Percentile Advance

75 Percentile Advance

75 Percentile Advance

30.3

29.1

27.8

26.6

25.8

25.4

24.4

23.4

22.3

21.6

21.4

20.5

19.6

18.7

39.1

38.1

37.2

36.2

35.6

36.5

35.5

34.6

33.6

33.0

28.6

27.8

27.1

26.3

41.9

40.8

39.8

38.8

38.1

39.1

38.0

37.0

36.0

35.3

30.6

29.8

29.0

28.2

44.6

43.5

42.4

41.3

40.6

41.6

40.5

39.5

38.4

37.6

32.6

31.7

30.9

30.0

47.4

46.2

45.0

43.9

43.1

44.2

43.1

41.9

40.7

40.0

34.6

33.7

32.8

31.9

Change in Weight and Engine Power
25% Move to
50% Move to
75% Move to
0% Reduction
1980 Levels
1980 Levels
1980 Levels
25.8
27.6
29.4
31.3

Table 6: Fuel Economy Counterfactuals in 2020 (Bush Standards)

No Shift in Mix

Cars 50%

Average Advance

75 Percentile Advance

No Shift in Mix

Average Advance

Cars 80%

Cars 80%

No Advance

Average Advance

Cars 70%

No Advance

Cars 70%

Cars 60%

No Advance

Average Advance

Cars 50%

No Advance

Cars 60%

No Shift in Mix

No Advance

Average Advance

Car/Truck Mix

Technological Advance

Continued
Growth
18.1

50.1

48.9

47.7

46.4

45.6

46.8

45.6

44.3

43.1

42.3

36.6

35.7

34.7

33.7

33.1

1980 Levels

35
Cars 50%
Cars 60%
Cars 70%
Cars 80%

75 Percentile Advance

75 Percentile Advance

75 Percentile Advance

75 Percentile Advance

29.6

28.6

27.6

26.5

25.9

28.2

27.2

26.2

25.2

24.5

23.6

22.8

22.0

21.1

35.8

34.9

34.0

33.0

32.4

34.0

33.1

32.2

31.3

30.8

28.6

27.8

27.1

26.3

38.3

37.3

36.3

35.4

34.7

36.4

35.5

34.5

33.6

32.9

30.6

29.8

29.0

28.2

40.8

39.8

38.7

37.7

37.0

38.8

37.8

36.8

35.8

35.1

32.6

31.7

30.9

30.0

43.3

42.2

41.1

40.0

39.3

41.2

40.1

39.1

38.0

37.3

34.6

33.7

32.8

31.9

Change in Weight and Engine Power
25% Move to
50% Move to
75% Move to
0% Reduction
1980 Levels
1980 Levels
1980 Levels
25.8
27.6
29.4
31.3

Table 7: Fuel Economy Counterfactuals in 2016 (Obama Standards)

No Shift in Mix

Cars 50%

Average Advance

75 Percentile Advance

No Shift in Mix

Average Advance

Cars 80%

Cars 80%

No Advance

Average Advance

Cars 70%

No Advance

Cars 70%

Cars 60%

No Advance

Average Advance

Cars 50%

No Advance

Cars 60%

No Shift in Mix

No Advance

Average Advance

Car/Truck Mix

Technological Advance

Continued
Growth
20.6

45.8

44.7

43.5

42.4

41.6

43.6

42.5

41.3

40.2

39.4

36.6

35.7

34.7

33.7

33.1

1980 Levels

36
0.044**
(0.005)
0.227**
(0.025)

Base
-0.428**
(0.028)
-0.256**
(0.044)
-0.052
(0.038)

0.043**
(0.005)
0.235**
(0.029)
-0.027*
(0.012)
-0.027*
(0.012)

0.043**
(0.005)
0.235**
(0.029)

0.043**
(0.002)
0.195**
(0.006)

Luxury
-0.409**
(0.012)
-0.255**
(0.008)
-0.062**
(0.009)

Base
-0.459
(1.252)
-3.352**
(0.802)
0.736
(0.778)
-0.199**
(0.059)
-0.117
(0.123)
-0.042
(0.068)
0.535**
(0.150)
-0.132
(0.154)
0.146*
(0.060)
0.046**
(0.005)
0.275**
(0.033)

Yes
Yes
14879
0.879

Yes
Yes
14879
0.879

Translog Model
Relative Prices Real Prices
-2.740*
-2.740*
(1.338)
(1.338)
-3.074**
-3.074**
(0.652)
(0.652)
1.308+
1.308+
(0.747)
(0.747)
-0.190**
-0.190**
(0.057)
(0.057)
0.085
0.085
(0.135)
(0.135)
-0.061
-0.061
(0.072)
(0.072)
0.450**
0.450**
(0.115)
(0.115)
-0.221
-0.221
(0.154)
(0.154)
0.213**
0.213**
(0.069)
(0.069)
0.045**
0.045**
(0.005)
(0.005)
0.275**
0.275**
(0.033)
(0.033)
-0.053**
(0.009)
-0.053**
(0.009)

Table 8: Trade-Off Estimates for Passenger Cars Controlling for Proxies of Technology Expenditures

-0.013**
(0.004)
Year Fixed Effects?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Manufacturer Fixed Effects?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
15061
14879
14879
7057
15061
R-squared
0.869
0.869
0.869
0.872
0.879
Notes: ** denotes significance at the one percent level, * at the five percent level, and + at the 10 percent level.
Standard errors are clustered at the manufacturer level.

Luxury

Real Price

Relative Price

Diesel

Manual

ln(HP)*ln(Torque)

ln(Weight)*ln(Torque)

ln(Weight)*ln(HP)

ln(Torque)2

ln(HP)2

ln(Weight)2

ln(Torque)

ln(HP)

ln(Weight)

Cobb-Douglas Model
Relative Prices Real Prices
-0.426**
-0.426**
(0.030)
(0.030)
-0.228**
-0.228**
(0.041)
(0.041)
-0.052
-0.052
(0.038)
(0.038)

-0.028**
(0.004)
Yes
Yes
7057
0.882

Luxury
-3.743**
(0.662)
-2.094**
(0.289)
1.614**
(0.403)
-0.096**
(0.024)
0.277**
(0.059)
0.156**
(0.037)
0.308**
(0.051)
-0.464**
(0.074)
0.062
(0.051)
0.043**
(0.002)
0.212**
(0.007)

Base

Cobb-Douglas Model
Relative Prices Real Prices

Luxury

1981

Base

Translog Model
Relative Prices Real Prices

0.054**
0.055**
0.056**
0.043**
0.051**
0.053**
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.007)
(0.009)
(0.009)
1982
0.093**
0.095**
0.096**
0.074**
0.087**
0.091**
(0.013)
(0.012)
(0.013)
(0.006)
(0.012)
(0.011)
1983
0.129**
0.132**
0.133**
0.114**
0.121**
0.126**
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.015)
(0.006)
(0.012)
(0.012)
1984
0.155**
0.156**
0.158**
0.145**
0.145**
0.149**
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.006)
(0.009)
(0.009)
1985
0.179**
0.178**
0.182**
0.166**
0.167**
0.169**
(0.011)
(0.010)
(0.011)
(0.006)
(0.009)
(0.009)
1986
0.207**
0.206**
0.210**
0.198**
0.193**
0.195**
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.006)
(0.009)
(0.009)
1987
0.215**
0.212**
0.218**
0.215**
0.202**
0.200**
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.006)
(0.012)
(0.013)
1988
0.235**
0.230**
0.237**
0.236**
0.222**
0.217**
(0.013)
(0.014)
(0.012)
(0.007)
(0.015)
(0.016)
1989
0.243**
0.236**
0.244**
0.241**
0.228**
0.222**
(0.011)
(0.012)
(0.011)
(0.007)
(0.012)
(0.013)
1990
0.255**
0.248**
0.255**
0.253**
0.242**
0.233**
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.011)
(0.007)
(0.012)
(0.013)
1991
0.265**
0.256**
0.264**
0.258**
0.251**
0.240**
(0.012)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.007)
(0.011)
(0.011)
1992
0.276**
0.266**
0.274**
0.273**
0.261**
0.247**
(0.015)
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.007)
(0.014)
(0.014)
1993
0.303**
0.292**
0.301**
0.296**
0.287**
0.271**
(0.016)
(0.015)
(0.015)
(0.007)
(0.015)
(0.015)
1994
0.319**
0.308**
0.318**
0.316**
0.303**
0.285**
(0.017)
(0.018)
(0.016)
(0.007)
(0.016)
(0.017)
1995
0.349**
0.335**
0.346**
0.337**
0.330**
0.309**
(0.017)
(0.016)
(0.015)
(0.007)
(0.015)
(0.016)
1996
0.355**
0.342**
0.351**
0.346**
0.337**
0.319**
(0.015)
(0.015)
(0.014)
(0.007)
(0.014)
(0.015)
1997
0.367**
0.352**
0.362**
0.349**
0.350**
0.329**
(0.017)
(0.016)
(0.015)
(0.007)
(0.015)
(0.015)
1998
0.384**
0.369**
0.378**
0.367**
0.368**
0.344**
(0.018)
(0.017)
(0.016)
(0.008)
(0.016)
(0.016)
1999
0.382**
0.362**
0.377**
0.360**
0.367**
0.336**
(0.018)
(0.017)
(0.016)
(0.008)
(0.017)
(0.017)
2000
0.393**
0.372**
0.386**
0.378**
0.379**
0.346**
(0.019)
(0.018)
(0.017)
(0.008)
(0.018)
(0.019)
2001
0.404**
0.386**
0.398**
0.389**
0.390**
0.360**
(0.020)
(0.021)
(0.019)
(0.008)
(0.019)
(0.021)
2002
0.419**
0.396**
0.411**
0.406**
0.405**
0.368**
(0.022)
(0.022)
(0.020)
(0.008)
(0.021)
(0.022)
2003
0.433**
0.412**
0.424**
0.424**
0.420**
0.384**
(0.024)
(0.024)
(0.023)
(0.008)
(0.023)
(0.025)
2004
0.440**
0.419**
0.432**
0.442**
0.426**
0.388**
(0.022)
(0.023)
(0.022)
(0.008)
(0.021)
(0.023)
2005
0.452**
0.431**
0.445**
0.449**
0.440**
0.400**
(0.022)
(0.022)
(0.021)
(0.008)
(0.021)
(0.022)
2006
0.474**
0.448**
0.464**
0.459**
0.458**
0.410**
(0.024)
(0.023)
(0.022)
(0.008)
(0.023)
(0.023)
Year FEs?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Manufacturer FEs?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
15061
14879
14879
7057
15061
14879
R-squared
0.869
0.869
0.869
0.872
0.879
0.879
Notes: ** denotes significance at the one percent level, * at the five percent level, and + at the 10 percent level.
Standard errors are clustered at the manufacturer level.

0.054**
(0.009)
0.094**
(0.011)
0.129**
(0.012)
0.154**
(0.009)
0.175**
(0.009)
0.202**
(0.009)
0.211**
(0.012)
0.230**
(0.014)
0.235**
(0.012)
0.247**
(0.012)
0.255**
(0.011)
0.264**
(0.014)
0.288**
(0.014)
0.304**
(0.016)
0.330**
(0.015)
0.336**
(0.014)
0.346**
(0.014)
0.362**
(0.015)
0.364**
(0.015)
0.373**
(0.017)
0.384**
(0.019)
0.396**
(0.020)
0.407**
(0.023)
0.413**
(0.021)
0.427**
(0.021)
0.440**
(0.022)
Yes
Yes
14879
0.879

Luxury
0.041**
(0.006)
0.071**
(0.006)
0.106**
(0.006)
0.140**
(0.006)
0.161**
(0.006)
0.190**
(0.006)
0.208**
(0.006)
0.231**
(0.006)
0.233**
(0.007)
0.244**
(0.007)
0.249**
(0.007)
0.264**
(0.007)
0.283**
(0.007)
0.305**
(0.007)
0.324**
(0.007)
0.335**
(0.007)
0.339**
(0.007)
0.356**
(0.008)
0.350**
(0.008)
0.370**
(0.008)
0.382**
(0.008)
0.398**
(0.008)
0.414**
(0.008)
0.429**
(0.008)
0.436**
(0.008)
0.439**
(0.008)
Yes
Yes
7057
0.882

Table 9: Technological Progress Estimates for Passenger Cars Controlling for Proxies of Technology
Expenditures

37

38
0.044**
(0.008)
0.246**
(0.024)

Base
-0.356**
(0.043)
-0.063
(0.042)
-0.313**
(0.054)

0.043**
(0.009)
0.247**
(0.022)
-0.018
(0.023)
-0.018
(0.023)

0.043**
(0.009)
0.247**
(0.022)

0.037**
(0.003)
0.214**
(0.005)

Luxury
-0.339**
(0.009)
-0.130**
(0.012)
-0.234**
(0.010)

Base
1.302
(1.329)
-1.890**
(0.570)
-0.473
(0.863)
0.064
(0.156)
-0.238**
(0.070)
-0.381*
(0.137)
-0.006
(0.094)
0.406**
(0.114)
0.220
(0.285)
0.043**
(0.008)
0.255**
(0.019)

Yes
Yes
12386
0.806

Yes
Yes
12386
0.806

Translog Model
Relative Prices Real Prices
1.170
1.170
(1.240)
(1.240)
-2.061**
-2.061**
(0.604)
(0.604)
-0.257
-0.257
(0.853)
(0.853)
0.069
0.069
(0.162)
(0.162)
-0.224**
-0.224**
(0.065)
(0.065)
-0.392**
-0.392**
(0.136)
(0.136)
0.000
0.000
(0.092)
(0.092)
0.384**
0.384**
(0.121)
(0.121)
0.234
0.234
(0.295)
(0.295)
0.041**
0.041**
(0.009)
(0.009)
0.259**
0.259**
(0.018)
(0.018)
-0.034
(0.021)
-0.034
(0.021)

Table 10: Trade-Off Estimates for Light Duty Trucks Controlling for Proxies of Technology Expenditures

0.030**
(0.009)
Year Fixed Effects?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Manufacturer Fixed Effects?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
12565
12386
12386
8213
12565
R-squared
0.791
0.795
0.795
0.748
0.802
Notes: ** denotes significance at the one percent level, * at the five percent level, and + at the 10 percent level.
Standard errors are clustered at the manufacturer level.

Luxury

Real Price

Relative Price

Diesel

Manual

ln(HP)*ln(Torque)

ln(Weight)*ln(Torque)

ln(Weight)*ln(HP)

ln(Torque)2

ln(HP)2

ln(Weight)2

ln(Torque)

ln(HP)

ln(Weight)

Cobb-Douglas Model
Relative Prices Real Prices
-0.345**
-0.345**
(0.051)
(0.051)
-0.063
-0.063
(0.044)
(0.044)
-0.315**
-0.315**
(0.053)
(0.053)

0.009
(0.009)
Yes
Yes
8213
0.762

Luxury
3.213**
(0.462)
-2.085**
(0.311)
-0.369
(0.326)
0.166**
(0.030)
-0.323**
(0.032)
-0.312**
(0.025)
-0.058
(0.049)
0.361**
(0.049)
0.134**
(0.045)
0.034**
(0.003)
0.225**
(0.006)

Base

Cobb-Douglas Model
Relative Prices Real Prices

Luxury

1981

Base

Translog Model
Relative Prices Real Prices

0.067**
0.067**
0.068**
0.054**
0.063**
0.064**
(0.011)
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.007)
(0.011)
(0.010)
1982
0.097**
0.097**
0.098**
0.078**
0.093**
0.093**
(0.017)
(0.017)
(0.018)
(0.007)
(0.015)
(0.015)
1983
0.117**
0.117**
0.118**
0.110**
0.113**
0.114**
(0.016)
(0.017)
(0.018)
(0.006)
(0.016)
(0.016)
1984
0.111**
0.110**
0.112**
0.092**
0.110**
0.109**
(0.018)
(0.018)
(0.018)
(0.007)
(0.017)
(0.017)
1985
0.118**
0.118**
0.120**
0.115**
0.113**
0.113**
(0.009)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.011)
(0.010)
1986
0.143**
0.143**
0.145**
0.142**
0.137**
0.138**
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.007)
(0.012)
(0.011)
1987
0.148**
0.148**
0.152**
0.142**
0.144**
0.145**
(0.012)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.007)
(0.012)
(0.011)
1988
0.178**
0.177**
0.182**
0.171**
0.177**
0.175**
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.008)
(0.011)
(0.010)
1989
0.183**
0.181**
0.186**
0.179**
0.181**
0.178**
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.009)
1990
0.195**
0.194**
0.199**
0.180**
0.195**
0.193**
(0.016)
(0.017)
(0.013)
(0.008)
(0.018)
(0.018)
1991
0.198**
0.196**
0.201**
0.201**
0.197**
0.192**
(0.008)
(0.010)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.010)
(0.011)
1992
0.229**
0.226**
0.232**
0.219**
0.225**
0.219**
(0.014)
(0.016)
(0.011)
(0.008)
(0.013)
(0.015)
1993
0.230**
0.227**
0.233**
0.211**
0.226**
0.220**
(0.023)
(0.025)
(0.019)
(0.008)
(0.022)
(0.024)
1994
0.253**
0.250**
0.257**
0.233**
0.251**
0.244**
(0.023)
(0.025)
(0.019)
(0.008)
(0.020)
(0.022)
1995
0.256**
0.253**
0.260**
0.235**
0.252**
0.245**
(0.026)
(0.030)
(0.022)
(0.008)
(0.024)
(0.027)
1996
0.258**
0.257**
0.263**
0.242**
0.274**
0.269**
(0.025)
(0.028)
(0.022)
(0.008)
(0.016)
(0.018)
1997
0.303**
0.300**
0.306**
0.289**
0.315**
0.308**
(0.018)
(0.022)
(0.016)
(0.011)
(0.013)
(0.014)
1998
0.291**
0.291**
0.297**
0.278**
0.289**
0.285**
(0.022)
(0.025)
(0.018)
(0.010)
(0.020)
(0.021)
1999
0.319**
0.309**
0.319**
0.295**
0.319**
0.304**
(0.026)
(0.031)
(0.021)
(0.009)
(0.028)
(0.031)
2000
0.346**
0.341**
0.351**
0.323**
0.332**
0.322**
(0.024)
(0.029)
(0.019)
(0.009)
(0.024)
(0.029)
2001
0.313**
0.311**
0.319**
0.302**
0.300**
0.292**
(0.022)
(0.028)
(0.019)
(0.009)
(0.022)
(0.027)
2002
0.322**
0.318**
0.327**
0.309**
0.306**
0.295**
(0.022)
(0.028)
(0.018)
(0.009)
(0.023)
(0.028)
2003
0.338**
0.334**
0.342**
0.318**
0.320**
0.309**
(0.032)
(0.038)
(0.029)
(0.009)
(0.032)
(0.036)
2004
0.384**
0.359**
0.367**
0.371**
0.359**
0.327**
(0.030)
(0.035)
(0.025)
(0.009)
(0.031)
(0.036)
2005
0.436**
0.432**
0.442**
0.436**
0.406**
0.395**
(0.023)
(0.028)
(0.019)
(0.009)
(0.022)
(0.026)
2006
0.464**
0.459**
0.470**
0.458**
0.434**
0.420**
(0.027)
(0.035)
(0.024)
(0.009)
(0.024)
(0.030)
Year FEs?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Manufacturer FEs?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
12565
12386
12386
8213
12565
12386
R-squared
0.791
0.795
0.795
0.748
0.802
0.806
Notes: ** denotes significance at the one percent level, * at the five percent level, and + at the 10 percent level.
Standard errors are clustered at the manufacturer level.

0.065**
(0.010)
0.095**
(0.015)
0.116**
(0.017)
0.113**
(0.017)
0.117**
(0.009)
0.143**
(0.010)
0.152**
(0.009)
0.184**
(0.008)
0.187**
(0.007)
0.202**
(0.014)
0.202**
(0.009)
0.230**
(0.010)
0.231**
(0.019)
0.257**
(0.016)
0.259**
(0.020)
0.281**
(0.014)
0.319**
(0.012)
0.296**
(0.015)
0.323**
(0.021)
0.339**
(0.019)
0.307**
(0.019)
0.314**
(0.018)
0.324**
(0.028)
0.343**
(0.027)
0.412**
(0.017)
0.439**
(0.020)
Yes
Yes
12386
0.806

Luxury
0.048**
(0.007)
0.074**
(0.007)
0.104**
(0.006)
0.088**
(0.007)
0.106**
(0.008)
0.134**
(0.007)
0.136**
(0.007)
0.167**
(0.007)
0.176**
(0.008)
0.178**
(0.008)
0.200**
(0.008)
0.219**
(0.008)
0.210**
(0.008)
0.233**
(0.008)
0.235**
(0.008)
0.263**
(0.008)
0.306**
(0.010)
0.279**
(0.009)
0.292**
(0.009)
0.308**
(0.009)
0.285**
(0.009)
0.289**
(0.009)
0.298**
(0.009)
0.342**
(0.009)
0.400**
(0.009)
0.426**
(0.009)
Yes
Yes
8213
0.762

Table 11: Technological Progress Estimates for Light Duty Trucks Controlling for Proxies of Technology Expenditures

39

2

Figures

0

20

Percentage of New Cars
40
60

80

100

Figure 2: Penetration of Engine-Related Technologies that would Shift the Production Possibilities
Frontier

Fuel Injection

Multiple Valves

Variable Valve Timing

Hybrid

Turbo/Supercharger

40

2005

2002

1999

1996

1993

1990

1987

1984

1981

1978

1975

Year

0

20

Percentage of New Cars
40
60

80

100

Figure 3: Penetration of non-Engine-Related Technologies that would Shift the Production Possibilities Frontier

2005

2002

1999

1996

1993

1990

1987

1984

1981

1978

1975

Year
Front Wheel Drive

Torque Converter Lock-up

Continuous Transmission

Over 3 Speeds

Over 4 Speeds

41

0

.05

Density

.1

.15

Figure 4: Distribution of Fuel Economy for Passenger Cars and Light Duty Trucks, 1980 and 2006

10

20

Fuel Economy

Cars in 1980
Trucks in 1980

30

40
Cars in 2006
Trucks in 2006

0

.005

Density

.01

.015

Figure 5: Distribution of Horsepower for Passenger Cars and Light Duty Trucks, 1980 and 2006

0

200

Horsepower

Cars in 1980
Trucks in 1980

42

400
Cars in 2006
Trucks in 2006

600

0

.1

Density

.2

.3

Figure 6: Distribution of Acceleration for Passenger Cars and Light Duty Trucks, 1980 and 2006

5

10
15
0-60 Time for Passenger Cars
Cars in 1980
Trucks in 1980

20

Cars in 2006
Trucks in 2006

10

20

Fuel Economy
30

40

Figure 7: Fuel Economy versus Weight, 1980 and 2006, Passenger Cars

2000

3000

4000
Curb Weight
1980

43

2006

5000

6000

10

20

Fuel Economy
30

40

50

Figure 8: Fuel Economy versus Horsepower, 1980 and 2006, Passenger Cars

0

200

400
600
Horsepower
1980

800

1000

2006

10

20

Fuel Economy
30

40

Figure 9: Fuel Economy versus Torque, 1980 and 2006, Passenger Cars

0

200

400

Torque

1980

44

600
2006

800

1000

10

15

Fuel Economy
20
25

30

Figure 10: Fuel Economy versus Weight, 1980 and 2006, Light Duty Trucks

2000

3000

4000
Curb Weight
1980

5000

6000

2006

10

15

Fuel Economy
20
25

30

Figure 11: Fuel Economy versus Horsepower, 1980 and 2006, Light Duty Trucks

0

100

200
300
Horsepower
1980

45

2006

400

500

10

15

Fuel Economy
20
25

30

Figure 12: Fuel Economy versus Torque, 1980 and 2006, Light Duty Trucks

0

200

400
Torque
1980

600

800

2006

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

Figure 13: Passenger Car Technological Progress Measures from All Models

Model 2
Model 5

46

Model 3
Model 6

2006

Model 1
Model 4

2004

2002

2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

1982

1980

Year

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

Figure 14: Passenger Car Technological Progress Measures from Model 3

2006

2004

2002

2000

Technological Advance

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

1982

1980

Year

95% CI

-.05

0

0
.05
Change in CAFE

Annual Progress
.02
.04
.06

.1

.08

Figure 15: Passenger Car Annual Technological Progress and Annual CAFE Changes

% Change in CAFE Standards

47

2006

2004

2002

2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

1982

1980

Annual Progress

Year

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

Figure 16: Light Truck Technological Progress Measures from All Models

2006

2004

2002

2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

1982

1980

Year
Model 1
Model 4

Model 2
Model 5

Model 3
Model 6

0

Technological Progress
.1
.2
.3
.4

.5

Figure 17: Light Truck Technological Progress Measures from Model 3

2006

2004

95% CI

2002

2000

48

1998

Technological Advance

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

1982

1980

Year

0

Technological Progress
.1
.2
.3
.4

.5

Figure 18: Passenger Car and Light Truck Technological Progress Measures from Model 3

2006

2004

2002

2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

1982

1980

Year
Passenger Cars Model 6
Light Trucks Model 6

Passenger Cars Model 7
Light Trucks Model 7

-.05

-.02

0

Annual Progress
0
.05

.02
.04
.06
Change in CAFE

.08

.1

Figure 19: Light Truck Annual Technological Progress and Annual CAFE Changes

% Change in CAFE Standards

49

2006

2004

2002

2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

1982

1980

Annual Progress

Year

+)-.#$
*),)*#$
-"11#-$
(4$
.#"+#*1'$
8+7,10&7$

Figure 20: Firm-Level Productivity Measures for Passenger Cars

%)718+&$
"1'5'$
3)7.$
/)0/)$
76:;4</012&

9#('#7$(7$
4&78&.&1$
4"*1'6"1+"$

345,6708916&

1##6$
#48$
1'5'!"$

*+,-./012&

642$
1'6#7'$
#'1*"-$7)$
7&-#'0*$
1'6#7'$
4#5.#$
#'."$
3"#*$
/)0!12#(&-$
+,'-.#"$
%&'(&)*$

50

!"#$%&

!"#$&

!"#"'&

!"#"(&

!"#")&

!"#"%&

"&

"#"%&

"#")&

"#"(&

"#"'&

"#$&

!"#$

!"#!"+
%-4'0-+

Figure 21: Firm-Level Productivity Measures by Passenger Cars and Light Duty Trucks

(5+
2"*7'+
8"07+
23-*7',+
5'.7'+
%''4+
01-23%4.567*%

5)01)7)%+
6"3"6'+

()**+,-+.%/).*%

'-7,+
7',2'6%-+
5,6%-4,%2,+
45&+
*,%%'*+
1203%#)0+
,%-.-+
/"0%12)+
%-.-$,+
$,'+

51

!"#$%

!"#&'%

!"#&%

!"#"'%

"%

"#"'%

"#&%

!"#$%&'()*+

)&7-!&(
#"0#"(
/5&24-,(

Figure 22: Firm-Level Productivity Measures for Light Duty Trucks Across Time

-3.(
/"24-(
3-*4-(
6"5"6-(
-&4,(

1(23&,)-./0&

%3(
8"!4(

'()*+&,)-./0&

731(
3,6)&7,)/,(
./!5)0$!(
2,))-2(
3$!.$4$)(
#"0+)1-%$2(
'"!)./$(
+,-(
,)&*&(
)&*&+,(

52

!"#$%&

!"#$&

!"#"%&

"&

"#"%&

"#$&

!"#$!%!"&'(

