NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHANGING RESEARCH PERSPECTIVES ON THE GLOBAL HEALTH WORKFORCE
Till Bärnighausen
David E. Bloom
Working Paper 15168
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15168

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2009

We thank Larry Rosenberg, Sherry A. Glied, and Peter C. Smith for valuable comments and Gaargi
Ramakrishnan for research support. A shorter version of this paper will appear as a chapter in P. Smith
& S. Glied (Eds.), Oxford Handbook of Health Economics. New York: Oxford University Press (Bärnighausen
& Bloom, 2010 (forthcoming)). The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Till Bärnighausen and David E. Bloom. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Changing Research Perspectives on the Global Health Workforce
Till Bärnighausen and David E. Bloom
NBER Working Paper No. 15168
July 2009
JEL No. I12,I18,J44
ABSTRACT
Past research on the health workforce can be structured into three perspectives – “health workforce
planning” (1960 through 1970s); “the health worker as economic actor” (1980s through 1990s); and
“the health worker as necessary resource” (1990s through 2000s). During the first phase, shortages
of health workers in developed countries triggered the development of four approaches to project future
health worker requirements. We discuss each approach and show that modified versions are experiencing
a resurgence in current studies estimating health worker requirements to meet population health goals,
such as the United Nations’ health-related Millennium Development Goals. A perceived “cost explosion”
in many health systems shifted the focus to the study of the effect of health workers’ behavior on health
system efficiency during the second phase. We review the literature on one example topic: health
worker licensure. In the last phase, regional health worker shortages in developing countries and local
shortages in developed countries led to research on international health worker migration and programs
to increase the supply of health workers in underserved areas. Based on our review of existing studies,
we suggest areas for future research on the health workforce, including the transfer of existing approaches
from developed to developing countries.

Till Bärnighausen
Harvard School of Public Health
Department of Global Health and Population
665 Huntington Ave.
Boston, MA 02115
and Africa Centre for Health and Population Studies
University of KwaZulu-Natal
tbarnighausen@africacentre.ac.za
David E. Bloom
Harvard School of Public Health
Department of Global Health and Population
665 Huntington Ave.
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
dbloom@hsph.harvard.edu

I. Introduction
“People deliver health” (Joint Learning Initiative, 2004). The health workforce, i.e., the
people who are “primarily engaged in action with the primary intent of enhancing health”
(WHO, 2006b), diagnose illnesses, heal, care for people, monitor health outcomes, support
treatment adherence, provide medical information and prevent diseases. The importance of
health workers as decision makers and service providers in health systems is obvious. It is
matched by their impact on health spending. WHO estimates that across countries worldwide
about 50% of total public and private health expenditure (including capital costs) is spent on
health worker wages, salaries and allowances (Hernandez, Dräger, Evans, Tan-Torres Edejer,
& Dal Poz, 2006).1 In addition, health workers are indirectly responsible for a large
proportion of recurrent spending on health care through drug prescription, hospital
admissions and other resource use in providing diagnostic, therapeutic and palliative services.
In the following, we review the health economics and health systems literature on the health
workforce. We organize the review according to three perspectives on health workers, which
correspond roughly to chronological phases of academic publication: health workforce
planning (1960s and 1970s), the health worker as economic actor (1980s and 1990s), and the
health worker as necessary resource (1990s and 2000s).
A major research focus of studies on the health care workforce in the 1960s and 1970s was
on models to predict future health staffing needs. This research was triggered by shortages of
specific types of health workers in developed countries and by reports from socialist
countries that health manpower planning can aid health policy makers in ensuring an
adequate supply of health workers. Planning models developed in this phase continue to be
applied today both in developed and developing countries.
In the 1980s and 1990s, the research focus shifted to the study of health workers’ effect on
allocative and technical efficiency in health systems. Research in this phase was motivated
by the perception of rising health expenditures in developed countries and the belief that
health workers do not always act in their patients’ best interest. Many of the important

1

Hernandez and colleagues identified data from 29 countries in Europe, 7 countries in the Americas, 4 countries
in the Western Pacific region, 2 countries in Africa, and 1 country in the Eastern Mediterranean. It is thus
possible that the true average across all countries worldwide substantially differs from this estimate. Saltman
and Von Otter estimated that 65% to 80% of recurrent health expenditure is spent on health worker
remuneration (Saltman & Von Otter, 1995); for Africa, Huddart and Picazo estimated this proportion to lie
between 50% and 70% (Huddart & Picazo, 2003).

3

research topics in this phase are covered in other chapters of the handbook, including agency
(chapter 26), provider payment and incentives (chapter 27), competition among providers
(chapter 29), performance and productivity (chapters 30 and 31), and medical decisionmaking (chapter 33). In this chapter, we review the literature on one research theme in this
phase that is not discussed in detail elsewhere in this book (health worker licensure).
Starting in the 1990s and continuing in this decade, health workers became increasingly
viewed as a resource that is necessary to achieve population health goals. In many
geographical areas, health policies could not be implemented because health workers were
lacking. In developed countries, essential health care could not be delivered in rural and
remote areas because the human resources for such delivery were not available. In
developing countries, it became apparent that population health goals – such as the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) to “reduce child mortality”, “improve maternal
health”, and “combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases” (United Nations, 2009) could
not be attained unless the sizes of many national health workforces were dramatically
increased. As major themes in this phase, we review the research on programs to increase the
supply of health workers to underserved areas in developed countries and studies measuring
and analyzing international health worker migration.
Table 1 provides an overview of the three perspectives on health workers. In separate
subchapters below, we describe the health policy backgrounds that gave rise to each of the
perspectives and then review relevant literature. The three perspectives are of course highly
stylized; the backgrounds are reductionist descriptions of much richer policy contexts; and
the periods overlap. However, the perspectives serve useful purposes in this subchapter in
framing past research, structuring our exposition, and laying out a research agenda on the
health workforce for coming years.

4

Table 1: Three perspectives on the health workforce

Period
Background

First perspective:
Health workforce
planning

Second perspective: The
health worker as
economic actor

Third perspective: The
health worker as
necessary resource

1960s and 1970s

1980s and 1990s

1990s and 2000s

•

•

General health
worker shortages

•

Rising health
expenditures
Cost containment
policies

Geographical
focus

Developed countries

Developed countries

Research themes

Health workforce
planning models
• Need
• Demand
• Service targets
• Population ratio

Application of
microeconomic theory to
the study of health
worker behavior
• Agency
• Provider payment
and incentives
• Competition
among providers
• Performance and
productivity
• Medical decisionmaking
• Health worker
licensure

5

•
•

Local health
worker
shortages
Focus of
international
development aid
on population
health

Developing countries
and developed countries
•

•

Interventions to
increase the
supply of health
workers to
medically
underserved
areas
Health worker
migration from
developing to
developed
countries

II.

First phase: Health workforce planning

II.1 Background
Three historical backgrounds gave rise to health workforce planning studies in the 1960s and
1970s. First, in the two decades many developed and developing countries experienced
shortages of health workers, such as nurses (Aurousseau, 1971; Baaij, 1961; Boval, 1966;
Bureau, 1960; Charokopou, 1966; "[Finland has a nursing shortage]," 1973; Hale, 1964;
Hanada, 1968; Harer, 1965; Nevo, 1972; "The nursing shortage," 1967; Petursdottir, 1970;
Salling, 1978; Shambaugh, 1965; Sorensen, 1974; Stokes, 1970; "[Suggestion for alleviation
of nursing shortage in Tokyo]," 1971; Voval, 1966; Wallace, 1964), midwives (Aoki, 1968;
Burslem, 1979; Hirosawa, 1968; Keto, 1971; Munch, 1973; Valvanne, 1971), physicians in
general (Coffey, 1961; Cohen, 1968; Engel, 1964; Estes, 1968; Flynn, 1973; A. L. Frank,
1971; Gerber, 1967; Ginzberg, 1966; Guerra, 1965; Kadaner, 1965; "The medical manpower
shortage," 1971; Nevanlinna, 1966; O'Flanagan, 1972; Portes, 1966; Sriratanaban, 1974;
"Village, household distribution of contraceptives helps Asian nations overcome doctor
shortage," 1976; "WHO assistance to meet critical shortage of health personnel training for
doctors, nurses and health workers," 1966), certain types of physicians (C. P. Cooper, 1973;
Ganguli, 1977; Hargreaves, 1969; Jarvis, 1977; Keen & Thambiran, 1971; Knesper, 1978;
Pardes, 1979; Sandison, 1979; "Shortage of anaesthetists," 1977; "Shortage of radiologists,"
1966; Wyatt & Cross, 1966), dentists (G. A. Holmes, 1967; Holzinger, 1966; Maleh, 1966;
Mehta, 1968; Rogers, 1972; Tateishi, Takeuchi, Tanabe, Yasuu, & Sakakibara, 1971),
paramedical personnel (Jaffurs, 1972; Smith, 1968), pharmacists (Kuyvenhoven, 1960;
Ogunyemi, 1971), physical therapists (LaViolette, 1979; Millward, 1961), or laboratory
technicians (Oakley, 1964; Trinkler, 1966). These shortages demonstrated the insufficiency
of existing systems to ensure adequate health worker supplies and led to the conclusion that
“[h]ealth manpower is not a commodity whose production can be left to the imperfect
functioning of laissez-faire market mechanisms” (Hall & Mejia, 1978).
Second, reports from socialist countries, such as the USSR, asserted that health manpower
planning could produce valid projections of future health workforce requirements, aiding
policy makers in designing workforce policies to ensure sufficient supplies of health workers
(Daniels, 1974; Popov, 1971). Third, WHO identified a number of technical difficulties that
policy makers would inevitably face in ensuring adequate future supplies of health workers
both in developing and developed countries (Hall & Mejia, 1978).
6

“Manpower requires the longest preparatory period of all the health resources and cannot be
improvised. It is also subject to a certain inherent inertia, in that the rigidity of the health and
education systems and the attitudes of health workers do not make for easy mobility or
conduce to improving geographical and occupational distribution. Nor can manpower be
stored or discarded. If it is to be available at the proper time, it has to be planned for in
advance in the right amount and type – no more and no less than is needed. Because they are
subject to obsolescence, manpower abilities and skills also need to be maintained by means
of permanent supervision and continuing education.”
WHO advocated health workforce planning as a method of ensuring a sufficient supply of
health workers despite these difficulties. Initially, WHO had defined health workforce
planning as “the process of estimating the number of persons and the kind of knowledge,
skills, and attitudes they need to achieve predetermined health targets and ultimately health
status objectives” (Hornby, Mejia, Ray, & Simeonov, 1976). The organization envisioned
that health workforce planners would calculate future health worker requirements through
mathematical modeling, using detailed data on population projections, disease burdens,
health services, and capacities of health care facilities and education institutions. The
planners would prepare several health workforce scenarios and present them to policy
makers, who, in turn, would select the best option for implementation. However, WHO soon
came to realize that health policy-making did not follow this rational model.
“What are the lessons to be learned from experience with manpower planning? Such
planning is now more concerned with the actual decision-making process and implementation
of decisions than with manipulation of numbers in forecasting demand and supply …
Planning efforts are unlikely to be effective if due account is not take of the social, economic,
and – most important – the political milieu in which they take place” (Hornby et al., 1976).
“[M]anpower studies or reports of commissions, however, sophisticated, do not necessarily
lead to the development, much less to the implementation of a plan, or to an integrated
process of health manpower development unless the necessary social, economic, and political
conditions and a definite national political will are present” (Hall & Mejia, 1978).
“In a word, the health manpower planning process came to be recognized in WHO, as it was
in countries, as being more political and social than mathematical” (Fülöp & Roemer, 1982).

7

The 1978 WHO report Health Manpower Planning: Principles, Methods, Issues (Hall &
Mejia, 1978) thus broadened the objectives of planning to include implementation plans and
communication strategies and emphasized the importance of the “political dimension”,
“leadership readiness for and commitment to change”, “enabling legislation for planning and
subsequent plan implementation”, and “administrative capacity and willingness to implement
the plan” (Hall & Mejia, 1978).
II.2 Literature
While the focus of health workforce planning thus moved away from mathematical modeling
towards management and policy-making, the initial emphasis on estimation led to the
development of the four main approaches – still used today2 – to plan national or regional
health workforce requirements: the need, demand, service targets, and population ratio
approach (see Table 2 for an overview). The approaches differ in their scientific stance,
which, in turn, determines the type of information that is taken into account in the planning
effort. The need approach takes a normative stance. Experts use epidemiological
information to estimate the future occurrence of disease cases in a population. The number
and types of health workers necessary to provide the services to adequately treat all disease
cases are then calculated, using information on the amount of health worker time required to
provide certain services. In contrast, the demand approach takes a positive stance. Future
demand for health services is predicted from current demand by assuming that the
relationships between demand and its determinants (such as population size and income) will
remain unchanged while the level of the determinants changes. Predicted health service
demand is then translated into human resource requirements.
The service targets approach usually takes a normative stance but, unlike the need approach,
allows for constraints to the provision of health care in calculating future service
requirements. Such constraints include health care capacity and technology on the supply
side and ability and willingness to pay for health care on the demand side. Finally, the
population ratio approach can either take a normative or a positive stance. Future health
worker requirements are predicted using population growth predictions and health worker-topopulation ratios derived from studies or deliberations among policy makers.
2

These approaches are defined well in the 1978 WHO book on health manpower planning by Hall and Mejia
(Hall & Mejia, 1978). More recent reviews used similar categorizations of planning approaches (Dreesch,
Dolea, Dal Poz, Goubarev, Adams, Aregawi et al., 2005; Markham & Birch, 1997; Murphy, 2002; O'BrienPallas, Baumann, Donner, Murphy, Lochhaas-Gerlach, & Luba, 2001).

8

The need, demand, and service targets approach require the calculation of health services
requirements as a step preceding the estimation of health worker requirements. Since the
need and the service targets approach are normative, they are likely to stimulate the study of
health worker productivity, such as analyses of the types and combinations of health workers
that can produce desired numbers of health services most efficiently. In contrast, the demand
approach does not motivate the study of health worker productivity, because it takes current
modes of health services delivery as given, and the population ratio approach does not require
a translation of health services into health human resources requirements and thus adds little
information to the study of health worker productivity.
The difference between projected health worker requirements and the current supply of health
workers is likely to be largest if the need approach is used for projection because – unlike the
other approaches – the need approach neither takes account of a country’s current level of
health care provision nor considers a country’s capacity to deliver health care. As a result, in
many developing countries the needed number of health workers substantially exceeds the
current supply of health workers (Joint Learning Initiative, 2004; WHO, 2006b). In contrast,
in developed countries the needed health worker numbers may be significantly lower than the
number of currently available workers, either because health service demand exceeds need or
a country has produced more health workers than necessary to satisfy either need or demand
(R. A. Cooper, 2004; R. A. Cooper, Getzen, & Laud, 2003).3
Both the need and the service targets approach require that health policy makers can
effectively control the health care sector in order to ensure that the health workers in a
country do indeed provide the services that have been determined to be needed and do not
provide unneeded services demanded by consumers. In contrast, as Hall and Mejia write,
studies following the demand approach “have the greatest applicability in countries … in
which the government plays a relatively passive role in relation to health sector development
and hence is more concerned with anticipating than shaping the future” (Hall & Mejia, 1978).

3

Two general observations explain why health worker need and status quo are likely to differ in opposite
directions in developing and developed countries. First, health care need decreases with income (Deaton, 2003;
Riley, 2001). Second, the supply and utilization of health workers increases with income (R. A. Cooper et al.,
2003).

9

Table 2: Four approaches to health workforce planning
Approach
Scientific stance

Need
Normative

Demand
Predictive

Service targets
Normative

Population ratio
Normative or
predictive

Origin

Epidemiology,
Medicine

Economics

Health services
research

Geography

Assumption4

(All) health needs
should and can be
met

Current level and
distribution of
health services
adequate

Planned coverage
of specific priority
health services
can be achieved
within the time
period of
projection

An adequate
health worker-topopulation ratio
can be identified

Data requirements

High

High

Low to high

Low

Health worker
requirements derived
from health services
projections

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Stimulates study of
health worker
productivity

Yes

No

Yes

No

Expected difference
between projections and
status quo*

Large

Small

Intermediate

Small or large

Level of sectoral control
necessary for
implementation

High

Low

High

Low or high

First approach to estimating health workforce requirements: need
A good example of an analysis following the need approach to estimating health workforce
requirements is a 1972 study by Schönfeld, Heston and Falk calculating the numbers of
physicians required for primary medical care in the United States (US) (Schönfeld, Heston, &
Falk, 1972). Schönfeld and colleagues used data from the National Center for Health
Statistics to predict the annual numbers of cases of different diseases requiring attention by
two categories of primary care physicians (pediatricians and internists). They then calculated
4

Sources: (Dreesch et al., 2005; Hall & Mejia, 1978; Murphy, 2002).

10

the total number of pediatrician and internist hours needed to adequately treat all disease
cases using treatment norms based on health worker opinion.
“For this specific study, the basic clinical data for number of services and time per unit of
service have been accumulated from 617 interviews with physicians, expressing the
judgments of 24 pediatricians and 55 internists regarding what should be done to provide
good care in each of 80 diseases occurring in children and 170 diseases of adults” (Schönfeld
et al., 1972).
Finally, in order to estimate health worker need, the authors divided the total pediatrician
hours required in one year by the average number of hours a pediatrician works per year
(2,227 in the period 1965 to 1967) and the total internist hours by the average number of
hours an internist works per year (2,198). The study concluded that 133 primary care
physicians were needed per 100,000 persons, while only about half that number were
available at the time (Schönfeld et al., 1972).
Other applications of the need to approach to estimating health worker requirements in the
US include the Lee-Jones report of 1933 (Lee & Jones, 1933) and the “adjusted needs-based
model” developed by the Graduate Medical Education National Advisory Committee
(GMENAC) of 1980 (Graduate Medical Education National Advisory Committee
(GMENAC), 1980). In the period 1960-1980, the need approach to estimating health worker
requirements was further applied in the USSR (Minstriy of Health, 1967), in Latin America
(Center for Development Studies (CENDES), 1965), and in Sri Lanka (Hall & Mejia, 1978).
A recent example of a study following the need approach is an analysis by Birch and
colleagues who estimated the need for registered nurses in the Atlantic Region of Canada
(Birch, Kephart, Tomblin-Murphy, O'Brien-Pallas, Alder, & MacKenzie, 2007).
The need approach is appealing to health workers because it is clearly rooted in the sciences
of epidemiology and medicine and its underlying ethic of health care is often embraced by
the health care professions (Bodenheimer & Grumbach, 2002; Cookson & Dolan, 2000) –
health care should be provided according to need and independently of other characteristics
of individual patients . However, the approach has been criticized on conceptual and
practical grounds. Conceptually, as Klarman (1969) points out, “[w]hether need is a
desirable standard hinges on society’s willingness to accord an absolute priority to health
services, regardless of cost” (Klarman, 1969). Some modifications of the need approach take
this criticism into account. In some studies, only those diseases whose treatments met certain
11

cost-benefit criteria were taken into account in planning (Hall & Mejia, 1978). Practically,
the morbidity data for need projection may not be available in many countries or may be
measured with considerable uncertainty. In addition, the need approach may not be robust
across geographical areas, practice settings, or time periods. For instance, Schönfeld, Heston,
and Falk cautioned against generalization of their study findings because
“the interviewed physicians of this study are mainly in solo or limited partnership practice in
one geographical area (New Haven, Connecticut), and their opinions apply to only one point
in time – the present. It may therefore be necessary to have these current views and the
derivative standards of what constitutes good care reviewed by physicians in other parts of
the country and in other types of practices” (Schönfeld et al., 1972).
The results from the GMENAC study could not be replicated in a later study when treatment
norms were developed through analysis of visit records in three large health maintenance
organizations (HMOs) or by a Delphi panel of pediatricians belonging to the three HMOS
instead of by the national panel of pediatricians used in the original study (Weiner,
Steinwachs, Shapiro, Coltin, Ershoff, & Connor, 1987). The analyses of visit records
obtained from the HMOs Maxicare, Med Centers Health Plan, and Harvard Community
Health Plan yielded estimated numbers of pediatricians that were 59%, 84%, and 92% of the
GMENAC estimate, respectively. The Delphi panel of pediatricians from these three HMOs
yielded estimated numbers that were 39%, 48%, and 33% of the GMENAC estimate,
respectively.
Moreover, even if data and methods allowed valid estimation of health worker requirements
according to health need and a country had sufficient resources and the political will to
provide all the required health workers, it would be unlikely that health care would be
provided exactly according to policy plans. Patients may not demand needed health services
and may demand unneeded ones; health workers may not supply needed services and may
supply unneeded ones (Murphy, 2002). Finally, since the treatment norms used in the need
approach are based on current medical practice, the approach may inhibit innovation in the
delivery of health care. In many cases, current medical practice may be replaced by
alternative means of delivery, e.g., by substituting one type of health worker with another or
by increasing the use of medical information technology.
In sum, the need approach may only be feasible in situations where detailed data on disease
prevalence and incidence are available, the health sector can draw on adequate resources to
12

fund needed health workers, and the strength of sectoral control is such that it can be assured
that most utilized health care is needed. In such settings, health policy makers should
undertake careful sensitivity analyses of health worker requirements in order to assess how
much estimates will change if expert opinion or health care technology changes.
Second approach to estimating health workforce requirements: demand
An example of an analysis following the demand approach is a 1975 study by Hall, Reinke
and Lawrence on health workforce requirements in Chile (Hall, Reinke, & Lawrence, 1975).
The researchers first estimated in regression analyses the effects of geographical location,
income, sex, age, insurance coverage, and education on three measures of health care demand
(doctor visits, dentist visits, hospital nights). They then used predictions of the independent
variables to estimate future demand for health services (10 years and 20 years after 1968, the
year for which the equations were estimated). Finally, they converted predicted demand into
health worker requirements, using estimates of productivity and staffing patterns of hospitals
and facilities providing ambulatory and dental care, which were based on field observation
and expert opinion (Hall, 1971).
Other health manpower studies employing a demand approach include Baker and Pearlman’s
1967 study on Taiwan (Baker & Perlman, 1967), Fein’s 1967 study on the US (Fein, 1967),
and Hall’s 1969 study on Peru (Hall, 1969). Recent examples are a study predicting the
demand for accident and emergency services in the UK (Chambers & Johnson, 1986) and a
2008 WHO study projecting the global demand for physicians (Scheffler, Liu, Kinfu, & Dal
Poz, 2008).
Whether the predictive nature of the demand approach is an advantage or a disadvantage will
depend on the intended use of the estimated health worker requirements. In situations in
which policy makers intend to merely adjust the status quo of health services delivery to
changes in a few factors that are outside their control (such as population size and
composition, economic growth, or migration) demand studies may provide sufficient
information about future health worker requirements. Demand studies may also provide
baseline estimates for further normative analyses in countries where the government intends
to significantly change the pattern of health care utilization.
While demand studies could thus inform health policy in many circumstances, they are often
not feasible because the data necessary to estimate demand functions are lacking (Dreesch et
13

al., 2005). In addition, demand-based studies may not yield reliable estimates of future health
worker requirements. First, they commonly do not take into account (as, for example, the
studies mentioned above) that demand and supply are simultaneously determined. Estimates
of health worker requirements that do not account for the interaction between demand and
supply in the health care market are thus likely to be biased. Research on health worker
requirements following the demand approach may benefit from increased use economic
models of health care demand (Benham, 1971; M. S. Feldstein, 1967, 1971). Second,
demand-based studies usually assume that the relationships between demand and its
determinants will remain unchanged in the future, an assumption that is likely to be violated
in many situations. Third, they assume that projections of the development of the
determinants of health care demand are reasonably accurate. This assumption may not hold
true; for instance, per-capita income may not rise to predicted levels because of an
unexpected economic crisis. Fourth, they may wrongly assume generalizability of findings
from the particular setting of one study to other settings. For instance, one of the
determinants commonly taken into account in demand-based studies is income. However,
estimates of the income elasticity of health care demand in microeconomic studies (which are
often used for demand-based forecasting (Hall & Mejia, 1978; Klarman, 1969, 1973)) vary
widely, even if they cover similar geographic areas and time periods, suggesting that these
estimates are quite uncertain (see, for instance, (R. Anderson & Benham, 1970; Fein, 1967; P.
J. Feldstein, 1964; Gorham, 1967; Newhouse & Phelps, 1976; Rosett & Huang, 1973; Silver,
1970; Stigler, 1956)). In sum, studies of health worker requirements following the demand
approach can be useful in certain situations. In many other situations, however, they may not
provide the information required to plan and implement future health policies, may provide
the required information only with considerable uncertainty, or may not be feasible to
conduct at all.
Third approach to estimating health workforce requirements: service targets
Hall and Mejia (Hall & Mejia, 1978) describe an example of a study deriving health worker
requirements from service targets. Colombian health planners first identified “priority
services” for a population of nine million people lacking access to basic health care, based on
“morbidity surveys carried out earlier, the accumulated experience of pilot simplified
medicine programmes, statistics on service utilization, referral rates, and international
experience”. The planners then calculated the numbers of different types of health workers
14

(health promoters and nurse auxiliaries working in communities and physicians and support
staff working at health posts and in hospitals), using “normative techniques”. Many of the
more recent examples of estimations of health worker requirements follow a service target
approach. For instance, Kurowski, Wyss, Abdulla and Mills (Kurowski & Mills, 2006;
Kurowski, Wyss, Abdulla, & Mills, 2007) estimated the numbers of health workers required
to deliver 33 “priority interventions” identified by the Commission on Macroeconomics and
Health as important to achieving the MDGs (Commission on Macroeconomics and Health,
2001; Working Group 5 of the Commission on Macroecnomics and Health, 2002). Based on
WHO guidelines, the researchers broke the interventions down into tasks requiring different
levels of health worker skill. Next, they measured the time needed to complete the different
tasks through structured interviews with randomly selected health workers in Tanzania.
Then, they estimated through a time and motion study (Robbins, Bergman, Stagg, & Coulter,
2003) the proportion of health worker time spent providing health care (staff productivity)
and the proportion of productive staff time spent providing the selected priority interventions
(service productivity). Finally, the researchers estimated the numbers of nurses, midwives,
physicians, and technicians necessary to provide the “priority interventions” in Tanzania
under three productivity scenarios (assuming that staff and service productivity remained
unchanged, deteriorated, or improved). Dreesch and colleagues (Dreesch et al., 2005)
proposed a similar method to estimate the health workforce required to achieve the MDGs.
First, they selected priority interventions, taking into account “incidence and prevalence of
health problems, demographic characteristics of the population, and (internationally) the
targets set forth by the MDGs, or (at country level) targets identified in health sector strategic
plans”. Next, they identified in functional job analysis (F. I. Moore, 1999) the tasks required
to deliver the interventions. Then, they estimated the time required to complete the tasks
based on observation (Hurst, 2002) or expert opinion. Finally, they considered whether
required times per task could be reduced by improving productivity through task
reorganization.
As these examples demonstrate, the main differences between the two normative planning
approaches (the service targets and the need approach) are in the scope of health care
considered and in the constraints taken into account. The service targets approach decides on
priority interventions, taking into account health care need but also (explicitly or implicitly)
existing constraints to meeting that need; in contrast, the need approach starts by identifying
health care need and assumes that all need can be met. The former approach will thus yield
15

more realistic human resources requirements than the latter. The service targets approach has
the further advantages that it explicitly disaggregates need into different components, is easy
to communicate, can be easily combined with other planning approaches, and facilitates the
study of health worker productivity (Hall & Mejia, 1978). Moreover, unlike the need and the
demand approach, the service targets approach does not depend on detailed local data to yield
useful estimates of health workforce requirements.
On the other hand, just like the needs approach, the service targets approach has the
disadvantage that it assumes that consumers demand and health workers provide precisely
those services that the planners have used to derive health worker requirements. In most
settings, however, the overlap between the health services consumed and those planned will
be imperfect. The health services approach will be most useful in countries where the
government can exert substantial control over health services and is willing to use this power
to maximize delivery of planned services and minimize delivery of unplanned ones.
Fourth approach to estimating health workforce requirements: population ratio
Health worker-to-population ratios have been frequently used in planning manpower
requirements. For instance, following a WHO recommendation Thailand aimed at achieving
a physician-to-population ratio of 1:5000 in the period 1972-1976 (Chunharas, 1998).
Bahrain tried to attain a physician-to-population ratio of 1:650 in the period 1998-2005
(Ahmed, Fateha, & Benjamin, 2000). In the 1993 World Development Report, the World
Bank stated that “[t]he public health and minimum essential clinical interventions require
about 0.1 physician per 1,000 population and between 2 and 4 graduate nurses per physician”
(World Bank, 1993); and in the 2006 World Health Report, WHO identified a “needs-based
sufficiency” threshold of 2.5 health workers per 1,000 population (WHO, 2006b):
“To achieve a global assessment of shortfall, the Joint Learning Initiative (JLI), a network of
global health leaders, launched by the Rockefeller Foundation, suggested that, on average,
countries with fewer than 2.5 health care professionals (counting only doctors, nurses and
midwives) per 1,000 population failed to achieve an 80% coverage rate for deliveries by
skilled birth attendants or for measles immunization.”
“This method of defining a shortage, whether global or by country, is driven partly by the
decision to set the minimum desired level of coverage at 80% and partly by the empirical
identification of health worker density associated with that level of coverage. Using a similar
16

“threshold” method and updated information on the size of the health workforce obtained for
this report, the JLI analysis has been repeated for skilled birth attendants .. . A remarkably
similar threshold is found at 2.28 health care professionals per 1000 population, ranging from
2.02 to 2.54 allowing for uncertainty. The 57 countries that fall below this threshold and
which fail to attain the 80% coverage level are defined as having a critical shortage.”
The popularity of the population ratio approach to health workforce planning stems from the
ease and flexibility of its use. The data to estimate current health worker-to-population ratios
are available in most countries worldwide for some time periods, and ratio objectives are easy
to communicate to policy makers and planners. On the other hand, the approach suffers from
many limitations.

First, population ratios are necessarily averages across geographical

regions, subregions of which may have ratios that differ widely from the averages. For
instance, Bennet, Hall, Lutwana and Rado in a study in 1965 found an overall physician-topopulation ratio of 1:18,500 in Kenya, Uganda, and the then Tanganyika. This average,
however, could be decomposed into an average ratio of 1:4,400 for urban areas and an
average ratio of 1:31,000 for rural areas where more than 90% of the population lived
(Bennett, Hall, Lutwana, & Rado, 1965). Figure 1 shows the quotients of urban nurse-topopulation ratios divided by the rural nurse-to-population ratios for country-years for which
these data were available in the WHO Global Atlas of the Health Workforce (WHO, 2009);
Figure 2 shows the urban-to-rural quotients for physicians based on the same data source.5
The two figures show large differences between health worker population ratios in urban and
rural areas in most countries for which data were available, suggesting that for many planning
purposes pooled rural-urban averages will not be sufficiently disaggregated.6
Second, unlike the other three health worker planning approaches, the population ratio
approach does not require an intermediary step of estimating health services in order to
calculate the health worker numbers. It is thus the approach that will be least likely to lead to
a focus on health worker productivity in planning future worker requirements. Third, the
5

The graphs show the ratios for all country-years for which data were available in the WHO Global Atlas of the
Health Workforce with one exception. We do not show the urban-to-rural ratio for physicians for Bhutan 2004.
Because the ratio is quite large (599), the differences between the other ratios in the graphs would have been
difficult to discern, had we included it in the display.
6

Note that while the WHO Global Atlas is the most reliable dataset on health worker population ratios available
(Anand & Bärnighausen, 2004), it cannot be ruled out that the differences health worker population ratios
between urban and rural areas shown in the two figures can be partially explained by differences in data sources
and data definitions (such as definitions of physicians and nurses or rural and urban areas) (WHO, 2009).
However, it is unlikely that improved adjustment for these differences would alter the conclusion that rural-tourban health worker population ratios vary widely across countries.

17

approach does not explain which factors drive health worker requirements, except for
changes in crude population size. Thus, the population ratio approach to health workforce
planning is mainly useful for international comparison and as a first indicator of a country’s
overall health human resources situation (Bossert, Bärnighausen, Bowser, Mitchell, & Gedik,
2007), rather than as the main planning tool to estimate health worker requirements.
Figure 1: Quotients of urban nurse-to-population ratios divided by rural nurse-topopulation ratios
Equatorial Guinea 2004
Bhutan 2004
Oman 2004
Tunisia 2004
Niger 2004
Sri Lanka 2004
Côte d'Ivoire 2004
Togo 2004
Mali 2004
Brazil 2000
Sudan 2004
Swaziland 2004
Rwanda 2004
Eritrea 2004
India 1991
Honduras 2000
Guinea 2004
Gambia 2003
Pakistan 2004
Chad 2004
Burundi 2004
Maldives 2004
Uganda 2004
Sao Tome and Principe 2004
Guinea-Bissau 2004
Mauritius 2004
DRG Congo 2004
Cameroon 2004
Iraq 2004
Benin 2004
Algeria 2002
Myanmar 2004
Tanzania 2002

55.3
39.1
17.2
12.5
8.8
8.3
6.9
6.0
6.0
5.9
5.7
5.6
5.5
5.2
5.1
5.1
4.7
3.7
2.7
2.4
2.3
2.3
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.2
1.2
1.1
1.1
0.7
0.6
0.6
0.4
0

10

20

18

30

40

50

60

Figure 2: Quotients of urban physician-to-population ratios divided by rural physicianto-population ratios
Swaziland 2004
Timor-Leste 2004
Oman 2004
Brazil 2000
Rwanda 2004
Mali 2004
Togo 2004
Niger 2004
Yemen 2004
Honduras 2002
Eritrea 2002
Romania 2002
Burundi 2004
Chad 2004
Sao Tome and Principe 2004
Uganda 2004
Guinea 2004
Guinea-Bissau 2004
DRG Congo 2004
Pakistan 2004
Liberia 2003
Gambia 2003
Ghana 2004
Djibouti 2004
Maldives 2004
Cameroon 2004
Iraq 2004
Benin 2004
Mauritius 2004
Algeria 2002
Tanzania 2002
Mauritania 2004
Gabon 2004

88.4
82.6
41.5
29.8
28.4
25.4
23.5
21.1
20.0
18.9
18.8
15.7
14.2
13.7
11.6
11.0
6.4
5.0
4.5
4.2
3.9
3.3
3.1
2.9
2.4
2.1
2.0
2.0
1.7
1.7
1.5
1.0
0.9
0

20

40

19

60

80

100

III. Second phase: The health worker as economic actor
III.1 Background
Starting in the 1970s and continuing in the 1980s and 1990s, policy makers in developed
countries became increasingly worried about rising health expenditures (Altman & Levitt,
2002; Boccuti & Moon, 2003; R.G. Evans, Barer, & Hertzman, 1991; Gray, 1998). The
average annual growth rate of health care expenditure in real terms for 18 countries belonging
to the OECD was 3.0% in the period 1980-1990 and 3.3% in the period 1990-2001(Huber &
Orosz, 2003).7 Health care expenditures throughout the developed world rose in terms of
both per-capita spending on health (Huber, 1999; Huber & Orosz, 2003; Martin, Whittle, &
Levit, 2001; Schieber, Poullier, & Greenwald, 1993, 1994) and the proportion of per-capita
gross domestic product (Huber, 1999; Huber & Orosz, 2003; Schieber et al., 1993, 1994).8

At the same time, the apparent health worker shortage of the past period gave way to a
perceived oversupply (O. Adams, 1989; Budetti, 1981; Bui, 1986; Charatan, 1996; Ellwood
& Ellwein, 1981; Ginzberg, 1983; Grayson, 1978; "HEW advisers eye physician
'oversupply'," 1980; Hosokawa & Roberts, 1982; Macleish, 1985; Menken, 1981; Menken &
Sheps, 1984; "Most medical staffs have an oversupply of specialists, but don't plan to take
action to correct this," 1995; Placone & Wallace, 1982; Riska, 1995; Sabiston, 1984; Salmon
& Culbertson, 1985; Schroeder, 1984; Selby, 1981; Tierney, Waters, & Williams, 1980;
Whitcomb, 1995; M. S. White & Culbertson, 1981; R. I. White, 1992; Yager, 1987).9 The
focus of research on health workers thus shifted from planning for future supplies to
investigating the extent to which health workers contribute to increases in health expenditures

7

In this study, health care spending was adjusted for inflation using the gross domestic product deflator (Huber
& Orosz, 2003).
8

While most macroeconomic studies of the income elasticity of health care expenditure estimated values greater
than unity (Gerdtham & Jonsson, 1991; Gerdtham, Sogaard, Anderson, & Jonsson, 1992; Hitiris, 1997; Hitiris
& Posnett, 1992; Milne & Molana, 1991; Newhouse, 1977), the estimates vary substantially and some studies
find income elasticities smaller than unity (Parkin, McGuire, & Yule, 1987; Selvanathan & Selvanathan, 1993).
Reasons for the divergent results include difference in datasets, econometric models, and approaches to
adjusting for purchasing power in studies with cross-country data (Okunade & Suraratdecha, 2000).
9

Claims of health worker shortages or oversupplies imply that quantity standards for health workers have been
set. Such quantity standards are difficult to determine and usually quite uncertain (Ginzberg, 1983), as
described in the preceding subchapter on health worker planning, making it difficult to validate claims of
shortages or oversupplies. For the argument in this background section, however, it is unimportant whether
such claims are valid. We merely need to show that policy makers and researchers perceived an oversupply of
health workers where previously they had perceived a shortage.

20

and whether changes in the administration of health workers can help contain costs (Carrin &
Hanvoravongchai, 2003; Mehrotra, Dudley, & Luft, 2003; Stone, 1997). Health workers
came to be seen as profit-maximizing economic actors individually and as rent-seeking
professional groups collectively. Much of the research in this phase was motivated by the
belief that health workers do not always act in their patients’ best interest, exploiting market
failures in health care for their own gain and reducing social welfare in the process. In health
economics research, this belief was exemplified by the intensive study of supplier-induced
demand, defined by McGuire in the Handbook of Health Economics (McGuire, 2000) as
follows:

“Supplier induced demand exists when the physician influences a patient’s demand for care
against the physician’s interpretation of the best interest of the patient.”

In commentaries in health policy journals, the belief was expressed more blatantly. “Is the
health workforce a barrier to cost containment?” asks Montoya in The American Journal of
Managed Care (Montoya, 2000) and as Aaron writes in Health Affairs (Aaron, 2002)

“Hospital wings echoed with unoccupied beds. Doctors’ garages were filled with Mercedes
Benzes. And employers were reeling under rising health care premium costs.”

While the view of health workers as profit-maximizing economic actors was narrow
(neglecting, for instance, the influence of such factors as altruism and professional ethics in
guiding the actions of nurses and doctors (Le Grand, 1997)),10 the rigorous application of
microeconomic theory to health worker behavior was fruitful, leading to important insights
on a range of topics, such as competition among providers, health worker licensure,
information asymmetry and health worker agency (Blomqvist, 1991), health worker
performance and productivity (Cutler & Berndt, 2001), provider payment and incentives
(Sloan & Kasper, 2008), and medical decision making. As described in the introduction
section, other chapters in this handbook are devoted to many of these topics (chapters 26, 27,
29, 30, 31, and 33). In the literature review in this subchapter, we thus cover only one topic,
health worker licensure, which is not discussed in detail elsewhere in this book.
10

Many recent economic models of health worker behavior take a more differentiated view of factors explaining
health worker behavior (Encinosa, Gaynor, & Rebitzer, 2007; R. G. Frank & Zeckhauser, 2007; Olbrich, 2008;
Schneider & Ulrich, 2008).

21

III.2 Health worker licensure
Health worker licensure, i.e., the authorization of health workers to practice their profession,
has existed since the medieval period (Garcia-Ballester, McVaugh, & Rubio-Vela, 1989;
Loewy, 1989).11 Over time it has become increasingly structured and standardized (Rowe &
Garcia-Barbero, 2005). Today, licensure of health workers has been introduced into national
or subnational legislation in many countries worldwide (see, for instance, (Gaumer, 1984;
Graddy, 1991a; Muzondo & Pazderka, 1980; Rowe & Garcia-Barbero, 2005; The Licentiate
Committee of the Medical Council of Hong Kong, 2008; WHO, 2006a)). In order to obtain a
health worker license, candidates must have completed formal training in a recognized health
care education institution and must usually meet further requirements such as completion of
practical training (e.g., an internship), passage of licensure examinations, proof of absence of
a criminal record, and swearing of a professional oath (such as the Hippocratic oath or the
oath of Geneva). Licensing may be exercised by the Ministry of Health or by independent
professional bodies, such as a chamber, order, college or council (Rowe & Garcia-Barbero,
2005). Clearly specified conditions (for instance, malpractice or substance use) can lead to
revocation of a health worker license.
Theories of licensure
There are two families of theories to explain the existence and specific patterns of legislation,
including health worker licensure (T. G. Moore, 1961; Noether, 1986; Paul, 1984; Posner,
1974). According to “public interest” theories policy makers supply regulation in response to
the demand of the public for the correction of a market failure. According to “interest group”
theories, on the other hand, policy makers supply regulation in response to the demands of
interest groups trying to increase the incomes of their members (Peltzman, 1976; Stigler,
1971). The two families of theories offer different explanations for the existence of health
worker licensure and lead to different predictions regarding licensure effects.

11

Licensure has to be distinguished from two other types of state regulation of professions, certification and
registration (Gaumer, 1984). Certification restricts the use of a particular occupational title to individuals
meeting specified requirements, but does not bar individuals who do not meet the requirements from practice in
the occupation. Registration simply requires that certain information on a health worker (such as name, address,
and place of occupational training) is recorded by a state agency.

22

a. “Public interest” theories
A common version of the “public interest” explanation for the existence of licensure is “the
belief that the public interest will be best served if the poorly trained, incompetent, and
unethical people are kept from practicing”, because such exclusions will increase the average
quality of health services (Gaumer, 1984). This version is not motivated by an economic
model of behavior. Arrow (Arrow, 1963) developed a “public interest” theory of licensure,
which rests on the assumption that health workers know their own abilities – and the more
capable health workers have higher-paying alternative opportunities for employment.
Because patients cannot easily judge the quality of individual health workers, the price of a
health service does not differ by health worker and reflects the average quality of the service
in the market – i.e., a setup analogous to the one in Akerlof’s classic analysis of “The market
for ‘lemons’” (Akerlof, 1970).
Health workers with above-average ability withdraw from this market because their
alternative employment opportunities provide them with higher incomes. The withdrawal
lowers the average quality of health workers and the prices of health services fall, causing
those among the remaining workers whose abilities exceed the new average ability to exit the
market. This process repeats itself until only the least capable health workers are left to
supply health services. In this analysis, the market fails because of informational asymmetry
between health workers and consumers of health services. Searching out information to
overcome this asymmetry may be more expensive for the individual consumer than the
expected gain in welfare (Leland, 1979). Consumers may find it costly to obtain information
on health worker quality because most people consume the services of a particular health
worker only rarely and the outcome of health care may not be observable for a long time after
service delivery and may depend on factors other than health worker quality (Henderson,
McQuire, & Mooney, 1987). In this situation, licensure may serve as a less expensive means
of reducing the informational asymmetry between health worker and consumer by screening
out those workers who do not meet defined minimum quality standards – in Arrow’s words
“[t]he general uncertainty about the prospects of medical treatment is socially handled by
rigid entry requirements” (Arrow, 1963).
However, if the only purpose of licensure is to reduce information asymmetry between health
workers and consumers, certification – which, unlike licensure, does not exclude anyone
from practicing as a health worker – should serve that purpose at least equally well without
23

reducing consumer choice. While licensure excludes low-quality health workers from
professional practice, certification informs consumers about the relative quality of health
workers. Several authors have thus argued that the selection of health worker licensure over
certification is evidence that health worker interests dominate the public interest in the
regulation of health care (Friedman, 1962; Leffler, 1978; Leland, 1979; T. G. Moore, 1961).
Against this argument, Svorny (Svorny, 1987) holds that licensure is more effective than
certification in ensuring that health workers provide high-quality care because, unlike loss of
licensure, loss of certification does not prevent health workers from practicing altogether. A
health worker who loses certification (which she may regain) may have to reduce the prices
of her services, but will still be able to earn an income providing health care. In contrast, a
health worker who loses her license permanently forfeits the entire premium stream derived
from the investment in career-specific training.12 Compared to loss of certification,
revocation of licensure should lead to a larger loss of expected net present value (of the future
returns on health care education) and thus serve as a stronger incentive against providing lowquality health care than certification.
b. “Interest group” theories
“Interest group” explanations for the existence of health worker licensure originate in the
belief that licensure has been introduced in response to the demands of interest groups aiming
to ensure through licensure that incumbent health workers earn economic rents (Friedman,
1962; Kessel, 1958, 1970; Rayack, 1967). Peltzman (Peltzman, 1976) developed a formal
model of the influence of interest groups on regulation (such as licensure legislation), based
on a study by Stigler (Stigler, 1971). According to the model, self-interested legislators
maximize the expected number of votes in their favor
·
where

· ,

is the number of potential voters belonging to the interest group that is set to benefit

from the regulation,
for the legislator,

is the average probability that a member of the interest group will vote
is the total number of potential voters, and

is the average probability

that a member of the group which incurs a loss due to the legislation (every non- ) votes
against the legislator (Peltzman, 1976). In this model, the probability of a supportive vote

12

Investment in career-specific training includes tuition, living expenses during schooling, and the opportunity
cost of time attaining a health care education.

24

from the beneficiary group ( ) is a function of the net benefit per interest group member
which, in turn, is a function the total dollar amount transferred to the beneficiary group ( ),
the total amount of dollars spent by the group to mitigate opposition ( ), and the cost of
organizing the beneficiary group to support the legislator and to mitigate opposition (

)

.
The legislator chooses the size of the group she will benefit ( ), and offers the group

in

return for . The probability of opposition , on the other hand, increases with the rate at
which the income of a member of

is taxed in order to pay for

and decreases with

.
Note that, assuming diminishing returns to the per-capita net benefit, the legislator who
maximizes

will benefit both

and

to some extent. Peltzman’s model further

predicts that the cost of interest group organization

and “imperfect information about

both the gains and losses of regulatory decisions” restrict the size of the group benefiting
from the regulation. Furthermore, “the costs of using the political process” limit the size of
the gains of the beneficiary group (Peltzman, 1976).13 Based on the “interest group” theories
of regulation, we would expect health worker groups to be successful in increasing their rents
through regulation, because – in comparison to many other occupational groups – they are
small, well-informed, and well-organized in professional organizations (Friedman, 1962;
Kessel, 1970; Peltzman, 1989; Stigler, 1971).
Literature on health worker licensure
Three categories of health worker licensure studies can be distinguished. The first category
examined whether health care markets are competitive or monopolistic. In this literature,
monopolistic market structures are taken as evidence that licensure has benefited health
13

Using a setup similar to Peltzman’s, Becker (Becker, 1983) developed another version of an “interest group”
theory of regulation in order to investigate the effect of deadweight loss on the size of the gain that the
beneficiary group can achieve through the regulatory process. The deadweight loss is the difference between
the gains of the beneficiary group and the losses of the public due to regulation. Becker’s model predicted that
deadweight loss is a constraint on the gains of the beneficiary group. Because deadweight loss increased at an
increasing rate as regulation moves output away from the efficient level, the beneficiary group would need to
exert increasing marginal pressure in order to overcome opposition to the regulation. The model further
predicted that deadweight loss motivates a search for greater efficiency in regulatory redistribution because
neither the beneficiary nor the loser group opposes changes that eliminate some deadweight loss.

25

workers and hurt consumers. The second category of licensure studies analyzed the effects of
changes in licensure regulation on health worker incomes or on the quantity, price, or quality
of health services. Studies in this category infer from relationships between these outcomes
and the stringency of licensure requirements whether “interest group” or “public interest”
explanations of licensure hold true. The third category of studies investigated whether the
political power of health worker interest groups is a determinant of licensure legislation. A
positive relationship between interest group power and licensure legislation is taken as
evidence that the interests of health workers have dominated those of consumers in
influencing licensure legislation. Below, we describe the analytical approaches that have
been employed in each of the three categories. For each approach, we review the findings of
studies and critically discuss the evidence on reasons for the existence of health worker
licensure.
a. First category of licensure studies: market structure
One approach to determining the level of competitiveness in the health care market has been
to estimate the return to health worker education and to compare it to the returns to education
in other occupations. Studies employing this approach generally found significant positive
returns to medical education. However, depending on the time period of observation, the
particular physician specialties, the comparison occupations, and the estimation technique,
the estimated returns to education varied widely (Burstein & Cromwell, 1985; Friedman &
Kuznet, 1945; Leffler, 1978; Leffler & Lindsay, 1980; Lindsay, 1973; Marder & Willke,
1991; Maurizi, 1975; Weeks, Wallace, Wallace, & Welch, 1994; Wilkinson, 1966).
Moreover, a number of estimation problems were identified in these studies. First, the results
were sensitive to the choice of discount rate and there is no consensus as to which discount
rate to use to estimate returns to medical education (Leffler, 1978). Second, the studies
commonly failed to take into account progressive taxation (Leffler, 1978) and the cost of
malpractice insurance. Third, many of the earlier studies of return to medical education did
not control for differences in hours worked across occupations (Lindsay, 1973). Where
physicians earn more but work longer hours than comparison occupations, adjustment for
hours worked reduces cross-occupation differences in rates of return. Newer studies took this
criticism into account. Burstein and Cromwell (1985) found hours-adjusted internal rates of
return (IRR) to education for all physicians of about 12 percent in 1980 (Burstein &
Cromwell, 1985); Marder and Willke estimate hours adjusted IRRs to vary across specialty
26

between about 2 percent for Pediatrics to 58 percent for Pathology (Marder & Willke, 1991);
and Weeks and colleagues calculated hours adjusted IRRs of about 16 percent for primary
care physicians and 21 percent for specialist physicians, while the comparison occupations
received similar or higher returns on their education (dentists: 21 percent; attorneys: 25
percent; business people: 29 percent) (Weeks et al., 1994). Thus, studies since 1985 that
calculated hours-adjusted IRR suggest that for many medical specialties the stringent
licensure requirements did not led to excessive returns.
Another approach to assess whether health care markets are competitive or monopolistic has
been to investigate the relationship between physician density per population and the price of
physician services. A positive association between density and price was interpreted as
evidence of a monopolistic market (Newhouse, 1970) or as evidence that physicians induce
demand for their services (Cromwell & Mitchell, 1986; R. G. Evans, Parish, & Sully, 1973;
Fuchs, 1978; Tussing & Wojtowycz, 1986). However, as Sloan and Feldman (Sloan &
Feldman, 1978) and Newhouse (Newhouse, 1978) pointed out, the inability to control for
differences in quality of physician services in these studies rendered their results of little
explanatory value.
“Recall that analysis of a competitive market assumes a fixed and homogeneous product. But
physicians in areas with greater concentration of physicians spend more time with their
patients and patients in such areas spend less time waiting for their physicians. More time
with the physicians and less waiting time are both desirable characteristics that lead to more
physician time per visit. In a competitive market, visits using more physician time would be
more expensive. As a result, even if the market were competitive, there could be a positive
relationship between the physician/population ratio and the price of a (non-homogeneous)
physician visit” (Newhouse, 1978).
A third approach has been to estimate an index of market power based on comparison of
marginal revenue to marginal cost in the health services industry (Bresnahan, 1982; Panzar &
Rosse, 1987). Wong (Wong, 1996) did not find evidence that the marginal revenue exceeds
marginal costs in the market for physician services in the US, while Seldon, Jung and
Cavazos (Seldon, Jung, & Cavazos, 1998) observed that the price for physician services was
maintained above marginal costs. The results regarding physician market power from studies
following this approach are thus inconclusive.

27

In sum, the studies in this category do not provide decisive evidence for monopolistic
structures in health care markets. Moreover, none of the studies took consumer benefits into
account. It is possible that consumers are better off in a less competitive market than in a
more competitive one.14 For instance, licensure legislation may restrict entry of health
workers into the market and at the same time improve the quality of health care. If the
outward shift in demand caused by the latter effect exceeds the inward shift in supply caused
by the former, consumer welfare will increase. Even if the studies in this category had
provided strong evidence for monopolistic structures in health care markets, this evidence
would have been insufficient to rule out the possibility that such structures were serving the
public interest.
Second category of licensure studies: licensure effects
A second category of licensure studies has investigated the effects of changes in licensure
legislation on outcomes in order to establish whether “public interest” or “interest group”
explanations of licensure hold true. Outcomes considered in this category of studies included
health worker incomes and the price, quality and quantity of health services. A number of
studies found that health workers’ incomes (G. M. Anderson, Halcoussis, & Lowenberg,
2000; Friedman & Kuznet, 1945; Leffler, 1978; Muzondo & Pazderka, 1980; W. D. White,
1978) or the price of health services and products (Benham & Benham, 1975; Shepard, 1978)
increasd when licensure regulations became stricter. The studies inferred from the results
that licensure benefited health workers and not consumers. Yet, these studies suffer from the
same fundamental weakness that studies investigating the level of competitiveness in the
health services market suffer from: Their results do not rule out that the quality-improving
effect of licensure legislation has shifted health services demand to such an extent that
aggregate consumption and consumer welfare increase despite the supply-restricting effect of
the legislation (Svorny, 1987). Hence the results cannot be used to determine whether
licensure legislation benefited the public. Two other approaches in this category of studies
are better suited for this purpose.

14

Conversely, lack of evidence of monopolistic structures does not imply that licensure was established to
protect the public. As Svorny (1987) points out, “there must have been a one-time gain to practicing physicians
when restrictions on practice of medicine were imposed. As in other protected markets, entry may dissipate any
rents over time.”

28

First, it is theoretically possible to exclude the possibility that health worker licensure
benefited consumers through analysis the quality of health services.15 If health services
quality did not improve in response to licensure regulation, it could be ruled out that the
legislation benefited the consumers. (In contrast, if health services quality did improve in
response to licensure legislation, additional information would be necessary in order to
determine whether the legislation increased consumer welfare, because the quality
improvement may or may not have been sufficient in size to compensate for a reduction in
consumer welfare due to supply-restricting effects of licensure.)
Three studies investigated the effect of licensure on health service quality. Carroll and
Gaston (Carroll & Gaston, 1981) found that some licensure requirements for dentists in the
US led to a reduction in the quality of dental services; Feldman and Begun (Feldman &
Begun, 1985) found that licensure legislation in the US increased the quality of optometric
services; and Haas-Wilson (Haas-Wilson, 1986) did not find any significant effect on
optometric service quality of four state restrictions on optometric practice which, if violated,
could have led to revocation of optometric license. The three studies have thus come to very
different conclusions regarding the effect of licensure on health care quality. More
important, it is highly unlikely that the quality measures used in the three studies captured all,
or even the most important, dimensions of health services quality. Carroll and Gaston
(Carroll & Gaston, 1981) measured quality as waiting time for dental appointments, while
Feldman and Begun (Feldman & Begun, 1985) measured it as length and thoroughness of eye
exams, and Haas-Wilson (Haas-Wilson, 1986) measured it as the thoroughness of eye exams.
The studies thus analyzed the effect of licensure legislation on some specific indicators of
process quality, while ignoring other quality dimensions (such as outcome quality).
However, in order to rule out the possibility that health worker licensure legislation benefited
consumers, information on the effects of licensure on all quality dimensions is necessary.
Second, analysis of the effect of licensure legislation on equilibrium consumption can be used
to determine whether consumers benefited from such legislation. If licensure legislation
caused an outward shift in the demand for health services that is greater than the inward shift
in supply, equilibrium consumption would have increase and consumers would have
benefited from the legislation; if, on the other hand, the outward shift in demand were smaller

15

We use the word ‘quality’ here to mean all possible dimensions of heath service quality as well as increases in
certainty about the level of quality in the market for health services.

29

than the inward shift in supply, equilibrium consumption would have decreases and consumer
welfare would have been reduced.16
Svorny (Svorny, 1987) investigated the effect of two particular medical licensure regulations
(basic science certification and citizenship) on the consumption of physician services. She
found that, controlling for a range of socioeconomic, population, and health system
characteristics, more stringent licensure requirements in a US state were associated with
lower numbers of physicians per population in the state, and concluded that “the interests of
organized medicine dominated those of consumers in influencing the medical regulatory
supply process” (Svorny, 1987). Adams, Ekelund and Jackson examined the effect of a range
of variables capturing the stringency of midwife licensure and other midwifery regulations on
the consumption of the services of certified nurse-midwives (CNM) (Adams 2003). They
found that more stringent midwifery regulations in a US state led to lower consumption of
midwifery services in the state and concluded that “supply-restricting effects dominated
quality assurance in the U.S. market for CNM services” (A. F. Adams, Ekelund, & Jackson,
2003).
Both studies have technical limitations. Svorny (Svorny, 1987) assumed that her outcome
variable, physician population density by US state, was a measure of the quantity of
physician services consumed in the states. However, it is plausible that physicians in states
with lower physician population densities provided on average more services per year than
physicians in states with higher densities. The conclusion that licensure decreases
equilibrium consumption of health services may thus be wrong. Adams, Ekelund and
Jackson (A. F. Adams et al., 2003) controlled for endogeneity between their outcome variable
(the quantity of midwife services) and the licensure and regulation variables using a number
of instrumental variables. However, the instrumental variables (hospital charges for an
uncomplicated vaginal delivery, number of CNM per-capita, physician deliveries as a
percentage of total deliveries, total population in the state) may be invalid because they are
likely to have affected the outcome variable through many pathways other than the licensure
and regulation variables. The coefficients in the instrumental variable regressions may thus
be biased.

16
This identification of the net effect of licensure legislation on consumer benefits is possible because we
assume that such legislation never leads to an outward shift in supply. If this assumption were not met,
consumer welfare could decrease when equilibrium consumption increases.

30

In sum, analyses of the licensure effect on health worker income or the price of health
services cannot determine whether licensure served the public interest. Analyses of the
licensure effect on health service quality can theoretically rule out that licensure benefited the
public, but past studies were not able to demonstrate that licensure was in the public interest
(and it seems unlikely that future studies will) because of practical difficulties in measuring
comprehensively all dimensions of health service quality that can be affected by licensure
legislation. The most promising approach within the second category of studies is to evaluate
the licensure effect on the quantity of health services. The results of the two studies that used
this approach suggest that licensure reduced social welfare, but technical issues diminish the
strength of this evidence.
b. Third category of licensure studies: political power
A third category of licensure studies has analyzed the relationship between the political
power of health worker interest groups and the passage of licensure legislation and other
occupational regulation. Variables used to proxy interest group power were found to be
positively associated with passage of licensure legislation for physicians, nurses, dentists, and
pharmacists (Stigler, 1971) and physician assistants and psychologists (Graddy, 1991b), as
well as the stringency of licensure regulation for dentists (Becker, 1986) and the stringency of
other occupational regulation for optometrists (Begun, Crowe, & Feldman, 1981). The
authors of these studies interpreted their results as evidence that “interest group” explanations
of licensure hold true. However, it is unclear whether the proxy variables they used really
measured the political power of health worker interest groups. For instance, Stigler (Stigler,
1971) and Becker (Becker, 1986) used the percentage of an occupation living in urban areas
as a measure of political power. As Stigler argued, an occupation that is more concentrated
in cities will be more powerful: “When the occupation organizes a campaign to obtain
favorable legislation, it incurs expenses in the solicitation of support, and these are higher for
a diffused occupation than a concentrated one” (Stigler, 1971). However, the concentration
of health workers in cities may not matter for the political power of occupations in countries
where most members of the occupation have access to communication technologies, such as
mail or telephone, so that political support can be organized independent of physical distance
between health workers.
Graddy (Graddy, 1991b) assumed that the political power of health worker groups (physician
assistants and psychologists) increases with the ratio of group members “belonging to the
31

major professional association” to the total number of employed persons, and Begun, Crowe,
and Feldman (Begun et al., 1981) assumed that the political power of optometrists increases
with the ratio of optometrists to their competitors (ophthalmologists and opticians).
However, political power may decrease in these ratios beyond some point. Ceteris paribus,
the ratios increased with group size. However, as group size increases, the cost of organizing
political support among group members may rise, reducing the group’s political power
(Peltzman, 1976):
“It is not enough for the successful group to recognize its interests; it must organize to
translate this interest into support for the politician who will implement it. This means not
only mobilizing its own vote, but contributing resources to the support of the appropriate
political party or policy: to finance campaigns, to persuade other voters to support or at least
not oppose the policy or candidate, perhaps occasionally to bribe those in office. While there
may be some economies of scale in this organization of support and neutralization of
opposition, these must be limited. The larger the groups that seeks the transfer, the narrower
the base of the opposition and the greater the per-capita stakes that determine the strength of
opposition, so lobbying and campaigning costs will rise faster than group size. The cost of
overcoming “free riders” will also rise faster than group size.”
Note also that a number of variables hypothesized to proxy political power of interest groups
in these studies were found not to be associated with licensure legislation and other regulation
(for instance “the ratio of the occupation to the total labor force” in Stigler’s 1971 study
(Stigler, 1971) and “the percentage of optometrists who belong to their state optometry
association” and “whether or not the state’s optometry association has a legislative lobbyist”
in the 1981 study by Begun, Crowe, and Feldman (Begun et al., 1981)). The absence of
significant relationships between these variables and occupation regulation suggests that the
variables either did not measure political power or that certain dimensions of political power
did not influence occupational regulation.
Another problem with the above analysis belonging to the third category of licensure studies
is that they did not control for reverse causality, so that their estimates of the effect of
political power of interest groups on licensure legislation may be biased. It seems likely that
in many cases the introduction of licensure or an increase in licensure stringency will reduce
the costs of organizing political support and thus strengthen health workers’ political power.
Licensed health workers are usually centrally registered (for instance, with a professional
32

chamber or council) and can thus be easily contacted in a political campaign. In addition,
licensure defines the scope of practice of different types of health worker groups, ensuring a
certain level of homogeneity of interests within the groups. Furthermore, the more stringent
the licensure requirements, the smaller the size of the group of licensed health workers and
the easier the political organization of the group.
In sum, while the literature on the relationship between political power of health worker
interest groups and licensure suggests that political power does determine licensure
legislation – i.e., that “interest group” explanations of the existence of licensure hold true –
the studies in this category suffer from a number of limitations. In particular, it is unclear
whether the proxy variables for political power chosen in these studies are valid and the
analyses failed to control for reverse causality in the relationship between political power and
professional licensure.
To sum up, we identify three categories of licensure studies: first, studies examining the level
of competitiveness in the market for health services; second, studies analyzing the effect of
changes in licensure legislation on health worker incomes or quantity, price, or quality of
health services; and third, studies investigating the influence of political power of interest
groups on the passage of licensure legislation. While several studies suggest that “interest
group” explanation of the existence of licensure hold true, the evidence is not conclusive.
Most of the studies we reviewed merely show that health workers have benefited from
licensure legislation (studies in the first and second category) or that health worker groups
have had some influence on licensure legislation (studies in the third category), but fail to
demonstrate that consumers suffered a welfare loss. Thus, these studies cannot rule out that
licensure legislation served the public interest. The studies of licensure effect on quality or
quantity of health services are an exception. A decrease in the quality of health services rules
out an increase in consumer welfare and an increase (decrease) in the quantity of health
services consumed implies an increase (decrease) in consumer welfare. However, the few
studies that investigated the effect of licensure on the quality or quantity of health services
suffer from technical limitations in measurement of variables and effect estimation, so the
evidence – again – is not conclusive.
An important shortcoming of the literature on health worker licensure is that almost all
published studies were conducted in the US, even though health worker licensure regulations
exist in most developed and developing countries. The US health services market has
33

characteristics that are rarely found in other countries. Some of these characteristics are
likely to influence the effect of licensure on market outcomes. For instance, in the US, health
workers may already have strong incentives to provide high-quality health services because
of the high costs associated with health care malpractice suits. The marginal effect that
licensure can have on market outcomes may thus be lower in the US compared to settings
where malpractice suits are less expensive. Future studies need to investigate causes and
effects of licensure regulation in other countries.
Two further criticisms apply to studies in the first and the second category. First, the real
effects of licensure may differ from the effects that legislators or interest groups intend to
achieve. Changes in licensure regulation are infrequent events. Legislators and members of
interest groups will thus have little opportunity to observe the effects of licensure laws and to
learn from failures. Hence, inferences about the behavior of actors in the regulatory process
based on observed effects of regulation (as done in many of the studies discussed above) may
be invalid. A case in point is a study on the regulation of physiotherapists in the US. Sass
and Nichols (Sass & Nichols, 1996) found “that physical therapists have devoted
considerable effort to obtain passage of laws that ultimately result in lower wages”. As an
explanation of “this seemingly perverse result” the authors consider that physical therapists
incorrectly believed that the professional regulation would increase their earnings (Sass &
Nichols, 1996).
Second, analyses belonging to the first and the second category of licensure studies are
concerned with structures and outcomes in the market for health services. Health services,
however, are merely instruments to attain better health. It is therefore possible that
consumers suffered a welfare loss in the market for health services, while overall consumer
welfare increased. For instance, licensure regulation may have prevented incompetent health
workers from providing a health service intended to reduce childhood mortality. The
resulting inward shift in supply (due to the exclusion of health workers from the market) may
have exceeded the outward shift in demand (due to the increase in average quality of the
service), so that consumers suffered a welfare loss in the market for that health service.
Nevertheless, more children may have survived (since the fewer children who did receive the
service received a better service) and overall consumer welfare may thus have increased. In
measuring the effect of licensure on social welfare, future studies should thus include the
value of changes in population health outcomes due to licensure regulation.

34

IV. Third phase: The health worker as necessary resource
IV.1 Background
In the 1990s and 2000s, the lack of health workers became a major research focus in
developed and developing countries. In contrast to the first phase (see above), health worker
shortages in developed countries were local rather than nationwide, occurring in so-called
medically underserved areas, which were most commonly rural or remote areas but included
also certain areas in cities where predominantly poor people seek health care.17 In 2002,
Brooks and colleagues described health worker maldistribution and the resulting health
worker shortages in underserved areas in the US (Brooks, Walsh, Mardon, Lewis, &
Clawson, 2002):
“While 20% of the population of the United States resides in rural areas, less than 11% of
physicians practice in rural communities. Despite the fact that the supply of physicians has
increased over the last 20 years, the percentage of physicians practicing primary care
specialties has declined. Although the overall number of physicians practicing in rural areas
has increased, the proportion relative to urban areas continues to decline. In sum, it continues
to be difficult to attract and retain physicians in rural areas, particularly primary care
physicians.”
Six years later, Rabinowitz and colleagues repeated, in essence, Brooks’ problem statement
(Rabinowitz, Diamond, Markham, & Wortman, 2008):
“The persistent shortage of physicians in rural areas continues to have a major impact on
access to care for those living in small communities. Although one of every five Americans
(20%) lives in a rural area, only 9% of physicians practice there. The scope of this problem is
substantial, because more than 20 million of the 60 million people residing in rural areas live
in federally designated Health Professional Shortage Areas (HSPAs). This rural physician
shortage has existed for more than 80 years, despite the fact that, in general, people living in
rural areas have a greater need for medical care, being older, sicker, and poorer than their
nonrural peers. Of greater concern, the future rural physician workforce is likely to decline

17

A medically underserved area is an area where the number of health workers falls below a target. As
described in section II., such targets can be based on need, demand, or supply criteria (such as service targets or
population ratios). Commonly, a mix of criteria is used in the definition of underserved areas (Bärnighausen &
Bloom, 2009b).

35

even further, with only 3% of recent medical students planning to practice in small towns and
rural areas.”
In developing countries, evidence emerged that the population density of health workers
affected both population health outcomes (such as child mortality (Anand & Bärnighausen,
2004)) and health systems outcomes (such as childhood vaccination coverage (Anand &
Bärnighausen, 2007)), emphasizing the need to increase health worker education and
retention in developing countries (Joint Learning Initiative, 2004; WHO, 2006b). In addition,
with the adoption of the MDGs by national governments and international organizations,
health became a major focus of development policies. In particular, the fourth MDG
(“reduce child mortality”), the fifth MDG (“improve maternal health”), and the sixth MDG
(“combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases”) emphasized population health
improvements as primary goals of development (United Nations, 2009). While these goals
do not depend on health services delivery alone, they are unlikely to be achieved without
substantial increases in service coverage in developing countries. The indicators used to
monitor the progress towards the health MDGs include health service targets, e.g., the
proportion of one-year old children immunized against measles (for the fourth MDG), the
proportion of births attended by skilled health personnel (for the fifth MDG), and the
proportion of population with advanced HIV infection with access to antiretroviral drugs (for
the sixth MDG) (United Nations, 2009). It soon became apparent that such health service
targets could not be achieved without substantially increasing the health workforce in
developing countries (Joint Learning Initiative, 2004; WHO, 2006b, 2008).18 Access to
antiretroviral treatment (ART) is a case in point. A number of studies modeling the need for
health workers to provide universal access to antiretroviral treatment (ART) showed that at
current health worker education and migration rates in developing countries it is very
unlikely that sufficient health workers will be available to treat most patients needing ART in
the foreseeable future (Bärnighausen & Bloom, 2009a; Bärnighausen, Bloom, & Humair,
2007). Even at current levels of relatively low ART coverage, many developing countries are
struggling to find the health workers necessary to further expand coverage (Clark, 2006;
IOM, 2007; Kober & Van Damme, 2004; MSF, 2007; Ooms, Van Damme, & Temmerman,
2007).
18

Of course, increases in the efficiency of health care delivery, e.g. through changes in health worker team
composition and task shifting from more to less highly educated health workers , could decrease the gap
between current health worker numbers and the numbers required to achieve the health MDGs. However, it is
very unlikely that efficiency increases can eliminate the gap (WHO, 2008).

36

The shift in perspective from regarding health workers as economic agents to viewing them
as a resource necessary to improve population health in underserved areas of developed and
developing countries led to research on means to increase health worker supplies to such
areas. In the following, we review two major topics in this third phase of research on the
health workforce: first, programs aimed at attracting health workers to underserved areas in
developed countries; and, second, health worker emigration from developing to developed
countries (Aiken, Buchan, Sochalski, Nichols, & Powell, 2004). While the supply of health
workers to underserved areas and regions is not only a function of health worker movements,
but also of education rates (Bärnighausen & Bloom, 2009a), studies on health worker
education are few (Eckhert, 2002) and thus do not warrant a review.
IV.2 Developed countries: interventions to increase the supply of health workers to
underserved areas
Programs to increase the supply of health workers to underserved areas can affect health
workers in different stages of their careers. Before the start of training to become a health
worker, selective admission strategies attempt to increase the number health workers who
will practice in underserved area by selecting those individuals into health care training who
– given observable characteristics – are most likely to work in underserved areas after
graduation. During training, curricula specific to health needs in underserved areas and
exposure to practice in such areas attempt to increase graduates’ likelihood of choosing
underserved practice by specifically preparing them for this type of service. Lastly, financialincentive programs offer scholarships (during training) or loan repayments (after training) in
return for service in underserved areas (Bärnighausen & Bloom, 2008). Table 3 shows an
overview of studies extracted from three recent systematic reviews of four types of programs
(selective admission to medical school, medical school training for practice in underserved
areas, residency training for practice in underserved areas (Brooks et al., 2002; Rabinowitz et
al., 2008), and finanicial-incentive programs for return of service in underserved areas
(Bärnighausen & Bloom, 2009b)), supplemented by studies identified through additional
literature searches by the authors of this chapter using the PubMed and Econlit databases.
We excluded from the overview in Table 3 studies that merely described program results and
included only those studies that compared outcomes in program participants with outcomes in
non-participants. All included studies measured an outcome in either one of two categories:
provision of care – if the study compared all health workers enrolled in a program to all
health workers – or retention – if the study compared only those enrolled and non-enrolled
37

health workers who at some point took up practice in an underserved area. Two types of
retention outcomes can be distinguished: retention in the same underserved area (i.e., a health
worker leaving a particular underserved area to work in another underserved area counts as
non-retention) and retention in any underserved (i.e., a health worker leaving a particular
underserved area to work in another underserved area counts as retention).
Our extraction and literature searches identified only one study reporting the effect of
selective admission to medical school without additional medical school training to prepare
students for practice in underserved areas (Basco, Buchbinder, Duggan, & Wilson, 1998).
The study found – unsurprisingly – that students attending medical schools with selective
admission targeting future generalists were significantly more interested in primary care and
in rural practice than students attending medical schools that did not have such a selective
admission policy. Other studies investigated programs that trained (future) health workers
specifically for practice in underserved areas either during medical school (without or without
an explicit selective admission policies) or during residency. These studies found that
participants in these programs were significantly more likely than non-participants to practice
in underserved areas (Bowman & Penrod, 1998; Brazeau, Potts, & Hickner, 1990; Fryer,
Stine, Krugman, & Miyoshi, 1994; Rabinowitz, 1993; Rabinowitz, Diamond, Markham, &
Hazelwood, 1999b; Rabinowitz, Diamond, Markham, & Paynter, 2001; Smucny, Beatty,
Grant, Dennison, & Wolff, 2005), to intend to practice in underserved areas (Rosenthal,
2000), and to remain in the same underserved area (Pathman, Steiner, Jones, & Konrad,
1999; Rabinowitz, Diamond, Markham, & Rabinowitz, 2005) – with only one exception,
which did not find any significant difference between participants and non-participants
(Rabinowitz, Diamond, Hojat, & Hazelwood, 1999a).
Five of seven studies investigating the effect of participation in financial-incentive programs
on retention in the same underserved found that participants were significantly less likely to
remain in the same underserved area (G. M. Holmes, 2004; Pathman, Konrad, King, Taylor,
& Koch, 2004; Pathman, Konrad, & Ricketts, 1992, 1994a, b), while one study did not report
a significance level but found substantially lower retention among participants (Singer,
Davidson, Graham, & Davidson, 1998), and another study did not find a significant
difference (Jackson, Shannon, Pathman, Mason, & Nemitz, 2003).
On the other hand, 10 of the 12 studies investigating the effect of financial-incentive
programs on provision of care or retention in any underserved area found that participants
38

were more likely to provide care to underserved populations (Brooks, Mardon, & Clawson,
2003; Inoue, Matsumoto, & Sawada, 2007; Matsumoto, Inoue, & Kajii, 2008; Pathman,
Konrad, King, Spaulding, & Taylor, 2000; Probst, Samuels, Shaw, Hart, & Daly, 2003;
Rabinowitz, Diamond, Veloski, & Gayle, 2000; Rittenhouse, Fryer, Phillips, Miyoshi,
Nielsen, Goodman et al., 2008; Xu, Fields, Laine, Veloski, Barzansky, & Martini, 1997a; Xu,
Veloski, Hojat, Politzer, Rabinowitz, & Rattner, 1997b) and to continue to practice in some
underserved area (G. M. Holmes, 2004; Pathman et al., 2000) . These differences were
shown to be statistically significant in eight of the ten studies (Brooks et al., 2003; G. M.
Holmes, 2004; Pathman et al., 2000; Probst et al., 2003; Rabinowitz et al., 2000; Rittenhouse
et al., 2008; Xu et al., 1997a; Xu et al., 1997b), while two studies did not provide the results
of significance tests (Inoue et al., 2007; Matsumoto et al., 2008) and two other studies
reported that participants were significantly less likely than non-participants to remain in
some underserved area (Matsumoto et al., 2008; Pathman et al., 1992).
In all of the above studies, the (future) health workers chose to participate in a program. It is
thus difficult to distinguish whether the finding that program participants are more (or less)
likely to provide care in underserved areas or to remain in an underserved area is a true effect
of program participation or merely a selection effect. Selection issues are particularly
apparent in the evaluation of programs with selective admission policies. All of the studies
evaluating such programs compare participating health care students to their nonparticipating peers. However, such peers are unlikely to be a good counterfactual, because
they will on average be less likely than the participants to have the characteristic required for
participation in the program, e.g., rural upbringing or self-declared interest in primary health
care. As the selection criterion was likely chosen because it was observed to be positively
associated with practice in underserved areas, we would expect that observed differences in
the likelihood to practice in underserved areas between participating and non-participating
health care students can be (partially) explained by selective admission.
Indeed, the one study that does not find any significant difference in the provision of care in
underserved areas between participants and non-participants in a program with selective
admission (and medical school training for rural practice) controlled for rural upbringing in
the analysis (Rabinowitz et al., 1999a) – while the program “recruits and selectively admits
medical school applicants who have grown up in a rural area and intend to practice family
medicine in rural and underserved areas” (Rabinowitz et al., 1999b).

39

Another study of the same program concludes that “the admission component of the PSAP
[Physician Shortage Area Program] is the most important reason for its success” (Rabinowitz
et al., 2001). Implicit in such a conclusion is the assumption that a large proportion of
participants would not have studied to become health workers, had they not enrolled in the
program. If this assumption were not met, the program would not have increased the supply
of health workers to underserved areas and could thus not be called a “success”.
Of the 16 studies of program effect in Table 3, 14 controlled for additional variables in the
comparison between participants and non-participants, such as sex, age, ethnicity, marital
status, medical specialty (Bowman & Penrod, 1998; G. M. Holmes, 2004; Pathman et al.,
2000; Pathman et al., 2004; Pathman et al., 1992, 1994b; Probst et al., 2003; Rabinowitz et
al., 1999a; Rabinowitz et al., 1999b; Rabinowitz et al., 2001; Rabinowitz et al., 2000;
Rittenhouse et al., 2008; Xu et al., 1997a; Xu et al., 1997b). However, even those studies that
control for factors likely to be closely related to care provision and retention in underserved
areas (such as growing up in an underserved area (Rabinowitz et al., 1999a; Rabinowitz et al.,
2000; Xu et al., 1997a; Xu et al., 1997b) or “strong interest” prior to medical school to
practice as a doctor in an underserved area (Rabinowitz et al., 2000; Xu et al., 1997b)) cannot
rule out that participants selected into the program on unobserved characteristics related to
the preference of working in underserved areas.
Only one study of program effect attempted to control for selection on unobserved variables
by using a selection model (G. M. Holmes, 2004). In order to identify the program effect, the
study used four medical school characteristics: “historical proportion of graduates
specializing in primary care”, “quality of the school”, a “tuition index”, and a “public school
indicator”. The use of these identifying variables assumes that they influenced selection into
the program but did not affect the provision of care in underserved areas other than through
their effect on program participation. However, the type of medical school that students
attend is likely to be related not only to the decision to enroll in financial-incentive programs,
but also – independent of program participation – to the decision to work in underserved
areas. For instance, students with strong preferences to work in underserved areas may be
more likely than their peers with weaker preferences for such care to select medical schools
with a high “historical proportion” of graduates pursuing careers in primary care, because
such schools are likely to focus on medical education relevant for underserved areas. This
selection may determine work location decisions, independent of any effect the medical

40

school characteristic may have on participation in the programs. Thus the characteristics may
not be valid variables to identify program effects.
In sum, studies evaluating programs aimed at increasing the supply of health workers to
underserved area find that participants are more likely to provide care for underserved
population and to remain in underserved areas in the long run (even if not in the same
underserved area where they were initially placed). However, because the studies to date
have not convincingly controlled for selection effects, the evidence to date does not allow the
inference that the programs have caused increases in health worker supply to underserved
areas.

41

Table 3: Studies of programs aimed at increasing the supply of health workers to underserved areas
Study

Program type

Program

Outcomes

Results

(Basco et al.,
1998)

Selective
admission to
medical school

All US medical
schools “with
premedical
recruitment
activities that
targeted future
generalists”

Self-reported interest
in primary care and
rural practice

Students attending medical schools with selective
recruitment targeting future generalists were significantly
more interested in primary care and in rural practice than
students attending other schools.

Physician
Shortage Area
Program (PSAP)
of Jefferson
Medical College
(selective
admission and
medical school
training for
practice in
underserved
areas)

Provision of care in
any underserved area

PSAP participation significantly increased the likelihood
of a graduate of Jefferson Medical College graduates to
practice rural primary care (adjusted odds ratio (aOR) 2.5,
p < 0.001) net of rural preceptorship during medical
school, NHSC participation, sex, expected peak income,
rural family practice clerkship. Holding the other factors
equal rural preceptorship and NHSC participation
significantly increased the likelihood of rural primary
practice (aORs 2.4 and 2.6, respectively, both p < 0.001).

(Rabinowitz et al., Selective
2001)
admission to
medical school
Medical school
training for
practice in
underserved
areas
Financial
incentives

Rural
preceptorship
NHSC (financial
incentives)

42

Study

Program type

(Rabinowitz et al., Selective
1999a)
admission to
medical school

Program

Outcomes

Results

PSAP

Provision of care in
any underserved area

PSAP participation was not significantly related to
practice in rural area, when controlling for “size of
community raised”, “size of community undergraduate
college”, “father’s education”, “specialty plans as a
Freshman”, “senior debt”.

PSAP

Retention in the
same underserved
area

“After 11–16 years, 68% (26/38) of the PSAP graduates
were still practicing family medicine in the same rural
area, compared with 46% (25/54) of their non-PSAP peers
(p = .03).”

PSAP

Provision of care in
any underserved area

“PSAP graduates from the classes of 1978 through 1986
were approximately four times as likely as non-PSAP
graduates to practice family medicine (55 percent vs. 13
percent), to practice in a rural area (39 percent vs. 11
percent), and to practice in underserved areas (33 percent
vs. 8 percent). They were approximately 10 times more
likely to combine a career in family medicine with
practice in a rural (26 percent vs. 3 percent) or
underserved (23 percent vs. 2 percent) area.”

Medical school
training for
practice in
underserved
areas
(Rabinowitz et al., Selective
2005)
admission to
medical school
Medical school
training for
practice in
underserved
areas
(Rabinowitz,
1993)

Selective
admission to
medical school
Medical school
training for
practice in
underserved
areas

43

Study

Program type

(Rabinowitz et al., Selective
1999b)
admission to
medical school

Program

Outcomes

Results

PSAP

Provision of care in
any underserved area

“PSAP graduates were much more likely than their nonPSAP classmates at JMC [Jefferson Medical College] to
practice in a rural area of the United States (34% vs 11%;
RR, 3.0), to practice in an underserved area (30% vs 9%;
RR, 3.2), to practice family medicine (52% vs 13%; RR,
4.0), and to have combined a career in family practice
with practice in a rural area (21% vs 2%; RR, 8.5).”

Medical school
training for
practice in
underserved
areas
(Smucny et al.,
2005)

Medical school
training for
practice in
underserved
areas

Rural Medical
Education
Program (RMED)
of the State
University of
New York
(SUNY)

Provision of care in
any underserved area

“A greater percentage of former RMED students practiced
in rural locations [22/86 (26%)] than did non-RMED
students [95/1,307 (7%)]” (p < 0.0001).

(Brazeau et al.,
1990)

Medical school
training for
practice in
underserved
areas

Upper Peninsula
Medical
Education
Program at
Michigan State
University

Provision of care in
any underserved area

Program graduates “chose rural practice and primary care
specialties, especially family practice, more often than did
their downstate colleagues” (whose medical school did not
emphasize training for practice in underserved areas).

Medical school
training for
practice in
underserved
areas

Statewide
Education
Activities for
Rural Colorado’s
Health
(SEARCH) at the
University of
Colorado Medical
School (UCSOM)

Provision of care in
any underserved area

(Fryer et al.,
1994)

Specialty choice of
medical school
graduates

Specialty choice of
medical school
graduates

44

UCSOM graduates who had participated in SEARCH
were more likely to have chosen a primary care specialty
(46.9% vs. 30.6%) and to establish practices in rural
counties (16.4% vs. 9.6%) than graduates who had not
participated.

Study

Program type

Program

Outcomes

Results

(Pathman et al.,
1999)

Medical school
training for rural
practice

All US medical
schools or
residency
programs with
rural rotations

Self-reported
preparedness for
rural practice

“Residency rural rotations predicted greater preparedness
for rural practice (p = .004) and small-town living (p =
.03) and longer retention (hazard ratio, 0.43, p = .003).
Extended medical school rural rotations predicted only
greater preparedness for rural practice (p = .03).”

Residency
training for rural
practice

Self-reported
preparedness for
small-town living

“The physicians' sense of preparedness for small-town
living predicted their retention duration (hazard ratio,
0.74, p < .0001), whereas their preparedness for rural
medical practice did not predict their retention duration
after controlling for preparedness for small-town living
(hazard ratio, 0.92; p = .27).”

Retention in the
same underserved
area

(Rosenthal, 2000)

Residency
training for
practice in
underserved
areas

Family medicine
residencies with
“rural training
tracks”

Self-reported intent
to practice in
underserved areas

Graduates of family medicine residencies with rural
training tracks were more likely to report that they
intended to practice in rural communities than graduates
of “small urban FP [family practice] residencies”,
“midsize urban FP residencies”, and “all FP residencies”
(76% vs. 39% vs. 18% vs. 24%).

(Bowman &
Penrod, 1998)

Residency
training for
practice in
underserved
areas

All US family
residency
programs that
focus on training
for rural practice

Provision of care in
any underserved area

A one-month increase in the length of time of required
rural training increased the proportion of graduates of a
residency program practicing in rural areas by 0.82
percent (p < 0.0001) net of “percentage of minority
residents at program”, “full rural mission at program”,
“partial rural mission at program”, “percentage of
population of the state that is nonmetropolitan”, “emphasis
on rural or OB [obstetrics] fellowship”, “director is rural
contact person”, “other graduate training programs used at
site”, “months of obstetrical training”, percentage of
female residents at program”, “population of program site
(city or metropolitan)”, “percentage of faculty with rural
practice experience”, “sponsoring hospital of program is
public”. Holding the other factors constant, having a rural
mission statement increased the proportion of graduates
practicing in rural areas by 12% (p < 0.0001).

45

Study

Program type

Program

Outcomes

Results

(Inoue et al.,
2007)

Financial
incentives

Jichi Medical
University, Japan

Provision of care in
any underserved area

Participants and former participants were more likely to
work in a rural area of Japan than non-participants.

(Matsumoto et al.,
2008)

Financial
incentives

Jichi Medical
University, Japan

Provision of care in
any underserved area

Former participants were about four times more likely to
work in rural areas than non-participants (12.8% vs. 3.3%
in 1994 and 10.7% vs. 2.6% in 2004).

(Pathman et al.,
1992)

Financial
incentives

National Health
Service Corps

Retention in the
same underserved
area

Participants were significantly more likely to leave their
practice of original placement than non-participants
(adjusted hazard ratio (aHR) 1.98, p = 0.0002), when
controlling for training in internal medicine and stated
importance of living in a small community).

Retention in any
underserved area

Participants were significantly more likely to leave
practice in underserved areas than-non participants (aHR
1.56, p = 0.02), when controlling for training in internal
medicine and stated importance of living in a small
community).
(Pathman et al.,
1994a)

Financial
incentives

National Health
Service Corps

Retention in the
same underserved
area

Compared to non-participants, former participants were
about three times less likely to remain in the same practice
(13% vs. 44%, p < 0.001) and about half as likely to
remain in a non-metropolitan area (24% vs. 52%, p <
0.001).

Retention in any
underserved area
(Pathman et al.,
1994b)

Financial
incentives

National Health
Service Corps

Retention in the
same underserved
area

Five years after starting work at a practice site,
participants were significantly less likely to have remained
at the site of first practice than non-participants (aOR
0.41, p = 0.01), when controlling for physician discipline
(allopath vs. osteopath), physician specialty, initial plans
to remain in the underserved area, percentage of minority
patients in the practice, county population, type of county,
per-capita income in the county, and physician population
density in the county.

46

Study

Program type

Program

Outcomes

Results

(Xu et al., 1997b)

Financial
incentives

National Health
Service Corps

Provision of care in
any underserved area

Former participants were significantly more likely to
practice in an underserved area ten years after graduating
from medical school than non-participants (aOR = 3.7, p <
0.0001, when controlling for age, sex, ethnicity, having
grown up in an underserved area, family income as a
child, strong interest in working in underserved areas prior
to medical school, debt, medical school experience in an
underserved area, and residency experience in an
underserved area).

(Xu et al., 1997a)

Financial
incentives

National Health
Service Corps

Provision of care to
poor patients

30% of former participants’ patients, but only 19% of nonparticipants’ patients, were poor.

(Singer et al.,
1998)

Financial
incentives

National Health
Service Corps

Retention in the
same community
health center

After five years of work in a community health centre,
36% of participants, but only 17% of non-participants, still
worked in the same centre.

(Rabinowitz et al., Financial
2000)
incentives

National Health
Service Corps

Provision of care in
any underserved area

“Participation in the NHSC is the only experiential factor
related to caring for the underserved” (aOR 2.2, 95% CI
1.6-3.0, when controlling for sex, ethnicity, family income
when growing up, childhood in inner-city/rural area,
strong interest in underserved practice prior to medical
school, clinical experience with the underserved during
medical school).

47

Study

Program type

Program

Outcomes

Results

(Brooks et al.,
2003)

Financial
incentives

National Health
Service Corps

Provision of care in
any underserved area

13% of rural primary care physicians, but only 3% of
suburban and 3% of urban primary care physicians, had
participated in the program.

(Probst et al.,
2003)

Financial
incentives

National Health
Service Corps

Provision of care in
any underserved area

Former participants were significantly more likely to be
highly engaged in Medicaid19 inpatient practice than nonparticipants (aOR = 1.93 (95% CI 1.18-3.13), when
controlling for physician’s sex, ethnicity, medical
specialty, period of graduation from medical school,
medical education in South Carolina, graduation from a
non-US medical school).

(G. M. Holmes,
2004)

Financial
incentives

National Health
Service Corps

Retention in the
same underserved
area

Participants were less likely to remain in their first
practice location than non-participants (beta coefficients
between -0.248 and -0.272 across three graduation cohorts
(all p < 0.01), when controlling for age, sex, and
ethnicity).

Provision of care in
any underserved area

Participants were more likely to serve in any underserved
area than non-participants (beta coefficients between
0.528 and -0.745 across three graduation cohorts (all p <
0.01), when controlling for age, sex, and ethnicity).
(Rittenhouse et
al., 2008)

Financial
incentives

National Health
Service Corps

Provision of care in
any community
health center

Participants were significantly more likely to work in a
community health centre than non-participants (aOR =
6.99, p < 0.001, when controlling for sex, year of
residency completion, private vs. public medical school,
attendance of a medical school receiving Title VII
funding20).

19

Medicaid is a means-tested health program funded by the US federal government and the states. It covers health care expenditures of some categories of lowincome individuals, including children, parents, pregnant women, and children with disabilities (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, 2009).

20

In the US, “Title VII grants are intended to strengthen the primary care educational infrastructure at medical schools and residency programs and to encourage
physicians-in-training to pursue careers working with underserved populations” (Rittenhouse et al., 2008).

48

Study

Program type

Program

Outcomes

Results

(Pathman et al.,
2000)

Financial
incentives

National Health
Service Corps

Provision of care in
any underserved area

In comparison to non-participants, participants in
financial-incentive programs were significantly more
likely to practice in rural areas (33.3% vs. 6.5%, p <
0.001) and to care for underserved populations (54.1% vs.
29.4%, p < 0.001).

Retention in the
same underserved
area

Retention in the first practice site was not significantly
different between program participants and nonparticipants.

Indian Health
Service Corps
State scholarships
State loan
repayment
programs
Practice and
hospitalsponsored
financial
incentives
(Jackson et al.,
2003)

Financial
incentives

West Virginia
Community
Scholarship
Program
West Virginia
Health Sciences
Scholarship
Program
West Virginia
Recruitment and
Retention
Community
Program
West Virginia
State Loan
Repayment
Program

49

Study

Program type

Program

Outcomes

Results

(Pathman et al.,
2004)

Financial
incentives

State scholarship
programs

Retention in the
same underserved
area

Participants were not significantly more likely to remain at
their site of first practice than non-participants (aHR 0.75,
p = 0.080, when controlling for age, sex, medical
specialty, and marital status).

State loan
programs with
service option
State loan
repayment
programs
State direct
financialincentive
programs for
medial residents
State direct
financialincentive
programs for fully
trained health
professionals

50

IV.3 Developing countries: health worker emigration
In the past decade, health worker migration from developing to developed countries has been a
common topic of editorials (Bundred & Levitt, 2000; Chen & Boufford, 2005; Mullan, 2007;
Pang, Lansang, & Haines, 2002), policy reports (International Pharmaceutical Federation (FIP),
2006; Joint Learning Initiative, 2004; WHO, 2006b), and scientific publications. Below, we
summarize the research on international health worker migration regarding measurement (i.e.,
studies estimating the size of migration flows from developing to developed countries or the
stock of health workers who have migrated), causes (i.e., studies investigating migration
reasons), welfare impact (i.e., studies investigating how health worker migration affects social
welfare in source or recipient countries), and programs and policies (i.e., publications discussing
potential interventions to reduce migration or minimize any negative consequences of
international health worker migration).
Numerous studies have described international migration flows or stocks of in- or out-migrated
health workers for individual migration source countries (e.g., India , Zimbabwe (Chikanda,
2005), Ghana (Dovlo & Nyonator, 1999), India (Kaushik, Jaiswal, Shah, & Mahal, 2008),
Malawi (Zijlstra & Broadhead, 2007), Philippines (Institute of Health Policy and Development
Studies, 2005)) or from individual recipient countries (e.g., UK (Buchan, 2002; Buchan,
Baldwin, & Mundo, 2008), USA (Akl, Maroun, Major, Chahoud, & Schunemann, 2007; Akl,
Mustafa, Bdair, & Schunemann, 2007; Brush, Sochalski, & Berger, 2004), Italy (Chaloff, 2008),
Canada (Dumont, Zurn, Church, & Le Thi, 2008), New Zealand (Zurn & Dumont, 2008)). While
data on health worker migration published in these studies is useful to demonstrate the
magnitude of health worker migration from developing to developed countries, it is insufficient
for many research purposes. For one, the country-level data cannot be pooled for multi-country
analyses, because different studies used different methods to estimate the size of migration flows
and stocks. In addition, most of the studies covered only short periods of time. Finally, some
studies measured only migration of health workers who graduated from specific institutions or
regions in a country (e.g., (Zijlstra & Broadhead, 2007)).
Four different studies have published datasets of stocks of emigrated health workers from a
number of countries (Clemens & Pettersson, 2008; Hagopian, Thompson, Fordyce, Johnson, &

51

Hart, 2004; Mullan, 2005; OECD, 2005; WHO, 2006b).21 All of the four datasets used numbers
of health workers reported in recipient countries in order to estimate the magnitude of emigration
from source countries. The stock estimates differ substantially across the datasets (see Table 4).
These discrepancies are due to several factors, demonstrating some of the difficulties in
estimating international health worker migration flows.
First, the four datasets used different sources of information on the numbers of foreign
physicians in recipient countries. WHO/OECD (OECD, 2005; WHO, 2006b) and Clemens and
Petterson (Clemens & Pettersson, 2008) used national census data, while Mullan (Mullan, 2005)
and Hagopian and colleagues (Hagopian et al., 2004) used data from health workers’
professional organizations.
Second, in order to estimate emigration stocks the different studies counted health workers in
different sets of recipient countries – WHO/OECD counted health workers in the UK, US,
Australia, Canada, Finland, France, Germany, Portugal; Clemens and Pettersson in the UK, US,
Australia, Canada, France, Portugal, Spain, Belgium, South Africa; Mullan in the UK, US,
Australia and Canada; and Hagopian and colleagues in the UK and US.
Third, the different datasets used different definitions of migrant health workers. WHO, Mullan,
and Hagopian and colleagues defined a migrant health worker as one who was trained in another
country, while Clemens and Pettersson defined a migrant health worker as one born in another
country. This distinction is important, because some of the countries with the worldwide lowest
population densities of health workers (such as Lesotho and Swaziland (WHO, 2009)) do not
have their own medical school and thus depend on physicians trained in other countries – in
particular their own citizens – to staff their hospitals and clinics (Clemens & Pettersson, 2008).
According to the definition of a migrant health worker as one who was trained in another
country, these countries can never have any emigrated physicians and any physician working in
these countries will always be an immigrant. Last, the four datasets estimate stocks of emigrated
health workers for different years (Table 4).

21

The data reported in WHO 2006 (WHO, 2006b) is extracted from OECD 2005 (OECD, 2005).

52

Table 4: Estimates of stocks of physicians who emigrated from selected sub-Saharan
African countries

Country

WHO 2006 , OECD
2005
Year of data
South Africa
Nigeria
Ghana
Ethiopia
Uganda
Zimbabwe
Angola
Cameroon
Tanzania

Mozambique
NR = not reported

Study
Clemens and
Mullan 2005
Pettersson 2008

2002

2000

Hagopian et al.
2004

2004

2002

12136
4261
926
335
316
237
168
109
46

7363
4856
1639
553
1837
1602
2102
845
1356

3734
3921
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR

3788
2281
515
266
175
101
NR
NR
NR

22

1334

NR

NR

One comprehensive dataset provides physician emigration rates for all countries worldwide for
each year in the period 1991-2004 (Docquier & Bhargava, 2006, 2007). Figure 3 shows annual
emigration rates (in % per year) for the year 2004 for all countries in sub-Saharan Africa covered
in the dataset. According to the dataset, in 2004 emigration rates exceeded 10% in seventeen
countries in the region and 20% in eight countries. Such panel on health worker emigration rates
is extremely useful for a wide range of analyses, including on the causes and consequences of
health worker migration. However, the dataset has a number of limitations. For one, the
definition of migrant physician used for different recipient countries in the dataset differed across
recipient countries (a physicians born in another country, a physician with citizenship in another
country, and a physician trained in another country) (Clemens & Pettersson, 2008). Moreover,
the data on physicians who immigrated to a recipient country was available for all fourteen years
from 1991 through 2004 for only 4 of the 16 recipient countries across which physician numbers
were summed to estimate emigration flows from source countries. For all other recipient
countries, the authors intra- or extrapolated some country-year values of emigrated physicians.

53

Figure 3: Estimates of health worker emigration rates in sub-Saharan African countries,
2004
Cape Verde
Liberia
Malawi
Zimbabwe
Somalia
Ghana
Ethiopia
Belize
Uganda
The Gambia
Angola
Zambia
Togo
South Africa
Guinea
Cameroon
Tanzania
Eritrea
Congo, Rep.
Sudan
Rwanda
Mauritius
Sierra Leone
Burundi
Botswana
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Kenya
Nigeria
Mozambique
Seychelles
Senegal
Mali
Central African Republic
Benin
Djibouti
Comoros
Chad
Madagascar
Yemen
Namibia
Equatorial Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Gabon
Cote d'Ivoire
Niger
Burkina Faso
Mauritania
Swaziland
Lesotho
0.0000

0.1000

0.2000

54

0.3000

0.4000

0.5000

0.6000

The relatively recent arrival of the above datasets and the fact that each suffers from some
limitations may explain why the literature on causes of health worker migration is largely
descriptive and the literature on the welfare impact of the migration is small. Studies on the
causes of health worker migration investigated reasons for migration decisions through surveys
of health workers in both source and recipient countries. In these surveys, health workers
consistently listed higher earnings in other countries as one of the most important reasons for
migration plans or past migration (Awases, Gbary, Nyoni, & Chatora, 2004; Chikanda, 2005;
Luck, Fernandes, & Ferrinho, 2000; Mackintosh, 2003; Martineau, Decker, & Bundred, 2002;
Nguyen, Ropers, Nderitu, Zuyderduin, Luboga, & Hagopian, 2008). However, health workers
also named a number of other factors as influencing their migration decisions, including job
security, flexible leave policies (Mackintosh, 2003), opportunities for education and training
(Awases et al., 2004; Mackintosh, 2003; Oman, Moulds, & Usher, 2009), opportunities for
promotion (Bach, 2004; Buchan, Parkin, & Sochalski, 2003; Muula & Maseko, 2006), the
management of health services (Bach, 2004; Chikanda, 2005; Kingma, 2006; Luck et al., 2000),
workplace safety (in particular the risk of work-related HIV infection (Bossert et al., 2007;
Institute of Health Policy and Development Studies, 2005; Muula & Maseko, 2006; Palmer,
2006)), family welfare (Chikanda, 2005; Oman et al., 2009), and country stability (Chikanda,
2005; Nguyen et al., 2008; Oman et al., 2009). Non-financial factors appear to be nearly as
important as earnings differentials in motivating migration, but the patterns of important nonfinancial factors differ across countries (Awases et al., 2004).
Despite a well-developed economics literature on the welfare impact of migration (e.g., (Borjas,
1995; Goldfarb, Havrylyshyn, & Magnum, 1984; Grubel & Scott, 1966; Kwok & Leland,
1982)), only a few studies have examined the particular impact of international health worker
migration on social welfare in source and recipient countries. Studies in Kenya (Kirigia, Gbary,
Muthuri, Nyoni, & Seddoh, 2006) and Malawi (Muula, Panulo, & Maseko, 2006) estimated the
financial loss due emigration of a health workers as the total costs of educating such a health
worker (including tuition, study materials, accommodation , and living expenses during primary,
secondary and tertiary education). The estimated losses of returns on investment were about half
a million year-2005 US$ for a doctor in Kenya, more than 300 thousand year-2005 US$ for a
nurse in Kenya (Kirigia et al., 2006), and between approximately 240 thousand year-2005 US$
(when an interest rate of 7% per annum is used) and 26 million year-2005 US$ (when an interest
55

rate of 25% is used) (Muula et al., 2006). While these financial losses seem large, two studies of
remittances from emigrated health workers found that the remittances (of Filipino physicians
(Goldfarb et al., 1984) and Tongan and Samoan nurses (Connell & Brown, 2004)) exceeded the
initial investment in their human capital, suggesting that in some countries it may pay to train
health workers for export.
Another study estimated the social net present value of a financial incentive that pays fully for a
student’s education as a health worker in return for a few years of service in an ART program in
sub-Saharan Africa. The study found that these financial incentives are highly cost-beneficial if
they are effective in reducing health worker emigration. For instance, if the only effect of the
financial incentive were to reduce annual health worker emigration from 12% to 5% for five
years, the net present value of financing the education of a team of health workers sufficient to
treat 500 ART patients would be more than 200 thousand year-2000 US$ (Bärnighausen &
Bloom, 2009a).
A final set of publications on health worker migration has discusses potential programs and
policies to reduce emigration of health workers from developing countries or to mitigate negative
consequences of migration. Table 5 summarizes the proposed interventions. Some the programs
and policies have already been implemented in developing countries (such as compulsory service
(Reid, 2001) or financial-incentive programs (Ross, 2007) in South Africa or non-financial
incentives in Zambia (Koot & Martineau, 2005)) or been adopted by developed countries (such
as the UK’s “ethical recruitment policy” (Carlisle, 2004)). However, studies evaluating the
effect of the implemented programs and policies on health worker migration – similar to those
evaluating programs to increase the supply of health workers to underserved areas in developed
countries – are as of yet lacking.
In sum, although the recent focus of development policy on population health has sparked
research on health worker migration from developing to developed countries, the majority of
studies are descriptive in nature, in part, because comprehensive data on international migration
flows of health workers has not been available. Future initiatives need to emphasize further
improvements in data on international health worker migration. Once validated data are
available, researchers can draw on the extensive literature and theories of migration in economics

56

and other disciplines to further investigate the causes and consequences of health worker
migration and to evaluate existing interventions to reduce migration rates.

57

Table 5: Programs and policies to reduce health worker migration from developing
countries or to mitigate any negative consequences of such migration
Program or policy

Definition

References

Selective admission

Select students for health worker
education who are likely to remain in the
country of training

(Lehmann, Dieleman, &
Martineau, 2008)

Training for practice in
developing countries

Focus health care education on the health
care needs of developing countries

(Lehmann et al., 2008)

Increased health worker
training in developed
countries

Increase the national health worker
education rate in countries that currently
receive large numbers of health workers
from developing countries

(Ahmad, 2005)

Compulsory service

Require all health workers to serve for
some time in their country of training

(Metz, 1991; Reid, 2001)

Financial incentives

Offer financial incentives for return of
service in the country of training

(Bärnighausen & Bloom, 2009b;
Ross, 2007)

Non-financial incentives

Improve the working and living
conditions of health workers in
developing countries

(Lehmann et al., 2008; Stilwell,
Diallo, Zurn, Vujicic, Adams, &
Dal Poz, 2004)

Visa restrictions

Potential recipient countries agree not to
issue visas to health workers from certain
potential source countries or to issue only
temporary visas

(Ahmad, 2005; Stilwell et al.,
2004)

“Ethical recruitment”

Potential recipient countries allow
recruitment of health workers only if the
source country consents to such
recruitment

(Ahmad, 2005; Buchan &
Sochalski, 2004; Labonte,
Packer, Klassen, Kazanjian,
Apland, Adalikwu et al., 2006)

Compensation payments

Recipient countries make payments to
certain migration source countries for
every health workers they receive from
the source countries

(Ahmad, 2005; Buchan &
Sochalski, 2004; Labonte et al.,
2006)

Microlevel approaches

Macrolevel approaches

58

V. Conclusions
In this paper, we have reviewed research on the health workforce since the 1960s. We have
structured the review into three perspectives corresponding roughly to three chronological
phases. During the first phase – which is associated with the perspective “health workforce
planning” – shortages of health workers in developed countries triggered research on manpower
planning methods to aid policy makers in ensuring adequate supplies of health workers (1960s
through 1970s). Four main approaches to project future health worker requirements were
developed, viz., approaches based on health need, demand for health care, health care service
targets, and health worker-to-population ratios. We discuss the advantages and disadvantages of
each of the four approaches and show that modified versions of the approaches, in particular the
service targets approach, are experiencing a renaissance in current studies estimating health
worker requirements to meet population health goals, such as the health MDGs, in developing
countries.
During the second phase – which is associated with the perspective “the health worker as
economic actor“ – a perceived “cost explosion” in many health systems in developed countries
shifted the research focus to the study of the influence of health workers’ behavior on allocative
and technical efficiency in health systems (1980s through 1990s). We review the literature on
one particular research topic during this phase, health worker licensure, which investigated
whether licensure regulation was introduced to benefit health worker “interest groups” or to
serve the “public interest”. We describe three categories of studies testing “interest group”
against “public interest” explanations of the existence of health worker licensure. Studies in the
first category, “market structure”, measured the level of competitiveness in the health care
market, taking competitive structures as evidence against and monopolistic structures as
evidence for “interest group” explanations; studies in the second category, “licensure effects”,
examined the influence of licensure on health worker incomes, and the price, quality, and
quantity of health services; studies in the third category, “political power”, analyzed the
relationship between the political power of health worker interest groups and the passage of
licensure legislation. While the findings of several studies suggest that “interest group”
explanation of the existence of licensure hold true, the evidence is not conclusive because of
technical limitations and conceptual problems in the analytical approaches.
59

During the third phase – which is associated with the perspective “the health worker as necessary
resource” – local health worker shortages in developed countries and regional shortages in
developing countries sparked research investigating the effectiveness of interventions to increase
the supply of health workers to so-called underserved areas of developed countries and health
worker migration from developing to developed countries (1990s through 2000s). Several
studies showed that participants in programs aimed at increasing the number of health workers in
underserved areas (such as selective admission to health worker education or financial-incentives
for return of service) were more likely to provide care in such areas than their peers who did not
participate. However, the studies could not conclude that the programs caused an increase in the
supply of health workers to underserved areas, because they cannot rule out that selection rather
than program effects was responsible for the differences in the behavior between program
participants and non-participants. International health worker migration has recently emerged as
a research topic (including studies on the causes and consequences of such migration), but has
been hampered by the lack of validated data on health worker migration flows and stocks of
migrated health workers.
Of course, the three research perspectives on the global health workforce are merely stylized
descriptions of main research thrusts and do not imply that such foci were necessarily the best
use of research resources during the different phases. Moreover, the three perspectives are not
mutually exclusive. For instance, some of the studies undertaken from a perspective of the
health worker as a necessary resource use health workforce planning approaches to estimate the
size of the gap between available and needed health workers – even if the starting point of these
studies is an observed health worker constraint in the delivery of certain priority health
interventions. Other studies that are motivated by a perceived or measured lack of health
workers clearly view health workers as economic actors that consider financial and non-financial
incentives in their location decisions.
Opportunities for future research on the health workforce abound. While they are likely to
include new approaches to the study, our review suggests that the transfer of existing approaches
from developed to developing countries could lead to important insights. For instance, studies
on health worker licensure were mostly carried out in the US. It seems likely that the strength of
health worker “interest groups” relative to the power of the public differs across stages of
60

socioeconomic development and by type of health system. Evidence on the causes and effects of
health worker licensure in different developing countries is thus likely to contribute substantially
to the licensure debate. Another example where transfer of research topics and methods could
lead to important insights is programs to influence health workers’ location decisions. Programs
similar to those aimed at increasing the supply of health workers to underserved areas in
developed countries have been implemented in many developing countries. Unlike their
developed-country counterparts, however, they have yet to be evaluated in their impact on health
worker movements from well-served to underserved areas and from developing to developed
countries, suggesting the need for a coherent economic model of medical migration..

61

VI. References
Aaron, H. J. (2002). The unsurprising surprise of renewed health care cost inflation. Health
Affairs(Suppl Web Exclusives), W85-W87.
Adams, A. F., Ekelund, R., & Jackson, J. D. (2003). Occupational licensing of a credence good:
the regulation of midwifery. Southern Economic Journal, 69(3), 659-675.
Adams, O. (1989). Canada one country among many grappling with MD-oversupply issue.
CMAJ, 140(1), 68-69.
Ahmad, O. B. (2005). Managing medical migration from poor countries. BMJ, 331(7507), 43-45.
Ahmed, A. A., Fateha, B., & Benjamin, S. (2000). Demand and supply of doctors and dentists in
Bahrain, 1998-2005. Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal, 6(1), 6-12.
Aiken, L. H., Buchan, J., Sochalski, J., Nichols, B., & Powell, M. (2004). Trends in international
nurse migration. Health Aff (Millwood), 23(3), 69-77.
Akerlof, G. A. (1970). The market for 'lemons': quality uncertainty and the market mechanism.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84, 488-500.
Akl, E. A., Maroun, N., Major, S., Chahoud, B., & Schunemann, H. J. (2007). Graduates of
Lebanese medical schools in the United States: an observational study of international
migration of physicians. BMC Health Serv Res, 7, 49.
Akl, E. A., Mustafa, R., Bdair, F., & Schunemann, H. J. (2007). The United States physician
workforce and international medical graduates: trends and characteristics. J Gen Intern
Med, 22(2), 264-268.
Altman, D. E., & Levitt, L. (2002). The sad history of health care cost containment as told in one
chart. Health Affairs, Suppl Web Exclusives, W83-W84.
Anand, S., & Bärnighausen, T. (2004). Human resources and health outcomes: cross-country
econometric study. Lancet, 364(9445), 1603-1609.
Anand, S., & Bärnighausen, T. (2007). Health workers and vaccination coverage in developing
countries: an econometric analysis. Lancet, 369(9569), 1277-1285.
Anderson, G. M., Halcoussis, L. J., & Lowenberg, A. D. (2000). Regulatory barriers to entry in
the healthcare industry: the case of alternative medicine. The Quarterly Review of
Economics and Finance, 40, 485-502.
Anderson, R., & Benham, L. (1970). Factors affecting the relationship between family income
and medical care consumption. In H. E. Klarman (Ed.), Empirical studies in health
economics. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins.
62

Aoki, Y. (1968). [Current situation of the midwives' shortage. Its problems and measures to
solve them]. Kango, 20(9), 12-22.
Arrow, K. J. (1963). Uncertainty and the welfare economics of medical care. The American
Economic Review, LIII(2), 941-973.
Aurousseau, P. (1971). [Distribution of case in Europe--severe shortage of nurses]. Can Hosp,
48(10), 91-92 passim.
Awases, M., Gbary, A., Nyoni, J., & Chatora, R. (2004). Migration of health professionals in six
countries: a synthesis report. Geneva: WHO.
Baaij, J. H. (1961). [Report on some qualitative aspects of the shortage of nurses in the
Netherlands.]. Ziekenhuiswezen, 34, 349-360.
Bach, S. (2004). International migration of health workers. Geneva: ILO.
Baker, T. D., & Perlman, M. (1967). Health manpower in a developing economy: Taiwan, a case
study in planning in a developing country. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.
Bärnighausen, T., & Bloom, D. (2008). Designing financial-incentive programmes for return of
medical service in underserved areas of sub-Saharan Africa: Program on the Global
Demography of Aging (PGDA), Harvard School of Public Health, Working Paper No.
3708.
Bärnighausen, T., & Bloom, D. (2009a). "Conditional scholarships" for HIV/AIDS health
workers: educating and retaining the workforce to provide antiretroviral treatment in subSaharan Africa. Soc Sci Med, 68, 544-551.
Bärnighausen, T., & Bloom, D. E. (2009b). Financial incentives for return of service in
underserved areas: a systematic review. BMC Health Serv Res, 9(1), 86.
Bärnighausen, T., & Bloom, D. E. (2010 (forthcoming)). The global health workforce. In P.
Smith & S. Glied (Eds.), Oxford handbook of health economics. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Bärnighausen, T., Bloom, D. E., & Humair, S. (2007). Human resources for treating HIV/AIDS:
needs, capacities, and gaps. AIDS Patient Care and STDs, 21(11), 799-812.
Basco, W. T., Jr., Buchbinder, S. B., Duggan, A. K., & Wilson, M. H. (1998). Associations
between primary care-oriented practices in medical school admission and the practice
intentions of matriculants. Acad Med, 73(11), 1207-1210.
Becker, G. (1983). A theory of competition among pressure groups for political influence. The
Quarterly Review of Economics, XCVIII(3).
63

Becker, G. (1986). The public interest hypothesis revisited: a new test of Peltzman's theory of
regulation. Public Choice, 49, 223-234.
Begun, J. W., Crowe, E. W., & Feldman, R. (1981). Occupational regulation in the states: a
causal model. Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law, 6(2), 229-254.
Benham, L. (1971). The labor market for registered nurses: a three-equation model. The Review
of Economics and Statistics, 53(3), 246-252.
Benham, L., & Benham, A. (1975). Regulating through the professions: a perspective on
information control. Journal of Law and Economics, 18(2), 421-447.
Bennett, F. J., Hall, S. A., Lutwana, J. S., & Rado, E. R. (1965). Medical manpower in East
Africa: prospects and problems. East African Medical Journal, 42, 149-161.
Birch, S., Kephart, G., Tomblin-Murphy, G., O'Brien-Pallas, L., Alder, R., & MacKenzie, A.
(2007). Human resources planning and the production of health: a needs-based analytical
framework. Canadian Public Policy, 33(supplement), S1-S16.
Blomqvist, A. (1991). The doctor as double agent: information asymmetry, health insurance, and
medical care. Journal of Health Economics, 10(4), 411-432.
Boccuti, C., & Moon, M. (2003). Comparing Medicare and private insurers: growth rates in
spending over three decades. Health Affairs, 22(2), 230-237.
Bodenheimer, T., & Grumbach, K. (2002). Understanding health policy: a clinical approach.
New York: Lange Medical, McGraw-Hill.
Borjas, G. J. (1995). The economic benefits from migration. Journal of Economic Perspectives,
9(2), 3-22.
Bossert, T., Bärnighausen, T., Bowser, D., Mitchell, A., & Gedik, G. (2007). Assessing
financing, education, management and policy context for strategic planning of human
resources in health. Geneva: WHO.
Boval (1966). [The shortage of nurses. II.]. Cah Nurs, 39(6), 5-7.
Bowman, R. C., & Penrod, J. D. (1998). Family practice residency programs and the graduation
of rural family physicians. Fam Med, 30(4), 288-292.
Brazeau, N. K., Potts, M. J., & Hickner, J. M. (1990). The Upper Peninsula Program: a
successful model for increasing primary care physicians in rural areas. Fam Med, 22(5),
350-355.

64

Bresnahan, T. F. (1982). The oligopoly solution concept is identified. Economics Letters, 10, 8792.
Brooks, R. G., Mardon, R., & Clawson, A. (2003). The rural physician workforce in Florida: a
survey of US- and foreign-born primary care physicians. J Rural Health, 19(4), 484-491.
Brooks, R. G., Walsh, M., Mardon, R. E., Lewis, M., & Clawson, A. (2002). The roles of nature
and nurture in the recruitment and retention of primary care physicians in rural areas: a
review of the literature. Acad Med, 77(8), 790-798.
Brush, B. L., Sochalski, J., & Berger, A. M. (2004). Imported care: recruiting foreign nurses to
U.S. health care facilities. Health Aff (Millwood), 23(3), 78-87.
Buchan, J. (2002). International recruitment of nurses: United Kingdom case study. Queen
Margaret University College: Edingburgh.
Buchan, J., Baldwin, S., & Mundo, M. (2008). Migration of health workers: the UK perspective
to 2006. Paris: OECD.
Buchan, J., Parkin, T., & Sochalski, J. (2003). International nurse mobility. Geneva: World
Health Organization.
Buchan, J., & Sochalski, J. (2004). The migration of nurses: trends and policies. Bull World
Health Organ, 82(8), 587-594.
Budetti, P. P. (1981). The impending pediatric 'Surplus': causes, implications, and alternatives.
Pediatrics, 67(5), 597-606.
Bui, D. H. (1986). Supply and oversupply of physicians: past trend and future development. Cah
Sociol Demogr Med, 26(4), 365-390.
Bundred, P. E., & Levitt, C. (2000). Medical migration: who are the real losers? Lancet,
356(9225), 245-246.
Bureau, D. (1960). [The shortage of nursing personnel. Attempt at finding a solution.]. Tech
Hosp Med Soc Sanit, 15, 69.
Burslem, R. W. (1979). Shortage of midwives. Br Med J, 2(6202), 1442-1443.
Burstein, P. L., & Cromwell, J. (1985). Relative incomes and rates of return for U.S. physicians.
Journal of Health Economics, 4, 63-78.
Carlisle, D. (2004). UK's "ethical recruitment policy" needs to be strengthened. BMJ, 328, 1218.

65

Carrin, G., & Hanvoravongchai, P. (2003). Provider payments and patient charges as policy tools
for cost-containment: how successful are they in high-income countries? Human
Resources for Health, 1(6), 1-10.
Carroll, S. L., & Gaston, R. J. (1981). Occupational restrictions and the quality of service
received: some evidence. Southern Economic Journal, 47(4), 959-976.
Center for Development Studies (CENDES), C. U., Venezuela, (1965). Health planning:
problems of concept and method. Washington, D.C.: Pan American Health Organization.
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (2009). Medicaid.
http://www.cms.hhs.gov/home/medicaid.asp (accessed 10 January 2009).
Chaloff, J. (2008). Mismatches in the formal sector, expansion of the informal sector:
immigration of health professionals to Italy. OECD: Paris.
Chambers, J., & Johnson, K. (1986). Predicting demand for accident and emergency services.
Journal of Public Health, 8(2), 93-103.
Charatan, F. B. (1996). US has oversupply of doctors. BMJ, 312(7026), 269.
Charokopou, D. E. (1966). [The shortage of hospital nurses]. Hell Adelphe, 13, 13-16.
Chen, L. C., & Boufford, J. I. (2005). Fatal flows--doctors on the move. N Engl J Med, 353(17),
1850-1852.
Chikanda, A. (2005). Nurse migration from Zimbabwe: analysis of recent trends and impacts.
Nurs Inq, 12(3), 162-174.
Chunharas, S. (1998). Human resources for health planning: a review of the Thai experience.
Human Resources Development Journal, 2(2), 1-12.
Clark, J. (2006). HIV programmes in poor countries lack health workers. BMJ, 333(7565), 412.
Clemens, M. A., & Pettersson, G. (2008). New data on African health professionals abroad. Hum
Resour Health, 6, 1.
Coffey, R. R. (1961). A national emergency: ways of meeting the physician shortage. I. The
nature of the problem. J Int Coll Surg, 36, 395-398.
Cohen, M. (1968). Doctors--their shortage, training and privileges. Med J Aust, 2(15), 642.
Commission on Macroeconomics and Health (2001). Macroeconomics and health: investing in
health for economic development. Geneva: WHO.

66

Connell, J., & Brown, R. P. (2004). The remittances of migrant Tongan and Samoan nurses from
Australia. Hum Resour Health, 2(1), 2.
Cookson, R., & Dolan, P. (2000). Principles of justice in health care rationing. Journal of
Medical Ethics, 26, 323-329.
Cooper, C. P. (1973). Shortage of radiologists. Br Med J, 1(5850), 418.
Cooper, R. A. (2004). Weighing the evidence for expanding physician supply. Ann Intern Med,
141(9), 705-714.
Cooper, R. A., Getzen, T. E., & Laud, P. (2003). Economic expansion is a major determinant of
physician supply and utilization. Health Serv Res, 38(2), 675-696.
Cromwell, J., & Mitchell, J. (1986). Physician-induced demand for surgery. Journal of Health
Economics, 5(3), 293-313.
Cutler, D. M., & Berndt, E. R. (2001). Medical care output and productivity. Chicago and
London: National Bureau of Economic Research Studies in Income and Wealth,
University of Chicago Press,.
Daniels, R. S. (1974). Health planning in the U.S.S.R.: are there lessons to be learned? Am J
Public Health, 64(6), 613-615.
Deaton, A. (2003). Health, income, and inequality.
http://www.nber.org/reporter/spring03/health.html (accessed 12 June 2009).
Docquier, F., & Bhargava, A. (2006). The medical brain drain: a new data set on physicians'
emigration rates (1991-2004).
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTRES/Resources/DataSetDocquierBhargava_Medic
al_BD100306.xls (accessed 25 June 2007).
Docquier, F., & Bhargava, A. (2007). A new panel data set on physicians' emigration rates
(1991-2004).
www.ires.ucl.ac.be/CSSSP/home_pa_pers/docquier/filePDF/MBD1_Description.pdf
(accessed 25 June 2007).
Dovlo, D., & Nyonator, F. (1999). Migration by graduates of the University of Ghana Medical
School: a preliminary rapid appraisal. Human Resources for Health Development
Journal, 3(1), 40-51.
Dreesch, N., Dolea, C., Dal Poz, M. R., Goubarev, A., Adams, O., Aregawi, M., et al. (2005). An
approach to estimating human resource requirements to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals. Health Policy Plan, 20(5), 267-276.

67

Dumont, J.-C., Zurn, P., Church, J., & Le Thi, C. (2008). International mobility of health
professionals and health workforce management in Canada: myths and realities. Paris:
OECD.
Eckhert, N. L. (2002). The global pipeline: too narrow, too wide or just right? Med Educ, 36(7),
606-613.
Ellwood, P. M., Jr., & Ellwein, L. K. (1981). Physician glut will force hospitals to look outward.
Hospitals, 55(2), 81-85.
Encinosa, W. E., Gaynor, M., & Rebitzer, J. B. (2007). The sociology of groups and the
economics of incentives: Theory and evidence on compensation systems. Journal of
Economic Behavior & Organization, 62(2), 187-214.
Engel, A. (1964). [Facing the Shortage of Physicians.]. Sven Lakartidn, 61, 3482-3496.
Estes, E. H., Jr. (1968). The critical shortage--physicians and supporting personnel. Ann Intern
Med, 69(5), 957-962.
Evans, R. G., Barer, M. L., & Hertzman, C. (1991). The 20-year experiment: accounting for,
explaining, and evaluating health care cost containment in Canada and the United States.
Annual Review of Public Health, 481-518.
Evans, R. G., Parish, E. M. A., & Sully, F. (1973). Medical productivity, scale effects, and
demand generation. Canadian Journal of Economics, 6(3), 376-393.
Fein, R. (1967). The doctor shortage: an economic diagnosis. Washington, D.C.: Brookings
Institution.
Feldman, R., & Begun, J. W. (1985). The welfare cost of quality changes due to professional
regulation. The Journal of Industrial Economics, 34(1), 17-32.
Feldstein, M. S. (1967). An aggregate planning model of the health care sector. Medical Care,
5(6), 369-381.
Feldstein, M. S. (1971). An econometric model of the Medicare system. The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 85(1), 1-20.
Feldstein, P. J. (1964). The demand for medical care. In Commission on the Cost of Medical
Care (Ed.), General Report, Vol. 1. Chicago: American Medical Association.
[Finland has a nursing shortage]. (1973). Sairaanhoitaja, 49(13), 28-29.
Flynn, J. T. (1973). Shortage of physicians. JAMA, 225(4), 419.
Frank, A. L. (1971). Shortage of Physicians. Science, 174(4013), 979-980.
68

Frank, R. G., & Zeckhauser, R. J. (2007). Custom-made versus ready-to-wear treatments:
behavioral propensities in physicians' choices. Journal of Health Economics, 26, 11011127.
Friedman, M. (1962). Capitalism and freedom. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Friedman, M., & Kuznet, S. (1945). Income from independent professional practice. New York:
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Fryer, G. E., Stine, C., Krugman, R. D., & Miyoshi, T. J. (1994). Geographic benefit from
decentralized medical education: student and preceptor practice patterns. J Rural Health,
10(3), 193-198.
Fuchs, V. (1978). The supply of surgeons and the demand for operations. Journal of Human
Resources, 12 (supplement), 35-56.
Fülöp, T., & Roemer, M. I. (1982). International development of health manpower policy.
Geneva: WHO.
Ganguli, P. K. (1977). Shortage of radiologists. Br Med J, 2(6099), 1419.
Garcia-Ballester, L., McVaugh, M., & Rubio-Vela, A. (1989). Medical licensing and learning in
fourteenth century Valencia. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, 79(6).
Gaumer, G. L. (1984). Regulating health professionals: a review of the empirical literature. The
Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly. Health and Society, 62(3), 380-416.
Gerber, A. (1967). The medical manpower shortage. J Med Educ, 42(4), 306-319.
Gerdtham, U. G., & Jonsson, B. (1991). Price and quantity in international comparisons of health
expenditure. Applied Economics, 23, 1519-1528.
Gerdtham, U. G., Sogaard, J., Anderson, G., & Jonsson, B. (1992). An econometric analysis of
health care expenditure: a cross-section study of OECD countries. Journal of Health
Economics, 11, 63-64.
Ginzberg, E. (1966). Physician shortage reconsidered. N Engl J Med, 275(2), 85-87.
Ginzberg, E. (1983). How many physicians are enough? Ann Am Acad Pol Soc Sci(468), 205215.
Goldfarb, R., Havrylyshyn, O., & Magnum, S. (1984). Can remittances compensate for
manpower outflows : the case of Philippine physicians. Journal of Development
Economics, 15, 1-17.

69

Gorham, W. (1967). A report to the president on medical care prices. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
Graddy, E. (1991a). Interest groups or the public interest -- why do we regulate health
occupations? Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law, 16(1), 25-49.
Graddy, E. (1991b). Toward a general theory of occupational regulation. Social Science
Quarterly, 72(4), 676-695.
Graduate Medical Education National Advisory Committee (GMENAC) (1980). Report of the
graduate medical education national advisory committee to the secretary, department of
health and human services. Washington, D.C.: US Department of Health and Human
Services.
Gray, G. (1998). Access to medical care under strain: new pressures in Canada and Australia.
Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law, 23(6), 905-947.
Grayson, M. A. (1978). Medical educators told to reduce enrollments. Hosp Med Staff, 7(12), 3740.
Grubel, H., & Scott, A. (1966). The international flow of human capital. American Economic
Review, 56, 268-283.
Guerra, M. (1965). [The shortage of physicians]. J Med (Oporto), 57(173), 643.
Haas-Wilson, D. (1986). The effect of commercial practice restrictions: the case of optometry.
Journal of Law and Economics, 29, 165-186.
Hagopian, A., Thompson, M. J., Fordyce, M., Johnson, K. E., & Hart, L. G. (2004). The
migration of physicians from sub-Saharan Africa to the United States of America:
measures of the African brain drain. Hum Resour Health, 2(1), 17.
Hale, T. (1964). Why the Nursing Shortage Persists. N Engl J Med, 270, 1092-1097.
Hall, T. L. (1969). Health manpower in Peru: a case study in planning. Baltimore: John Hopkins
Press.
Hall, T. L. (1971). Chile health manpower study: methods and problems. International Journal
of Health Services, 1(2), 166-184.
Hall, T. L., & Mejia, A. (1978). Health manpower planning: principles, methods, issues. Geneva:
WHO.
Hall, T. L., Reinke, W. A., & Lawrence, D. (1975). Measurement and projection of the demand
for health care: the Chilean experience. Medical Care, 13(6), 511-522.

70

Hanada, M. (1968). [Analyzing the shortage of nurses--from the viewpoint of local
administration]. Kango, 20(9), 28-34.
Harer, W. B. (1965). The Nursing Shortage. Arch Otolaryngol, 82, 326-327.
Hargreaves, T. (1969). Shortage of chemical pathologists? Lancet, 1(7590), 368.
Henderson, J., McQuire, A., & Mooney, G. (1987). The economics of health care. London:
Taylor & Francis.
Hernandez, P., Dräger, S., Evans, D. B., Tan-Torres Edejer, T., & Dal Poz, M. R. (2006).
Measuring expenditure for the health workforce: evidence and challenges. Geneva:
World Health Organization.
HEW advisers eye physician 'oversupply'. (1980). Med World News, 21(6), 6, 9.
Hirosawa, K. (1968). [Acute shortage of midwives]. Josanpu Zasshi, 22(10), 46-47.
Hitiris, T. (1997). Health care expenditures and integration in the countries of the European
Union. Applied Economics, 29, 1-6.
Hitiris, T., & Posnett, J. (1992). The determinants and effects of health expenditure in developed
countries. Journal of Health Economics, 11, 173-181.
Holmes, G. A. (1967). Dental manpower: shortage and distribution. Oral Hyg, 57(11), 27-35.
Holmes, G. M. (2004). Does the National Health Service Corps improve physician supply in
underserved locations? Eastern Economic Journal, 30(4), 563-581.
Holzinger, W. (1966). [Shortage of dentists brings shortage for dentists]. Zahnarztl Mitt, 56(22),
1079-1080.
Hornby, P., Mejia, A., Ray, D., & Simeonov, L. A. (1976). Trends in planning for health
manpower. WHO Chron, 30(11), 447-454.
Hosokawa, M. C., & Roberts, C. R. (1982). The physician oversupply: implications for patient
education. Patient Educ Newsl, 5(2), 20-21.
Huber, M. (1999). Health expenditure trends in OECD countries, 1970-1997. Health Care
Financing Review, 21(2), 99-117.
Huber, M., & Orosz, E. (2003). Health expenditure trends in OECD countries, 1990-2001.
Health Care Financing Review, 25(1), 1-22.
Huddart, J., & Picazo, O. (2003). The health sector human resource crisis in Africa: an issue
paper. Washington, D.C.: USAID.
71

Hurst, K. (2002). Selecting and applying methods for estimating the size and mix of nursing
teams. Systematic review of the literature commissioned by the Department of Health.
Leeds: University of Leeds.
Inoue, K., Matsumoto, M., & Sawada, T. (2007). Evaluation of a medical school for rural
doctors. J Rural Health, 23(2), 183-187.
Institute of Health Policy and Development Studies (2005). Migration of health workers: country
case study Philippines. Geneva: International Labour Office.
International Pharmaceutical Federation (FIP) (2006). Global pharmacy workforce and migration
report: a call for action. The Hague: FIP.
IOM (2007). PEPFAR implementation: progress and promise. Washington, D.C.: National
Academic Press.
Jackson, J., Shannon, C. K., Pathman, D. E., Mason, E., & Nemitz, J. W. (2003). A comparative
assessment of West Virginia's financial incentive programs for rural physicians. J Rural
Health, 19 Suppl, 329-339.
Jaffurs, W. J. (1972). Shortage of paramedical personnel. Med Ann Dist Columbia, 41(6),
Suppl:6-8.
Jarvis, C. A. (1977). Shortage of anaesthetists. Br Med J, 2(6100), 1481.
Joint Learning Initiative (2004). Human resources for health: overcoming the crisis. Boston:
Global Equity Initiative,.
Kadaner, I. (1965). World Shortage of Medical Manpower. WHO Chron, 19, 47-55.
Kaushik, M., Jaiswal, A., Shah, N., & Mahal, A. (2008). High-end physician migration from
India. Bull World Health Organ, 86(1), 40-45.
Keen, E. N., & Thambiran, A. K. (1971). Doctor shortage. S Afr Med J, 45(46), 1348.
Kessel, R. A. (1958). Price discrimination in medicine. Journal of Law and Economics, 1, 20-53.
Kessel, R. A. (1970). The A.M.A and the supply of physicians. Law and Contemporary
Problems, 35(2), 267-283.
Keto, E. (1971). [Shortage of midwives]. Katilolehti, 76(10), 444-445.
Kingma, M. (2006). Nurses on the move - migration and the global health care economy. Ithaca:
Cornell University Press.

72

Kirigia, J. M., Gbary, A. R., Muthuri, L. K., Nyoni, J., & Seddoh, A. (2006). The cost of health
professionals' brain drain in Kenya. BMC Health Serv Res, 6, 89.
Klarman, H. E. (1969). Economic aspects of projecting requirements for health manpower.
Journal of Human Resources, 4(3), 360-376.
Klarman, H. E. (1973). Approaches to health manpower analysis, with special reference to
physicians. American Economist, 17(2), 137-142.
Knesper, D. J. (1978). Psychiatric manpower for state mental hospitals. A continuing dilemma.
Arch Gen Psychiatry, 35(1), 19-24.
Kober, K., & Van Damme, W. (2004). Scaling-up access to antiretroviral treatment in southern
Africa: who will do the job? Lancet, 364(9428), 103-107.
Koot, J., & Martineau, T. (2005). Mid term review: Zambian health workers retention scheme
2003-2004.
Kurowski, C., & Mills, A. (2006). Estimating human resource requirements for scaling up
priority health interventions in low-income countries of sub-Saharan Africa: a
methodology based on service quantity, tasks, and productivity (the QTP methodology).
London: London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine.
Kurowski, C., Wyss, K., Abdulla, S., & Mills, A. (2007). Scaling up priority health interventions
in Tanzania: the human resources challenge. Health Policy Plan, 22(3), 113-127.
Kuyvenhoven, L. M. (1960). [The shortage of pharmacists.]. Pharm Weekbl, 95, 288-292.
Kwok, V., & Leland, H. (1982). An economic model of the brain drain. American Economic
Review, 74, 91-100.
Labonte, R., Packer, C., Klassen, N., Kazanjian, A., Apland, L., Adalikwu, J., et al. (2006). The
brain drain of health professionals from sub-Saharan Africa to Canand. Cape Town:
Idasa.
LaViolette, S. (1979). Physical therapy: shortage spurs recruiting efforts. Mod Healthc, 9(11),
72.
Le Grand, J. (1997). Knights, knaves or pawns? Human behaviour and social policy. Journal of
Social Policy, 26(2), 149-169.
Lee, R. I., & Jones, L. W. (1933). The fundamentals of good medical care: an outline of the
fundamentals of good medical care and an estimate of the service required to supply the
medical needs of the United States. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

73

Leffler, K. B. (1978). Physician licensure: competition and monopoly in American medicine.
Journal of Law and Economics, 21(1), 165-186.
Leffler, K. B., & Lindsay, C. M. (1980). Markets for medical care and medical education: an
integrated long-run structural approach. Journal of Human Resources, 16, 21-40.
Lehmann, U., Dieleman, M., & Martineau, T. (2008). Staffing remote rural areas in middle- and
low-income countries: a literature review of attraction and retention. BMC Health Serv
Res, 8, 19.
Leland, H. E. (1979). Quacks, lemons, and licensing: a theory of minimum quality standards.
Journal of Political Economy, 87(6), 1328-1346.
Lindsay, C. M. (1973). Real returns to medical education. The Journal of Human Resources,
VIII(3), 331-348.
Loewy, E. (1989). Textbook of medical ethics. Berlin: Springer.
Luck, M., Fernandes, M., & Ferrinho, P. (2000). At the other end of the brain-drain: African
nurses living in Lisbon. Studies in Health Serve Organization and Policy, 16, 157-169.
Mackintosh, L. S. (2003). A study identifying factors affecting retention of midwives in Malawi.
Liverpool: Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine.
Macleish, D. G. (1985). Oversupply of medical graduates. Med J Aust, 143(7), 317.
Maleh, M. (1966). [The problem of shortage of dentists in the Syrian village]. Majallat Tibb
Alasnan Alsuriyah, 2(2), 62.
Marder, W. D., & Willke, R. J. (1991). Comparisons of the value of physician time by specialty.
In H. E. Frech (Ed.), Regulating doctors' fees: competition, benefits, and controls under
Medicare. Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute.
Markham, B., & Birch, S. (1997). Back to the future: a framework for estimating health-care
human resource requirements. Canadian Journal of Nursing Administration, 10, 7-23.
Martin, A. B., Whittle, L. S., & Levit, K. R. (2001). Trends in state health care expenditures and
funding: 1980-1998. Health Care Financing Review, 22(4), 111-140.
Martineau, T., Decker, K., & Bundred, P. (2002). Briefing note on international migration of
health professionals: leveling the playing field for developing country health systems.
Liverpool: Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine.
Matsumoto, M., Inoue, K., & Kajii, E. (2008). A contract-based training system for rural
physicians: follow-up of Jichi Medical University graduates (1978-2006). J Rural Health,
24(4), 360-368.
74

Maurizi, A. (1975). Rates of return to dentistry and the decision to enter dental school. Journal of
Human Resources, 10, 521-528.
McGuire, T. G. (2000). Physician agency. In A. J. Culyer & J. P. Newhouse (Eds.), Handbook of
Health Economics pp. 461-536). Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
The medical manpower shortage. (1971). JAMA, 217(13), 1857-1859.
Mehrotra, A., Dudley, R. A., & Luft, H. S. (2003). What's behind the health care expenditure
trends? Annual Review of Public Health, 385-412.
Mehta, F. N. (1968). Shortage of dentists in India facts & figures. J Indian Dent Assoc, 40(4),
95-96.
Menken, M. (1981). The coming oversupply of neurologists in the 1980s. Implications for
neurology and primary care. JAMA, 245(23), 2401-2403.
Menken, M., & Sheps, C. G. (1984). Consequences of an oversupply of specialists for primary
and specialty care: the case of neurology. Public Health Rev, 12(3-4), 253-257.
Metz, H. C. e. (1991). Nigeria. Washington, D.C.: GPO for the Library of Congress.
Millward, R. C. (1961). The shortage of physiotherapists. I. The administrator's point of view.
Physiotherapy, 47, 211-213.
Milne, R., & Molana, H. (1991). On the effect of income and relative price on demand for health
care: EC evidence. Applied Economics, 23, 1221-1226.
Minstriy of Health (1967). The system of public health services in the USSR. Moscow: Ministry
of Health.
Montoya, I. D. (2000). Is the health workforce a barrier to cost containment? The American
Journal of Managed Care, 6(9), 971-972.
Moore, F. I. (1999). Guidelines for task analysis and job design. Geneva: WHO.
Moore, T. G. (1961). The purpose of licensing. Journal of Law and Economics, 4, 93-117.
Most medical staffs have an oversupply of specialists, but don't plan to take action to correct this.
(1995). Med Netw Strategy Rep, 4(9), 11.
MSF (2007). Help wanted - confronting the health care worker crisis to expand access to
HIV/AIDS treatment: MSF experience in southern Africa. Johannesburg: Médecins sans
frontières.

75

Mullan, F. (2005). The metrics of the physician brain drain. N Engl J Med, 353(17), 1810-1818.
Mullan, F. (2007). Doctors and soccer players--African professionals on the move. N Engl J
Med, 356(5), 440-443.
Munch, E. (1973). [Nursing shortage]. Sygeplejersken, 73(21), 18.
Murphy, G. T. (2002). Methodological issues in health human resource planning: cataloguing
assumptions and controlling for variables in needs-based modelling. Can J Nurs Res,
33(4), 51-70.
Muula, A. S., & Maseko, F. C. (2006). How are health professionals earning their living in
Malawi? BMC Health Serv Res, 6, 97.
Muula, A. S., Panulo, B., Jr., & Maseko, F. C. (2006). The financial losses from the migration of
nurses from Malawi. BMC Nurs, 5, 9.
Muzondo, T. R., & Pazderka, B. (1980). Occupational licensing and professional incomes in
Canada. Canadian Journal of Economics, 13, 659-667.
Nevanlinna, H. R. (1966). [The shortage of doctors and its correction]. Suom Laakaril, 21(34),
2858-2864.
Nevo, R. (1972). [The shortage of nurses in Israel goes beyond the bounds of the permissible].
Ahot Beyisrael, 20(81), 14.
Newhouse, J. P. (1970). A model of physician pricing. Southern Economic Journal, 37, 174-183.
Newhouse, J. P. (1977). Medical care expenditure: a cross-national survey. Journal of Human
Resources, 12(1), 115-125.
Newhouse, J. P. (1978). The economics of medical care. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Newhouse, J. P., & Phelps, C. E. (1976). New estimates of price and income elasticities of
medical care services. In R. N. Rosett (Ed.), The role of health insurance in the health
services sector. New York: Neal Watson.
Nguyen, L., Ropers, S., Nderitu, E., Zuyderduin, A., Luboga, S., & Hagopian, A. (2008). Intent
to migrate among nursing students in Uganda: measures of the brain drain in the next
generation of health professionals. Hum Resour Health, 6(1), 5.
Noether, M. (1986). The growing supply of physicians: has the market become more
competitive? Journal of Labor Economics, 4(4), 503-537.
The nursing shortage. (1967). JAMA, 200(9), 790.

76

O'Brien-Pallas, L., Baumann, A., Donner, G., Murphy, G. T., Lochhaas-Gerlach, J., & Luba, M.
(2001). Forecasting models for human resources in health care. Journal of Advanced
Nursing, 33(1), 120-129.
O'Flanagan, H. (1972). Doctor shortage and health services. S Afr Med J, 46(4), 83.
Oakley, A. H. (1964). The Shortage of Trained Medical Laboratory Technicians. Lancet,
1(7331), 487-488.
OECD (2005). Trends in international migration. Paris: OECD.
Ogunyemi, B. (1971). The acute shortage of pharmacists. J Natl Med Assoc, 63(3), 221-222.
Okunade, A. A., & Suraratdecha, C. (2000). Health care expenditure inertia in the OECD
countries: a heterogeneous analysis. Health Care Management Science, 3, 31-42.
Olbrich, A. (2008). The optimal negligence standard in health care under supply-side cost
sharing. International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics, 8, 73-85.
Oman, K. M., Moulds, R., & Usher, K. (2009). Specialist training in Fiji: Why do graduates
migrate, and why do they remain? A qualitative study. Hum Resour Health, 7, 9.
Ooms, G., Van Damme, W., & Temmerman, M. (2007). Medicines without doctors: why the
Global Fund must fund salaries of health workers to expand AIDS treatment. PLoS Med,
4(4), e128.
Palmer, D. (2006). Tackling Malawi's human resources crisis. Reprod Health Matters, 14(27),
27-39.
Pang, T., Lansang, M. A., & Haines, A. (2002). Brain drain and health professionals. BMJ,
324(7336), 499-500.
Panzar, L., & Rosse, J. N. (1987). Testing for 'monopoly' equilibrium. The Journal of Industrial
Economics, 35(4), 443-456.
Pardes, H. (1979). Countering psychiatry's manpower shortage. Psychosomatics, 20(6), 377-378.
Parkin, D., McGuire, A., & Yule, B. (1987). Aggregate health care expenditures and national
income. Journal of Health Economics, 6, 109-127.
Pathman, D. E., Konrad, T. R., King, T. S., Spaulding, C., & Taylor, D. H. (2000). Medical
training debt and service commitments: the rural consequences. J Rural Health, 16(3),
264-272.

77

Pathman, D. E., Konrad, T. R., King, T. S., Taylor, D. H., Jr., & Koch, G. G. (2004). Outcomes
of states' scholarship, loan repayment, and related programs for physicians. Med Care,
42(6), 560-568.
Pathman, D. E., Konrad, T. R., & Ricketts, T. C., 3rd (1992). The comparative retention of
National Health Service Corps and other rural physicians. Results of a 9-year follow-up
study. Jama, 268(12), 1552-1558.
Pathman, D. E., Konrad, T. R., & Ricketts, T. C., 3rd (1994a). Medical education and the
retention of rural physicians. Health Serv Res, 29(1), 39-58.
Pathman, D. E., Konrad, T. R., & Ricketts, T. C., 3rd (1994b). The National Health Service
Corps experience for rural physicians in the late 1980s. Jama, 272(17), 1341-1348.
Pathman, D. E., Steiner, B. D., Jones, B. D., & Konrad, T. R. (1999). Preparing and retaining
rural physicians through medical education. Acad Med, 74(7), 810-820.
Paul, C. (1984). Physician licensure legislation and the quality of medical care. Atlantic
Economic Journal, 12(4), 18-30.
Peltzman, S. (1976). Toward a more general theory of regulation. Journal of Law and
Economics, 19, 211-240.
Peltzman, S. (1989). The economic theory of regulation after a decade of deregulation.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, Special Issue, 1-41.
Petursdottir, M. (1970). [Shortage of nurses in Iceland]. Sairaanhoitaja, 2, 99-101.
Placone, D., & Wallace, M. (1982). Should we really worry about an oversupply of doctors? J S
C Med Assoc, 78(11), 631-633.
Popov, G. A. (1971). Principles of health planning in the USSR. Geneva: WHO.
Portes, C. (1966). Doctor shortage. IMJ Ill Med J, 130(6), 752 passim.
Posner, R. A. (1974). Theories of Economic Regulation. The Bell Journal of Economics and
Management Science, 5(2), 335-358.
Probst, J. C., Samuels, M. E., Shaw, T. V., Hart, G. L., & Daly, C. (2003). The National Health
Service Corps and Medicaid inpatient care: experience in a southern state. South Med J,
96(8), 775-783.
Rabinowitz, H. K. (1993). Recruitment, retention, and follow-up of graduates of a program to
increase the number of family physicians in rural and underserved areas. N Engl J Med,
328(13), 934-939.

78

Rabinowitz, H. K., Diamond, J. J., Hojat, M., & Hazelwood, C. E. (1999a). Demographic,
educational and economic factors related to recruitment and retention of physicians in
rural Pennsylvania. J Rural Health, 15(2), 212-218.
Rabinowitz, H. K., Diamond, J. J., Markham, F. W., & Hazelwood, C. E. (1999b). A program to
increase the number of family physicians in rural and underserved areas: impact after 22
years. Jama, 281(3), 255-260.
Rabinowitz, H. K., Diamond, J. J., Markham, F. W., & Paynter, N. P. (2001). Critical factors for
designing programs to increase the supply and retention of rural primary care physicians.
JAMA, 286(9), 1041-1048.
Rabinowitz, H. K., Diamond, J. J., Markham, F. W., & Rabinowitz, C. (2005). Long-term
retention of graduates from a program to increase the supply of rural family physicians.
Acad Med, 80(8), 728-732.
Rabinowitz, H. K., Diamond, J. J., Markham, F. W., & Wortman, J. R. (2008). Medical school
programs to increase the rural physician supply: a systematic review and projected impact
of widespread replication. Acad Med, 83(3), 235-243.
Rabinowitz, H. K., Diamond, J. J., Veloski, J. J., & Gayle, J. A. (2000). The impact of multiple
predictors on generalist physicians' care of underserved populations. Am J Public Health,
90(8), 1225-1228.
Rayack, E. (1967). Professional power and American medicine. Cleveland: World Publishing
Company.
Reid, S. J. (2001). Compulsory community service for doctors in South Africa--an evaluation of
the first year. S Afr Med J, 91(4), 329-336.
Riley, J. C. (2001). Rising life expectancy: a global history. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Riska, E. (1995). They don't care: unemployed physicians in the Nordic countries. Int J Health
Serv, 25(2), 259-269.
Rittenhouse, D. R., Fryer, G. E., Jr., Phillips, R. L., Jr., Miyoshi, T., Nielsen, C., Goodman, D.
C., et al. (2008). Impact of Title VII training programs on community health center
staffing and National Health Service Corps participation. Ann Fam Med, 6(5), 397-405.
Robbins, S. P., Bergman, R., Stagg, L., & Coulter, M. (2003). Management. Sydney: Prentice
Hall.
Rogers, N. J. (1972). Shortage of general practitioners in Australia. Med J Aust, 2(16), 911.

79

Rosenthal, T. C. (2000). Outcomes of rural training tracks: a review. J Rural Health, 16(3), 213216.
Rosett, R. N., & Huang, L. F. (1973). The effect of health insurance on the demand for medical
care. Journal of Political Economy, 81, 281-305.
Ross, A. J. (2007). Success of a scholarship scheme for rural students. S Afr Med J, 97(11),
1087-1090.
Rowe, A., & Garcia-Barbero, M. (2005). Regulating and licensing of physicians in the WHO
European Region. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe.
Sabiston, D. C., Jr. (1984). Report of the Chairman of the Board of Regents: the current and
serious issue of the oversupply of physicians in our nation today. Bull Am Coll Surg,
69(12), 11-12.
Salling, A. L. (1978). [More substantial reasons for the nursing shortage]. Sygeplejersken,
78(37), 11-17.
Salmon, M. E., & Culbertson, R. A. (1985). Health manpower oversupply: implications for
physicians, nurse practitioners and physician assistants. A model. Hosp Health Serv Adm,
30(1), 100-115.
Saltman, R. B., & Von Otter, C. (1995). Implementing planned markets in health care: balancing
social and economic responsibility. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Sandison, C. R. (1979). Improving the position of the shortage specialties. Br J Hosp Med, 22(1),
88, 90.
Sass, T. R., & Nichols, M. W. (1996). Scope-of-practice regulation: physician control and the
wages of non-physician health-care professionals. Journal of Regulatory Economics, 9,
61-81.
Scheffler, R. M., Liu, J. X., Kinfu, Y., & Dal Poz, M. R. (2008). Forecasting the global shortage
of physicians: an economic- and needs-based approach. Bull World Health Organ, 86(7),
516-523B.
Schieber, G. J., Poullier, J.-P., & Greenwald, L. M. (1993). Health spending, delivery, and
outcomes in OECD countries. Health Affairs, 12(2), 120-129.
Schieber, G. J., Poullier, J.-P., & Greenwald, L. M. (1994). Health systems performance in
OECD countries, 1980-1992. Health Affairs, 13(4), 100-112.
Schneider, U., & Ulrich, V. (2008). The physician-patient relationship revisited: the patient's
view. International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics, 8, 279-300.

80

Schönfeld, H. K., Heston, J. F., & Falk, I. S. (1972). Numbers of physicians required for primary
medical care. New England Journal of Medicine, 286(11), 571-576.
Schroeder, S. A. (1984). Western European responses to physician oversupply. Lessons for the
United States. JAMA, 252(3), 373-384.
Selby, R. (1981). A response to controlling physician oversupply through certificate of need. Am
J Law Med, 7(2), 183-185.
Seldon, B. J., Jung, C., & Cavazos, R. J. (1998). Market power among physicians in the U.S.,
1983-1991. The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance, 38(4), 799-824.
Selvanathan, S., & Selvanathan, A. (1993). A cross-country analysis of consumption patterns.
Applied Economics, 25, 1245-1259.
Shambaugh, G. E. (1965). The Nursing Shortage. Arch Otolaryngol, 81, 223-224.
Shepard, L. (1978). Licensing restrictions and the cost of dental care. Journal of Law and
Economics, 21, 187-201.
Shortage of anaesthetists. (1977). Br Med J, 2(6079), 120.
Shortage of radiologists. (1966). Br Med J, 2(5518), 843-844.
Silver, M. (1970). An economic analysis of variations in medical expenses and work-loss rates.
In H. E. Klarman (Ed.), Empirical studies in health economics. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins.
Singer, J. D., Davidson, S. M., Graham, S., & Davidson, H. S. (1998). Physician retention in
community and migrant health centers: who stays and for how long? Med Care, 36(8),
1198-1213.
Sloan, F. A., & Feldman, R. (1978). Competition among physicians. In W. Greenberg (Ed.),
Competition in the health care sector. Maryland: Aspen Systems Corporation.
Sloan, F. A., & Kasper, H. (2008). Incentives and choice in health care. Boston: MIT Press.
Smith, H. E. (1968). Paramedical manpower shortage. Eye Ear Nose Throat Mon, 47(5), 232233.
Smucny, J., Beatty, P., Grant, W., Dennison, T., & Wolff, L. T. (2005). An evaluation of the
Rural Medical Education Program of the State University Of New York Upstate Medical
University, 1990-2003. Acad Med, 80(8), 733-738.
Sorensen, K. (1974). [Great shortage of nurses in Australia]. Sygeplejersken, 74(27), 30-31.

81

Sriratanaban, A. (1974). Shortage of physicians in Thailand, An approach to the problem. J Med
Assoc Thai, 57(3), 126-130.
Stigler, G. J. (1956). Trends in employment in the service industries. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press.
Stigler, G. J. (1971). The theory of economic regulation. The Bell Journal of Economics and
Management Science, 2(1), 3-21.
Stilwell, B., Diallo, K., Zurn, P., Vujicic, M., Adams, O., & Dal Poz, M. (2004). Migration of
health-care workers from developing countries: strategic approaches to its management.
Bull World Health Organ, 82(8), 595-600.
Stokes, G. S. (1970). Shortage of nurses. Med J Aust, 1(16), 821.
Stone, D. A. (1997). The doctor as businessman: the changing politics of a cultural icon. J
Health Polit Policy Law, 22(2), 533-556.
[Suggestion for alleviation of nursing shortage in Tokyo]. (1971). Kango Kyoiku, 12(10), 21-42.
Svorny, S. V. (1987). Physician licensure: a new approach to examining the role of professional
interests. Economic Inquiry, XXV(497-509).
Tateishi, F., Takeuchi, T., Tanabe, A., Yasuu, N., & Sakakibara, Y. (1971). [Problems of
manpower shortage in dentistry]. Nippon Shika Ishikai Zasshi, 24(6), 598-609.
The Licentiate Committee of the Medical Council of Hong Kong (2008). The 2008 licensing
examination of the medical council of Hong Kong.
http://www.mchk.org.hk/licensing_exam/index_e.htm (accessed 15 November 2008).
Tierney, J. T., Waters, W. J., & Williams, D. C. (1980). Controlling physician oversupply
through certificate of need. Am J Law Med, 6(3), 335-360.
Trinkler, H. (1966). [Thoughts on personnel shortage in medical laboratories]. Med Lab (Stuttg),
19(10), 242-246.
Tussing, A. D., & Wojtowycz, M. A. (1986). Physician-induced demand by Irish GPs. Social
Science and Medicine, 23(9), 851-860.
United Nations (2009). United Nations Millennium Development Goals.
http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/ (accessed 10 April 2009).
Valvanne, L. (1971). [Shortage of midwives]. Katilolehti, 76(9), 387.
Village, household distribution of contraceptives helps Asian nations overcome doctor shortage.
(1976). Int Fam Plann Dig, 2(3), 1-2.
82

Voval (1966). [The shortage of nurses]. Cah Nurs, 24(5), 16-22 contd.
Wallace, M. B. (1964). The Nursing Shortage. Can Hosp, 41, 63-64.
Weeks, W. B., Wallace, A. E., Wallace, M. M., & Welch, H. G. (1994). A comparison of the
educational costs and incomes of physicians and other professions. New England Journal
of Medicine, 330, 1280-1286.
Weiner, J. P., Steinwachs, D. M., Shapiro, S., Coltin, K., Ershoff, D., & Connor, P. O. (1987).
Assessing a methodology for physician requirement forecasting. Medical Care, 25(5),
426-436.
Whitcomb, M. E. (1995). Correcting the oversupply of specialists by limiting residencies for
graduates of foreign medical schools. N Engl J Med, 333(7), 454-456.
White, M. S., & Culbertson, R. A. (1981). The oversupply of physicians: implications for
hospital planning. Hosp Prog, 62(2), 28-31.
White, R. I. (1992). Training radiologists for the future. The oversupply of physicians,
subspecialization, and turf. Invest Radiol, 27(6), 481-482.
White, W. D. (1978). The impact of occupational licensure of clinical laboratory personnel.
Journal of Human Resources, 13(1), 91-102.
WHO (2006a). Medical council in countries of the region. New Dehli: WHO Regional Office for
South-East Asia.
WHO (2006b). World health report 2006: working together for health. Geneva: WHO.
WHO (2008). Task shifting: rational redistribution of tasks among health workforce teams:
global recommendations and guidelines. Geneva: WHO.
WHO (2009). Global atlas of the health workforce. http://www.who.int/globalatlas/default.asp
(accessed 12 September 2009).
WHO assistance to meet critical shortage of health personnel training for doctors, nurses and
health workers. (1966). West Afr Med J, 15(2), 53.
Wilkinson, B. (1966). Present values of lifetime earning for different occupations. Journal of
Political Economy, 74, 556-572.
Wong, H. S. (1996). Market structure and the role of consumer information in the physician
services industry: an empirical test. Journal of Health Economics, 15, 139-160.

83

Working Group 5 of the Commission on Macroecnomics and Health (2002). Improving the
health of the poor. Geneva: WHO.
World Bank (1993). World Development Report. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Wyatt, H. V., & Cross, T. (1966). Shortage of microbiologists. Chem Ind, 35, 1472-1474.
Xu, G., Fields, S. K., Laine, C., Veloski, J. J., Barzansky, B., & Martini, C. J. (1997a). The
relationship between the race/ethnicity of generalist physicians and their care for
underserved populations. Am J Public Health, 87(5), 817-822.
Xu, G., Veloski, J. J., Hojat, M., Politzer, R. M., Rabinowitz, H. K., & Rattner, S. (1997b).
Factors influencing physicians' choices to practice in inner-city or rural areas. Acad Med,
72(12), 1026.
Yager, J. (1987). Psychiatric residency training and the changing economic scene. Hosp
Community Psychiatry, 38(10), 1076-1081.
Zijlstra, E. E., & Broadhead, R. L. (2007). The College of Medicine in the Republic of Malawi:
towards sustainable staff development. Hum Resour Health, 5, 10.
Zurn, P., & Dumont, J.-C. (2008). Health workforce and international migration: can New
Zealand compete? Paris: OECD.

84

