                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           WHEN CONSENSUS CHOICE DOMINATES INDIVIDUALISM:
   JENSEN'S INEQUALITY AND COLLECTIVE DECISIONS UNDER UNCERTAINTY

                                         Charles F. Manski

                                        Working Paper 15172
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15172


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2009




This research was supported in part by National Science Foundation grant SES-0911181. I am grateful
for comments from Stephen Coate, Hanming Fang, and Aleksey Tetenov. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Charles F. Manski. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
WHEN CONSENSUS CHOICE DOMINATES INDIVIDUALISM: Jensen's Inequality and
Collective Decisions under Uncertainty
Charles F. Manski
NBER Working Paper No. 15172
July 2009
JEL No. D7,D81,H42

                                              ABSTRACT

Research on collective provision of private goods has focused on distributional considerations. This
paper studies a class of problems of decision under uncertainty in which the argument for collective
choice emerges from the mathematics of aggregating individual payoffs. Consider decision making
when each member of a population has the same objective function, which depends on an unknown
state of nature. If agents knew the state of nature, they would make the same decision. However,
they may have different beliefs or may use different decision criteria. Hence, they may choose different
actions even though they share the same objective. Let the set of feasible actions be convex and the
objective function be concave in actions, for all states of nature. Then Jensen's inequality implies
that consensus choice of the mean privately-chosen action yields a larger aggregate payoff than does
individualistic decision making, in all states of nature. If payoffs are transferable, the aggregate payoff
from consensus choice may be allocated to Pareto dominate individualistic decision making, in all
states of nature. I develop these ideas. I also use Jensen's inequality to show that a planner with the
power to assign actions to the members of the population should not diversify. Finally, I give a version
of the collective choice result that holds with consensus choice of the median rather than mean action.


Charles F. Manski
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
cfmanski@northwestern.edu
1. Introduction



       Economists working in the utilitarian paradigm have a strong predisposition to think that

individualistic decision making regarding private goods is superior to collective choice. Research

on public provision of private goods, whether normative or positive, has largely focused on

distributional considerations. See, for example, Blackorby and Donaldson (1988), Besley and Coate

(1991), Bruce and Waldman (1991), Blomquist and Christiansen (1995), Coate (1995), and Epple

and Romano (1996). A recent exception is Fang and Norman (2008), where government observation

of demand for publicly provided goods reveals private information useful in setting tax policy.

       This paper gives an entirely different utilitarian rationale for collective choice of private

goods. I study a simple problem of private decision making under uncertainty in which the argument

for collective choice emerges directly from the mathematics of aggregating individual payoffs.

       I mainly consider decision making when each member of a population faces the same choice

problem and wants to optimize the same objective function, which depends on an unknown state of

nature. If agents knew the state of nature, they would make the same decision. However, they may

have different beliefs about the state or may cope with their incomplete information by using

different criteria to make decisions. Hence, acting independently, they may choose different actions

even though they share the same objective.

       For example, a set of price-taking firms may have the same production technology and want

to choose inputs to maximize profit. When inputs are chosen, firms may not know the price they

will receive per unit of output. Then firms with different beliefs about product price or different risk

preferences may choose different input levels.

       Suppose that the set of feasible actions is convex and the objective function is concave in
                                                  2

actions, for all states of nature. In this context, Section 2 shows that population coordination on a

specific consensus action yields a larger aggregate payoff than does individualistic decision making,

in all states of nature. The consensus action with this remarkable property is the mean action that

agents would choose independently. This result is an immediate consequence of Jensen’s inequality.

I use input choice by firms and asset allocation by investors to illustrate the result. I discuss its

robustness to relaxation of the assumption that each member of the population wants to optimize the

same concave objective function.

       Section 3 shows that, if payoffs are transferable, the aggregate payoff realized by collective

choice of the consensus action may be allocated across the population so that collective choice

Pareto dominates individualistic decision making, in all states of nature. A Pareto dominating

collective choice mechanism is implementable if agents truthfully reveal the actions they would

choose individualistically. I give conditions under which truthful revelation is incentive compatible.

I suggest that the collective choice mechanism introduced here may find profitable application in the

operation of agricultural cooperatives.

       Whereas Section 3 concerns decision making by a population whose members must agree

on a collective choice mechanism, Section 4 considers treatment choice by a planner who has the

power to assign actions to the members of the population. Here Jensen’s inequality implies that any

heterogeneous treatment of the population is dominated by assigning the associated mean treatment

to all persons. Thus, the planner should not diversify treatment. I explain why this result differs

from the positive findings for diversification obtained in Manski (2009). There I studied a different

class of planning problems, where the choice set is not convex and agents may have heterogeneous,

non-concave objective functions.
                                                   3

        Except for the discussion of robustness in Section 2, the paper thus far concerns decision

making with a convex choice set and a common concave objective function. Section 5 supposes

instead that the choice set is ordered and that agents have objective functions that are unimodal in

each state of nature. The state-specific mode is invariant across agents, but the objective functions

may otherwise vary. In this setting, I show that consensus choice of the median individualistic action

makes the majority of agents better off than they would be with private choice, in all states of nature.

This result is closely related to the median voter theorem.

        The analysis of this paper is simple and straightforward. It nevertheless appears to be new

to research on collective choice of private goods. The closest connection that I have been able to

discover is to the distantly related literature on consensus forecasting. Section 6 makes this

connection.




2. Analysis with a Convex Choice Set and a Concave Objective Function



2.1. Notation and Concepts



        To begin, let (J, Ù, P) be a probability space of agents, each of whom must choose an action

from a set X. Here J lists the agents, the ó-algebra Ù places probability on individual agents, and

P is the probability measure. For example, J may be a finite group of size *J*, in which case P(j) =

1/*J* for j 0 J. Or J may be a continuum indexed by the unit interval, in which case P is the uniform

distribution on [0, 1].
                                                    4

        The set S lists feasible states of nature. The objective function f(A, A): X × S 6 R maps actions

and states into the real line. Each agent wants to choose an action that maximizes f(@, r), where r 0 S

is the actual state of nature. Agents know that r 0 S, but they may not know the identity of r. Hence,

they may not be able to solve the optimization problem max x 0 X f(x, r).

        Agents may have different beliefs about r. They may also use different criteria to make

choices with their beliefs. For example, they may maximize subjective expected utility or apply the

maximin or minimax-regret criterion. Let xj be the action that agent j 0 J would choose in a regime

of individualistic decision making. Then the aggregate payoff in state of nature s is If(xj, s)dP(j).

        Consider an alternative regime of collective choice in which all agents choose some

consensus action, say c 0 X. Then the aggregate payoff in state s is If(c, s)dP(j) = f(c, s). The

question of interest is whether there exists a consensus choice that improves on individualistic

decision making. The answer is positive if X is convex and if f(A, s) is concave on X for each s 0 S.



2.2. Collective Choice of the Mean Action



        Let ì / IxjdP(j) denote the mean individualistic action and assume that ì is finite. Convexity

of X implies that ì 0 X, so ì is a feasible action. The aggregate payoff with collective choice of ì

is f(ì, s). Jensen’s inequality gives



(1)   f(ì, s) $ If(xj, s)dP(j),   all s 0 S.



Thus, in all states of nature, the aggregate payoff with consensus choice of action ì is at least as large
                                                    5

as with individualistic decision making.

        Let g(s) / f(ì, s) ! If(xj, s)dP(j) denote the aggregate surplus achieved by consensus choice

of ì. This surplus is non-negative by (1). It ordinarily is positive, a familiar sufficient condition

being that f(A, s) is strictly concave and Var(xj) > 0.



2.3. Illustrative Applications to Production Decisions



        Result (1) has many applications in which a group of firms or other agents have a common

concave production function and want to choose inputs to maximize profit. Here are two examples.



Production by Firms when Product Price is Unknown

        Let J be a group of price-taking firms which face the same concave production function. In

particular, let the set of feasible inputs be X = [0, 4) and let output be log (x + 1). Let the unit cost

of input be one, and let product price be s. Then the profit function is f(x, s) = s@log(x + 1) ! x.

Suppose that firms do not know product price when they choose input quantities. For example, the

firms may be farms of equal size which must decide how intensively to plant in the spring, before

knowing the crop price that they will receive at harvest.

        Let the set S of feasible prices be a subset of the half-line [0, 4). Suppose each firm places

a subjective distribution on price and maximizes expected profit. Let pj be the subjective mean price

held by firm j. Acting independently, firm j would solve the problem max x 0 X pj@log(x + 1) ! x,

yielding the input choice xj = max(0, pj ! 1). Suppose that pj $ 1 for all j 0 J. Then ì = E(p) ! 1.

        In state s, the aggregate payoff with collective choice of input quantity ì and with
                                                     6

individualistic decision making are respectively



       f(ì, s) = sAlog[E(p)] ! E(p) + 1,                 If(xj, s)dP(j) = sE[log(p)] ! E(p) + 1.



Hence, the surplus achieved by consensus choice of ì is g(s) = s{log[E(p)] ! E[log(p)]}.



Allocation of an Endowment Between a Safe Asset and Production with Unknown Return

        Let J be a group of investors, each having an endowment of size one. Suppose that each

investor must allocate his endowment between a safe asset with known return one and a productive

activity with unknown return. The set of feasible choices is X = [0, 1], where x 0 X denotes the

fraction of the endowment allocated to the productive activity. Let the return to production be s@x1/2,

where S = (0, 4). Then the return to allocation x in state of nature s is s@x1/2 + (1 ! x).

        Suppose each investor places a subjective distribution on S and maximizes expected return.

Let qj be the subjective mean of s for investor j. Acting independently, j would solve the problem

max x 0 X qj@x1/2 + (1 ! x), yielding the choice xj = min(1, q2j /4). Suppose that qj # 2 for all j 0 J. Then

ì = E(q2)/4.

        In state s, the aggregate payoff with collective choice of input quantity ì and with

individualistic decision making are respectively



      f(ì, s) = (s/2)A[E(q2)]1/2 + 1 ! E(q2)/4,            If(xj, s)dP(j) = (s/2)@E(q) + 1 ! E(q2)/4.



Hence, the surplus achieved by consensus choice of ì is g(s) = (s/2)[E(q2)1/2 ! E(q)].
                                                  7

2.4. Relaxing the Assumption of a Common Concave Objective Function



       Observe that result (1) requires no restrictions on the beliefs that agents hold about the actual

state of nature, nor on the decision criteria they use to cope with incomplete knowledge of the state.

Some agents may believe that they know the state of nature with certainty. Others may have

probabilistic beliefs and maximize expected utility, with possibly heterogeneous risk preferences.

Still others may not have probabilistic beliefs and use a criterion for decision making under

ambiguity, such as the maximin or minimax-regret criterion.

       The result as stated does presume that each member of the population has the same concave

objective function. Although some semblance of this condition seems essential, some relaxation is

possible. I consider two scenarios here.



Collective Choice within Sub-populations

       Let the population be composed of K types. Persons of a given type have the same concave

objective function, but this function may vary across types. Let ìk denote the mean action that would

be privately chosen by persons of type k. Consider collective choice in sub-populations, with all

persons of type k choosing action ìk.

       Application of (1) to persons of type k gives f(ìk, s) $ If(xj, s)dP(j*k), all s 0 S. Aggregation

of payoffs across types gives 3 k f(ìk, s)P(k) $ If(xj, s)dP(j), where P(k) is the fraction of type-k

persons in the population. Thus, the aggregate payoff from collective choice within each of the K

sub-populations is at least as large as that produced by individualistic decision making.

       The above proves that collective choice within each of the K sub-populations improves on
                                                       8

any decision process based on a finer partition of the population. It does not prove that the aggregate

payoff is maximized by partitioning the population into the K types. It leaves open the possibility

that collective choice within a grosser partition of the population would further increase the

aggregate payoff in at least some states of nature.



Neighborhoods of a Common Concave Function

        Suppose that each agent j 0 J has a person-specific, not necessarily concave, objective

function fj(A, A): X × S 6 R. Then the aggregate payoffs in state of nature s with individualistic

decision making and collective choice of ì are Ifj(xj, s)dP(j) and Ifj(ì, s)dP(j) respectively.

Collective choice achieves a non-negative surplus if Ifj(ì, s)dP(j) $ fj(xj, s)dP(j). This inequality can

hold if agents do not share the same concave objective function. In particular, it holds if all agents

have objective functions that are sufficiently close to a common concave function.

        For each state s, let there exist a ë(s) > 0 and a concave function f(A, s): X 6 R such that



                              sup       *fj(w, s) ! f(w, s)* < ë(s).
                         w 0 X, j 0 J



As earlier, let g(s) / f(ì, s) ! If(xj, s)dP(j) denote the surplus that occurs with function f. Surplus

with the actual objective functions fj(@, s), j 0 J satisfies the inequality



                       Ifj(ì, s)dP(j) ! Ifj(xj, s)dP(j) $ g(s) ! 2ë(s).



Hence, the condition ë(s) # g(s)/2 suffices to ensure that actual surplus is non-negative.
                                                    9



3. Pareto Dominant Collective Choice Mechanisms



3.1. Allocation of Transferable Payoffs



        The fact that collective choice of ì yields non-negative aggregate surplus in all states of

nature does not imply that collective choice makes all agents better off relative to individualistic

decision making. However, if payoffs are transferable across the population, then there exist

collective choice mechanisms that Pareto dominate private choice.

        Let ã / [ãj(s), (j, s) 0 J × S] be any set of positive real numbers such that Iãj(s)dP(j) # 1, all

s 0 S. Consider a collective choice mechanism in which agents take the consensus action ì and, if

the state of nature turns out to be s, agent j receives the payoff



(2) hj(ã, s) / f(xj, s) + ãj(s)g(s).



The collective-choice payoffs weakly dominate payoffs with private choice; that is, hj(ã, s) $ f(xj, s)

for all s 0 S and hj(ã, s) $ f(xj, s) for some s. The collective-choice payoffs are feasible because

Ihj(ã, s)dP(j) # f(ì, s). Hence, the collective choice mechanism is feasible and Pareto dominates

individualistic decision making. Selecting a ã with Iãj(s)dP(j) = 1 allocates the surplus fully in every

state of nature.

        Observe that a collective choice mechanism of this type benefits even an agent who knows

the actual state of nature with certainty. The consensus action ì may differ from what such an agent
                                                  10

knows to be the optimal action. Nonetheless, in all states of nature, he receives at least the payoff

that he would have achieved by private choice.

       Our finding that consensus choice of a private good can Pareto dominate individualistic

decision making goes against conventional economic wisdom. It has been common to think that,

absent distributional considerations or paternalism, private choice must be Pareto superior to

collective choice. The standard utilitarian argument is that when agents want to make different

choices, collective choice of a single good creates deadweight loss.

       Our analysis shows that it is important to ask why agents want to make different choices.

The standard utilitarian argument is correct in deterministic settings, where variation in private

choices stems solely from heterogeneity in choice sets or objective functions. In decisions under

uncertainty, variation in private choices may also stem from heterogeneity in agents’ beliefs about

the state of nature or in their decision criteria. The latter sources of heterogeneity are the driving

force behind result (1). When agents have the same convex choice set and concave objective

function, (1) shows that consensus choice creates aggregate surplus rather than deadweight loss.

This enables the Pareto improvement achieved by mechanism (2).



Contrast with Collective Insurance

       The collective choice mechanism introduced here differs from collective insurance. In

insurance systems, agents make individualistic decisions and then smooth payoffs across states of

nature. Insurance increases payoffs in states with relatively bad private outcomes and decreases

payoffs in states with relatively good private outcomes. Typically, agent j privately chooses an

action xj and receives payoff f(xj, s) + öj(s) ! cj. Here cj > 0 is a state-invariant insurance premium
                                                    11

and öj(s) is a state-dependent insurance payment, with öj(s) = 0 in states where f(xj, s) is relatively

large and öj(s) > cj in states where f(xj, s) is relatively small.

        A collective insurance system is feasible if aggregate payments do not exceed aggregate

premiums in every state of nature; that is, if Iöj(s)dP(j) # IcjdP(j) for all s 0 S. This set of

inequalities formalizes the idea that it is infeasible to insure against systemic risks. Insurance is

feasible only if, in every state of nature, the sub-population of agents who experience bad private

outcomes and receive payments is sufficiently small that aggregate premiums cover their payments.

        In contrast to insurance, our agents all choose the consensus action ì. In every state of

nature, they receive payoffs (2) that are at least as large as their private outcomes under

individualistic decision making. These payoffs are feasible because collective choice of ì generates

a non-negative aggregate surplus in every state of nature.



3.2. Truthful Revelation of Private Choices



        To implement the collective choice mechanism requires knowledge of the actions that agents

would choose privately. Research on mechanism design has long sought to determine when it is

incentive compatible for agents to reveal private information truthfully. Here we would like each

agent to announce his private choice truthfully.

        In a regime of private choice, agent j receives payoff f(xj, s) in state s. Let xaj denote the

action that j announces under the collective choice mechanism and let ìa / Ixaj dP(j) denote the mean

of the announced actions. Then
                                                   12

(2N) haj (ã, s) / f(xaj , s) + ãj(s)ga(s)



is the collective-choice payoff based on announcements. Here ga(s) / f(ìa, s) ! If(xaj , s)dP(j) is the

surplus in state s.

        Private and collective-choice payoffs differ, so agent j would not necessarily announce xaj =

xj. However, truthful revelation is incentive compatible in some settings. I show here that it is if the

population is a continuum and agents either maximize expected payoff or minimize maximum regret.

        Suppose that the population is a continuum. Then the action announced by agent j does not

affect ga(s). Here, as in analysis of other collective decision problems, the idea of a continuum of

agents is a simplifying idealization, meant to approximate a large finite population. In a large finite

population, an agent’s announced action negligibly affects aggregate surplus.

        Suppose that j announces an action that maximizes his subjective expected payoff. Then xaj

= argmax x 0 X If(x, s)dðj + Iãj(s)ga(s)dðj, where ðj is the agent’s subjective distribution on S. In the

private-choice regime, this agent would choose xj = argmax          x 0 X   If(x, s)dðj. The expression

Iãj(s)ga(s)dðj does not vary with x. Hence, xaj = xj.

        Suppose that j minimizes maximum regret. In this case xaj = xj because


      max [f(w, s) + ãj(s)ga(s)] ! [f(x, s) + ãj(s)ga(s)] = max f(w, s) ! f(x, s).
     w0X                                                     w0X




The left-hand side of the equation is regret for announcing action x in state s. The right-hand side

is regret for choosing x in state s in a regime of private choose. The equation holds because, the

population being a continuum, ga(s) does not vary with w or x.
                                                  13




3.3. Application to Agricultural Cooperatives



       Is the collective choice mechanism introduced here only of theoretical interest, or might it

have useful application? The mechanism may prove particularly helpful to stimulate the formation

and guide the operation of agricultural cooperatives. I use crop production to illustrate.

       Crop production approximates the conditions assumed in this paper reasonably closely.

Farmers share the common objective of profit maximization. They typically have concave

production functions and convex choice sets, with diminishing returns to inputs of seed, fertilizer,

labor, and irrigation. The farmers in a given region face approximately homogeneous climate, soil

conditions, input costs, and crop prices.        Hence, their profit functions are approximately

homogeneous. Finally, profits are a transferable payoff. Thus, the conditions for application of

result (1) and mechanism (2) approximately hold.

       The surplus generated by consensus choice is greatest in settings with considerable

uncertainty, where agents with disperse beliefs and decision criteria make heterogeneous private

choices. Farmers making planting decisions in the spring face considerable uncertainty about the

crop prices they will receive in the fall, as well as uncertainty about crop yield arising from the

difficulty of predicting weather during the planting season. In a private-choice regime, farmers may

cope with this uncertainty in different ways, varying the allocation of fields to alternative crops, the

timing of planting, and so on. Hence, consensus choice may generate meaningful surplus.

       A cooperative could determine the consensus input bundle in late winter, prior to initiation
                                                 14

of the annual production cycle in the spring. Each farmer in the cooperative would report the input

bundle he would choose if making production decisions individualistically. The mean announced

bundle would become the consensus choice.




4. Implications for Planning: Uniform Treatment Dominates Diversification



        Sections 2 and 3 considered decision making when the members of a population collectively

agree on a consensus choice. This section concerns a planner who has the power to assign actions.

The planner’s objective is to maximize the aggregate payoff.

        When studying planning problems, actions are often called treatments. The planner’s

problem is to choose treatments. A planner with incomplete knowledge of the state of nature has

partial knowledge of treatment response. I have previously studied certain such planning problems

in Manski (2005, 2009) and elsewhere. Those problems did not have a convex choice set and

concave objective function. I show here that this structure qualitatively affects findings.

        Suppose that a planner can assign each agent any feasible action. Thus, the planner can

choose any element of the Cartesian Product set X*J*. Let w / (wj, j 0 J) be any set of assigned

actions with finite mean ìw / IwjdP(j). Jensen’s inequality gives



(3)   f(ìw, s) $ If(wj, s)dP(j),   all s 0 S.



Result (3) shows that, in each state, the aggregate payoff when the planner assigns every agent action
                                                  15

ìw is at least as large as the payoff with the possibly heterogeneous assignments (wj, j 0 J). In other

words, any diversified treatment of the population is dominated by assigning the associated mean

treatment to all persons.

       This finding differs sharply from one that I have reported in Manski (2009) and elsewhere.

There I studied a class of planning problems in which diversified treatment of observationally

identical persons is always undominated. In particular, I studied problems where the choice set X

contains only two elements, say a and b. I also permitted heterogeneous objective functions.

       Let á(s) / Ifj(a, s)dP(j) denote the aggregate payoff in state s when all agents receive

treatment a and, similarly, let â(s) / Ifj(b, s)dP(j). Consider a treatment allocation that randomly

assigns a fraction ä 0 [0, 1] of the population to treatment b and 1 ! ä to treatment a. Let the

population be a continuum. Then the payoff to allocation ä in state s is (1 ! ä)á(s) + äâ(s). Suppose

that the planner faces ambiguity; that is, there exists a state s with á(s) > â(s) and another state sN

with á(sN) < â(sN). Then it is immediate that all ä 0 [0, 1] are undominated. Moreover, it can be

shown that the minimax-regret allocation always diversifies treatment.

       Result (3) shows that the situation differs dramatically if all convex combinations of a and

b are feasible treatments and all agents have the same concave objective function f. Then, for all ä

0 (0, 1) and s 0 S, assigning every agent to treatment (1 ! ä)a + äb yields at least as large a payoff

as does the diversified allocation assigning fraction ä to b and 1 ! ä to a. Formally,



        f[(1 ! ä)a + äb, s] $ (1 ! ä)f(a, s) + äf(b, s) = (1 ! ä)á(s) + äâ(s), all s 0 S.
                                                  16

Application to Medical Treatment



       Medical treatment with partial knowledge of treatment response illustrates when

diversification is and is not a reasonable strategy. Consider first an organ disease with two

alternative treatments. One is surgery to repair the organ and the other is replacement of the organ

with a transplant. Convex combinations of these treatments are not feasible—one can only repair

or replace. In a setting of this sort, diversification warrants consideration when it is not clear which

treatment is better. Some fraction of patients would have the organ repaired and the remaining

fraction would receive transplants. The minimax-regret criterion provides a coherent method to

choose the fractions.

       Now consider a psychiatric ailment where the potential treatments are alternative doses of

a certain drug and the outcome of interest is a real measure of patient functionality. Here convex

combinations of treatments are feasible—one can administer the drug in any dose. Suppose the

medical planner knows that the objective function is concave and homogeneous across the patient

population, with diminishing marginal returns to larger doses and possibly decreased functionality

beyond some dosage. In a setting of this sort, a medical planner with partial knowledge of the dose

response function should not vary dosage across patients. Any diversified treatment strategy is

dominated by a decision to give all patients the mean of the contemplated doses.
                                                    17

5. Analysis with An Ordered Choice Set and Unimodal Objective Functions



        Section 2.4 showed that collective choice of the mean action may dominate individualistic

decision making in circumstances where agents do not have the same concave objective function.

However, this goes so only so far. Result (1) certainly does not hold universally.

        This section presents a weaker result that holds when X is an ordered set of actions and each

agent j has an objective function fj(A, A): X × S 6 R that is unimodal on X for each s 0 S. Set X need

not be convex; it may, for example, be a discrete subset of the real line. Objective functions may

vary across agents, except that they share the same mode. Formally, I assume that, for each s 0 S,

è(s) / argmax x 0 X fj(x, s) is invariant across j 0 J.

        Let m denote the median individualistic action; that is, m / inf t: P(xj # t) $ ½. I will show

that, in every state of nature, a majority of agents receive at least as high a payoff with consensus

choice of action m as they would with individualistic decision making. That is,



(4)   P[fj(m, s) $ fj(xj, s)] $ ½, all s 0 S.



Proof: Result (4) is a special case of a result that holds for any quantile of the distribution of

individualistic actions. For ê 0 (0, 1), let qê denote the ê-quantile individualistic action; that is, qê

/ inf t: P(xj # t) $ ê . The general result is



(5)   P[fj(qê, s) $ fj(xj, s)] $ min (ê, 1 ! ê), all s 0 S.
                                                    18

To show (5), consider separately the cases in which qê = è(s), qê < è(s), and qê > è(s).

        First let qê = è(s). Then P[fj(qê, s) $ fj(xj, s)] = 1. Next let qê < è(s). Then P[fj(qê, s) $ fj(xj,

s)] $ P(xj # qê) $ ê. Now let qê > è(s). Then P[fj(qê , s) $ fj(xj, s)] $ P(xj $ qê) $ 1 ! ê. Combining

these cases yields (5). Result (4) is the special case with ê = ½.         ~



        Result (4) brings to mind the median voter theorem of Black (1948), which also considered

an ordered set of actions and unimodal objective functions. Indeed (4) shows that, given knowledge

of the state of nature, a majority of agents prefer consensus choice of action m to the set (xj, j 0 J)

of individualistic actions. However, (4) does not imply that a majority of agents prefer m ex ante,

before the actual state is known. The composition of the majority who receive larger payoffs with

consensus choice varies with the state of nature. Hence, agents need not prefer m ex ante.

        While result (4) is interesting, it is much less powerful than result (1). It does not provide

the foundation for a Pareto dominant collective choice mechanism. The aggregate surplus in state

s with collective choice of m is Ifj(m, s)dP(j) ! Ifj(xj, s)dP(j). Result (4) does not determine the sign

of this quantity. If there exists a state of nature where surplus is negative, it is not possible in this

state to allocate payoffs so all agents are better off than they would be with private choice.
                                                  19

6. Jensen’s Inequality and Research on Consensus Forecasting



       The analysis of this paper appears to be entirely new to research on collective choice of

private goods. However, a version of result (1) has received sporadic recognition in research on the

distantly related subject of consensus forecasts. I explain in this concluding section.

       For over a century, beginning at least as early as Galton (1907), researchers studying the

accuracy of forecasts have studied settings in which multiple agents are asked to give point forecasts

of a quantity and their forecasts are combined to create a consensus forecast. It is particularly

common to define the consensus forecast as the cross-sectional mean of the individual forecasts.

       Empirical studies have regularly found that the cross-sectional mean forecast is more accurate

than the individuals forecasts used to form the mean. Clemen (1989, p. 559) put it this way in a

review article:

       “The results have been virtually unanimous: combining multiple forecasts leads to increased

       forecast accuracy. This has been the result whether the forecasts are judgmental or statistical,

       econometric or extrapolation.       Furthermore, in many cases one can make dramatic

       performance improvements by simply averaging the forecasts.”

Researchers have been intrigued by this empirical regularity, which has recently become known

popularly as the “wisdom of crowds” (Surowiecki, 2004). Various reasons have been suggested.

In fact, the empirical regularity follow from Jensen’s inequality.

       Let yn, n = 1, . . . , N be a set of individual point forecasts of an unknown real quantity è, let

PN denote the cross-sectional distribution of the forecasts, and let ìN / IydPN denote the cross-

sectional mean forecast. Let L(A, A): R × R 6 [0, 4) be a loss function used to measure the
                                                  20

consequence of prediction error. Research on forecasting has typically used absolute loss L(y, è) =

*y ! è* or square loss L(y, è) = (y ! è)2. When these or any other convex loss function is used,

Jensen’s inequality gives L(ìN, è) # IL(y, è)dPN for all è 0 R. Thus, whatever the actual value of

the quantity being forecast, the loss associated with the mean forecast is no larger than the mean loss

of the individual forecasts.

        This simple result has long been known in statistical decision theory. There è is a parameter

to be estimated and (yn, n = 1, . . . , N) is a randomized estimate, meaning that the statistician draws

an integer i at random from the set (1, . . . , N) and uses yi to estimate è. Suppose that a convex loss

function is used to measure precision of estimation. Then Jensen’s inequality implies that loss using

the non-randomized estimate ìN is smaller than expected loss using the randomized estimate. See

Hodges and Lehmann (1950).

        Research on consensus forecasts has largely disregarded the result as it has sought to explain

why mean forecasts perform better than individual forecasts. A notable exception is McNees (1992),

who exposited the matter clearly in the context of absolute and square loss. He also recognized the

consensus-forecasting version of result (4); that is, the median forecast of any event must be at least

as close to the truth as at least half of the individual forecasts, whatever the truth may be. McNees

observed that much research on forecasting did not acknowledge “these simple, well-known, yet

often ignored arithmetic principles” (page 705).

        More recently, Larrick and Soll (2006) referred to the application of Jensen’s inequality to

consensus forecasting as the “averaging principle” and reported experimental research showing that

a majority of their student subjects did not understand the principle. Thus, the power of Jensen’s

inequality may be plain in abstraction but not as evident in application.
                                                21

References


Besley, T. and S. Coate (1991), “Public Provision of Private Goods and the Redistribution of
Income,” American Economic Review, 81, 979-984.

Black, D. (1948), “On the Rationale of Group Decision-Making,” Journal of Political Economy, 56,
23-34.

Blackorby, C. and D. Donaldson (1988), “Cash versus Kind, Self-Selection, and Efficient Transfers,”
American Economic Review, 78, 691-700.

Blomquist, S. and V. Christiansen (1995), “Public Provision of Private Goods as a Redistributive
Device in an Optimum Income Tax Model,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 97, 547-67.

Bruce, N. and M. Waldman (1991), “Transfers In-Kind: Why They Can Be Efficient and
Nonpaternalistic,” American Economic Review, 81, 1345-1351.

Coate, S. (1995), Altruism, the Samaritan’s Dilemma, and Government Transfer Policy,” American
Economic Review, 85, 46-57.

Clemen, R. (1989), “Combining Forecasts: A Review and Annotated Bibliography,” International
Journal of Forecasting, 5, 559-583.

Epple, D. and R. Romano (1996), “Public Provision of Private Goods,” Journal of Political
Economy, 104, 57-84.

Fang, H. and P. Norman (2008), “Toward an Efficiency Rationale for the Public Provision of Private
Goods,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 13827.

Galton, F. (1907), “Vox Populi,” Nature, 75, 450-451.

Hodges, J. and E. Lehmann (1950), “Some Problems in Minimax Point Estimation,” Annals of
Mathematical Statistics, 21, 182-197.

Larrick, R. and J. Soll (2006), “Intuitions about Combining Opinions: Misappreciation of the
Averaging Principle,” Management Science, 52, 111-127.

Manski, C. (2005), Social Choice with Partial Knowledge of Treatment Response, Princeton:
Princeton University Press.

Manski, C. (2009), “Diversified Treatment under Ambiguity,” International Economic Review,
forthcoming.
                                             22

McNees, S. (1992), “The Uses and Abuses of ‘Consensus’ Forecasts,” Journal of Forecasting, 11,
703-710.

Surowiecki, J. (2004), The Wisdom of Crowds, New York: Random House.
