NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE LONG AND SHORT (OF) QUALITY LADDERS
Amit Khandelwal
Working Paper 15178
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15178

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2009

I am especially grateful to my dissertation committee, Irene Brambilla, Penny Goldberg and Peter
Schott, for guidance and support. I have benefited from conversations with Steve Berry, Ray Fisman,
Juan Carlos Hallak, David Hummels, Kala Krishna, Chris Ksoll, Frank Limbrock, Alex Mcquoid,
Nina Pavcnik, Siddharth Sharma, Gustavo Soares, Robert Staiger, Catherine Thomas, Daniel Trefler,
Chris Udry, Eric Verhoogen, David Weinstein, Jeffrey Weinstein, and various seminar participants.
Special thanks also to Amalavoyal Chari. All errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Amit Khandelwal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Long and Short (of) Quality Ladders
Amit Khandelwal
NBER Working Paper No. 15178
July 2009
JEL No. F1,F15,F16
ABSTRACT
Prices are typically used as proxies for countries' export quality. I relax this strong assumption by exploiting
both price and quantity information to estimate the quality of products exported to the U.S. Higher
quality is assigned to products with higher market shares conditional on price. The estimated qualities
reveal substantial heterogeneity in product markets' scope for quality differentiation, or their "quality
ladders.'' I use this variation to explain the heterogeneous impact of low-wage competition on U.S.
manufacturing employment and output. Markets characterized by relatively shorter quality ladders
are associated with larger employment and output declines resulting from low-wage competition.

Amit Khandelwal
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall 606, 3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
ak2796@columbia.edu

The Long and Short (of) Quality Ladders∗
Amit Khandelwal†
Columbia Business School & NBER
First Draft: November 2006
This Version: July 2009

Abstract
Prices are typically used as proxies for countries’ export quality. I relax this strong assumption by
exploiting both price and quantity information to estimate the quality of products exported to the U.S.
Higher quality is assigned to products with higher market shares conditional on price. The estimated
qualities reveal substantial heterogeneity in product markets’ scope for quality differentiation, or their
“quality ladders.” I use this variation to explain the heterogeneous impact of low-wage competition on
U.S. manufacturing employment and output. Markets characterized by relatively shorter quality ladders
are associated with larger employment and output declines resulting from low-wage competition.

Keywords: Quality Ladders; Low Wage Competition; Quality Specialization; Product Differentiation
JEL Classification: F1, F15, F16

1

Introduction

The quality of products manufactured by countries affects many economic outcomes in international and
development economics. Past studies have consistently found that product quality influences cross-border
trade; richer countries consume and export higher quality products than developing countries.1 The ability
∗I

am especially grateful to my dissertation committee, Irene Brambilla, Penny Goldberg and Peter Schott, for guidance and

support. I have benefited from conversations with Steve Berry, Ray Fisman, Juan Carlos Hallak, David Hummels, Kala Krishna,
Chris Ksoll, Frank Limbrock, Alex Mcquoid, Nina Pavcnik, Siddharth Sharma, Gustavo Soares, Robert Staiger, Catherine
Thomas, Daniel Trefler, Chris Udry, Eric Verhoogen, David Weinstein, Jeffrey Weinstein, and various seminar participants.
Special thanks also to Amalavoyal Chari. All errors are my own.
† Uris Hall,
Room 606, 3022 Broadway, New York,

NY

10027,

email:

ak2796@columbia.edu,

website:

http://www0.gsb.columbia.edu/faculty/akhandelwal/.
1 Support for the demand-side explanation, initially posited by Linder (1961), has been shown by Hallak (2006) and Verhoogen
(2008). Studies by Hummels and Klenow (2005) and Schott (2004) provide systematic evidence that richer countries export

1

of developing countries to transition from low-quality to high-quality products is therefore seen by some as a
necessary (but certainly not a sufficient) condition for export success and, ultimately, economic development.2
In addition, quality upgrading features prominently in current debates about the role of international trade
in driving wage inequality. But while this research suggests a positive association between quality upgrading
and income per capita, Verhoogen (2008) and Goldberg and Pavcnik (2007) argue that quality upgrading
also affects the variance of the income distribution through changes in the relative demand for skilled labor.
Quality specialization may therefore partly explain why inequality has risen in developing countries following
trade liberalizations, in contrast to Stolper-Samuelson predictions. Differences in the quality space may also
affect how closely countries’ products compete with one another and therefore have implications for the
impact of trade on industry employment and output Leamer (2006).
These studies stress the importance of understanding why product quality varies across countries and
over time, and how it is influenced by policy. The challenge faced by this literature is that product quality is
unobserved. Research in the international trade literature has attempted to deal with this problem by using
prices (or unit values) to proxy for quality. This approach, while convenient, requires strong assumptions
since prices could reflect not just quality, but also variations in manufacturing costs. For example, in 1999,
the U.S. imported Malaysian and Portuguese women’s trousers (HS 6204624020) at unit values (inclusive
of transportation and tariff duties) of $146 and $371, respectively. If prices are assumed to proxy perfectly
for quality, Malaysian trousers would possess about half the quality of Portuguese trousers. However, the
annual wage in the apparel sector for Malaysia and Portugal was $3,100 and $5,700, respectively (UNIDO,
2005). So the difference in unit values may instead be a reflection of these different factor prices. Why
would a consumer ever purchase expensive Portuguese trousers if they, in fact, possess lower quality? One
explanation is that a fraction of consumers have a preference for the horizontal attributes of Portuguese
trousers (for instance, the cut or color patterns). Indeed, U.S. consumers imported more than 82,000 dozens
of Malaysian trousers compared to only 865 dozens from Portugal. Idiosyncratic preferences for products’
horizontal attributes can therefore break the direct mapping from prices to quality that has been traditionally
assumed.
This paper estimates the quality of U.S. imports using a procedure that relaxes the strong qualityequals-price assumption. The quality measures are derived from a nested logit demand system, based on
Berry (1994), that embeds preferences for both horizontal and vertical attributes.3 Quality is the vertical
higher quality products. Baldwin and Harrigan (2007), Hallak and Sivadasan (2009), Kugler and Verhoogen (2008) and Johnson
(2009) also document the role of product quality in influencing production and trade patterns.
2 Kremer (1993) provides microeconomic foundations for the quality production function and its implications for economic
development (see also Verhoogen (2008) and Kugler and Verhoogen (2008)). Endogenous growth models that highlight the
importance of product quality include Grossman and Helpman (1991). Hausmann and Rodrik (2003), Rodrik (2006) and
Hidalgo et al. (2007) highlight the importance of export quality for economic performance.
3 Other studies within international trade that use a nested logit structure include Goldberg (1995) and Irwin and Pavcnik

2

component of the estimated model and captures the mean valuation that U.S. consumers attach to an imported product. The procedure utilizes both unit value and quantity information to infer quality and has
a straightforward intuition: conditional on price, imports with higher market shares are assigned higher
quality. Importantly, the procedure requires no special data beyond what is readily available in standard
disaggregate trade data. It is also easy to implement; here, I estimate separate demand curves for approximately hundreds of manufacturing industries. Moreover, the procedure recovers quality at the finest level of
product aggregation available (for the U.S. data, this is the ten-digit HS level).4
The inferred qualities indicate that developed countries export higher quality products relative
to developing countries. This finding is consistent with Schott (2004) who uses unit values to proxy for
quality. However, the estimates also reveal substantial heterogeneity in product markets’ scope for quality
differentiation, or quality ladders, which I measure as the range of qualities within the product market. In
markets with a larger scope for quality differentiation, or a “long” quality ladder, unit values are relatively
more correlated with the estimated qualities. In these markets, prices appear to be appropriate proxies for
quality. In contrast, prices appear to be less appropriate proxies for quality in markets with a narrow range
of estimated qualities (“short” ladder markets). This provides suggestive evidence that expensive imports in
short-ladder markets coexist with cheaper rivals due to horizontal product differentiation. That is, although
the average U.S. consumer attaches a low valuation to the expensive import, there is a fraction of consumers
who still value the product. This heterogeneity underscores the drawback in invoking the quality-equals-price
assumption, particularly for products characterized by short quality ladders.
I use this heterogeneity in ladder lengths to demonstrate that quality specialization has important
implications for the U.S. labor market. The public’s fear of globalization is often rooted in the vulnerability or,
to use Edward Leamer’s terminology, the contestability of jobs. According to Leamer, the contestable jobs are
those where “wages in Los Angeles are set in Shanghai” (Leamer (2006), p. 5). A recent study by Bernard,
Jensen, and Schott (2006) provides evidence that the probability of U.S. plant survival and employment
growth are negatively associated with an industry’s exposure to import penetration, particularly from lowwage countries.5 However, while low-wage competition negatively affects output and employment growth,
the impact is heterogenous across industries. For instance, between 1980 and the mid-1990s, electronics
(SIC 36) experienced greater low-wage import penetration than fabricated metals (SIC 34) but experienced
(2004) although these papers do not focus on the quality of imported products.
4 An alternative procedure developed by Hallak and Schott (2007) relies on the similar intuition to infer countries’ export
quality to the U.S., but their methodology prevents estimating quality at the finest level of disaggregation due to data limitations.
5 Other studies studying the negative relationships between trade and employment include Sachs and Shatz (1994), Freeman and Katz (1991) and Revenga (1992). Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2006) explicitly connect the relationship between
employment and trade with low-wage countries, defined as nations with less than 5 percent of U.S. per capita GDP. I use their
definition of low-wage countries in this paper (see Table 1).

3

a smaller employment decline.6
Using a simple model developed in Section 2, I demonstrate that the impact of low-wage competition
on U.S. industries will vary with its quality ladder. My argument is related to a body of research that reject
standard model predictions of factor price equalization (FPE).7 These studies show that if countries inhabit
different cones of (quality) diversification, with developing countries exporting low-quality products, then
developed countries will be insulated from movements of wages in developing countries. However, if markets
vary in their scope for quality differentiation, developed countries will experience heterogeneity in their
exposure to developing countries. In long-ladder markets, developed countries can insulate themselves from
the South by using comparative advantage factors (e.g., skill, capital and/or technology) to specialize atop the
quality ladder. In short-ladder markets, however, developed countries will be directly exposed to Southern
competition because quality upgrading is infeasible. Thus, a market’s scope for vertical differentiation is
important for understanding Leamer’s notion of contestable jobs.
I find robust support for this hypothesis by matching U.S. industry data and import competition to
quality ladders constructed from the estimated qualities. Consistent with Bernard et al. (2006), I find that
industry employment is negatively associated with import penetration, particularly from low-wage countries.
However, the empirical results confirm that import penetration has a weaker impact on employment in
industries with long quality ladders: a ten percentage point increase in low-wage penetration is associated
with a 6 percent employment decline in an industry characterized by an average quality ladder length. A
similar increase in competition in a long-ladder industry (one standard deviation above the mean) results in
only a 1.4 percent employment decline. Differential impacts on industry output are similar. Importantly, the
impact of import competition on short and long-ladder industries is similar in magnitude to the differential
impact on low and high capital-intensive industries. In other words, even after controlling for the differential
impact through traditional channels, such as capital and skill intensities (see Sachs and Shatz (1994) and
Bernard et al. (2006)), the quality ladder remains an important determinant of an industry’s vulnerability
to low-wage competition. Moreover, the heterogenous effect is not precisely captured if one simply uses
variations in unit values.
These results complement the literature studying the relationship between quality specialization and
labor markets. But while existing studies focus predominantly on developing countries (see Goldberg and
Pavcnik (2007), Verhoogen (2008), Kaplan and Verhoogen (2005)), the evidence here suggests that quality
specialization is also important for developed countries. Quality ladders may therefore help identify those
markets that are likely to be contested by competition from low-wage countries.
6 One

potential explanation is differences in capital intensity, but in 1980, electronics was less capital intensive than fabricated

metals. Indeed, this paper offers evidence that capital intensity only partly explains the heterogeneity in U.S. employment
outcomes due to import competition.
7 For instance, see Leamer (1987) and Schott (2003).

4

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 offers a simple model to illustrate that
exposure to low-wage competition is greater in markets with short quality ladders. In Section 3, I discuss
the approach used to infer quality from trade data. The data and quality estimation results are presented in
Section 4. Section 5 applies the quality estimates to test the implications of quality specialization for U.S.
employment. I conclude in Section 6.

2

A Model of Contestable Jobs

This section develops a simple model that delivers two comparative static results. First, the impact of foreign
competition on domestic market shares is larger from low-wage countries. Second, the impact will depend on
the market’s quality ladder length. I then use the empirical quality measures derived in Section 3 to assess
the predictions of the model.
The model is partial equilibrium and analyzes firms in two regions, North (N ) and South (S), where
the Southern firms freely export to the North. The wages in each country are determined by an outside sector
and are therefore treated as exogenous: wN > wS . Each region has J homogenous firms that compete by
manufacturing horizontally and vertically distinct varieties. Following Krugman (1980) and Melitz (2003),
horizontal differentiation is costless so in equilibrium, all firms produce horizontally distinct varieties. But as
in Flam and Helpman (1987), vertical (e.g., quality) differentiation depends on a Ricardian-type comparative
advantage given by region c’s technology, Zc . I assume that Northern firms have access to better technology
than the South: ZN > ZS . Firm j uses this technology to manufacture a variety subject to a marginal cost
function that is increasing with quality (λj ): wc +

λ2j
2Zc ,

for c ∈ {N, S}.8

The consumers who live in the North have discrete choice preferences. Consumer n observes the
domestic and Southern varieties and chooses the variety j that provides her with the highest indirect utility,
Vnj = θλj − αpj + nj .

(1)

Quality is defined as an attribute whose valuation is agreed upon by all consumers: holding prices fixed,
all consumers would prefer higher quality objects. The vertical component can be interpreted as the clarity
or sharpness of a television screen or it can reflect the perceived quality that results from advertising. In
either case, quality represents any attribute that enhances consumers’ willingness-to-pay for a variety. An
alternative interpretation is that λ represents a shift parameter in the variety’s demand schedule: holding
price pj fixed, demand shifts out when the quality improves (Sutton, 1991). The empirical identification of
quality relies on this latter intuition. The parameter θ reflects the consumers’ valuation for quality and, as
shown below, represents a proxy for the market’s quality ladder in the model.
8 One

can think of this marginal cost function as arising from a fixed-proportions technology that combines labor and capital

in the proportion 1 to

λ2
2Z

(with the rental rate on capital being implicitly treated as one).

5

Horizontal product differentiation is introduced in (1) through the consumer-variety-specific term,
nj . Following standard practice in the discrete choice literature, nj is assumed to be distributed i.i.d.
type-I extreme value. Unlike the vertical attribute, the horizontal attribute has the property that some
people prefer it while others do not and on average, it provides zero utility.9 Denote the mean valuation for
variety j as δj ≡ θλj − αpj . Under the distributional assumption, the market share of variety j is given by
the familiar logit formula
eδj
(2)
mj = P δ .
k
ke
A firm from region c maximizes profits in the Northern market by choosing price and quality by
solving the following problem
"

λ2j
max pj − wc −
pj ,λj
2Zc

#

eδj
P δ
k
ke

(3)

The market is characterized by monopolistic competition with a sufficiently large number of firms that no
one firm can influence the market equilibrium prices and qualities. The optimal price charged by variety j
is therefore10

λ∗2
1
j
+ wc +
,
∀j ∈ c
(4)
α
2Zc
Under this pricing rule, firms charge a markup ( α1 ) over their marginal cost. The optimal quality choice
p∗j =

equates the marginal benefit of choosing quality to its marginal cost:
λ∗j =

θZc
,
α

∀j ∈ c

(5)

Equations (4) and (5) indicate that all firms within a region choose the same price and quality (but recall that
all firms differentiate their varieties in the (costless) horizontal dimension). I therefore drop the subscript j
and index the representative firm’s choice in each region by N or S. Note also that the market share in (2)
simplifies to mc =

eδc
,c
J (eδN +eδS )

∈ {N, S} and the aggregate market share in each region is Mc = Jmc . The

optimal price and quality choice imply that the mean valuation consumers attach to the representative firm
in region c is
θ 2 Zc
− αwc − 1,
c ∈ {N, S}.
(6)
2α
The Northern firms manufacture the higher quality varieties since ZN > ZS .11 Below, I verify that
δc∗ ≡ θλ∗c − αp∗c =

more advanced countries indeed export higher quality products using the newly proposed quality measures
9 For

example, comfort is a quality attribute since, ceteris paribus, all consumers prefer more comfort to less. An article of

clothing’s fashion or style is a horizontal attribute since at equal prices, not all consumers would purchase the same style (e.g.,
stripes versus solids).
10 If a firm takes into account the impact of its decision on the denominator in (2), the optimal price is given by p∗ =
j
1
α(1−mj )

+ wc +

λ∗2
j
.
2Zc

As discussed in Anderson et al. (1992), monopolistic competition assumes there are a sufficiently large

number of varieties so that the market share of any one variety is negligible. The optimal price is therefore given by (4).
11 Since quality is a monotonic function of technology, prices are sufficient statistics for quality in this model. However, if
ZN = ZS , all qualities would be identical, but the North would charge higher prices because of higher manufacturing costs.
Thus, empirically, prices alone may confound differences in quality and quality-adjusted manufacturing costs.

6

which provides a justification for this assumption. These higher quality Northern firms will also have larger
market shares if
θ2
(ZN − ZS ) > α (wN − wS ) ,
2α

(7)

∗
since this implies that δN
> δS∗ . This condition in (7) holds if consumers’ valuation for quality is sufficiently

high or the North’s technological prowess is sufficient to overcome its disadvantage in manufacturing costs.
This assumption is consistent with substantial theoretical and empirical work arguing that higher quality,
or more productive, firms have higher output (and market shares).12
I define the market’s quality ladder as the difference between the highest and lowest quality (Grossman and Helpman, 1991). As discussed below, the empirical measures cannot separately identify λ from the
consumers’ valuation for quality (θ). I therefore define the market’s quality ladder as
Ladder(θ) ≡ θλ∗N − θλ∗S =

θ2
(ZN − ZS ) .
α

(8)

The market’s quality ladder can be indexed by θ and so as the valuation for quality increases, the quality
ladder increases, or lengthens. The scope for quality differentiation will therefore vary according the consumers’ valuations for quality in each market.13 Moreover, as the quality ladder increases, the market share
gains are disproportionately distributed to the manufacturers of the higher quality (

∗
∂δN
∂θ

>

∗
∂δS
∂θ ).

This simple model abstracts away from the endogenous “lengthening” of the ladder that may occur
in a long-run equilibrium with technological progress or shifts in consumer preferences. Instead, I assume that
the quality ladder is fixed which may be appropriate in the short to medium run and mitigate endogeneity
concerns in the empirical analysis by assigning a market’s quality ladder its initial length. This assumption
is consistent with the data which reports a persistence between a market’s initial ladder length and its final
period length. That is, on average, markets with initially “short” ladders are not “long” by the end of the
sample, implying that the quality ladder length is an intrinsic attribute of a market characterizing its scope
for quality differentiation.14
I can now analyze how the aggregate Northern market share changes with Southern wages, and how
this impact varies according to a market’s quality ladder length. The first result shows that the North loses
market share as Southern manufacturing wages decline:
∂MN
∂δ ∗
= −MN MS S > 0
∂wS
∂wS

(9)

∂δS∗
= −α.
∂wS

(10)

since

12 For
13 The

instance, see Melitz (2003) and Bernard et al. (2007).
ladder length could also vary by changing ZN and the predictions of the model do not change. Hence, the contestable

jobs hypothesis does not hinge on the source of the market’s scope for quality differentiation.
14 A market’s intrinsic scope for quality differentiation is closely related to escalation principle developed in Sutton (1998).

7

Thus, Southern firms become more competitive as its manufacturing costs falls and this gain comes at
the expense of lower market shares for the Northern firms. This comparative static is quite intuitive and
is supported by existing empirical evidence. For instance, Bernard et al. (2006) show that output and
employment for U.S. plants are negatively associated with import competition, but the impact is much
larger when import competition originates from countries with less than 5% of U.S. per capita GDP.
Importantly, this model adds quality differentiation to show that the intensity of competition within
a market depends on the quality ladder length. In particular, while (9) indicates that the North’s market
share falls as Southern wages decline, it suffers a smaller loss in markets characterized by longer quality
ladders (high θ markets). This is seen by differentiating (9) with respect to θ:
 2 ∗


∂ 2 MN
∂ δS
∂δS∗
∂MS
∂MN
= −
MN MS +
MN
+ MS
∂wS ∂θ
∂wS ∂θ
∂wS
∂θ
∂θ
 ∗

 ∗
∗

∂δN
∂δ
∂δS
2
MN MS2 − MN
MS
− S
= −
∂wS
∂θ
∂θ

 ∗
∗
∗
∂δS
∂δ
∂δN
=
− S
MN MS (MN − MS )
∂wS
∂θ
∂θ
= −θMN MS (MN − MS ) (ZN − ZS ) < 0,

(11)

since MN > MS . This derivative shows that in long-ladder markets (high θ), the sensitivity of Northern
market shares to Southern competitiveness is reduced. As a result, a decrease in the South’s wage results in
a smaller decline of the North’s market share in long ladders.
The model shows that trading with the South can generate a differential impact on two markets
that are otherwise identical but vary according in their quality ladders. This result is related to more
general models of international trade that predict a breakdown of FPE when countries are fully specialized
in production. In contrast to a single-cone equilibrium, where endowments are such that all countries produce
all goods, the conditions required for factor price equalization are not met in multi-cone equilibrium because
countries specialize in varieties tailored to their endowments.15 Schott (2004) has extended this analysis to
within product specialization where endowment differences cause countries to specialize in different segments
of a product’s quality ladder. The model here sharpens this analysis by arguing that the scope for quality
specialization varies across markets.

3

Empirical Implementation

This section describes the procedure that infers quality using price and quantity information from standard
disaggregate trade data. The estimated qualities are then used to verify predictions from the model.
15 For

evidence in favor of the hypothesis that countries inhabit multiple cones of diversification, see Leamer (1987), Davis

and Weinstein (2001) and Schott (2003).

8

The methodology is based on the nested logit framework by Berry (1994). The nested logit has the
advantage over the logit in (1) because it partially relaxes the independence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA)
property by allowing for more plausible correlation structures among consumer preferences. To understand
why this is important, suppose a consumer is choosing between a Japanese wool shirt and an Italian cotton
shirt. If a Chinese cotton shirt enters the market, a logit or CES framework would predict that the market
shares for both imports would fall by the same percent. However, we might expect the Italian cotton shirt’s
market share to adjust more than the Japanese shirt because the Chinese shirt is also cotton. The nested
logit allows for more appropriate substitution patterns by placing varieties into appropriate nests.
In order to delineate the nests, I rely on the structure of the U.S. trade data. Feenstra et al. (2002)
have compiled U.S. import data which contain five-digit SITC industries that have been mapped to ten-digit
HS products denoted by h. The products serve as the nests. An import from country c within a product is
called a variety.
I model consumer preferences for a single industry and therefore suppress industry subscripts. Following Berry (1994), consumer n has preferences for country c’s import into HS product h (e.g., variety ch)
at time t. The consumer purchases the one variety that provides her with the highest indirect utility, given
by
Vncht = λ1,ch + λ2,t + λ3,cht − αpcht +

H
X

µnht dch + (1 − σ)ncht .

(12)

h=1

Quality is defined as λ1,ch + λ2,t + λ3,cht since it reflects the valuation for variety ch that is common across
consumers (notice that these terms are not subscripted by n). This quality term is decomposed into three
components. The first term, λ1,ch , is the time-invariant valuation that the consumer attaches to variety ch.
The second term, λ2,t , captures for secular time trends common across all varieties. The λ3,cht term is a
variety-time deviation from the fixed effect that is observed by the consumer but not the econometrician.
This last term is potentially correlated with the variety’s c.i.f. unit value, pcht .
The horizontal component of the model is captured by the random component,

PH

h=1

µnht dch + (1 −

σ)ncht . The logit error ncht is assumed to be distributed Type-I extreme value and explains why a variety
that is expensive and has low quality is ever purchased. The former term interacts the common valuation
that consumer n places on all varieties within product h, µnht , with a dummy variable dch that takes a value
of 1 if country c’s export lies in product h. This term generates the nest structure because if allows consumer
n’s preferences to be more correlated for varieties within product h than for varieties across products.16
An “outside” variety completes the demand system. The purpose of the outside variety is to allow
16 As

discussed in Berry (1994), Cardell (1997) has shown that the distribution of

PH

h=1

µnht dch is the unique distribution

such that if  is distributed extreme value, then the sum is also distributed type-I extreme value. The degree of within nest
correlation is controlled by σ ∈ (0, 1]. As σ approaches one, the correlation in consumer tastes for varieties within a nest
approaches one and as σ tends to zero, the nested logit converges to the standard logit model.

9

consumers the possibility to not purchase any of the inside varieties. For instance, consumers may choose
to purchase a domestic variety (or not simply not make any purchase) if the price of all imports rises. The
utility of the outside variety is given by
un0t = λ1,0 + λ2,t + λ3,0t − αp0t + µn0t + (1 − σ)n0t .

(13)

The mean utility of the outside variety is normalized to zero; this normalization anchors the valuations of
the inside varieties. In the context here, one can think of the outside variety as the domestic substitute for
imports, and I therefore set the outside variety market share to one minus the industry’s import penetration.17
Note that the choice of the outside variety proxy affects the absolute growth rate of import qualities but
not the relative growth rate because the estimation includes year fixed effects that are common to all
varieties. Once the outside variety market share (s0t ) is known, I can compute the total industry output:
P
M KTt = ch6=0 qcht /(1 − s0t ), where qcht denotes the import quantity of variety ch. The imported variety
market shares are then calculated as scht = qcht /M KTt .
The consumer chooses variety ch if Vncht > Vnc0 h0 t . Under the distributional assumptions for the
random component of consumer utility, Berry (1994) has shown that the demand curve implied by the
preferences in (12) is
ln(scht ) − ln(s0t ) = λ1,ch + λ2,t + αpcht + σ ln(nscht ) + λ3,cht ,

(14)

where scht is variety ch’s overall market share and nscht is its market share within product h (the nest
share).18
Since the trade data do not record detailed characteristics of varieties, I exploit the panel dimension of the data by specifying a time-invariant component of quality (λ1,ch ) with variety fixed effects, and
the common quality component (λ2,t ) with year fixed effects. This implies that the quality measure cannot separate the technology of the variety from the consumers’ valuation for quality. However, Section 2
demonstrated that separately identifying the channel is not important for the model’s predictions. The third
component of quality, λ3,cht , is not observed and plays the role of the estimation error. Since λ3,cht and the
17 Bernard

et al. (2006) provide SIC-level import penetration from 1989-1996. I obtain import penetration from 1997-2001 at

the NAICS level (I thank Spencer Amdur for constructing these data). Since I run the estimations at the SITC level, I map
the import penetration values to the SITC (rev. 2) level.
18 If one adopts a logit demand system, the nest share disappears from equation (14). To understand why nesting may be
important for inferring quality, re-consider the example discussed above. Suppose that the Japanese wool and Italian cotton
shirts are identical in every dimension (including price) and evenly split the market. We would infer their qualities also to be
equal. Now suppose an identical Chinese cotton shirt enters. If preferences are more correlated within a nest, the new market
shares for both cotton shirts would be 1/4 each and the Japanese wool shirt would capture the remaining 1/2. However, we do
not want the inferred quality of the existing varieties to fall simply because varieties within nests are closer substitutes than
varieties across nests. The nested logit alleviates this concern because the nest share (nscht ) adjusts to account for the changes
in market shares simply due to correlated preferences.

10

nest share are potentially correlated with the variety’s price, instrumental variables are required to identify
the parameters.

3.1

Identification and Hidden Varieties

Identifying the price coefficient in (14) typically relies on rival variety characteristics as instruments (Berry,
Levinsohn, and Pakes, 1995). Yet even if variety characteristics were available in the import data, the
assumption of exogenous characteristics may be problematic if firms simultaneously choose prices and characteristics (as in the model). Fortunately, the import data provide variety-specific unit transportation costs
that can serve as instruments for the c.i.f. price. Although transportation costs are obviously correlated
with c.i.f. prices, one may be concerned that they are correlated with quality because of the “Washington
Apples” effect: distant countries may ship higher quality goods in order to lower per unit transport costs
(Hummels and Skiba, 2004). This raises concerns that trade costs may be correlated with a variety’s quality. However, the exclusion restriction remains valid as long as transportation costs do not affect deviations
from average quality, λ3,cht . In other words, if an Australian firm chooses to export higher quality varieties
to the U.S. because of distance, the instruments remain valid as long as shocks to transportation costs do
not affect deviations from the firm’s average quality choice. Indeed, the Washington Apples phenomenon in
Hummels and Skiba (2004) identify the impact of distance on prices using cross-country variation in distance
rather than variation in transportation costs over time.19 I also include exchange rates and the interaction
of distance to the U.S. with oil prices as additional instruments; these instruments vary at the country-year
level.
The nscht is also endogenous and so to identify σ, I instrument this term with the number of varieties
within product h and the number of varieties exported by country c. These count measures will be correlated
with the nest term and uncorrelated with λ3,cht if variety entry and exit occur prior to exporting firms’ quality
choice. This assumption is now standard in the literature that estimates discrete choice demands curves (e.g.,
see Berry et al. (1995)).20
A second issue that arises in estimating (14) is that the market shares are likely to be an aggregation
of even more finely classified imports. As noted in Feenstra (1994), a country’s large market share may
simply reflect the fact that it exports more unobserved or hidden varieties within a product. To illustrate
this potential problem, suppose that China and Italy export identical varieties at identical prices and split
the market equally at the (unobserved) twelve-digit level, but that China exports more twelve-digit varieties
(such as more colors). Aggregation to the observed ten-digit level would assign a larger market share at
19 In

Section 5.1.1, I show that the results are also robust to including unit tariff costs as instruments.
the model above is developed under monopolistic competition where a firm’s quality choice is chosen indepen-

20 Moreover,

dently of the actions (and number) of its competitors.

11

identical prices to China. From (14), China’s estimated quality would be biased upward simply due to the
hidden varieties. I therefore follow predictions from Krugman (1980), among others, and use a country’s
population to proxy for countries’ hidden varieties.21 The demand curve that adjusts for the hidden varieties
is given by
ln(scht ) − ln(s0t ) = λ1,ch + λ2,t + αpcht + σ ln(nscht ) + γ ln popct + λ3,cht

(15)

where popct is the population of country c. I estimate separate demand curves in (15) for each industry.
The quality of variety ch at time t is defined using the estimated parameters:
λcht ≡ λ̂1,ch + λ̂2,t + λ̂3,cht .

(16)

Equation (15) shows that inferring quality relies on the intuitive idea that the quality of an imported variety
is its relative market share after controlling for exporter size and price. Thus, a variety’s quality will rise
if its price can rise without losing market share. While it is possible that many factors could affect market
shares, it is important to note that this set is made much smaller by conditioning on prices. For example, a
variety may have a large market share if the exporting country is geographically close to U.S. However, the
price includes transportation costs and therefore the quality estimate is not capturing purely gravity effects
such as distance. A similar argument can be made regarding free trade agreements: even though Mexican
and Canadian import shares are high because of NAFTA, this effect will operate through prices, which are
inclusive of tariffs.22

4

Data and Quality Estimation Results

I estimate regression (15) on U.S. product-level import data from 1989-2001 (Feenstra et al., 2002). In
addition to import quantities and values, the data record tariffs and transportation costs. A variety’s unit
value is defined as the sum of the value, total duties and transportation costs divided by the import quantity
and deflated to real values using the CPI. I restrict the sample to the manufacturing industries (SITC 5-8)
and exclude the homogenous goods defined by Rauch (1999) since these products, by definition, exhibit no
quality differentiation. Since the import data are extremely noisy (General Accounting Office, 1995), I trim
the data along two dimensions. The first trim excludes all varieties that report a quantity of one unit or a
total value of less than $7,500 in 1989 dollars. The second trim removes varieties with extreme unit values
that fall below the 5th percentile or above the 95th percentile within the industry.23
21 In

Section 5.1.1, I show that the results are robust to using GDP as the proxy for hidden varieties.
that defining quality based on residuals is analogous to the literature that infers total factor productivity from firm-

22 Note

level estimations. If one remains concerned about what the residual λ3,cht captures, I show that the results are not sensitive to
excluding the residual from the definition of quality in Section 5.1.1.
23 12 percent of the SITC industries record imports in multiple units. For these industries, the products of the majority unit
are kept which comprise about 80 percent of the observations within a multiple-unit industry. Baseline results are not sensitive

12

Table 2 reports basic summary statistics by two-digit SIC sectors. Column 1 indicates the number
of industries and column 2 reports the total number of products. Column 3 reports the (weighted) average
income per capita by sector; the average apparel and leather imports originate from countries with lowest
average per capita income while imports into transportation, industrial machinery and chemicals are dominated by relatively richer countries. Columns 4 and 5 report skill and capital intensity from the NBER
Manufacturing Industry Database (Bartelsman et al., 1996).
The estimating equation in (15) is run separately for 1,059 SITC (rev. 2) manufacturing industries
with standard errors clustered by exporting country. The results of these regressions are summarized in
Table 3. The bottom panel shows that 71 percent of the regressions, or 81 percent of the total 1.245 million
observations in the entire sample, have a negative and statistically significant price coefficient. Rows 1 and
2 in the top panel indicate that the average IV price coefficient is about 68 percent lower than the OLS price
coefficient, suggesting that the instruments are moving the price coefficient in the intuitive direction. Row
3 reports summary statistics for the own-price elasticities. While the average own price elasticity is low,
this is not surprising given that the parameters in (15) are estimated using variation within varieties over
time. Rows 4-6 indicate that the average and median regression pass the overidentifying restrictions test and
have low first-stage F-statistic p-values. Row 7 reports the coefficients on population. Row 8 reports that
57 percent of the estimations report a statistically significant σ̂ indicating the appropriateness of the nested
logit structure. Row 9 reports that the quality estimates are precisely estimated, which is not surprising
since these estimates are the sum of two fixed effects plus a residual.24

4.1

Factor Endowments and Quality Specialization

The inferred qualities offer support for previous studies that have found, using prices to proxy for quality, that
more capital- and skill-intensive countries export higher quality varieties (e.g., see Schott (2004) or Hallak
(2006)). This relationship is seen in the following specification which relates export quality to exporters’ per
capita income GDP per capita
λcht = αht + β ln Yct + νcht ,

(17)

where λcht is the estimated quality of country c’s export in product h at time t and Yct is country c’s
per capita GDP. The inclusion of a product-year dummy, αht , indicates that the regression considers the
cross-sectional relationship between quality and income within products. Table 4 reports that the coefficient
on exporter income is positive and significant. Richer countries, on average, export higher quality varieties
within products. Columns 2 and 3 re-run (17) using capital-labor ratios and the fraction of a country’s
workforce with tertiary education. The coefficient on capital-labor endowment is positive and significant, so
to varying price cutoffs or trimming observations below $5,000 or $10,000.
24 The standard errors are obtained by simulating draws from the asymptotic distribution of the estimated parameters.

13

more capital intensive countries also tend to export higher quality varieties within products. The coefficient
on the education variable is positive, but not statistically significant, but the precision may be low due to
lack of data.
These results are consistent with the model’s prediction that more advanced countries will manufacture higher quality products. This specification can also be used to check the importance of correcting
for exporter size when inferring quality from market shares and prices. Column 4 re-runs (17) using quality
estimates that have not been adjusted for hidden varieties (that is, qualities estimated from (14) rather than
(15)). Notice now that there is essentially no relationship between exporter income and the unadjusted quality estimates. The main reason why this occurs is China. When controlling for hidden varieties, the quality
estimates report that China’s export quality is below average. However, the unadjusted quality estimates
indicate that China has above average quality. This is seen in column 5 which includes a China dummy
in the regression of unadjusted quality estimates on exporter income, and the coefficient on income is now
similar to column 1. These results illustrate the importance of controlling for hidden varieties when inferring
quality from price and quantity information.25

4.2

Quality Ladders

I construct the quality ladder from the estimated qualities as the difference between the maximum and
minimum quality within a product:
Ladderh = λmax
− λmin
h
h .

(18)

Regression (17) provides evidence that richer countries sit atop the quality ladder. The quality ladder will
change over time as countries increase R&D expenditure and/or gain access to improved technology. To
mitigate endogeneity concerns, I fix the product’s quality ladder at the length measured in the first period
that the product appears in the sample.26 One concern of fixing the quality ladder is that “short” ladders
could become “long” or vice versa. However, there is persistence in a product’s ladder length over time.
The correlation coefficient between a product’s initial ladder length and its end of sample length is 0.7. This
suggests that the scope for quality differentiation is an intrinsic feature of products.
In a vertical product market, Bresnahan (1993) has shown that prices and quality are isomorphic
since all consumers agree on the rankings of goods. However, as discussed earlier, the mapping between
prices and quality is less clear when products also possess horizontal attributes. The following specification
25 Feenstra
26 The

(1994) and Hallak and Schott (2007) have made a similar point.
main results of the paper actually rely on the inter-decile range which is more robust to outliers than the range. In

Section 5.1.1, I show that the results are robust to defining the ladder using the full range, the inter-quartile range and the
standard deviation of qualities.

14

assesses the relationship between the inferred qualities and prices across products of varying ladder lengths
ln pcht = αht + β1 λcht + β2 (λcht × ln Ladderh ) + νcht .

(19)

pcht is the unit value of country c’s export in product h at time t and αht denote product-year fixed
effects. Column 1 of Table 5 reports that the interaction coefficient, β2 , is positive and significant.27 This
regression shows that in markets characterized by long quality ladders, there is a relatively steeper gradient
between prices and the estimated qualities. This is consistent with the quality-equals-price assumption
frequently made in the literature. However, this correlation weakens as the ladder length declines implying
that prices may be imperfect proxies for quality in short-ladder markets. Regression (19) therefore indicates
that the average consumer does not attach a high valuation to expensive imports in short-ladder products.
For example, the estimated qualities reveal that while Canadian footwear is 27 percent more expensive
than average imported footwear, it has below average quality. Horizontal attributes can explain why these
expensive, but low quality, Canadian shoes are purchased. Thus, inferring quality from prices alone would
instead attach a high quality rank for Canadian footwear.
Two graphs further illustrate this point. Figure 1 plots the relationship between quantities, unit
values and the estimated qualities for two products: “Transmission Receivers Exceeding 400 MHZ” (HS
8525203080) and “Footwear with Plastic Soles, Leather Uppers” (HS 6403999065). The graphs are ordered
by unit values, which also roughly correspond to exporter per capita GDP. For transmission receivers (top
panel), unit values and quality are positively correlated, indicating that the average consumer assigns a higher
valuation to more expensive varieties. For this product, it appears that the quality-equals-price assumption
is tenable.
The bottom panel plots leather shoes. Here, exporters of expensive varieties, like Belgium, are
associated with relatively low quality. The reason lies in the export quantities (square dots). Belgium has a
very low market share, even conditioning on its price. Taking into account Belgium’s market share and export
price, the quality estimates indicate that the average consumer attaches a low valuation to Belgian leather
shoes. On the other hand, France exported the second most expensive variety in this HS classification and
obtained a relatively high market share given its price; it is therefore assigned a high quality estimate. China
also has a high estimated quality since, conditional on its price, it also has a high market share. Consistent
with casual evidence, footwear exported by Spain, Italy and Germany are of relatively high quality: these
countries’ footwear are expensive but secure high market shares. These two figures therefore suggest that
the direct mapping from prices to quality may be more reasonable for some product markets rather than
others.
27 Note

that the negative β1 coefficient is a consequence of how quality is defined (see equation (15)): conditional on market

shares, price and the estimated quality measures are positively correlated.

15

Conceptually, the quality ladder (a proxy for vertical differentiation) and the CES elasticity of substitution (the measure of horizontal differentiation in standard trade models) appear related. In column 2 of
Table 5, I include the interaction of quality with the elasticities of substitution estimated by Broda and Weinstein (2006).28 The interaction coefficient is not significant suggesting no systematic relationship between
prices and qualities according to the elasticity of substitution. There are several potential explanations for
this finding. First, the logit and CES demand systems only yield identical aggregate demand curves if prices
and income are in logs (see Anderson et al. (1987)). Perhaps more importantly, our estimation methods
differ substantially. The approach here relies on supply-shifters to identify the demand curve. In contrast,
Broda and Weinstein (2006) assume that the demand and supply curve error terms are uncorrelated and
use heteroskedasticity to identify the parameters. Moreover, they rely on variation across varieties within
a product, while the estimations here use within-variety variation. Their methodology also constrains their
estimates to lie within an interval. So while conceptually similar, the quality ladder and elasticities from
Broda and Weinstein (2006) are difficult to compare in practice.
Finally, it is important to note that the quality ladders are constructed from not only from developing
country imports, but also imports from highly developed countries like Japan, Germany and Canada. The
quality ladder is therefore likely to represent the true quality frontier of a product. But while most countries
export apparel and footwear products, there is a negative correlation between the average number of varieties
within an HS product and industry capital intensity. Based on equation (15), a country’s variety has zero
market share if consumers assign a negative infinite consumer valuation (or if the price is infinite). In the next
section, I demonstrate that quality ladder lengths are positively correlated with industry capital intensity.
Putting these two findings together indicates that the selection bias that occurs because not all countries
export more capital-intensive products will underestimate the quality ladder for these products. As a result,
accounting for the selection bias (e.g., see Helpman et al. (2006)) is not a major concern since the selection
bias works against the results below. In other words, the quality ladders are underestimated for the markets
that are least affected by low-wage competition.

5
5.1

Long and Short Quality Ladders
Quality Ladders and U.S. Manufacturing Employment

With the quality ladders in hand, I can now examine the contestable jobs hypothesis outlined in Section 2
by linking the impact of import penetration on U.S. manufacturing employment with the quality ladder.
Since U.S. employment data is unavailable at the 10-digit HS level, I construct a four-digit SIC (rev. 1987)
industry quality ladder, IndLadderm , to match to industry-level U.S. employment data. The industry ladder
28 I

exclude extremely large elasticities of substitution (above the 90th percentile, or elasticities greater than 76.9).

16

is defined as the weighted average of the (initial year) product ladders within the SIC industry:
IndLadderm =

Hm
X

wh Ladderh ,

(20)

h=1

where Hm denotes the number of products in SIC industry m, Ladderh is the product’s baseline ladder
(defined in (18)). The variable wh is the product’s (real) import share within an SIC in the product’s initial
year. Again, by relying on initial year values, the industry ladder becomes a time invariant measure.
Summary statistics for the quality ladders are shown in the final column of Table 2. Table 6 examines
how standard industry characteristics correlate with the quality ladder. Column 1 regresses the industry
quality ladder in (20) on skill intensity, capital intensity and total factor productivity.29 The results report
a positive and statistically significant correlation with capital intensity and TFP, suggesting that capitalintensive and high productivity industries are also associated with longer quality ladders. Column 2 includes
measures of marketing expenses and R&D taken from the 1975 FTC Line of Business survey.30 The quality
ladders have a positive and significant correlation with the R&D measure but not the marketing expense
variable. So while the quality measures cannot directly separate consumer valuation from technology, this
regression suggests that the variation is driven predominantly the latter.
In column 3, I correlate the quality ladder with a measure of price dispersion and the Broda and
Weinstein elasticities.31 Both measures report no statistically significant correlation with the quality ladder.
So while the price dispersion measure is positively correlated with the quality ladder, the correlation is
noisy. This is consistent with earlier arguments that price dispersion may be more appropriate proxies for
quality in some markets rather than others. Finally, column 4 includes all observable industry characteristics.
The capital intensity and R&D intensity measure remain positive and statistically significant (p-value on
R&D coefficient is .108). One interesting feature of these regressions is that the R-squareds are extremely
low. Thus, most of the variation in quality ladders cannot be explained by these widely used industry
characteristics.
Following Bernard et al. (2006), I link employment outcomes with two measures of import penetration: imports originating from countries with less than 5 percent of U.S. per capita GDP (LW P EN ) and
the rest of the world (OT HP EN ). Total import penetration is defined as Imt /(Imt + Qmt − Xmt ), where
Imt is the value of imports in four-digit SIC industry m at time t, Qmt is the industry’s domestic production
and Xmt represents U.S. exports. LW P EN is the product of total import penetration and the value share
29 Skill

intensity is measured as the ratio of non-production to production workers. Capital intensity is the ratio of capital

stock to total employment. See (Bartelsman et al., 1996) for details on the measurement of total factor productivity.
30 These two measures have been used by Kugler and Verhoogen (2008), Sutton (1998) and Antras (2003) to measure the
importance of marketing expenses and R&D for an industry.
31 I aggregate the product-level elasticities and the product-level unit value dispersion (the coefficient of variation) to the
industry level using (20). The Broda-Weinstein elasticities are not available for all products so I assign missing values with
average elasticities over coarser HS codes.

17

of imports originating from low-wage countries
LW P ENmt =

low
Imt
.
Imt + Qmt − Xmt

(21)

OT HP EN is defined analogously as
OT HP ENmt =

low
Imt − Imt
.
Imt + Qmt − Xmt

(22)

The following specification, which is an industry-level regression based on Bernard et al. (2006),
regresses employment outcomes on the quality ladder and import penetration
ln Empmt = αm + αt + β1 OT HP ENmt + β2 LW P ENmt + β3 (LW P ENmt × ln IndLadderm ) + νmt . (23)
Note that the specification includes both industry (αm ) and year (αt ) fixed effects. If the data are consistent
with the comparative static prediction in (9), we should observe β2 < β1 < 0; higher import penetration is
negatively correlated with industry employment, and the correlation is stronger with low-wage penetration.
The second prediction of the model is that impact of low-wage penetration will depend on the quality
ladder (see (11)). The interaction between LW P EN and IndLadder captures this effect. The prediction
is that β3 > 0 implying that long-ladder industries with high exposure to low-wage countries suffer smaller
employment declines.32
Column one of Table 7 reports the baseline results. The coefficients are statistically significant
and have the predicted signs. Import penetration negatively affects employment, and imports from lowwage countries have a larger impact than imports originating from the remaining (richer) countries. The
interaction coefficient is positive and precisely estimated, supporting the model’s prediction that vulnerability
to low-wage penetration declines in industries with longer quality ladders.
The point estimates are also economically significant. If low-wage penetration increases by ten
percentage points, employment in an average ladder industry declines by 6 percent. In contrast, low-wage
penetration is associated with only a 1.4 percent employment loss in a long-ladder industry (one standard
deviation above the mean). For a specific example, if LW P EN were to increase by ten percentage points
in the household slippers industry (SIC 3142), employment would fall 13 percent more than in household
audio and video equipment (SIC 3651), an industry characterized by a three times longer quality ladder.
In column two, I include a ladder-OT HP EN interaction to determine if the effects of imports
originating from more-advanced countries are also dampened in long ladders. This interaction is statistically
significant, but its economic magnitude is smaller than the ladder-LW P EN interaction term.
Given that the quality ladder is positively correlated with industry capital intensity and TFP (see
Table 6), one concern is that the quality ladder simply proxies these variables. If this is true, then the results
32 Note

that the predictions for the signs of β1 , β2 , β3 are opposite from the model because in the model, an increase in wages

is analogous to a decline in LW P EN .

18

in columns one and two simply confirm the findings of previous studies arguing that, for instance, more
capital-intensive industries are less susceptible to import competition. To address this concern, I include
the interaction of initial industry capital-intensity with LW P EN in column three.33 More capital-intensive
industries are less vulnerable to low-wage imports, as expected, but the quality ladder interaction remains
positive and significant. Moreover, the magnitudes of the point estimates are about the same. Employment
in a short-ladder is predicted to fall 4.5 percent more, ceteris paribus, than its long-ladder counterpart.
Likewise, a low capital-intensive industry would contract 8 percent more than a highly intensive industry
due to low-wage competition. Column 4 interacts initial industry TFP with LW P EN and the results
continue to hold. Finally, (unreported) results are also robust to including both capital-intensity and TFP
interactions.
While using the initial-period ladder and factor intensities mitigate endogeneity concerns, import
penetration may be endogenous. For instance, international trade may be filling a void created by a decline
in domestic industries caused by other factors, such as structural changes in the economy. The simultaneity
would bias the import penetration coefficients downward in (23). I therefore instrument the penetration
measures with industry-year weighted averages of exchange rates, where the weights are the country’s share
of industry value in 1989, for low-wage countries and the rest of the world. Tariffs and freight rates also
serve as instruments. These two instruments are constructed by dividing total duties and freight costs for
each set of countries divided by their total import value for each industry and year.
Column 5 of Table 7 presents the baseline IV specification. The first column shows the baseline
specification. Instrumenting actually causes the coefficient on LW P EN to increase in magnitude, which
suggests measurement error in the variable.34 The quality ladder now generates an even larger impact of
competition on employment. For example, a ten percentage point increase in LW P EN leads to a 9 percent
employment decline in a short-ladder industry (one standard deviation below the mean) compared to a 27
percent employment gain in the average industry. While β3 is not significant at conventional levels when
including the OT HP EN × ln IndLadder interaction in column 6, the magnitude and signs are consistent
with earlier results. Column 7 includes the interaction of low-wage penetration with industry capital intensity
and the point estimates imply that employment in a short-ladder is predicted to fall 23 percent more, ceteris
paribus, than its long-ladder counterpart while a low capital-intensive industry would contract 19 percent
more than a highly capital-intensive industry. Column 8 shows that the result is robust to allowing for
a heterogenous response across industries with different TFP, and (unreported) results are also robust to
allowing for both capital and TFP interactions in the regression. These findings indicate that even industries
33 Since

this variable is itself endogenous, the regression assigns an industry’s capital intensity at its initial period level. This

implies that the coefficient on capital intensity is not identified because of the industry fixed effects.
34 Bernard et al. (2006) also find that instrumenting import penetration causes the magnitude of the coefficients to increase
in their employment regressions.

19

with similar observable characteristics may exhibit heterogenous impacts from international trade because
of inherent differences in vertical specialization.
The point estimates suggest large impacts, but they are consistent with an argument emphasized by
Leamer (2000): even low import volumes can have a significant impact on U.S. firms if international trade
equalizes product prices. The results indicate this argument is particularly salient for short-ladder products.
Indeed, the extent to which domestic goods overlap with foreign goods, and the source of the foreign imports,
is precisely what determines which industries are vulnerable to competition in the framework here. The
magnitude of the employment effects are also consistent with Bernard et al. (2006), whose conservative
estimates indicate that a ten percentage point increase in LW P EN raises the probability of U.S. plant
death by 17 percent. Moreover, the raw data reveal large correlations between employment outcomes and
rising low-wage import penetration. For example, the household slippers industry’s quality ladder is about
two-thirds of the average and between 1989 and 1996, employment fell more than 50 percent while low-wage
penetration simultaneously rose 25 percentage points. Import competition therefore can have large impacts
on domestic firms in short-ladder industries.
Finally, Table 8 reruns (23) with industry output as the dependent variable to show that employment
outcomes are not simply an artifact of U.S. firms substituting labor with capital. The table shows that
the Ladder interaction is positive and significant across all specifications (excluding columns 6) and the
magnitudes are comparable with the employment regressions. For example, using the point estimates in
column one, the impact of low-wage penetration on output growth in a short- versus long-ladder is 5 percent
more. Thus, the results offer strong evidence that long-ladder industries contract less than short-ladder
industries given the same level of low-wage import penetration.
5.1.1

Robustness Checks

I perform a number of robustness exercises to check the sensitivity of the results. The first check re-runs
the IV specifications using two-digit SIC-year pair fixed effects. This specification controls for sector-specific
shocks that may be correlated with the quality ladder and the results for employment and output are reported
in Table 9. The magnitude of the coefficients declines, not surprisingly, yet the interaction coefficients remain
statistically significant. Thus, the results are robust to a very flexible specification that uses only withinsector variation to identify heterogenous effects of import competition across quality ladder lengths.
The next set of robustness checks re-run the baseline specification in (23) using alternative measures
of the quality ladder. Each row of Table 10 reports the LW P EN -Ladder coefficient from the OLS and IV
employment regressions. The first sensitivity check addresses the Washington Apples concern that while
transport costs are correlated with c.i.f. prices, they may be correlated with the unobserved portion of
quality, λ3,cht (see discussion in Section 3.1). The first row of Table 10 addresses this concern by including

20

per-unit tariffs as an additional instrument and the results on the ladder interaction are robust in both the
OLS and IV specifications.
Constructing the quality ladders hinges on the disaggregate detail of U.S. import data. One concern
might be that the ladder lengths simply reflect aggregation differences if products in some industries are
defined more coarsely than others. Another worry could be that the product-level ladders just proxy for
the number of countries exporting that product code. To ensure that the results are not sensitive to these
concerns, rows 2 and 3 re-run the employment regressions using these count definitions of the ladder. The
second row defines the product-level ladder as the number of countries (varieties) within the product and
then aggregates to the industry level according to (20). Row 3 counts the number of products within the
four-digit industry code to construct the industry-level ladder. Both measures proxy potential differences in
the coarseness of product definitions across industries. However, the OLS and IV coefficients are imprecisely
measured. This provides evidence that the baseline results are not driven by the coarseness of data.
Empirical studies typically use unit values to proxy for quality. Table 6 demonstrated that while price
dispersion is associated with the quality ladder, the correlation is noisy. This is consistent with evidence that
prices may be better proxies for quality in only markets characterized by a high degree of vertical product
differentiation. In Row 4 of Table 10, I use this alternative price-based quality ladder to assess the model
predictions. The interaction coefficient is positive for both the OLS and IV specifications, which is consistent
with the model’s predictions, but only the IV result is significant at conventional levels. Row 5 of Table 10
takes the opposite approach and constructs the ladder using within-product market share dispersion. While
the OLS coefficient is statistically significant, the IV coefficient, which accounts for potential endogeneity
concerns, is very imprecisely estimated. This is not surprising; high quality is not assigned to products
simply with high market shares, but rather high market shares conditional on price.
Row 6 defines quality exclusive of the residual from the estimating equation in (15), λcht = λ̂1,ch +
λ̂2,t , and then constructs the industry ladder using (18) and (20). This measure addresses potential concerns
that the residual term (λ3,cht ) may be capturing factors other than quality. However, the table shows that
the results are robust to defining quality without this term.
Row 7 of Table 10 constructs the quality ladder for quality estimates obtained from specification
(15) where population is replaced by GDP as the proxy for exporter size. The results are not sensitive to
using this alternative proxy, either.
The next robustness check uses the dispersion measure constructed from the Broda and Weinstein
elasticities. The OLS coefficient in row 8 is significant at the 10 percent level and has an intuitive sign:
industries with higher substitutability experience relatively smaller employment growth. However, the IV
coefficient is not statistically significant. The finding that the results are noisy is not surprising given the
earlier results that show no systematic relationship between the quality ladders and the Broda and Weinstein

21

elasticities substitution. Moreover, the Broda-Weinstein measure becomes statistically insignificant if I also
include the quality ladder interaction, which remains positive and statistically significant. This is further
evidence that exposure to low-wage competition is more sensitive to differences in vertical, rather than
horizontal, differentiation.
The unit values used in the baseline regressions do not control for non-tariff barriers, such as voluntary export restraints or quotas, due to data limitations. The major non-tariff barriers during this period
were quotas imposed on textile and apparel imports under the Multifiber Arrangement (MFA) and its successor, the Agreement on Textile and Clothing (ATC). I therefore re-run the regressions using industry quality
ladders that exclude products that were covered by the MFA/ATC. These HS codes are obtained from
Brambilla, Khandelwal, and Schott (2008). Row 9 indicates that the results are not sensitive to excluding
products that were subject to import quotas.
Finally, the remaining rows of Table 10 construct quality ladders using alternative measures of
dispersion: range, inter-quartile range and the standard deviation of the estimated qualities. All coefficients
in both the OLS and IV regressions are positive and statistically significant. In short, this section shows
that the heterogenous impact of low-wage penetration across industries of varying quality ladders is robust
to several critiques and alternative measures of industries’ quality ladders.

6

Conclusion

This paper develops a procedure to infer the quality of countries’ exports to the U.S. Rather than restricting
the inference to just prices, as is typically the case, I incorporate both price and market share information to
construct a measure of quality that accounts for both horizontal and vertical differentiation. While obviously
more complicated than simply using prices, the method suggests that the scope for quality differentiation
varies substantially across products. Thus, products with large variation in prices could nonetheless possess
little differences in quality.
I illustrate the importance of heterogeneity in the scope for quality differentiation by revisiting the
impact of trade on U.S. industry outcomes. The model predicts that if countries are unable to exploit
comparative-advantage factors to manufacture vertically superior goods, employment and output in these
products is likely to shift to lower cost countries. I find support for this theory by matching the quality
ladders to U.S. industry employment outcomes resulting from increased foreign competition. The impact of
low-wage import penetration on employment varies inversely with the industry’s quality ladder.
In addition to this application, the quality estimates can offer insights into other theories related to
international trade, economic development and industrial organization. For instance, Amiti and Khandelwal
(2009) use the quality measures to show, consistent with the theory developed by Aghion et al. (2009), that

22

the relationship between a country’s pattern of quality upgrading and its level of its domestic competition
depends on the country’s distance to the world quality frontier. Chari and Khandelwal (2009) use these
quality estimates to provide evidence that quality specialization also plays a role in determining rates of
protection across industries (in addition to the well-understood determinants of industry lobbying).
The approach taken in this paper also may be particularly useful in assessing the role of product
quality in influencing trade patterns. For instance, a recent paper by Fajgelbaum, Grossman, and Helpman
(2009) develops a tractable framework for studying trade in horizontally and vertically differentiated products
using a nested logit demand system. In their words, “the close affinity between our analytical framework
and the empirical literature on discrete-choice demands makes the model ripe for empirical application.”

References
Aghion, P., R. Blundell, R. Griffith, P. Howitt, and S. Prantl (2009). The effects of entry on incumbent
innovation and productivity. The Review of Economics and Statistics 91, 20–32.
Amiti, M. and A. Khandelwal (2009). Competition and quality upgrading. Mimeo, Columbia University.
Anderson, S., A. De Palma, and J. Thisse (1987). The CES is a discrete choice model? Economic Letters 24,
139–140.
Anderson, S., A. de Palma, and J. Thisse (1992). Discrete Choice Theory of Product Differentiation. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Antras, P. (2003). Firms, contracts, and trade structure. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1375–1418.
Baldwin, R. and J. Harrigan (2007). Zeros, quality and space: Trade theory and trade evidence. NBER
Working Paper 13214.
Bartelsman, E., R. Becker, and W. Gray (1996). The NBER-CES manufacturing industry database. NBER
Technical Working Paper No. 205.
Bernard, A., B. Jensen, S. Redding, and P. Schott (2007). Firms in international trade. Journal of Economic
Perspectives 21, 105–130.
Bernard, A., J. Jensen, and P. Schott (2006). Survival of the best fit: Exposure to low-wage countries and
the (uneven) growth of U.S. manufacturing. Journal of International Economics 68, 219–237.
Berry, S. (1994). Estimating discrete-choice models of product differentiation. The RAND Journal of
Economics 25, 242–262.

23

Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (1995). Automobile prices in market equilibrium. Econometrica 63,
841–890.
Brambilla, I., A. Khandelwal, and P. Schott (2008). China’s experience under the Multifiber Arrangement
and Agreement on Textile and Clothing. NBER Working Paper 13346.
Bresnahan, T. (1993). Competition and collusion in the american automobile industry: The 1955 price war.
Journal of Industrial Economics 35, 457–482.
Broda, C. and D. Weinstein (2006). Globalization and the gains from variety. Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 541–585.
Cardell, N. S. (1997). Variance components structures for the extreme-value and logistic distributions with
application to models of heterogeneity. Econometric Theory 13, 185–213.
Chari, A. V. and A. Khandelwal (2009). Quality specialization and trade policy. Mimeo, Columbia University.
Davis, D. and D. Weinstein (2001). An account of global factor trade. American Economic Review 91,
1423–1454.
Fajgelbaum, P., G. Grossman, and E. Helpman (2009). Income distribution, product quality and international
trade. Mimeo, Princeton University.
Feenstra, R. (1994). New product varities and the measurement of international prices. American Economic
Review 84, 157–177.
Feenstra, R., J. Romalis, and P. Schott (2002). U.S. imports, exports, and tariff data, 1989-2001. NBER
Working Paper 9387.
Flam, H. and E. Helpman (1987). Vertical product differentiation and north-south trade. American Economic
Review 77, 810–822.
Freeman, R. and L. Katz (1991). Industrial wage and employment determination in an open economy. In
J. Abowd and R. Freeman (Eds.), Immigration, Trade and Labor Market. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
General Accounting Office (1995). U.S. imports: Unit values vary widely for identically classified commodities. Report GAO/GGD-95-90.
Goldberg, P. (1995). Product differentiation and oligopoly in international markets: The case of the u.s.
automobile industry. Econometrica 63, 891–951.

24

Goldberg, P. and N. Pavcnik (2007). Distributional effects of globalization in developing countries. Journal
of Economic Literature 45, 39–82.
Grossman, G. and E. Helpman (1991). Quality ladders and product cycles. Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, 557–586.
Hallak, J. and P. Schott (2007). Estimating cross-country differences in product quality. Yale University,
Mimeo.
Hallak, J. and J. Sivadasan (2009). Firms’ exporting behavior under quality constraints. NBER Working
Paper 14928.
Hallak, J. C. (2006). Product quality and the direction of trade. Journal of International Economics 68,
238–265.
Hausmann, R. and D. Rodrik (2003). Economic development as self-discovery. Mimeo, Harvard University.
Helpman, E., M. Melitz, and Y. Rubinstein (2006). Trading partners and trading volumes. Harvard University, Mimeo.
Hidalgo, C., B. Klinger, A. Barabasi, and R. Hausmann (2007). The product space conditions the development of nations. Science 317, 482–487.
Hummels, D. and P. Klenow (2005). The variety and quality of a nation’s exports. American Economic
Review 95, 704–723.
Hummels, D. and A. Skiba (2004). Shipping the good apples out? An empirical confirmation of the AlchianAllen Conjecture. Journal of Political Economy 112, 1384–1402.
Irwin, D. and N. Pavcnik (2004). Airbus versus boeing revisited: International competition in the aircraft
market. Journal of International Economics 64, 223–245.
Johnson, R. (2009). Trade and prices with heterogeneous firms. Mimeo, University of California at Berkeley.
Kaplan, D. and E. Verhoogen (2005). Exporting and individual wage premia: Evidence from Mexican
employer-employee data. Mimeo, Columbia University.
Kremer, M. (1993). The O-Ring theory of economic development. Quarterly Journal of Economics 108,
551–575.
Krugman, P. (1980). Scale economies, product differentiation and the pattern of trade. American Economic
Review 70, 950–959.

25

Kugler, M. and E. Verhoogen (2008). The quality-complementarity hypothesis: Theory and evidence from
Colombia. NBER Working Paper 14418.
Leamer, E. (1987). Paths of development in the three-factor, n-good general equilibrium model. Journal of
Political Economy 95, 961–999.
Leamer, E. (2000). What’s the use of factor contents? Journal of International Economics 50, 17–49.
Leamer, E. (2006). A flat world, a level playing field, a small world after all, or none of the above? UCLA,
Mimeo.
Linder, S. (1961). An Essay on Trade and Transformation. Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell.
Melitz, M. (2003). The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry productivity.
Econometrica 71, 1695–1725.
Rauch, J. (1999). Networks versus markets in international trade. Journal of International Economics 48,
7–35.
Revenga, A. (1992). Exporting jobs? The impact of import competition on employment and wages in U.S.
manufacturing. Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 255–284.
Rodrik, D. (2006). What’s so special about China’s exports? NBER Working Paper 11947.
Sachs, J. and H. Shatz (1994). Trade and jobs in U.S. manufacturing. Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 1994, 1–69.
Schott, P. (2003). One size fits all? Hecksher-Ohlin specialization in global production. American Economic
Review 93, 686–708.
Schott, P. (2004). Across-product versus within-product specialization in international trade. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 119, 647–678.
Sutton, J. (1991). Price Competition, Advertising, and the Evolution of Concentration. Cambridge: The
MIT Press.
Sutton, J. (1998). Technology and Market Structure: Theory and History. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
UNIDO (2005). Industrial statistics database.
Verhoogen, E. (2008). Trade, quality upgrading, and wage inequality in the Mexican manufacturing sector.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 123, 489–530.

26

7

Tables
Table 1: Low-wage Countries

Afghanistan
Chad
Haiti
Niger
Albania
China
India
Pakistan
Angola
Congo
Kenya
Rwanda
Armenia
Equitorial Guinea
Lao PDR
Samoa
Azerbaijan
Ethiopia
Madagascar
Sierra Leone
Bangladesh
Gambia
Malawi
Sri Lanka
Benin
Georgia
Mali
Sudan
Burkina Faso
Ghana
Mauritania
Togo
Burundi
Guinea
Moldova
Uganda
Cambodia
Guinea‐Bissau
Mozambique
Vietnam
Central African Republic
Guyana
Nepal
Yemen
Notes: Notes: The table provides the list of low‐wage countries used in the paper. Low‐wage countries
are defined as countries with a less than 5 percent of US per capita GDP. Source: Bernard et al (2006).

27

Table 2: Summary Statistics

Industry Products Average
Skill
Capital
Ladder
(SITC‐5)
(HS‐10)
GDP
Intensity Intensity Length
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Sector (SIC‐2)
20 Food
8
37
16,881
0.39
81.4
2.04
22 Textile
85
1,642
13,304
0.15
48.7
2.62
23 Apparel
68
2,560
7,120
0.18
11.2
2.28
24 Lumber
20
262
12,634
0.20
36.3
1.81
25 Furniture
5
72
11,849
0.25
22.1
1.66
26 Paper
38
216
19,766
0.30
126.0
1.88
27 Printing
16
55
17,574
0.87
33.2
1.33
28 Chemicals
231
2,558
20,094
0.75
166.1
2.46
29 Petroleum
7
21
10,952
0.51
509.1
2.64
30 Rubber & Plastic
45
515
14,119
0.29
48.5
2.32
31 Leather
17
403
6,088
0.19
18.6
1.68
32 Stone & Ceramic
57
357
15,133
0.29
78.6
2.15
33 Primary Metal
98
1,372
16,864
0.29
157.1
2.21
34 Fabricated Metal
78
599
17,364
0.35
53.0
1.42
35 Industrial Machinery
169
1,632
21,035
0.57
63.1
2.40
36 Electronic
100
1,325
15,551
0.56
57.7
2.01
37 Transportation
43
372
23,096
0.52
68.6
2.08
38 Instruments
60
715
21,843
0.96
45.3
2.40
39 Miscellaneous
76
375
10,804
0.38
29.7
2.17
Notes: The table provides summary statistics for the two‐digit SIC (1987 revision) sectors.
Column 1 reports the number of SITC industries. Column 2 reports the total number of HS
products. Column 3 reports the weighted average of exporter per capita GDP. Columns 4 and 5
report average skill (ratio of production to non‐production workers) and capital intensity.
Column 6 reports the (log) weighted average industry ladder (see equation (20)). Source: NBER
Manufacturing Database, Feenstra et al. (2002), World Development Indicators and author's
calculations.

28

Table 3: Quality Estimation Results

Statistic
OLS price coefficient
IV price coefficient
*Own price elasticity
Overidentifying restrictions p‐value
1st stage F‐stat p‐value, price
1st stage F‐stat p‐value, nest share
Coefficient on conditional market share
Coefficient on population
T‐statistic of quality estimates
R‐squared
Observations per estimation
Estimations with stat. sig. price coefficient
Observations with stat. sig. price coefficient
Total Estimations
Total Observations across all estimations

Mean
‐0.053
‐0.089
‐1.28
0.234
0.029
0.031
0.42
1.17
10.29
0.24
1,176

1st Quarter 3rd Quartile
‐0.023
‐0.0002
‐0.070
‐0.0003
‐1.44
‐0.20
0.015
0.371
0.000
0.004
0.000
0.006
0.09
0.81
‐1.04
3.81
1.34
10.59
0.04
0.40
223
1,168
0.71
0.81
1,059
1,245,006
Notes: The top panel reports estimation statistics of running equation (15) separately for each of the 1,059
manufacturing industries. The bottom panel reports statistics that apply to the entire sample. The
regressions cluster standard errors by exporting country. * denotes that the elasticity is computed
conditional on a negative price coefficient and σœ(0,1].

29

Median
‐0.003
‐0.009
‐0.58
0.116
0.000
0.000
0.46
0.68
3.89
0.14
509

Table 4: Quality and Factor Endowments

Qualitycht
Regressors
Log (PCGDPct)
Log (K/Lct)

(1)

(2)

Unadjusted Qualitycht
(3)

0.801 ***
0.221

(4)
0.025
0.054

(5)
0.783 ***
0.081

0.804 ***
0.210

Log (Educationct)

0.274
0.207

China Dummy

0.085 **
0.036

Product x Year FEs
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
R‐squared
0.20
0.21
0.32
0.49
0.49
Observations
1,244,475
1,172,510
512,329
1,244,475
1,244,475
Notes: Table regresses the quality estimates on (log) per capita GDP, (log) capital‐labor ratios and
percentage of workforce with tertiary education. Regressions include product‐year fixed effects. Robust
standard errors are clustered by exporting country. Column 4 uses quality estimates that do not control
for hidden varieties (qualities obtained from estimating equation (14)). Column 5 also uses the
unadjusted quality measures and includes a China indicator variable. Regressions include product‐year
fixed effects. Robust standard errors are clustered by exporting country. Significance levels: *** .01 **
.05 * .1. Significance levels: *** .01 ** .05 * .1. Source: World Bank's World Development Indicators and
Penn World Table.

30

Table 5: Relationship between Quality and Price

ln(pricecht)
(1)

Regressors
Qualitycht

‐0.021 *
0.012

Qualitycht x Log (Ladderh)

0.005 **
0.002

Qualitycht x BW Sigmah

(2)
‐0.025 *
0.014
0.006 **
0.003

9.40E‐05
7.20E‐05

Product x Year FEs
yes
yes
R‐squared
0.87
0.86
Observations
1,245,006
1,165,703
Notes: Column 1 regresses variety quality on (log) price and its
interaction with the product's baseline quality ladder. Column 2
includes quality interacted with elasticity of substitution measure
obtained from Broda and Weintein (2004). Products with elasticities
above the 90th percentile (elasticities greater than 76.9) are excluded.
Robust standard errors are clustered by exporting country. Significance
levels: * .1 ** .05 *** .01.

31

Table 6: Quality Ladder and Industry Characteristics

Log (IndLadderm)
(2)
(3)

Regressors

(1)

Log (K/Lm)

0.133 **
0.051

Log (Skillm)

0.138 **
0.060

‐0.105
0.080

‐0.121
0.080

0.934
0.577

0.833
0.580

(Marketing Intensity)m

0.052
0.866

0.238
0.853

(R&D Itensity)m

6.036 **
2.708

4.295
2.662

Log (TFPm)

‐0.015
0.067

0.124 **
0.057

(4)

1.052 *
0.600

(Broda‐Weinstein Elasticity)m

0.016
0.011

0.015
0.011

(Coefficient of Variation of Unit Values) m

0.362
0.230

0.366
0.258

R‐squared
0.03
0.05
0.02
0.05
Observations
325
306
325
306
Notes: Column 1 regresses the industry quality ladder (defined in (20)) on four‐digit SIC factor intensities: capital
intensity, skill intensity and total factor productivity. Capital intensity is the ratio of capital stock to total
employment. Skill intensity is measured as the ratio of non‐production to production workers. Total factor
productivity is obtained from a five‐factor model (see Bartelsman et al (1996)). Factor intensities measured at
1989 values. Column 3 includes marketing expense to sales and R&D to sales ratios obtained from the FTC Line of
Business (1975) survey. Column 3 includes industry‐level elasticity of substitution (obtain from Broda and
Weinstein (2004)) and industry‐level coefficient of variation of unit values. These produt‐level variables are
aggregated to the industry level using the same weights in (20). Robust standard errrors with significance levels: *
.1 ** .05 *** .01.

32

Table 7: Employment Regressions
Log (Employmentmt)
OLS

IV

Regressors

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

OTHPENmt

‐0.493 ***
0.157

‐1.175 ***
0.406

‐0.475 ***
0.132

LWPENmt

‐1.894 ***
0.256

‐2.190 ***
0.360

0.609 **
0.216

0.716 ***
0.234

Log (IndLadderm) x LWPENmt
Log (IndLadderm) x OTHPENmt
Log (K/Lm) x LWPENmt

(5)

(6)

‐0.495 ***
0.157

‐1.774
1.295

‐1.094
2.869

‐0.979 **
0.436

‐4.643 ***
1.194

‐1.897 ***
0.267

‐7.162 **
2.983

‐8.495
5.511

‐11.700 ***
3.010

0.600 **
0.276

0.617 **
0.239

4.620 *
2.414

5.714
4.453

2.879 ***
0.885

0.317 **
0.136

(7)

(8)
‐0.745
0.545
‐5.429 ***
1.753
3.033 **
1.462

‐0.535
1.772
0.918 **
0.361

Log (TFPm) x LWPENmt

2.223 **
0.932
0.329
0.870

7.003 *
3.726

Overidentification p‐value
‐
‐
‐
‐
0.48
0.43
0.38
0.40
Kleibergen‐Paap F statistic
‐
‐
‐
‐
0.61
0.61
18.40
3.52
Industry Fixed Effects
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Year Fixed Effects
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
R‐squared
0.112
0.120
0.124
0.112
0.013
0.009
0.018
0.020
Observations
2,585
2,585
2,585
2,585
2,585
2,585
2,585
2,585
Notes: The dependent variable for each regression is the four‐digit SIC industry (log) employment. The first column regresses employment on import penetration
from the rest of the world (OTHPEN), low‐wage import penetration (LWPEN) and the interaction of LWPEN with the industry quality ladder. Column 2 includes the
OTHPEN‐ladder interaction. Column 3 includes the interaction of LWPEN with initial industry capital intensity (in 1989) and column 4 includes the interaction of
LWPEN with intial industry TFP (in 1989). Columns 5‐8 present the IV results. The instruments are weighted average tariff rates, exchange rates and freight rates for
low‐wage countries and the rest of the world. Robust standard errors are clustered at the two‐digit SIC. Significance levels: * .1 ** .05 *** .01.

33

Table 8: Output Regressions
Log (Outputmt)
IV

OLS
Regressors

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

OTHPENmt

‐0.508 **
0.200

‐1.050 **
0.497

‐0.485 **
0.181

LWPENmt

‐2.008 ***
0.354

‐2.243 ***
0.404

0.699 **
0.307

0.783 **
0.308

Log (IndLadderm) x LWPENmt
Log (IndLadderm) x OTHPENmt
Log (K/Lm) x LWPENmt

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

‐0.487 **
0.190

‐0.430
1.980

1.159
3.834

0.231
0.284

0.321
0.857

‐5.483 **
1.942

‐1.978 ***
0.281

‐7.941 **
4.016

0.687 *
0.367

0.634 **
0.301

5.687 *
3.227

0.252
0.186

‐11.100
7.713

‐16.200 ***
3.593

‐6.619 **
2.603

8.241
6.300

3.671 ***
1.371

4.439 **
1.971

‐1.248
2.178
1.160
0.749

Log (TFPm) x LWPENmt

3.562 ***
1.379
‐2.589 ***
0.800

8.813 *
4.973

Overidentification p‐value
0.21
0.18
0.44
0.36
‐
‐
‐
‐
Kleibergen‐Paap F‐statistic
0.61
0.61
18.40
3.52
‐
‐
‐
‐
Industry Fixed Effects
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Year Fixed Effects
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
R‐squared
0.181
0.185
0.195
0.184
0.006
0.003
0.016
0.015
Observations
2,585
2,585
2,585
2,585
2,585
2,585
2,585
2,585
Notes: The dependent variable for each regression is the four‐digit SIC industry (log) output. The first column regresses output on import penetration from the
rest of the world (OTHPEN), low‐wage import penetration (LWPEN) and the interaction of LWPEN with the industry quality ladder. Column 2 includes the OTHPEN‐
ladder interaction. Column 3 includes the interaction of LWPEN with initial industry capital intensity (in 1989) and column 4 includes the interaction of LWPEN
with intial industry TFP (in 1989). Columns 5‐8 present the IV results. The instruments are weighted average tariff rates, exchange rates and freight rates for low‐
wage countries and the rest of the world. Robust standard errors are clustered at the two‐digit SIC. Significance levels: * .1 ** .05 *** .01.

34

Table 9: Employment and Output Regressions, SIC2-Year Fixed Effects: IV

IV ‐ Log (Employmentm)

IV ‐ Log (Outputm)

Regressors

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

OTHPENmt

‐0.720
1.234

‐0.512
0.496

‐0.499
0.675

‐0.066
1.529

0.209
0.345

0.188
0.699

LWPENmt

‐4.398 ***
1.344

‐4.531 ***
1.680

‐4.486 ***
1.307

‐13.000 ***
2.124

‐4.471 **
1.874

2.764 **
1.357

3.275 **
1.590

2.082 **
1.059

3.045 **
1.204

Log (IndLadderm) x LWPENmt
Log (K/Lm) x LWPENmt

2.706 **
1.360

‐10.600 **
4.625
2.148 **
0.954
2.121
1.440

Log (TFPm) x LWPENmt

2.946 ***
0.890
6.777
4.717

6.452
4.583

Overidentification p‐value
0.36
0.35
0.59
0.281
0.339
0.435
Kleibergen‐Paap F‐statistic
1.13
2.91
36.40
1.13
2.91
36.4
Industry Fixed Effects
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Two‐Digit SIC x Year FEs
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
R‐squared
0.006
0.020
0.009
0.010
0.0004
0.003
Obs.
2,585
2,585
2,585
2,585
2,585
2,585
Notes: The dependent variables for each regression in columns 1‐3 and columns 4‐6 are the four‐digit SIC industry (log) employment
and output, respectively. Each regression includes two‐digit SIC‐year pair fixed effects. The first column regresses employment on
import penetration from the rest of the world (OTHPEN), low‐wage import penetration (LWPEN) and the interaction of LWPEN with
the industry quality ladder. Column 2 includes the interaction of LWPEN with initial industry capital intensity (in 1989) and column 3
includes the interaction of LWPEN with intial industry TFP (in 1989). Columns 4‐6 present the IV results. The instruments are
weighted average tariff rates, exchange rates and freight rates for low‐wage countries and the rest of the world. Robust standard
errors are clustered at the two‐digit SIC. Significance levels: * .1 ** .05 *** .01.

35

Table 10: Employment Regressions, Robustness Checks

Regression Method
OLS
IV

LWPEN ‐Ladder Interaction
(1)

Quality identified from baseline instruments and tariffs

0.501 *
0.271

(2)

Product Count

0.000
0.001

‐0.005
0.005

(3)

Variety Count

‐0.440
0.348

0.690
0.948

(4)

Price

(5)

Market Share

(6)

Quality excluding residuals

0.646 ***
0.217

4.571 *
2.435

(7)

GDP‐Quality Ladder

0.609 **

4.620 *

0.230

2.414

‐0.910 *
0.471

‐1.591
1.141

(8)

Broda‐Weinstein Ladder

(9)

Exclude MFA products

1.285
1.227
12.664 ***
3.415

2.755 **
1.328

7.436 *
4.129
21.512
21.914

0.484 **

2.711 **

0.232

1.378

(10)

Range

0.639 **
0.233

3.888 ***
1.339

(11)

Inter‐quartile Range

0.650 **
0.239

5.236 **
2.667

(12)

Standard Deviation

0.751 **
0.271

5.061 **
2.417

Notes: Table re‐runs the employment regression in equation (23) and reports the industry ladder
interaction with LWPEN coefficient for alternative definitions of the quality ladder. Row 1 re‐estimates
equation (15) to include tariffs as additional instruments. Row 2 constructs the ladder from the number of
countries (i.e., varieties) within the product and then aggregates to the industry according to equation (20).
Row 3 counts the number of products within the four‐digit industry code. Rows 4 and 5 construct the ladder
from the dispersion of prices and market shares within products, respectively. Row 6 define the ladder from
quality estimates exclusive of the residual: lcht = l1,ch+l2,t. Row 7 re‐runs equation (15) but uses GDP instead
of population to control for hidden varieties. Row 8 constructs the quality ladder from the HS‐level
elasticities of substitution estimated by Broda and Weinstein (2006). Row 9 excludes HS codes that were
subject to quotas under the MFA in the construction of the industry ladders; the HS codes that were subject
to quotas are taken from Brambilla, Khandelwal and Schott (2008). The remaining rows use the full range,
inter‐quartile range and standard deviation of qualities within products. Robust standard errors are
clustered at the two‐digit SIC for each regression. Significance levels: * .1 ** .05 *** .01.

36

Figure 1: Prices, Market Shares and Quality

Transmission Receivers Exceeding 400 MHZ

VEN

TZA

AUS

FRA

DNK

JOR

ITA

NLD

DEU

ISL

CAN

ISR

NZL

NOR

CHE

GBR

AUT

ARG

KOR

TAI

BRA

IND

FIN

SWE

JPN

SGP

MEX

MYS

IRL

THA

IDN

ZAF

HKG

PHL

CHN

(Log) Price/Quantity, Quality
−20 −10
0
10
20

HS 8525203080

Country
Price

Quantity

Quality

Quality Best Fit

Footwear with Plastic Soles, Leather uppers

ARG
ALB
IND
ZAF
UKR
CHN
LKA
TAI
HKG
ROM
POL
IDN
BGR
URY
BRA
COL
VNM
DOM
BLR
PAN
LBY
ESP
GBR
GRC
MAC
BHS
TUR
MEX
TUN
CZR
KOR
PHL
SVN
ITA
THA
DNK
MCD
SVK
NZL
SEN
MYS
KNA
AUS
SLV
CHE
PER
SWE
PRT
DEU
CAN
SLE
HUN
VEN
CYP
MDA
MAR
ISR
NLD
HRV
AUT
FRA
BEL

(Log) Price/Quantity, Quality
−5
0
5
10

HS 6403999065

Country
Price

Quantity

Quality

Quality Best Fit

The graphs show the price, quantity and estimated quality (and 95 percent confidence interval) for
countries for HS 8525203080 (“Transmission Receivers Exceeding 400 MHZ”) and HS 6403999065
(“Footwear with Plastic Soles, Leather Uppers”) in 2001. Countries are ordered by unit value.

37

