NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LOCAL DIVIDEND CLIENTELES
Bo Becker
Zoran Ivkovi
Scott Weisbenner
Working Paper 15175
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15175

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2009

We thank Heitor Almeida, Vidhan Goyal, Denis Gromb, Christian Leuz, Andrew Metrick, Joshua
Pollet, Raghu Rajan, Xuan Tian, Michael Weisbach, Joshua White, seminar participants at City University
of Hong Kong, Emory University, Harvard Business School, London Business School, McGill University,
Massey University, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore Management University, Temple
University, University of Hong Kong, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, University of Toronto,
Victoria University of Wellington, Yale University, as well as participants at NBER Corporate Finance
Meeting (March 2007), American Finance Association Meetings (January 2008), FIRS Finance Conference
(June 2008), and Florida State University Beach Conference (April 2009) for comments and suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research. An Internet Appendix containing supporting material is available at http://www.afajof.org/supplements.asp.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Bo Becker, Zoran Ivkovi, and Scott Weisbenner. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Local Dividend Clienteles
Bo Becker, Zoran Ivkovi , and Scott Weisbenner
NBER Working Paper No. 15175
July 2009, Revised January 2010
JEL No. G30,G35
ABSTRACT
We exploit demographic variation to identify the effect of dividend demand on corporate payout policy.
Retail investors tend to hold local stocks and older investors prefer dividend-paying stocks. Together,
these tendencies generate geographically-varying demand for dividends. Firms headquartered in areas
in which seniors constitute a large fraction of the population are more likely to pay dividends, initiate
dividends, and have higher dividend yields. We also provide indirect evidence as to why managers
may respond to the demand for dividends from local seniors. Overall, these results are consistent with
the notion that the investor base affects corporate policy choices.

Bo Becker
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field Road
Baker Library 349
Boston, MA 02163
bbecker@hbs.edu
Zoran Ivkovi
Department of Finance
Michigan State University
315 Eppley Center
East Lansing, MI 48824
ivkovich@bus.msu.edu

Scott Weisbenner
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Department of Finance
340 Wohlers Hall, MC-706
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
weisbenn@illinois.edu

This paper examines the role of investor demand in shaping corporate payout policy.
Miller and Modigliani (1961) suggest that matching takes place between investor
clienteles who demand dividends and those firms that find it less costly to pay them,
that is, companies set payout policy and investors sort based on their preferences for
dividends. On the other hand, firms may actively respond to the preferences of their
current shareholders. The empirical patterns will be the same regardless of the direction
of the underlying causal relation—payout policies match investor preferences, but the
implications for understanding corporate policy are very different. For example, if
companies adjust policy in response to the composition of their current investors, then
it clearly matters who the shareholders actually are.
We test whether shareholder demand for dividends influences firm payout
policy. The challenge is to quantify dividend demand and, in particular, find a variable
that reflects investor demand for dividends, but does not, at the same time, also proxy
for dividend supply from firms (firms might be more likely to pay or supply dividends
because of a lack of investment opportunities).
We seek to identify the effect of dividend demand on firm policy by exploiting
geographical variation in the population of retail investors. Our identification strategy
is based upon two notions. First, seniors have a preference for dividend-paying stocks.1
Several reasons have been proposed for this preference. Miller and Modigliani (1961)
and Shefrin and Thaler (1988), among others, stress the role of life-cycle
considerations—older investors may prefer dividend-paying stocks for consumption
purposes. Thaler and Shefrin (1981) further point out that self-control and regret
avoidance may motivate a dividend preference (consume from dividends and thus
avoid the temptation to liquidate shares), Shefrin and Statman (1984) stress mental
accounting (dividends and capital gains are in two separate “mental accounts” and are
thus potentially viewed and treated differently), while Scholz (1992) highlights a tax
rationale. Because older investors likely have more pronounced needs to “cash out”
larger portions of their portfolios for consumption and also likely have lower tax rates
on dividends relative to younger investors, all of these motivations suggest greater

2

demand for dividends from senior investors. In this paper, we do not address the
reasons for seniors’ preference for dividends; rather, we build upon the strong
empirical evidence, provided in Graham and Kumar (2006), of the existence of an agebased dividend clientele among retail investors. The substantial demographic variation
in population age structure across the U.S. (see, e.g., Becker (2007)) thus lays a
foundation for an identification strategy.
Second, household stock ownership tends to be local. The tendency of individual
investors to hold stocks of local companies in the U.S. has been reported by Huberman
(2001) and Ivković and Weisbenner (2005); it has been documented in other countries as
well (e.g., Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001), and Massa and Simonov (2006)). Variation in
the local-age structure, therefore, induces differential dividend preferences across
locations. Companies located in the areas with more seniors will face higher demand for
dividends. Thus, we can identify a component of the dividend demand facing
individual firms. Our proxy for this demand is the variable Local Seniors, defined
henceforth as the fraction of residents who are 65 years old or older in the county in
which a company is headquartered. We use Local Seniors to test whether
geographically-varying dividend demand is a determinant of payout policy for U.S.
corporations, thus building upon the Miller and Modigliani (1961) framework.2
Our dividend demand hypothesis requires that a couple of conditions be
satisfied. First, there must be a sorting friction such as geographically-segmented
markets. This assumption seems less appropriate for well-known members of the S&P
500 index such as Microsoft or IBM. However, research suggests that location matters
for many firms in terms of their access to financing (Becker (2007)), their market
valuation (Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2008)), the correlation pattern in their stock returns
(Pirinsky and Wang (2006)), their liquidity (Loughran and Shultz (2005)), and the
composition of their shareholders (Ivković and Weisbenner (2005)). Second,
management must perceive some benefit to responding to the dividend demand from
local seniors, or some cost in not doing so. As discussed below, we provide suggestive
evidence for this in the paper.

3

Our identification strategy follows a three-tiered approach. First, we establish a
strong correlation between a firm’s dividend policy and the fraction of seniors in the
firm’s local community. Second, we provide a wide range of robustness tests which, in
their totality, enable us to better ascertain whether companies pay dividends in
response to the demand from their shareholders (who are more likely to be local seniors
in the areas in which the fraction of seniors is relatively high) or whether the presence of
local seniors proxies for the companies’ poor investment opportunities that compel
them to pay dividends (the dividend-supply alternative explanation). We also employ
specifications that require a substantially higher hurdle to identify this “local seniors
effect,” such as examining how dividend policy adapts to a change in the local
environment (when the fraction of seniors in the county changes or when the company
moves its headquarters). Finally, we provide indirect evidence as to why managers may
care about adjusting dividend policy to match the demand generated by local seniors.
In the first tier of our identification strategy (identifying the underlying
correlation), we show that companies headquartered in counties with a large fraction of
seniors are more likely to pay dividends, more likely to initiate dividends, and pay a
higher dividend yield. Increasing the proportion of seniors in a county by one standard
deviation (an increase by 3.1 percentage points of the population in the county)
increases the probability that a local firm is a dividend payer by approximately 1.8
percentage points, increases the probability that it might initiate dividends over the next
year by approximately 1.0 percentage points, and increases the dividend yield by
approximately 0.23% of market value. These results are obtained after controlling for
firm-specific characteristics, as well as state-year and industry-year fixed effects in
payout policy. Accordingly, any variable that varies only by state and year is absorbed
in the state-year fixed effects and cannot explain any of our regression findings. The
same holds for any variable that varies only by industry and year. Simply put, our
results are not obtained by comparing firms, for example, in Florida (the most senior
state) with those in Alaska (the least senior state).

Rather, they are identified by

differences in the proportion of seniors across counties within a state in a given year.

4

The effect of Local Seniors on dividend initiations is particularly strong given the
dividend initiation rate is roughly 2% per year over our sample—a one-standard
deviation increase in Local Seniors increases the likelihood of a dividend initiation by
50% of the baseline effect. To put this in perspective, a one-standard deviation increase
of the fraction of seniors in a company’s community has the same effect on the
likelihood that the company initiates dividends as does a one-standard deviation
increase in market capitalization, or ageing from being publicly-listed for 6-10 years to
being publicly-listed for 16-20 years. Determinants of the dividend initiation decision
are particularly relevant because, given the general “stickiness” of dividends (Lintner
(1956) and Brav, Graham, Harvey, and Michaely (2005)), the decision to initiate
dividends, practically speaking, really is a decision to commit to a long stream of cash
outlays (as opposed to a simple one-year commitment that can be easily reversed).
A natural concern with these results and the associated dividend-demand
interpretation is that some omitted variable might be the true driver of dividend policy.
If such a variable were correlated with the presence of seniors in communities, our
results would be spurious. For example, a dividend supply-based alternative theory
suggests that Local Seniors might proxy for areas with low growth prospects, in which
case it would characterize the areas in which companies are paying dividends because
they are facing limited future economic prospects.
Whereas it is difficult to rule out completely that such an alternative explanation
could play some role in explaining our results, in the second tier of our identification
strategy we provide evidence that helps differentiate our demand-based explanation
from the supply-based alternative theory and thus guides us in interpreting the
correlation between dividend policy and Local Seniors. We conduct a number of
additional tests and alternative specifications. Some of these additional analyses simply
add additional control variables to the baseline model. Others seek to identify subsets of
companies for which the correlation between dividend policy and Local Seniors should
be stronger (or weaker, or absent) under the dividend-demand hypothesis, whereas the
supply-based alternative predicts no variation in the effect of Local Seniors. In addition

5

to these robustness checks, we also employ different specifications that substantially
raise the hurdle of finding any effect of Local Seniors on payout policy by examining
how dividend policy adapts to a change in the local environment, either through the
fraction of seniors changing in a given community over time or through the change in
the presence of local seniors because the company moved its corporate headquarters.
Taken in their totality, the results obtained from this battery of robustness tests
and alternative specifications are informative in interpreting the likely mechanism
behind the relation between dividend policy and the presence of local seniors. For
example, we find no relation between the presence of local seniors and share
repurchases, investment, and net income (as would be predicted if the presence of local
seniors were related to the presence of mature companies that generate high cash flows,
but have limited investment opportunities)—the only relation is with dividend policy.
Our results are robust to a wide range of economic and demographic county-level
controls and we confirm that the correlation between dividend payout policy and the
presence of seniors in the community is not driven by firms in economically stagnating
counties.
Implicit behind the dividend-demand explanation is the presence of a market
friction such as geographically-segmented markets (for example, companies relying on
“locals” as their shareholders/financiers). These frictions and, hence, local shareholders,
probably are not equally important for all firms. In particular, we hypothesize that the
dividend policy of four subsets of firms should display greater sensitivity to the
presence of local seniors: (1) small companies (these companies generally are more
reliant on a local shareholder base and lack a “national” following); (2) companies
located in the counties in which there is a strong preference for owning local stocks in
general (unrelated to local seniors’ demand for dividends); (3) banks (a subset of
companies for which local seniors are also likely important customers because they
provide a large share of bank deposits, thus providing management a further incentive
to appease any preference for dividends); and (4) companies located in communities
with few other nearby companies around to satisfy the local investors’ demand for

6

dividends (akin to the “only-game-in-town” effect of Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2008)).
The supply-based alternative has no such predictions along these four dimensions
because the supply of dividends (i.e., the companies’ ability to pay dividends) should
not depend upon the role of local senior investors. Consistent with the “dividenddemand” hypothesis, we find that the effect of Local Seniors is stronger for all four of
the subsample splits identified above.
Finally, in the third tier of our identification strategy, we shed some light on an
important piece of the puzzle—why managers may care about responding to this
dividend demand. Our first finding is that local senior investors have lower stock
turnover. That is, once senior investors buy shares of a local stock, they tend to hold
them for a while, more than twice as long as average retail investors do. We also
document valuation effects on the ex-dividend day that are consistent with the localseniors effect.
Overall, the analyses presented in this paper suggest that corporations appear to
face varying incentives to pay dividends depending on their location, and that these
varying incentives seem to affect dividend policy, particularly the decision to start
paying dividends, a decision that has long-lasting consequences for the corporation. We
can detect such effects on payout policy in a given cross-section because there is
substantial variation in demographics across counties in the U.S.3 While the dividenddemand hypothesis has strong cross-sectional predictions (companies located in the
areas with larger fractions of seniors are more likely to pay dividends), it is unlikely to
have affected the aggregate time series of dividend payments. Over the period from 1980
to 2000, although the age structure of some counties has changed in a non-trivial way,
the average fraction of seniors in the counties in which firms are located has changed
little (from 11.1% of county population in 1980 to 11.8% in both 1990 and 2000). As
Fama and French (2001) point out, changes in the industry composition of firms over
time have led to a strong time-series decline in aggregate dividend payouts—this
certainly overwhelms any demographic tendencies over the sample period.

7

Our result that investor preferences can be an important determinant of
corporate decisions complements findings from several recent studies. For example, our
work is related to research on the time-series variation in the demand for dividends
(Baker and Wurgler (2004a, 2004b)). Similar to Baker and Wurgler, we conclude that
dividend demand drives some part of the variation in payout policy (in our case, crosssectional variation). Our paper is also related to Perez-Gonzales (2003) and Brown,
Liang, and Weisbenner (2007), which examine firms’ responses to tax changes based on
the presence of large shareholders and CEOs as owners, respectively, examples of the
type of research called for in Graham (2003). Similar to these papers, we conclude that
owners matter for corporate policies, but, in this case, these are retail investors. Finally,
our results suggest that there is important geographical variation in the financial
conditions facing firms, consistent with the findings reported in, for example, Jayaratne
and Strahan (1996), Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2004), Becker (2007), and Hong,
Kubik, and Stein (2008).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section I describes our data sources.
Section II presents evidence on the effect of Local Seniors on firm dividend policy with
several robustness checks. Section III describes evidence as to why managers may care
about this dividend demand, and Section IV concludes.

I. Data Sources and Main Sample Overview
A. Data Sources
We compile data from several sources. Stock returns and ex-dividend date
information come from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). Firm-level
accounting information, as well as firm location information (the county in which the
headquarters are located), come from Compustat. Our use of the location of corporate
headquarters follows previous studies in the locality literature (Coval and Moskowitz
(1999, 2001) and Ivković and Weisbenner (2005)).

8

Geographic data on seniors at the county level and other county-level
demographic variables come from the 1980, 1990, and 2000 U.S. Censuses. As discussed
before, we define the variable Local Seniors as the population of individuals aged 65 or
older living in a county divided by the total population of that county. The Local
Seniors variable is slow-moving and consecutive cross sections generally are very
similar (the correlation between the county-level fraction of seniors in the 1990 and 2000
censuses is 0.94, and the correlation between the 1980 and 2000 censuses is 0.84). We
also collect median house prices, median income, and educational composition of the
county (the fraction of the population completing grades 1-8, grades 9-11, high school,
some college, and finished a bachelor’s degree or higher) for each census year.
Some of our analyses involve the use of a data set of the positions and trades
made by tens of thousands of individuals through a large discount broker in the period
from 1991 to 1996.4 These data are used for two primary purposes. First, we use them to
establish the degree of local bias that prevails in a county. Second, we use detailed trade
data to draw inferences regarding the trading propensities of local seniors relative to
those exhibited by other individual investors who invested through the discount
broker.
In our analyses of dividend policy changes for companies that moved their
corporate headquarters, we use Compact Disclosure to ascertain likely movers. The
information provided through this data source was cross-checked with other sources to
confirm the moves.5
TABLE I ABOUT HERE
B. Main Sample Overview
Table I presents summary statistics for payout policy variables and key countylevel variables. The sample consists of pooled cross-sections for 1980, 1990, and 2000.
Summary statistics for payout policy variables are presented in Panel A and are
expressed in percentage points. Dividend Payer is an indicator variable equal to 0 for
non-payers and equal to 100 for dividend payers. Dividend Initiation is an indicator

9

variable defined for non-payers at the end-of-year t. Its values are 0 for the companies
that remain non-payers in year t+1, and 100 for non-payers at the end-of-year t that start
to pay a dividend in year t+1. Dividend Yield is the dollar amount of dividends paid
out in year t+1 as a percent of the end-of-year t equity market value. Repurchase Yield
is defined analogously for share repurchases in year t+1. All of our payout policy
variables (our left-hand side variables) are measured the year after our firm-level and
county-level controls (the right-hand-side variables). Thus, the payouts in 1981, 1991,
and 2001 are related to the firm-level and county-level characteristics in the 1980, 1990,
and 2000 cross sections, respectively. The average value of 47.4 for the variable
Dividend Payer indicates that 47.4% of companies paid dividends in the following year.
Similarly, in our sample 2.0% of companies not paying any dividends in a given year
paid dividends the next year (Dividend Initiation). The average dividend yield across
all firms (non-payers as well as payers) is 1.9%, and the repurchase yield is 1.1%.
Summary statistics for key geographical variables are presented in Panel B of
Table I. The Local Seniors variable (the proportion of county population aged 65 or
older) averages 0.116 across all sample observations. The range is wide, from 0.022 to
0.321, and the standard deviation is 0.031. Aside from summary statistics pertaining to
the proportion of seniors in counties, the table also lists summary statistics for the
inverse of the number of firms in the county (the number of firms from Compustat with
their headquarters—“company location”—located in the county). The average is 0.102
(corresponding to 10 companies in the county), and the range is from 0.002 to 1
(corresponding to 500 companies and one company in the county, respectively).

II. Results
A. Baseline Results
Our baseline test of the hypothesis that local dividend demand determined by
demographics helps explain corporate payout policy is to verify whether there is a
positive relation between our three dividend payout policy variables and Local Seniors.

10

In an ideal econometric framework, we would use the Local Seniors variable as an
instrument for dividend demand in payout policy regressions. Because we do not have
an explicit measure for dividend demand, we instead estimate payout policy
regressions with the Local Seniors variable (that is, we essentially estimate “reducedform” regressions). We employ a linear-regression (OLS) framework on the sample of
pooled observations from the 1980, 1990, and 2000 cross-sections, using three measures
of dividends: an indicator variable for paying dividends (Dividend Payer), an indicator
variable for paying dividends conditional upon having not paid dividends the previous
fiscal year (Dividend Initiation), and the dividend yield variable (Dividend Yield).6 All
of these dividend policy variables are expressed in percentage points.
Our payout policy dependent variables, defined in the previous section, are
measured one year after our Local Seniors variable and our firm-level controls. In
addition to Local Seniors, all the specifications feature a multitude of other firm-specific
controls. Net Income, Cash, and Debt (long-term) are all normalized by total assets. Q is
defined as the market-to-book ratio, that is, the market value of equity plus the book
value of liabilities divided by the book value of assets. Volatility refers to the standard
deviation of monthly stock returns over the preceding two years. Two-Year Lagged
Return refers to monthly stock returns over the preceding two years. Asset Growth is
the logarithm of the growth rate of assets over the prior year. Age-group indicator
variables (for corporations publicly listed 1-5, 6-10, 11-15, 16-20, and 21+ years ago),
industry-year interaction indicator variables (fixed effects for 2-digit level SIC industries
interacted with year), and state-year interaction indicator variables are also included in
all three specifications. All independent variables, when appropriate, are winsorized at
the 1st and 99th percentile levels.
State-year interaction indicator variables play a particularly important role
because they absorb all variation in dividend behavior between states in a given year.
This implies that none of our results are identified from, for example, differences across
Florida and Utah, but, rather, from county-to-county variation within states. Similarly,
industry-year interaction indicator variables ensure that our results are not identified

11

from, for example, technology companies being located in the areas with many young
people, and construction companies being located in the areas with many seniors.
Finally, we allow for heteroskedasticity and potential correlation across the
observations associated with the same firm when estimating the standard errors.
Specifically, we use the Huber and White sandwich estimator to estimate robust
standard errors with clustering by firm.
TABLE II ABOUT HERE

The results are presented in Table II. Column (1) reports the results for the
Dividend Payer dependent variable. The estimated coefficients pertaining to traditional
independent variables line up with expectations and previous studies. For example,
firm-level volatility, asset growth, and leverage all reduce the probability of paying
dividends, while firm size (market value) and firm age (unreported in the table for
brevity) increase the likelihood of paying dividends. The coefficient associated with
Local Seniors is 59.3 and is highly statistically significant (p-value < 0.01). The
interpretation of the coefficient is that moving from a county with no seniors to a
county with only seniors increases the likelihood that the company pays dividends by
59.3 percentage points. Thus, although Local Seniors is a noisy proxy for “dividend
demand” from shareholders, we find both statistically and economically significant
effects of Local Seniors on corporate dividend policy.
Column (2) examines dividend initiations. The sample is smaller because it
includes in each cross-section only the prior calendar year’s non-dividend payers. The
coefficient associated with Local Seniors is large and significant, implying that the
probability of initiating dividends is much higher for corporations located in counties
with a large fraction of seniors. The dependent variable in column (3) is Dividend Yield,
that is, total dividend payout divided by market value (expressed in percentage points).
Once again, Local Seniors has a positive and significant effect.
In Table IA.II of the Internet Appendix, we provide the economic magnitude of
the effects of Local Seniors and various firm-specific controls on company dividend

12

policy by analyzing the predicted effect on dividends resulting from a one-standard
deviation change in a particular variable (using the estimated coefficients from Table
II).7 For the simple Dividend Payer variable, the effect of Local Seniors is larger than
those of some firm characteristics commonly included in payout policy regressions, but
it is smaller than those of stock return volatility, size, Q (proxied for by the market-tobook ratio), and leverage. A one-standard deviation increase in Local Seniors (0.031)
boosts the likelihood of paying dividends by 1.8 percentage points, or four percent of
the sample average likelihood of paying dividends. An increase in Local Seniors by one
standard deviation is associated with an increase in the dividend yield by 0.23%, a 12
percent increase relative to the sample average yield of 1.9%.
Particularly striking is the economic magnitude of the effect of Local Seniors on
the dividend initiation decision. An increase of one standard deviation in Local Seniors
is associated with a 1.0 percentage-point increase in the probability of dividend
initiation for non-payers, an economically substantial effect that is equal to one-half of
the average rate of initiation of 2.0% over the sample. To put this effect of Local Seniors
on dividend initiations in perspective, it is of the same magnitude as a one-standard
deviation increase in firm size (market capitalization) or the firm ageing from being
publicly-listed for 6-10 years to being publicly-listed for 16-20 years (which is associated
with a 1.1 percentage point increase in the likelihood of the firm starting to pay
dividends). The effect of Local Seniors is twice the magnitude of one-standard deviation
changes in cash holdings, debt, volatility, and prior two-year returns.
These results provide evidence of an effect of Local Seniors on dividend policy.8
The estimated coefficients suggest an economically important relation between
corporate payout behavior and local dividend demand, particularly for dividend
initiations. Given the “stickiness” of dividend policy, understanding what causes
companies to start paying dividends in the first place is crucial for better understanding
why they are paying dividends today.

13

Whereas these findings are consistent with individual-investor demand driving
corporate payout policy decisions, this clearly is not the only plausible interpretation of
our results. We next consider potential alternative explanations for these results.
B. Toward Ruling Out a Supply-Based Alternative Hypothesis
Having established the baseline result—the presence of a strong correlation
between dividend payout behavior and Local Seniors, we proceed with the second tier
of our identification strategy, in an effort to differentiate our demand-based explanation
from the supply-based alternative theory. Indeed, it is possible that some omitted
variable, correlated with Local Seniors, might be the true driver of dividend policy. For
example, Local Seniors might proxy for areas with low growth prospects and, perhaps,
high profitability. A supply-based alternative explanation would suggest that the
companies located in counties with many seniors might have high profitability, low
investment, and high payouts (perhaps both in the forms of dividends and share
repurchases). On the other hand, our demand-based hypothesis predicts a positive
effect of Local Seniors on dividends, as established in the previous section, and no effect
of Local Seniors on company characteristics or policies affected by supply-based
alternatives such as share repurchases, profits, and investment.
To differentiate between these alternative explanations, we relate share
repurchase behavior, investment, and net income to Local Seniors (as well as the same
set of independent variables as in the analyses reported in Table II and discussed in the
previous section). The dependent variables in these analyses are Repurchase Yield (the
dollar amount of stock repurchases made in year t+1 as a percent of the end-of-year t
equity market value), Investment (capital expenditure in year t+1 as a percent of the
end-of-year t assets), and Net Income (net income in year t+1 as a percent of the end-ofyear t assets).
In short, the results, presented in Table III, do not offer any support for the
supply-based alternative. Indeed, there is no effect of Local Seniors on the Repurchase
Yield (either measured over the next year or averaged across the next three years to

14

address fluctuations in share repurchases on a year-to-year basis), Investment, or Net
Income.
TABLE III ABOUT HERE

C. Economically Growing Areas and Additional County-Level Controls
Another way to differentiate between demand- and supply-based explanations is
to consider a local economic environment that, very likely, is growing (or, at least, is not
stagnating). Governed by the notion that a decline in the total number of young
residents (those younger than 40 years of age) in the county since the last census is a
proxy for economic stagnation (for example, rural, declining areas with mature, “oldeconomy” companies), for the purposes of these analyses we remove the observations
associated with such county-year combinations from the sample.9 That is, in a given
cross-section, we drop firms located in the counties in which the fraction of seniors may
be high because young people left to find better opportunities elsewhere. If the relation
between dividends and the presence of local seniors is driven by mature firms in
declining areas, the effect of Local Seniors should disappear when estimated over the
“growing” subsample. The demand-based explanation, however, still applies in the
remaining sample and thus predicts a positive relation between dividends and Local
Seniors.
Table IV features the results of regressions by subsample. For ease of
comparison, columns (1), (4), and (7) replicate Table II. The columns featuring the
regressions analogous to those reported in Table II, but estimated over the growingcounty subsample—columns (2), (5), and (8)—report coefficients associated with Local
Seniors that are similar in magnitude to those resulting from the estimation based upon
the full sample (and are also highly statistically significant).
Returning to the full sample, a further robustness test serves to alleviate the
concern that Local Seniors might proxy for some observable demographic and
economic variables that capture the local environment in which firms operate. The
remaining three columns in Table IV—columns (3), (6), and (9)—feature the results

15

based upon such a specification, in which the set of independent variables has been
augmented by additional demographic controls (logarithm of county population and
the educational composition of the county—the fraction of the population having
finished college, the fraction having finished high school, and so on) and economic
controls (the average of each of the firm-level variables across all companies located in
the county, as well as the share of local companies in each industry as classified by the
two-digit SIC code, median house prices in the county, and median income in the
county). Once again, the regression coefficients are quite similar, both in terms of their
magnitude and significance, to those resulting from the baseline specification.
TABLE IV ABOUT HERE

D. Differences in Companies’ Responses to Local Dividend Demand
As discussed in the introduction, the relation between corporate policy and the
preferences of the local community likely varies across firms. In particular, we
hypothesize that the dividend policy of four subsets of firms should display greater
sensitivity to the presence of local seniors. The first subset is small corporations,
companies generally more reliant on local shareholder bases and characterized by a lack
of a “national” following. The second subset is firms located in the counties in which
there is a strong preference for owning local stocks in general (unrelated to local
seniors’ demand for dividends). The third subset is corporations in the banking
industry, a subset of firms for which local seniors likely also are important customers
because they provide a large share of bank deposits (thus providing further incentive to
appease any preference for dividends).10 Finally, the fourth subset is companies located
in counties with few other nearby corporations to satisfy the demand for dividends of
local investors (akin to the “only-game-in-town” effect of Hong, Kubik, and Stein
(2008)). The supply-based alternative has no such predictions along these four
dimensions because the supply of dividends (that is, the companies’ ability to pay
dividends) should not depend upon the role of local investors.

16

Table V features the related results. The first column restates the baseline
estimate of the Local Seniors coefficient from Table II. In addition to all the independent
variables from the baseline specification, these analyses feature three indicator
variables. The first indicator variable, featured in column (2), is Small Firm; it is equal to
1 for firms with below-median market capitalization, and to 0 otherwise. The second
indicator variable, featured in column (3) is High Local Bias County; it is equal to 1 if
the company is headquartered in a county in which the extent of local bias among the
non-senior local retail investors from the brokerage data sample is above the median,
and 0 otherwise.11 The third indicator variable, featured in column (4), is Bank; it is
equal to 1 for firms in the banking industry (2-digit SIC code equal to 60), and to 0
otherwise.
The results presented in column (2) line up with the predictions very closely—
the effect of Local Seniors is concentrated among small companies (there essentially is
no effect for large companies, with a point estimate of 7.6; SE = 24.0), with a highly
statistically significant point estimate of 99.8 for the total effect of Local Seniors for
small firms (the baseline effect of Local Seniors, 7.6, plus the interaction of Local Seniors
and Small Firm, 92.2, gives the total effect of Local Seniors for small firms). Column (3),
similarly, shows that the effect is concentrated among the companies headquartered in
high local-bias counties. The total effect of Local Seniors for firms in high local-bias
counties is 144.0, with a high level of statistical significance.
Next, we consider banks. Banks have a particularly relevant feature—local
seniors likely are important customers of the firm. As Becker (2007) documents, seniors
are important among bank retail customers. Compared with other age groups, seniors
tilt their financial portfolios disproportionately toward bank deposits; they are the only
age group in which more than 90% of individuals have transaction accounts and in
which more than 20% hold certificates of deposits. Moreover, seniors have much higher
mean and median shares of their wealth held in checking accounts, saving accounts,
and certificates of deposit than any other age group (Becker (2007, Figure 1)). Because of
this, and their higher financial wealth, although their population fraction is only 12%,

17

seniors own 33% of total household money in checking accounts, 27% of the money in
savings accounts, and 37% of the money in CDs (even though they receive only about
14% of total income, including pensions), and hold 25% of total household wealth.12
The median distance between a borrower and a bank over the period from 1973
to 1993 period is no more than five miles (Petersen and Rajan (2002)). Assuming the
same closeness exists for the bank-depositor relationship, there potentially is a
significant cost associated with not considering the demand for dividends by local
seniors—the risk of not only making local seniors unhappy as shareholders, but also as
depositors, that is, bank customers (with a credible threat that such unsatisfied local
seniors might withdraw their deposits and bank elsewhere).
According to column (4) of Table V, as predicted, the effect of Local Seniors is
about two and one-half times larger for banks than it is for other companies. The
coefficient associated with the total effect of Local Seniors on banks is 134.5 and is
highly statistically significant, whereas the effect of Local Seniors on other firms is 52.2
(still significant in its own right); the difference between the two is statistically
significant at the 5% level.
We conclude this section with a test of whether local dividend demand matters
more for companies in counties with fewer surrounding firms, in the spirit of the “onlygame-in-town” effect of Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2008), who find that companies
located in areas with fewer other firms around receive higher valuations. We extend
their study with an inquiry into whether such an effect is present for dividend policy. If
local seniors demand a certain level of dividends (or dividend-paying stocks in their
portfolio) and they look to local companies to satisfy it, then their dividend demand
should be stronger for a given firm when that firm is surrounded by few other
companies in the county. The results, presented in column (5) of Table V, indeed
suggest that the effect of Local Seniors is stronger in the counties with a lower density of
companies. Specifically, the effect of the interaction between Local Seniors and the
inverse of the number of firms in the county is positive, large in magnitude, and highly
statistically significant.

18

TABLE V ABOUT HERE

E. County-Level Fixed Effects
We next employ analyses that represent a much higher hurdle to identify the
local-seniors effect. The first such analysis is analogous to the baseline analysis (see
Section II.A and Table II), with the additional inclusion of fixed effects at the county level.
Thus, the identification of the effect of Local Seniors on dividend policy comes from
changes in the fraction of seniors in the county (controlling, as before, for all other firmspecific factors that may vary over time). In other words, the coefficient associated with
Local Seniors in this specification is identified from the payout policy decisions of
companies headquartered in counties in which the age composition is changing over
time. We first apply this county-level fixed-effects specification on the full sample, and
then obtain the relation between dividend policy and Local Seniors for two subsets of
firms where we would expect to find a more pronounced relation.
The coefficient associated with Local Seniors from the Dividend Payer countylevel fixed-effects regression is 64.4 (SE = 51.0) for the full sample of firms. The
magnitude of the effect is similar to that reported in the cross-sectional regression in
Table II but the p-value of the coefficient is 0.21. However, there are marginally
significant effects for two subsamples among which, a priori, the dividend-demand
motivation should be strong—small companies (coefficient = 114.8, SE = 64.8, p < 0.1),
companies in the counties in which the residents have high local-bias tendencies in their
portfolios (coefficient = 213.5, SE = 86.5, p < 0.05), and banks (coefficient = 112.4, SE =
67.7, p < 0.10).
F. Corporate Headquarter Moves
As a further source of identification, we consider the subset of firms that moved
their corporate headquarters to a different state, a proxy for sufficient distance to
assume comfortably that the two local individual investor pools (the “old” one and the
“new” one) are not overlapping. We examine a sample of just under 150 such
companies, obtained from Compact Disclosure, that moved their corporate

19

headquarters in the period from 1997 to 2000 and that have sufficient data pre- and
post-move to conduct our analyses.13
The analyses relate the changes in dividend policy in the aftermath of the move
(relative to the dividend policy before the move) to the changes in proportion of seniors
across the new and old communities, controlling also for changes in the other firm
characteristics over that time period. For the purposes of these analyses, we
incorporated the observations in off-Census years that occurred both before and after
the move. For such observations, we use linear interpolations of Census figures from
the 1990 and 2000 Censuses (and extrapolations for years after 2000). For a company
that moved its headquarters, for example, some time between 1999 and 2000 (the
company has an address in a different state in 2000 compared to 1999 in Compact
Disclosure), we record whether it paid dividends in 1998, one full year before the move
(and its characteristics and the fraction of seniors in the “old” community at that time)
and whether it paid dividends after moving to its new location (recording firm
characteristics and the fraction of local seniors at the “new” community). We measure
whether the company paid dividends one to five years after the move—in the 2000
move example, the first full year after the move would be 2001, and the fifth year after
the move would be 2005.
Column (1) of Table VI presents the results, provided in five panels that allow for
increasingly longer post-move periods, ranging from one to five years, respectively.14
Two key results stand out. First, even for a one-year post-move horizon, there is a
strong relation between the change in dividend-payer status and the change in Local
Seniors (the point estimate, 111.2, is large and is statistically significant at the 5% level).
Second, perhaps not surprisingly, the effect strengthens as the post-move horizon
increases; the effect of Local Seniors roughly doubles for the three-year horizon, and
increases still further to 343.2 for the five-year horizon (statistically significant at the 1%
level). A firm moving to a county in which Local Seniors is one standard deviation
higher than it was at its original location (that is, the Local Seniors variable increases by
0.031) is 3.4 percentage points more likely to be a dividend payer one year after the

20

move, 5.9 percentage points more likely to be a dividend payer three years after the
move, and 10.6 percentage points more likely to be a dividend payer five years after the
move.
The second column features the complete sample of corporations in existence
during the pre- and post-move years of the 1997 to 2000 sample of movers. To be
specific, in the first column we relate changes in dividend policy to changes in Local
Seniors and firm-level characteristics for the sample of movers only. In column (2), we
also include in the regression the changes in dividend policy and firm-level
characteristics for all the non-moving companies over the same time period. Aside from
testing whether the change in Local Seniors affected the dividend policy of moving
companies in column (1), the specifications in column (2) allow us to test further
whether the change in dividend policy differed across mover and non-mover
companies (also controlling for the effect of changes in the firm-specific characteristics
on both the movers and non-movers). These specifications thus include the indicator
variable Firm Moved (it is equal to 1 if the company’s headquarters moved in year t,
and 0 otherwise). The findings offer additional reassurance—by itself, the fact that the
company headquarter locations have changed (controlling for everything else, of
course) played little role in the change in dividend policy.15 Moreover, the sizes and
significance levels of the coefficients associated with Local Seniors in the two analyses
are highly comparable.
Naturally, the small sample size of the set of movers calls for caution in
interpreting these results and, thus, extrapolating these results to the general population
of firms. Nonetheless, the direction, magnitude, and significance of these results all line
up in a manner consistent with the dividend-demand hypothesis and our results
presented elsewhere in the paper, thus offering complementary evidence, obtained with
an entirely different identification strategy.
TABLE VI ABOUT HERE

21

III. Potential Benefits of Satisfying Local Dividend Demand
Upon finding effects consistent with the dividend-demand hypothesis, we
proceed with the third and final tier of our identification strategy. In this section, we
explore why managers might wish to respond to local seniors’ demand for dividends,16
whether there are benefits to such demand-induced payouts, as well as the mechanisms
through which individual investor demand may affect corporate policy. We consider
two possible channels and offer suggestive evidence. At the outset, we remark that the
channels we discuss in this section are not mutually exclusive. Moreover, none of these
channels require that managers explicitly be informed about local retail investors’ age,
or that they should feel goodwill toward local investors in general, or local seniors in
particular.
A. Lower Turnover
Graham and Kumar (2006) report that seniors are more likely to buy dividendpaying stocks in the two weeks leading up to the ex-dividend day, and are more likely
to buy stocks after they start to pay dividends. We use the same brokerage data as in
Graham and Kumar (2006) and build upon their result that seniors buy stocks after a
company initiates dividends (or just before a company is to pay dividends) by studying
individuals’ propensity to sell the stock they hold already (i.e., what local seniors do after
they buy the stock). The brokerage data are extremely well suited for this purpose—to
study the sale decision of a given investor and a given stock holding. That is, the many
observations of potential sale behavior across many investors enable us to obtain strong
and robust results regarding holding periods. We can thus ascertain, with a lot of
precision, what happens once investors purchase stock—given their characteristics (in
this case geographic location and age), whether they are more likely, relative to others,
to keep on holding the stock.
We test whether, conditional on owning the stock, local seniors have a
substantially longer holding period than other types of investors do. This lower
turnover may be attractive to company management, and a way to attract such loyal

22

investors to own the stock in the first place is by paying dividends. To test the “lower
turnover” channel, we first conduct a completely non-parametric analysis in which we
estimate the cumulative likelihood of sale of a given stock holding for four investor
groups (comprising just over 30,000 households): potential sales by all individuals,
potential sales by seniors (65 years of age or older), potential sales by local investors (the
distance between the household and corporate headquarters is 250 miles or fewer—the
local-distance metric used in Ivković and Weisbenner (2005)), and potential sales by
local senior investors.
Tallying of the sales made in a given month since purchase relative to the total
number of potential sales at the beginning of the month produces non-parametric
hazard rates for each month (i.e., probability of selling in that month conditional on not
having sold the stock up to that point), and cumulating those monthly hazard rates
yields the cumulative probability distribution of sale as a function of time since
purchase. The four cumulative probability distributions are presented in Figure 1.
Whereas the median holding period for all investors (the first sample) is 15 months, the
median holding period for local-senior investors (the fourth sample) is substantially
longer, 37 months.
This analysis, though compelling, does not take into consideration other
potential motivations for sale, including stock performance since purchase, nor
potential selection issues based on preferences for holding different kinds of stocks
(each of which, by themselves, could lead to different selling patterns across the
individuals). Therefore, we also conduct a more stringent analysis by incorporating
several covariates that capture investor sensitivity to past performance (be it for
behavioral reasons or because of tax motivations).
Our econometric framework for these analyses follows Ivković, Poterba, and
Weisbenner (2005) closely. We use the Cox proportional hazards model, which employs
non-parametric estimates of baseline monthly hazards (that is, the probabilities of
selling the stock in month t after purchase, conditional on no prior sale). The results of
the Cox proportional hazards model, presented in Table IA.V of the Internet Appendix,

23

confirm the differences in the likelihood of selling stock displayed in Figure 1.
According to the estimates from the more rigorous proportional hazard-model analyses,
during a month, a local-senior investor is 28 to 32 percent less likely to sell a share of
stock than a non-local non-senior investor is. Aggregated over time, this difference
results in much longer holding periods and much lower turnover for the group of
investors who likely are attracted to purchase the stock of firms that pay dividends.
B. Price Channel—Ex-Dividend Day Reaction
Our second line of inquiry considers valuation effects. Our identification strategy
studies stock price movements around the ex-dividend day.17 We relate ex-dividend
day returns to Local Seniors, a technique used previously to infer marginal tax rates
(see, e.g., Elton and Gruber (1970), Perez-Gonzales (2003), and Graham and Kumar
(2006)), as well as dividend-demand valuation effects for non-tax reasons (Graham and
Kumar (2006)). Elton and Gruber (1970) divide ex-dividend price drops by the amount
of the dividend and report that this ratio averages 0.78. Depending upon the
subpopulation of corporations they consider, Graham and Kumar (2006) report that this
ratio in their study averages from 0.67 to 0.79. The price drop is less than the dividend
paid, presumably because, for many investors, dividends face higher taxes than capital
gains do. As Elton and Gruber (1970) point out, in a rational market, the price drop
when the stock goes ex-dividend reflects the relative value of dividends and capital
gains to the marginal stockholders. Thus, a company whose owners face a lower
dividend tax rate (or a higher tax rate on capital gains) should experience a bigger drop
in the share price when the stock goes ex-dividend.
We apply a similar logic to the firms facing investors with a dividend preference:
the ex-dividend day price drop, as a fraction of the dividend amount, should be large
when demand for dividends is high. As before, we use Local Seniors to proxy for
dividend demand. Alternative explanations for our findings on payout policy (for
example, that Local Seniors proxies for local economic conditions that lead to dividend

24

supply by firms) do not predict such a relation between ex-dividend day price behavior
and Local Seniors.
We adjust the ex-dividend methodology of Elton and Gruber (1970) along two
dimensions. First, we use price changes from market close on the last cum-dividend day
to the opening trade the following, ex-dividend day, and thereby focus more narrowly
on the price change related to the loss of the dividend right, thus not confounding the
inference with the price changes taking place during the following, ex-dividend day.
Second, whereas the original Elton and Gruber (1970) methodology normalizes the
price change by the dividend amount, our dependent variable is the relative price
drop—the negative of the price change from the close of the last cum-dividend day to
the open of the ex-dividend day divided by the closing price on the last cum-dividend
day.18 Accordingly, our independent variables are the dividend amount scaled by the
closing price, Local Seniors, and the interaction between the two (we also include
Median Income, the median income of the county in which the company is
headquartered and its interaction with the amount of the dividend).19 We estimate these
regressions over the sample of stock returns surrounding ex-dividend days in the
period from 1992 to 2007. Local Seniors and Median Income in off-census years have
been estimated by linear interpolation (and extrapolation) of the figures from the
Census years.
Table VII reports the results. The first column provides a simple gauge; it
features only Div i,t / Piclose
,t −1 (abbreviated in the table as Div/P for readability). The
regression coefficient estimate is 0.73, suggesting that, absent further controls, a onedollar dividend is associated with a 73-cent price drop on the ex-dividend day, a figure
that is very similar to the baseline figures from Elton and Gruber (1970) and Graham
and Kumar (2006).
The second column features Div i,t / Piclose
,t −1 and its interaction with the indicator
variable Small Firm (defined as in Table V), thereby allowing for differential valuations
of dividends across the shareholders of small and large corporations. The results match

25

intuition and extant findings very well. For large companies, the price drop on the exdividend day associated with a one-dollar dividend is 86 cents, whereas for smaller
companies, more likely to be held by individuals, and thus subject to higher marginal
tax rates, the price drop is 60 cents (the difference between the two is 26 cents, and is
statistically significant at the 1% level).
In the third column, we present evidence that the ex-dividend day price drop,
that is, the valuation of dividends, varies across communities. We add to the
specification Local Seniors, an interaction between Div/P and Local Seniors, Median
Income, and the interaction between Div/P and Median Income. In light of the primary
interest in how characteristics of the community affect the relation between the exdividend day price drop and the amount of the dividend (that is, the interactions of
Local Seniors and Median Income with Div/P), the coefficients associated with Local
Seniors and Median Income themselves are suppressed from the table for readability.20
Median Income, measured at the county level, is a geographically-based measure of
income intended to capture tax-related motivations from potential local shareholders.
Consistent with seniors’ demand for dividends, the price drop is positively related to
Local Seniors (the coefficient estimate is 3.0, statistically significant at the 10% level),
that is, the ex-dividend day price drop is larger in the areas with a higher fraction of
seniors. The magnitude of this effect is substantial—a one-standard-deviation increase
in Local Seniors is associated with an increase in the ex-dividend day price drop as a
fraction of the dividend of 0.09, one-eighth of the average price drop from column (1).
The relation between the ex-dividend day price drop and the interaction (Div/P)
x Median Income is negative and is statistically significant, consistent with smaller exdividend day price drops in regions in which income, and presumably tax rates, are
higher. This result is consistent with marginal investors of at least some corporations
being local individuals (and, thus, whether a firm is located in a community in which
individuals have high income and high tax rates affects the valuation of the firm’s
dividends on the ex-dividend day). However, given the unit of measurement of Median
Income (in units of $100,000), its economic importance is very modest (a one-standard-

26

deviation increase in the median income of the county, $15,500 in our sample, is
associated with an ex-dividend day price drop as a fraction of the dividend that is only
0.01 smaller).
Finally, in the fourth column, all the variables from the third column are
interacted with the indicator variable Small Firm (defined as in Table V) to allow for
differential effects across small and large companies.21 Our prediction is that the
sensitivity of the valuation of dividends to the presence of Local Seniors should be
stronger for small firms than for large firms. This is exactly what we find. As shown in
column (4), there is no relation between the ex-dividend day price drop and the
presence of Local Seniors in the community (or the median income of the county) for
large corporations. Adding the coefficient on Div/P x Local Seniors and the coefficient
pertaining to Div/P x Local Seniors x Small Firm provides the total effect of Local
Seniors on the ex-dividend day price drop for small stocks and, compared to the
estimate across all stocks of 3.0 from column (2), shows a larger effect of 4.7 for small
stocks (statistically significant at the 10% level; the associated p-value is 0.06). A one
standard-deviation increase in Local Seniors is associated with an increase in the exdividend day price drop as a fraction of the dividend of 0.15 for small stocks, onequarter of the average price drop from column (2). For small companies, more likely to
be reliant on local shareholders, the ex-dividend price fall is also related to the median
income of the county in which the company is headquartered in the direction predicted,
but the economic magnitude of this “local-income” effect again is very small.
TABLE VII ABOUT HERE

In sum, these results extend the findings from Graham and Kumar (2006) that the
price fall on the ex-dividend day is positively related to the age of the shareholders of
the firm and negatively related to the income of the shareholders of the firm. Our exdividend results are consistent with the notion that companies located in counties with
higher fractions of seniors face stronger demand for dividends, and that such demand is
associated with larger stock-price drops on ex-dividend days, but only for the small

27

companies, those more likely to be affected by this geographically-varying demand for
dividends from the local-senior population. The valuation effects detected on the exdividend day and the prior evidence concerning lower turnover, while each suggestive
on their own, come together to reinforce the dividend-demand hypothesis. Moreover,
neither channel requires that managers explicitly be informed about local retail
investors’ age.

IV. Conclusion
Miller and Modigliani (1961) raise the question whether firms set policies and
investors sort accordingly, or companies respond to the preferences of their current
shareholders. In this paper, we provide evidence consistent with the latter. Specifically,
we test for the effect of dividend demand on payout policy. The tendency of older
investors to hold dividend-paying stocks in combination with individual investors’
inclination to hold local stocks results in stronger dividend demand for companies
located in areas with many seniors. Demographics thus provide an empirical proxy for
dividend demand, which we exploit in this paper to examine the broader question
whether the preferences of current owners influence corporate actions.
As predicted, we find a significant positive effect of Local Seniors, the fraction of
seniors in the county in which a firm is located, on the firm’s propensity to pay
dividends, its propensity to initiate dividends, and on its dividend yield. The effect of
Local Seniors on the corporate decision to start paying dividends is particularly strong,
of the same economic magnitude as other key determinants such as company size and
age.
Because demographics are only a rough proxy for demand, our results, in some
sense, place a lower bound on the effect of investor preferences on payout policy. If
there are other components of demand, the total effect of investor preferences on
corporate policies may be larger. Our results are robust to various methodologies and
identification strategies, and are not supportive of alternative explanations (for

28

example, that firms located in the areas with many seniors have low growth
opportunities and, therefore, are more likely to pay out cash to shareholders).
The main implication of our findings is that, at least in part, corporations
respond to the preferences of their owners when setting payout policy. We confirm that
age determines dividend demand, consistent with the hypothesis of Miller and
Modigliani (1961) and the evidence presented in Graham and Kumar (2006). We further
show that there are dividend clienteles that vary geographically, creating differences in
demand for dividends across firms that help explain some of the substantial crosssectional heterogeneity as to why some companies pay dividends while other do not.
Our findings thus suggest that there is important geographical variation in the financial
conditions facing firms.

29

References
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2004a, A catering theory of dividends, Journal of
Finance 59, 1125-1165.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2004b, Appearing and disappearing dividends:
The link to catering incentives, Journal of Financial Economics 73, 271-288.
Barber, Brad, and Terrance Odean, 2000, Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The
common stock investment performance of individual investors, Journal of Finance
55, 773-806.
Becker, Bo, 2007, Geographical segmentation of US capital markets, Journal of Financial
Economics 85, 151-178.
Brav, Alon, John R. Graham, Campbell R. Harvey, and Roni Michaely, 2005, Payout
policy in the 21st century, Journal of Financial Economics 77, 483-527.
Brown, Jeffrey, Nellie Liang, and Scott Weisbenner, 2007, Executive financial incentives
and payout policy: Firm responses to the 2003 dividend tax cut, Journal of Finance
62, 1935-1965.
Coval, Joshua D., and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 1999, Home bias at home: Local equity
preference in domestic portfolios, Journal of Finance 54, 1–39.
Coval, Joshua D., and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 2001, The geography of investment:
Informed trading and asset prices, Journal of Political Economy 109, 811–841.
Elton, Edward J., and Martin J. Gruber, 1970, Marginal stockholder clientele effect,
Review of Economics and Statistics 52, 68–74.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2001, Disappearing dividends: Changing firm
characteristics or lower propensity to pay?, Journal of Financial Economics 60, 3-43.
Graham, John R., 2003, Taxes and corporate finance: A review, Review of Financial
Studies 16, 1074-1128.
Graham, John R., and Alok Kumar, 2006, Do dividend clienteles exist? Evidence on
dividend preferences of retail investors, Journal of Finance 59, 1125-1165.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Matti Keloharju, 2001, How distance, language, and culture
influence stockholdings and trades, Journal of Finance 56, 1053-1073.

30

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, 2004, Does local financial
development matter?, Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 929-969.
Hong, Harrison, Jeffrey Kubik, and Jeremy Stein, 2008, The only game in town: Stockprice consequences of local bias, Journal of Financial Economics 90, 20-37.
Huberman, Gur, 2001, Familiarity breeds investment, Review of Financial Studies 14, 659680.
Ivković, Zoran, James Poterba, and Scott Weisbenner, 2005, Tax-motivated trading by
individual investors, American Economic Review 95, 1605-1630.
Ivković, Zoran, and Scott Weisbenner, 2005, Local does as local is: Information content
of the geography of individual investors’ common stock investments, Journal of
Finance 60, 267-306.
Jayaratne, Jith, and Philip Strahan, 1996, The finance-growth Nexus: Evidence from
bank branch deregulation, Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, 639-670.
Lintner, John, 1956, Distribution of incomes of corporations among dividends, retained
earnings, and taxes, American Economic Review 46, 97-113.
Loughran, Tim, and Paul Schulz, 2005, Liquidity: Urban versus rural firms, Journal of
Financial Economics 78, 341-374.
Massa, Massimo, and Andrei Simonov, 2006, Hedging, familiarity and portfolio choice,
Review of Financial Studies 19, 633-685.
Miller, Merton H., and Franco Modigliani, 1961, Dividend policy, growth, and the
valuation of shares, Journal of Business 34, 411-433.
Perez-Gonzales, Francisco, 2003, Large shareholders and dividends: Evidence from U.S.
tax reforms, Working Paper, Stanford University.
Peterson, Mitchell A., and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2002, Does distance still matter? The
information revolution in small business lending, Journal of Finance 57, 25332570.
Pirinsky, Christo, and Quinghai Wang, 2006, Does corporate headquarters location
matter for stock returns?, Journal of Finance 61, 1991-2015.

31

Scholz, John K., 1992, A direct examination of the dividend clientele hypothesis, Journal
of Public Economics 49, 261–285.
Shefrin, Hersh, and Meir Statman, 1984, Explaining investor preference for cash
dividends, Journal of Financial Economics 13, 253-282.
Shefrin, Hersh, and Richard H. Thaler, 1988, The behavioral life-cycle hypothesis,
Economic Inquiry 26, 609-643.
Thaler, Richard H., and Hersh M. Shefrin, 1981, An economic theory of self-control,
Journal of Political Economy 89, 392–406.

32

Table I
Summary Statistics for Payout Policy Variables and Key County-Level Variables
The sample consists of the pooled cross-section for 1980, 1990, and 2000. Summary statistics for
payout policy variables are presented in Panel A. Dividend Payer is an indicator variable equal
to 0 for non-payers and equal to 100 for dividend payers. Dividend Initiation is an indicator
variable defined for non-payers at the end-of-year t. Its values are 0 for the firms that remain
non-payers in year t+1, and 100 for non-payers at the end-of-year t who start to pay a dividend
in year t+1. Dividend Yield is the dollar amount of dividends paid out in year t+1 divided by
the end-of-year t equity market value. Repurchase Yield is defined analogously for share
repurchases in year t+1. Summary statistics for key geographical variables are presented in
Panel B. Aside from summary statistics pertaining to Local Seniors (the proportion of residents
who are 65 years old or older in the county in which a firm is headquartered, as reported by the
U.S. Bureau of Census), the table also lists summary statistics for the number of firms in the
county (firms with their headquarters located in the county).

Panel A: Summary Statistics for Payout Policy Variables (in percentage points)

Dividend Payer
Dividend Initiation
Dividend Yield
Repurchase Yield

Mean
47.4
2.0
1.9
1.1

25th
Percentile
0
0
0
0

Median
0
0
0
0

75th
Percentile
100
0
3.0
0.4

Standard
Deviation
49.9
14.2
3.7
3.9

Panel B: Summary Statistics for Key County-Level Variables
Mean

Min.

25th %

Median

75th %

Max. Std. Dev.

Local Seniors
(Proportion 65 years +)

0.116

0.022

0.097

0.115

0.132

0.321

0.031

Inverse of Number of
Firms in County

0.102

0.002

0.008

0.022

0.059

1.000

0.220

33

Table II
Dividend Payout and Local Seniors
This table presents OLS regression results for firm dividend payout behavior, estimated over
the sample of pooled observations from the 1980, 1990, and 2000 cross-sections. Dependent
variables are measured one year after the firm-level and the county-level controls (in 1981, 1991,
and 2001, respectively). Dividend Payer is an indicator variable equal to 0 for non-payers and
equal to 100 for dividend payers. Dividend Initiation is an indicator variable defined for nonpayers at the end-of-year t. Its values are 0 for the firms that remain non-payers in year t+1, and
100 for non-payers at the end-of-year t who start to pay a dividend in year t+1. Dividend Yield
is the dollar amount of dividends paid out in year t+1 divided by the end-of-year t equity
market value. Our key independent variable is Local Seniors, the fraction of residents who are
65 years old or older in the county in which a firm is headquartered, as reported by the U.S.
Bureau of Census. Besides Local Seniors, the regressions include firm-specific controls. Net
Income, Cash, and Debt (long-term) are all normalized by total assets. Q is defined as the
market-to-book ratio, that is, the market value of equity plus the book value of liabilities (using
the book value of liabilities as an approximation for the market value of liabilities) divided by
the book value of assets. Volatility refers to the standard deviation of monthly stock returns
over the preceding two years. Two-Year Lagged Return refers to monthly stock returns over the
preceding two years. Asset Growth is the logarithm of the growth rate of assets over the prior
year. Age-group indicator variables (for firms publicly listed 1-5, 6-10, 11-15, 16-20, and 21+
years ago), industry-year interaction indicator variables (fixed effects for 2-digit level SIC
industries interacted with year), and state-year interaction indicator variables are included in all
three specifications. Standard errors (shown in parentheses) allow for heteroskedasticity and are
clustered by firm.

34

Table II
Dividend Payout and Local Seniors (continued)

Local Seniors
Net Income
Cash
Q
Debt
Volatility
Two-Year Lagged Return
Log of Market Value
Log of Assets
Asset Growth
Adjusted R-squared
Number of Observations
***, **, *

(1)
Dividend
Payer
59.3***
(16.3)
-1.1
(1.3)
-9.7***
(2.5)
-2.5***
(0.3)
-16.8***
(2.1)
-131.4***
(5.0)
-0.05
(0.44)
9.2***
(0.5)
-3.0***
(0.5)
-4.2***
(1.2)
0.528
12,107

(2)
Dividend
Initiation
32.9***
(8.7)
0.04
(0.49)
3.7***
(1.3)
-0.4***
(0.1)
-2.6***
(0.8)
-6.3***
(1.9)
0.32*
(0.18)
0.44**
(0.19)
-0.04
(0.18)
-0.54
(0.56)
0.086
6,200

(3)
Dividend
Yield
7.4 ***
(2.6)
-0.1
(0.3)
0.9 *
(0.5)
-0.06 **
(0.03)
-1.1 ***
(0.3)
-6.3 ***
(0.5)
-0.04
(0.04)
0.04
(0.05)
0.11 **
(0.05)
-0.35
(0.22)
0.295
12,107

denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

35

Table III
Repurchases, Corporate Performance, and Local Seniors
This table presents OLS regression results for pooled regressions for the 1980, 1990, and 2000
cross-sections. Dependent variables are measured one year after the firm-level and the countylevel controls. Repurchase Yield is the dollar amount of stock repurchases made in year t+1
divided by the end-of-year t equity market value. Investment refers to capital expenditure in
year t+1 divided by the end-of-year t assets. Net Income refers to net income in year t+1 divided
by the end-of-year t assets. See Table II for a description of the independent variables. Standard
errors (shown in parentheses) allow for heteroskedasticity and are clustered by firm.

Local Seniors

Repurchases
(1)
(2)
Repurchase Repurchase Yield
Yield
(three-year average)
0.57
2.17
(1.69)
(1.08)

Corporate Performance
(3)
(4)
Net
Investment
Income
-1.30
-6.57
(2.47)
(11.0)

Net Income

0.39**
(0.20)

0.39***
(0.16)

0.03
(0.27)

Cash

2.24***
(0.39)

1.46***
(0.23)

-2.74***
(0.44)

-4.90
(3.03)

Q

-0.04
(0.03)

-0.01
(0.02)

-0.18***
(0.05)

-2.04***
(0.44)

Debt

-0.40
(0.26)

-0.41**
(0.18)

1.24***
(0.37)

2.21
(2.20)

Volatility

-1.31*
(0.73)

-0.71
(0.49)

0.02
(0.96)

-115.8***
(6.81)

Two-Year Lagged Return

0.12**
(0.05)

0.066**
(0.033)

0.60***
(0.08)

5.72***
(0.47)

Log of Market Value

-0.30***
(0.08)

-0.20***
(0.05)

1.21***
(0.08)

1.77***
(0.54)

Log of Assets

0.32***
(0.08)

0.30***
(0.05)

-1.11***
(0.09)

-0.71
(0.59)

Asset Growth

-0.38*
(0.21)

-0.42***
(0.16)

1.26***
(0.26)

0.76
(2.28)

Adjusted R-squared
Number of Observations
***, **, *

0.040
10,513

0.058
9,020

0.379
10,924

0.256
12,115

denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

36

Table IV
Dividend Payout and Local Seniors, with Growing Counties, and Demographic and Economic Controls
This table presents OLS regression results for firm dividend payout behavior, estimated over the sample of pooled observations from
the 1980, 1990, and 2000 cross-sections, with additional considerations. Dependent variables are measured one year after the firmlevel and the county-level controls. See Table II for a description of dependent variables and for the independent variables included
in the regressions. Columns (1), (4), and (7) replicate Table II. Columns (2), (5), and (8) are based upon the same baseline
specifications, but the sample is limited to the firms that, relative to the preceding census, have experienced population growth in the
number of residents in the county who are less than 40 years of age (the “Growing County Sample”). Finally, Columns (3), (6), and
(9) feature specifications similar to those from columns (1), (4), and (7), respectively, with additional demographic and economic
controls. Demographic controls are the logarithm of county population and the educational composition of the county (the fraction
of the population having finished college, the fraction of the population having finished high school, and so on). Economic Controls
are the average of each of the firm-level variables across all firms located in the county, as well as the share of local firms in each
industry (2 digit SIC), median house prices in the county, and median income in the county. For clarity, the table provides only the
coefficients associated with the Local Seniors variable. Standard errors (shown in parentheses) allow for heteroskedasticity and are
clustered by firm.

Dividend Payer
(1)
Local Seniors

(2)

Dividend Initiation
(3)

59.3 *** 59.1 ***
35.6 **
(16.3)
(20.8)
(18.3)

(4)

(5)

32.9 ***
(8.7)

26.3 ***
(9.8)

(6)
36.8 ***
(10.0)

Dividend Yield
(7)

(8)

(9)

7.4 ***
(2.6)

7.4 **
(3.8)

7.1 **
(3.2)

Baseline Regression Controls?

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Growing County Sample?

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

Demographic Controls?

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

Economic Controls?

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

0.528
12,107

0.525
7,899

0.533
12,071

0.086
6,200

0.101
4,409

0.091
6,177

0.295
12,107

0.300
7,899

0.303
12,071

Adjusted R-squared
Number of Observations
***, **, *

denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.
37

Table V
Dividend Payout and Local Seniors, Interactions with Small Firms, High Local-Bias
Counties, Banking Industry, and Number of Firms in County
This table presents OLS regression results for dividend payout behavior, estimated over the
sample of pooled observations from the 1980, 1990, and 2000 cross-sections. The dependent
variable Dividend Payer is measured one year after the firm-level and the county-level controls.
See Table II for a description of the Dividend Payer dependent variable and for the independent
variables included in the regressions. Column (1) reports the baseline regression coefficient on
the Local Seniors variable from Table II. In columns (2) through (4), the specification from Table
II is augmented with interactions using various indicator variables. The first such indicator
variable is Small Firm; it is equal to 1 for firms with below-median market capitalization in a
given cross section, and is 0 otherwise. The second indicator variable, featured in column (3), is
High Local-Bias County; it is equal to 1 if the firm is headquartered in a county in which the
extent of local bias among the non-senior local retail investors from the brokerage data is above
the sample median, and is 0 otherwise. The third indicator variable, featured in column (4), is
Bank; it is equal to 1 for firms in the banking industry (2-digit SIC code equal to 60), and is 0
otherwise. For clarity, in columns (2) through (4) the table provides only the coefficients
associated with the Local Seniors variable and, if applicable, its interaction with the respective
indicator variables. Moreover, columns (2) through (4) also feature the total effect of Local
Seniors for small firms (column (2)), for firms located in high-local bias counties (column (3)),
and for firms in the banking industry (column (4)). In column (5), the specification is similar to
that from Table II, with the addition of the Inverse Number of Firms, measured for each firm as
the inverse of the number of the firms headquartered in the same county (including the firm
itself), as well as the interaction between Local Seniors and Inverse Number of Firms. For
clarity, in column (5) the table provides only the coefficients associated with the Local Seniors
variable, Inverse Number of Firms, and their interaction. Standard errors (shown in
parentheses) allow for heteroskedasticity and are clustered by firm.

38

Table V
Dividend Payout and Local Seniors, Interactions with Small Firms, High Local-Bias
Counties, Banking Industry, and Number of Firms in County (continued)
(1)

Local Seniors

(2)

(3)

59.3 ***
7.6
(16.3)
(24.0)

24.1
(21.9)

Local Seniors x Small Firm

92.2 ***
(30.5)

Total effect for small firms

99.8 ***
(20.2)

Local Seniors x High Local-Bias County

(4)

52.2 *** 23.5
(17.0)
(18.6)

119.9 ***
(46.3)

Total effect for firms in high local-bias counties

144.0 ***
(40.8)

Local Seniors x Bank

82.3 **
(40.1)

Total effect for banks

134.5 ***
(38.6)

Inverse of Number of Firms

-2.1
(6.7)

Local Seniors x Inverse of Number of Firms
Adjusted R-squared
Number of Observations
***, **, *

(5)

105.7 **
(49.4)
0.528
12,107

0.560
12,107

0.536 0.529
11,436 12,107

denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

39

0.530
12,107

Table VI
Relating Changes in Dividend-Payer Status to Changes in Local Seniors, Analysis of Movers
This table presents results of OLS regressions that relate changes in dividend-payer status to changes in the fraction of local seniors, as
well as changes in the other independent variables described in Table II. The results are presented in five panels, corresponding to postmove horizons of one to five years, respectively. In each panel, column (1) focuses on the sample of firms, obtained from Compact
Disclosure, that moved their corporate headquarters to a different state in the period from 1997 to 2000, and that have sufficient data
pre- and post-move to conduct our analyses. For this sample, regressions relate their pre-move to post-move changes in dividend-payer
status over various post-move horizons with changes in the fraction of local seniors across the post- and pre-move communities, as well
as in the other independent variables. The second column in each panel reports the results of these change regressions for the complete
sample of firms in existence during the pre-and post-move years of the 1997 to 2000 sample of movers. The only additional independent
variable utilized in columns (2) is the indicator variable Firm Moved; it is equal to 1 if the firm’s headquarters had moved, and 0
otherwise. For the purposes of the analyses presented in this table, we incorporated the observations in off-Census years that occurred
both before and after the move. For such observations, we use linear interpolations of Census figures from the 1990 and 2000 Censuses
(and extrapolations for years after 2000). Standard errors (shown in parentheses) allow for heteroskedasticity and are clustered by firm.

Change in
Dividend-Payer Status

Panel A:

Panel C:

Panel D:

Panel E:

1 Year Post-Move 2 Years Post-Move 3 Years Post-Move 4 Years Post-Move 5 Years Post-Move
Relative to

1 Year Pre-Move
(1)
(2)
Movers
All
Only
Firms
**
Change in Local Seniors 111.2
98.1**
(49.8)
(41.1)
Firm Moved
Adjusted R-squared
0.143
Number of Observations
145
***, **, *

Panel B:
Relative to

Relative to

Relative to

Relative to

1 Year Pre-Move
(1)
(2)
Movers
All
Only
Firms
**
170.4
163.2**
(75.7)
(69.6)

1 Year Pre-Move
(1)
(2)
Movers
All
Only
Firms
**
190.9
187.1**
(88.4)
(82.4)

1 Year Pre-Move
(1)
(2)
Movers
All
Only
Firms
**
240.6
213.4**
(108.7) (89.1)

1 Year Pre-Move
(1)
(2)
Movers
All
Only
Firms
***
343.2
300.9***
(119.3) (114.3)

1.0
(1.4)
0.024
14,338

-0.2
(1.6)
0.202
114

-0.7
(2.2)

0.039
12,829

0.209
99

0.055
11,693

denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

40

-0.8
(2.6)
0.234
91

0.068
10,825

0.8
(3.6)
0.396
82

0.070
9,748

Table VII
Ex-Dividend Day Returns
This table presents results of estimating OLS regressions that relate the price drop on the ex-dividend
date to Local Seniors and other covariates. The estimation is carried out over the sample of stock
returns surrounding ex-dividend days in the period from 1992 to 2007. The dependent variable is the
relative price drop—the negative of the price change from the close of the last cum-dividend day to
the open of the ex-dividend day divided by the closing price of the last cum-dividend day. The first
column relates the price drop to the amount of the dividend scaled by the closing price
( Div i ,t / Piclose
,t −1 , abbreviated in the table as Div/P for readability). In the second column, Div/P is

interacted with the indicator variable Small Firm (defined as in Table V), to allow for differential
effects across large and small firms. In columns (3) and (4), two county-level variables are added to
the specification: Local Seniors (the fraction of residents who are 65 years old or older in the county in
which a firm is headquartered, as reported by the U.S. Bureau of Census) and Median Income
(measured at the county level; this geographically-based measure of income is intended to capture
local tax-related motivations more directly). The third column includes Div/P, Local Seniors, Median
Income, as well as interactions between Div/P and Local Seniors and Median Income, respectively.
The fourth column further allows for interactions of all independent variables featured in the third
column with the indicator variable Small Firm. Local Seniors and Median Income in off-census years
have been estimated by linear interpolation (or extrapolation) of the figures from the Census years. In
light of the primary interest in how characteristics of the community affect the relation between the
ex-dividend day price drop and the amount of the dividend, the coefficients associated with Local
Seniors and Median Income themselves, and their interactions with the Small Firm indicator variable,
are suppressed from the table for readability. These coefficients are reported in the text of Section
III.B. Standard errors (shown in parentheses) allow for heteroskedasticity and are clustered by firm.

(1)
0.73 ***
(0.05)

Div/P
(Div/P) x Small Firm
Total effect of Div/P for small firms

(2)
0.86 ***
(0.02)
-0.26 ***
(0.09)
0.60 ***
(0.09)

(3)
0.36
(0.23)

3.0 *
(1.7)

(Div/P) x Local Seniors
(Div/P) x Local Seniors x Small Firm
Total effect of (Div/P) x Local Seniors for small firms

-0.08 **
(0.03)

(Div/P) x Median Income
(Div/P) x Median Income x Small Firm
Total effect of (Div/P) x Med. Income for small firms
Adjusted R-squared
Number of Observations
***, **, *

0.196
116,933

0.201
116,933

0.198
116,370

denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.
41

(4)
0.92 ***
(0.08)
-0.89 ***
(0.34)
0.04
(0.33)
-0.19
(0.54)
4.9 *
(2.6)
4.7 *
(2.5)
-0.01
(0.01)
-0.10 *
(0.06)
-0.11 **
(0.06)
0.205
116,370

0.7

Cumulative Probability of Sale

0.6

Median Holding Period
for All Investors
is 15 Months

0.5

0.4
Median Holding Period
for Local Senior Investors
is 37 Months

0.3

0.2

0.1

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60

0.0

Months Since Purchase
All Investors

Local Investors

Senior Investors

Figure 1: Hazard Rates of Sale and Median Holding Periods.
42

Local Senior Investors

Figure 1: Hazard Rates of Sale and Median Holding Periods (continued). This figure plots cumulative probabilities of
sale of stocks purchased by just over 30,000 individual investors who invested through a large discount broker in the
period from 1991 to 1996. The first step is the computation of the non-parametric hazard rates for all purchases for all
investors for whom the data record their location and their age, local investors (whose household is within 250 miles from
the location of the company headquarters), senior investors (individuals 65 years of age or older), and, finally, local senior
investors. The second step cumulates the hazard rates into the cumulative probability of sale as a function of the number
of months since purchase.

43

FOOTNOTES
1

We follow Graham and Kumar (2006) in our definition of senior investors as individuals 65 years of age

or older.
2

Local senior investors likely are non-trivial owners of shares in corporations (particularly smaller firms,

more likely to face geographically-segmented markets). A compilation of data from multiple sources
enables a crude estimate. At the middle of our sample period, direct stock ownership by households in
the U.S. (not including indirect stock ownership though mutual funds) was roughly 55% (see Flow of
Funds Accounts from the Federal Reserve Board). According to the 1992 Survey of Consumer Finances
(SCF), senior households accounted for roughly two-fifths of total direct household stock ownership.
Authors’ calculations using the database of brokerage accounts for retail investors over the period from
1991 to 1996 (see Section I for a description of that data set) suggest that about one-quarter of senior stock
holdings are in local companies. Taking these numbers together leads to a rough approximation that
local-senior direct stock ownership comprises about five to six percent of total stock ownership and about
ten percent of total household stock ownership (i.e., non-institutional ownership).
3

In each census-year cross-section, the standard deviation of the fraction of seniors is around 3

percentage points, the interquartile range is around 3.5 percentage points, and the difference between the
maximum and minimum fraction of seniors across all U.S. counties is 30 percentage points.
4

For a detailed description of the data set, see Barber and Odean (2000).

5

We thank Jun-Koo Kang and Jin-Mo Kim for providing us with the data concerning headquarter moves.

6

For robustness, we also have estimated these regressions in logit, probit, and tobit frameworks and have

obtained very similar results, with statistical significance of the Local Seniors variable at the one-percent
level in all specifications. The coefficient estimates obtained from these specifications are reported in
Table IA.I of the Internet Appendix.
7

As a further measure of the relative importance of various independent variables in explaining dividend

policy, we calculated the contribution of these variables to the R-squared of the Dividend Payer,
Dividend Initiation, and Dividend Yield regressions. These results are displayed in Table IA.III of the
Internet Appendix.
8

Besides analyzing dividend-payer status, dividend initiations, and the dividend yield, we also studied

the determinants of dividend omissions, that is, whether companies, conditional upon paying dividends
in year t, stopped paying them next year, in year t+1. The results are displayed in Table IA.IV of the
Internet Appendix. Dividend omissions were concentrated among companies that clearly were in

44

financial distress, with low profitability, high stock-return volatility, and low past stock returns. Brav,
Graham, Harvey, and Michaely (2005, p. 521) report in their survey concerning payout policy that
executives “do not cut dividends except in extreme circumstances” and that there is a “big market
penalty for reducing and omitting [dividends].” Perhaps, in light of this, it is not surprising that Local
Seniors does not have a strong or statistically significant effect on dividend omissions—in these dire
circumstances, when company survival may be at stake, the preferences of local shareholders likely are
not first-order considerations.
9

There are approximately twice as many observations associated with corporations headquartered in

counties with positive growth of young people since the last census than there are observations in the
counties with negative growth of young people.
10

We thank the Co-Editor, John Graham, for this suggestion.

11

In constructing this measure, we consider non-senior household portfolios (specifically, those held by

investors younger than 40 years of age) to avoid endogeneity issues (that is, that the local bias of seniors
might be strong in those locations in which firms’ dividend policies correspond to local seniors’
preferences). The identifying assumption is that non-seniors’ local bias captures some aspect (other than
dividend preference) that affects the local bias of seniors as well, such as exposure to the same business
news or advertising.
12

Calculations are based on the 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), using the SCF-provided

sampling weights to calculate estimates for the U.S. population as a whole, and the U.S. Bureau of the
Census figures.
13

We thank Jun-Koo Kang and Min-Jo Kim for providing us these data. Their original data have 418

moves across states over the period from 1997 to 2000, as recorded by Compact Disclosure. Of these 418
potential firm moves, 227 companies can be linked with Compustat and have data on dividend policy
both one year before and one year after the move. Further requiring data on all the changes in the control
variables over the pre-move to post-move period results in the final sample of 145 company moves
displayed in column (1) of Table VI, Panel A.
14

Aside from the change in dividend-payer status and the change in Local Seniors across the two

communities, regressions include changes in all of the firm-level covariates displayed in Table II (Net
Income, Cash, Q, Debt, Volatility, Two-Year Lagged Return, Log of Market Value, Log of Assets, and
Asset Growth), as well as the age-group indicator variables at the time of the move.

45

15

Coefficients associated with changes in the firm-level variables in these change regressions line up as

expected. See Table IA.VI of the Internet Appendix for the coefficient estimates associated with the other
independent variables.
16

Corporations generally are known to care, at least to some extent, about retail investors. According to

Brav, Graham, Harvey, and Michaely (2005), executives believe attracting retail investors to purchase
their stock is an important motivation behind company dividend policy.
17

18

We thank Denis Gromb for suggesting this approach.
This methodology avoids normalizing by any small quantity (such as the dividend amount) and,

therefore, is more statistically robust.
19

The Elton and Gruber (1970) estimation corresponds to estimating this regression and weighting

observations by the inverse of their dividend yield (that is, putting the most weight on the observations
pertaining to stocks with the lowest yields). Thus, our methodology generalizes the original approach
from Elton and Gruber (1970).
20

The coefficient associated with Local Seniors in the specification presented in column (3) is 0.004 (SE =

0.005) and the coefficient associated with Median Income is 0.009 (SE = 0.004).
21

Once again for readability, in Table VII we do not report the coefficients associated with Local Seniors

and Median Income, respectively, nor their interactions with Small Firm, the small-firm indicator
variable. The coefficient associated with Local Seniors in the specification presented in column (4) is
-0.001 (SE = 0.003) and the interaction of Local Seniors and Small Firm is -0.001 (SE = 0.011). The
coefficient associated with Median Income is 0.001 (SE = 0.001) and the interaction of Median Income
with Small Firm is 0.016 (SE = 0.070).

46

Internet Appendix to “Local Dividend Clienteles” *
Table IA.I
Dividend Payout and Local Seniors

This table presents regression results for firm dividend payout behavior, estimated over the
sample of pooled observations from the 1980, 1990, and 2000 cross-sections. The regressions and
all the variables mirror those from Table II (see Table II for further details). Instead of OLS
(featured in Table II), in this table a probit model is employed for the regression results reported
in the first and third columns, a logit specification is employed for the results reported in the
second and fourth columns, and a tobit model is employed for the regression results reported in
the fifth column. Standard errors (shown in parentheses) allow for heteroskedasticity and are
clustered by firm.

Local Seniors
Net Income
Cash
Q
Debt
Volatility
Two-Year Lagged Return
Log of Market Value
Log of Assets
Asset Growth
Pseudo R-squared
Number of Observations
***, **, *

Dividend
Payer
Probit
Logit
***
2.7
4.1***
(0.8)
(1.4)
3.1***
7.8***
(0.9)
(0.9)
***
-0.45
-1.0***
(0.18)
(0.3)
***
-0.16
-0.31***
(0.03)
(0.05)
-0.68***
-1.0***
(0.13)
(0.2)
***
-10.3
-20.0***
(0.6)
(1.0)
0.02
0.01
(0.03)
(0.05)
***
0.36
0.61***
(0.04)
(0.06)
-0.07*
-0.08
(0.04)
(0.07)
***
-0.43
-0.73***
(0.10)
(0.19)
0.558
0.566
12,107
12,107

Dividend
Initiation
Probit
Logit
***
9.2
16.2***
(2.5)
(4.7)
1.1*
0.91
(0.6)
(0.74)
***
1.2
2.1***
(0.3)
(0.6)
***
-0.60
-0.39***
(0.10)
(0.09)
-0.89**
-1.4**
(0.37)
(0.7)
***
-2.3
-4.3***
(0.8)
(1.6)
***
0.14
0.14
(0.05)
(0.10)
***
0.38
0.39***
(0.09)
(0.14)
-0.18**
-0.09**
(0.09)
(0.13)
-0.21
-0.43
(0.24)
(0.52)
0.321
0.124
6,200
6,200

Dividend
Yield
Tobit
13.4 ***
(2.5)
6.3 ***
(0.8)
1.2 **
(0.5)
-0.35 ***
(0.06)
-2.4 ***
(0.4)
-37.6 ***
(1.4)
0.15 *
(0.09)
0.31 ***
(0.10)
0.19 *
(0.10)
-2.2 ***
(0.3)
0.161
12,107

denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

Citation format: Becker, Bo, Zoran Ivković, and Scott Weisbenner, 2010, Internet Appendix to “Local
Dividend Clienteles,” Journal of Finance 65, pppp - pppp, http://www.afajof.org/IA/2010.asp. Please
note: Wiley-Blackwell is not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting information
supplied by the authors. Any queries (other than missing material) should be directed to the authors of
the article.

*

1

Table IA.II
Economic Magnitudes of Effects of Local Seniors and Various Firm-Specific Controls
on Dividend Policy

This table is based upon the regression coefficients reported in Table II. It presents the effects of
a one-standard deviation increase in a given independent variable upon firm dividend policy.
Each panel in this table, pertaining to one dividend payout variable, corresponds to a column in
Table II. The first column of this table replicates the coefficients and significance levels of Local
Seniors and key firm-level independent variables. The second column features the standard
deviations of the independent variables in the sample. The third column presents the effects of a
one standard-deviation increase of the independent variable upon the firm dividend policy
(expressed in percentage points). Finally, the fourth column presents the ratio of that effect to
the sample average of the respective dividend-policy variable (expressed in percentage points).

Panel A: Dividend Payer (sample average = 47.4)

Local Seniors
Cash
Q
Debt
Volatility
Two-Year Lagged Return
Log of Market Value

Regression
Coefficient

59.3 ***
-9.7 ***
-2.5 ***
-16.8 ***
-131.4 ***
-0.05
9.2 ***

Std. Dev of
Variable

0.031
0.17
1.9
0.19
0.09
1.08
2.3

1-Std. Dev
Effect

1.8
-1.6
-4.7
-3.2
-11.8
-0.1
21.2

1-SD Effect /
Avg. of Div. Payer

3.9%
-3.5%
-10.0%
-6.7%
-24.9%
-0.1%
44.6%

Panel B: Dividend Initiation (sample average = 2.0)

Local Seniors
Cash
Q
Debt
Volatility
Two-Year Lagged Return
Log of Market Value

Regression
Coefficient

32.9 ***
3.7 ***
-0.4 ***
-2.6 ***
-6.3 ***
0.32 *
0.44 **

Std. Dev of
Variable

0.031
0.17
1.9
0.19
0.09
1.08
2.3

1-Std. Dev
Effect

1.0
0.6
-0.8
-0.5
-0.6
0.4
1.0

1-SD Effect /
Avg. of Div. Initiation

51.0%
31.5%
-38.0%
-24.7%
-28.4%
17.3%
50.6%

Panel C: Dividend Yield (sample average = 1.9)

Local Seniors
Cash
Q
Debt
Volatility
Two-Year Lagged Return
Log of Market Value
***, **, *

Regression
Coefficient

7.4 ***
0.9 *
-0.06 **
-1.1 ***
-6.3 ***
-0.04
0.04

Std. Dev of
Variable

0.031
0.17
1.9
0.19
0.09
1.08
2.3

1-Std. Dev
Effect

0.23
0.15
-0.11
-0.21
-0.57
-0.04
0.09

1-SD Effect /
Avg. of Div. Yield

12.1%
8.1%
-6.0%
-11.0%
-29.8%
-2.3%
4.8%

denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.
2

Table IA.III
Reduction in R-Squared When Omitting a Variable

This table is based upon the regression coefficients reported in Table II. It presents the effects of
a one-standard deviation increase in a given independent variable upon firm dividend policy.
Each panel in this table, pertaining to one dividend payout variable, corresponds to a column in
Table II. The first column of this table replicates the coefficients and significance levels of Local
Seniors and key firm-level independent variables. The second column features the standard
deviations of the independent variables in the sample. The third column presents the effects of a
one standard-deviation increase of the independent variable upon the firm dividend policy
(expressed in percentage points). Finally, the fourth column presents the ratio of that effect to
the sample average of the respective dividend-policy variable (expressed in percentage points).

Adjusted R-squared for
Full Specification
Local Seniors
Net Income
Cash
Q
Debt
Volatility
Two-Year Lagged Return
Log of Market Value
Age variables

Dividend Payer

Dividend Initiation

52.8%

8.6%

Dividend Yield
29.5%

Reduction of Adjusted R-squared When Variable Omitted
0.1%
0.2%
0.2%
0%
0%
0%
0.1%
0.2%
0.1%
0.4%
0.2%
0%
0.3%
0.1%
0.2%
2.8%
0.1%
0.1%
0%
0%
0%
1.6%
0%
0%
1.6%
0.1%
0.4%

3

Table IA.IV
Dividend Omissions and Local Seniors

This table presents regression results for the likelihood a firms stops paying dividends,
estimated over the sample of pooled observations from the 1980, 1990, and 2000 cross-sections.
The dividend omission variable is measured one year after the firm-level controls (i.e., in 1981,
1991, and 2001, respectively). Dividend Omission is an indicator variable defined for firms that
paid dividends during year t. Its values are 0 for the firms that remain payers in year t+1, and
100 for payers during year t that do not pay dividends in year t+1. The control variables mirror
those from Table II and Table IA.I (see Table II for further details). Results from an OLS
regression are displayed in column one, with regression coefficients from probit and logit
models displayed in the second and third columns, respectively. Standard errors (shown in
parentheses) allow for heteroskedasticity and are clustered by firm.

Local Seniors
Net Income
Cash
Q
Debt
Volatility
Two-Year Lagged Return
Log of Market Value
Log of Assets
Asset Growth
Pseudo R-squared
Number of Observations
***, **, *

OLS

Probit

Logit

-4.6
(13.6)
-61.8***
(17.2)
0.8
(3.2)
2.7***
(0.5)
-1.3
(3.2)
119.2***
(11.9)
-2.8***
(0.5)
-5.4***
(0.9)
3.8***
(0.9)
-7.5***
(2.5)

-0.61
(1.85)
-3.2***
(1.2)
0.07
(0.46)
0.23***
(0.03)
0.53*
(0.30)
10.5***
(1.3)
-0.42***
(0.14)
-0.90***
(0.10)
0.55***
(0.09)
-0.80***
(0.28)

-1.5
(3.9)
-8.2**
(3.3)
0.0
(1.0)
0.44***
(0.08)
0.88
(0.64)
22.2***
(2.9)
-1.2***
(0.3)
-1.6***
(0.2)
1.0***
(0.2)
-1.6***
(0.6)

0.240
5,907

0.505
5,907

0.516
5,907

denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

4

Table IA.V
Propensity of Sale and Local Seniors

The Cox proportional hazards model employs a non-parametric estimate of the baseline hazard
(i.e., the probability of selling the stock in month t after the purchase, conditional on no prior
sale). The first column features a common baseline hazard λ0(t), whereas the next two columns
report results allowing for stock-specific baseline hazards λj(t). The proportional hazards model
(assuming a common-baseline hazard rate) takes the functional form of (λ0(t) * eXi,t β) where:
X i, t β = β1*GAINi, t-1 + β2*GAINi, t-1*Decemberi, t + β3*LOSSi, t-1 + β4*LOSSi, t-1*Decemberi, t +
β5*Decemberi, t + β6*Locali + β7*Seniori, t + β8*Locali x Seniori, t + εi, t.
GAIN = max(return, 0) and LOSS = min(return, 0), where return is defined as the capital
appreciation of the stock since purchase. December is an indicator variable; it is equal to 1 for
December observations, and is equal to 0 otherwise. Local is an indicator variable; it is equal to
1 if the company headquarters are located within 250 miles from the household, and is equal to
0 otherwise. Senior is an indicator variable; it is equal to 1 if the investor is 65 years of age or
older, and is equal to 0 otherwise. All regressions are estimated over the full sample of 1,409,587
observations (i.e., potential monthly sale decisions), based upon common-stock purchases made
by just over 30,000 households through a large discount broker over the period from 1991 to
1996. Standard errors (shown in parentheses) allow for heteroskedasticity as well as correlation
across observations of the same household.
Common Baseline
(1)
0.09 ***
(0.01)

Stock-Specific Baselines
(2)
(3)
***
GAIN
0.09
0.09 ***
(0.02)
(0.02)
Local x Senior x GAIN
0.04
(0.10)
GAIN x December
-0.02
-0.10 **
-0.09 **
(0.03)
(0.05)
(0.05)
Local x Senior x GAIN x December
-0.19
(0.44)
LOSS
1.08 ***
1.65 ***
1.66 ***
(0.04)
(0.05)
(0.05)
Local x Senior x LOSS
-0.32
(0.30)
LOSS x December
-2.32 ***
-2.52 ***
-2.52 ***
(0.08)
(0.10)
(0.10)
Local x Senior x LOSS x December
-0.14
(0.64)
December
0.14 ***
0.15 ***
0.15 ***
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02)
Local x Senior x December
0.15
(0.17)
Local (250 miles)
-0.14 ***
-0.14 ***
-0.14 ***
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
***
***
Senior (65+)
-0.13
-0.05
-0.05 ***
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02)
***
***
Local (250 miles) x Senior (65+)
-0.11
-0.14
-0.18 ***
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.06)
***, **, * denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.
5

Table IA.VI
Dividend Payout and Local Seniors, Mover Regressions

This table presents results of OLS regressions that relate changes in dividend-payer status to
changes in Local Seniors, as well as changes in the other independent variables described in Table
VI. The results are presented in five columns, corresponding to post-move horizons of one to five
years, respectively, for the change regressions estimated over the full sample. The coefficients
associated with the variables Change in Local Seniors and Firm Moved reported below are also
reported in the second column of each of the five panels presented in Table VI. Standard errors
(shown in parentheses) allow for heteroskedasticity and are clustered by firm.
1 Year
2 Years
3 Years
4 Years
5 Years
Post-Move Post-Move Post-Move Post-Move Post-Move
Change in Dividend-Payer Status

Relative to Relative to Relative to Relative to Relative to
1 Year
Pre-Move

1 Year
Pre-Move

1 Year
Pre-Move

1 Year
Pre-Move

0.024
14,338

0.039
12,829

0.055
11,693

0.068
10,825

98.1**
(41.1)
Firm Moved
1.0
(1.4)
Change in Net Income
-1.2*
(0.7)
Change in Cash
1.5
(1.7)
Change in Q
-0.37***
(0.12)
Change in Debt
-1.1
(1.9)
Change in Volatility
-21.5***
(3.0)
Change in Two-Year Lagged Return -0.49**
(0.20)
Change in Log of Market Value
3.5***
(0.5)
Change in Log of Assets
-1.1
(0.7)
Change in Asset Growth
-0.33
(0.69)
Change in Local Seniors

Adjusted R-squared
Number of Observations
***, **, *

163.2**
(69.6)
-0.2
(1.6)
-1.5*
(0.8)
-0.7
(1.9)
-0.65***
(0.14)
-3.7*
(2.2)
-32.6***
(3.7)
-0.57**
(0.24)
4.3***
(0.5)
-1.9**
(0.8)
-0.04
(0.75)

187.1**
(82.4)
-0.7
(2.2)
-3.2***
(0.9)
-0.5
(2.3)
-0.91***
(0.17)
-7.8***
(2.7)
-44.8***
(4.6)
-0.36
(0.31)
5.2***
(0.7)
-2.3***
(0.9)
0.27
(0.85)

213.4**
(89.1)
-0.8
(2.6)
-2.5**
(1.2)
2.3
(2.6)
-1.18***
(0.22)
-6.8**
(2.8)
-52.9***
(5.6)
-0.66**
(0.34)
6.8***
(0.8)
-3.4***
(1.0)
-0.43
(1.02)

1 Year
Pre-Move

300.9 ***
(114.3)
0.8
(3.6)
-2.9 *
(1.5)
4.1
(3.0)
-1.16 ***
(0.25)
-7.4 ***
(2.9)
-58.9 ***
(7.1)
-0.63 *
(0.39)
6.8 ***
(0.9)
-2.9 ***
(1.1)
-0.50
(1.09)
0.070
9,748

denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

6

