                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               INSULATION IMPOSSIBLE:
                       FISCAL SPILLOVERS IN A MONETARY UNION

                                            Russell Cooper
                                            Hubert Kempf
                                              Dan Peled

                                        Working Paper 15176
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15176


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2009




Russell Cooper is grateful to the NSF for financial support and to seminar participants at the University
of Texas, the Bank of Canada, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, the Federal Reserve Bank of
Dallas, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the
Banque de France, T2M 2009 Meeting (Strasbourg), European Central Bank, University of Bern, Cardi_
Business School, the University of Melbourne, Bocconi, University, the University of California at
Davis, the Banco de Espana conference on "Interactions between Monetary and Fiscal Policy", the
Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance and the Universidad de San Andres for comments and
suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Russell Cooper, Hubert Kempf, and Dan Peled. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Insulation Impossible: Fiscal Spillovers in a Monetary Union
Russell Cooper, Hubert Kempf, and Dan Peled
NBER Working Paper No. 15176
July 2009, Revised April 2010
JEL No. E61,E63,F15,H77

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper studies fiscal spillovers in a monetary union. The focus of the analysis is on the interaction
between the fiscal policy of member countries (regions) and the central monetary authority. When
capital markets are integrated, the fiscal policy of one country will influence equilibrium wages and
interest rates. Thus there are fiscal spillovers within a federation. The magnitude and direction of these
spillovers, in particular the presence of a crowding out effect, can be influenced by the choice of monetary
policy rules. We find that there does not exist a monetary policy rule which completely insulates agents
in one region from fiscal policy in another. Some familiar policy rules, such as pegging an interest
rate, can provide partial insulation.


Russell Cooper                                       Dan Peled
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
BRB, 2.102A                                          University of Haifa
University of Texas                                  Haifa 31905, ISRAEL
Austin, TX 78712                                     dpeled@econ.haifa.ac.il
and NBER
cooper@eco.utexas.edu

Hubert Kempf
M.A.D.-Universite Paris I
Panthian-Sorhonne
106-112 Boulevard de l'Hopital
75013 Paris FRANCE
Hubert.Kempf@univ-paris1.fr
        Insulation Impossible: Fiscal Spillovers in a Monetary Union∗

                                 Russell Cooper†, Hubert Kempf‡, and Dan Peled§

                                                        April 3, 2010



                                                            Abstract

            This paper studies fiscal spillovers in a monetary union. The focus of the analysis is on the interaction
        between the fiscal policy of member countries (regions) and the central monetary authority. When capital
        markets are integrated, the fiscal policy of one country will influence equilibrium wages and interest rates.
        Thus there are fiscal spillovers within a federation. The magnitude and direction of these spillovers, in
        particular the presence of a crowding out effect, can be influenced by the choice of monetary policy rules.
        We find that there does not exist a monetary policy rule which completely insulates agents in one region
        from fiscal policy in another. Some familiar policy rules, such as pegging an interest rate, can provide
        partial insulation.



1       Introduction
This paper studies fiscal spillovers in a monetary union. The focus of the analysis is the interaction between
the effects of fiscal policy of member countries and the monetary rule chosen by the common central bank.
     A gain from the integration of capital markets between countries is a more efficient allocation of capital
across economies. But, at the same time, integration implies that the fiscal policy of one country will impact
agents in all countries through relative prices. This may occur in the usual practice of fiscal policy. These
spillovers are more apparent during times of fiscal crises, such as the difficult situation of Greece in early
2010.
     Given these spillovers, we ask whether there exists a monetary policy rule that insulates agents in one
region from the effects of fiscal policy in another. Our main finding is that such insulation is impossible.
    ∗ Russell   Cooper is grateful to the NSF for financial support and to seminar participants at the University of Texas, the
Bank of Canada, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, the Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Banque de France, T2M 2009 Meeting (Strasbourg), European
Central Bank, University of Bern, Cardiff Business School, the University of Melbourne, Bocconi, University, the University
of California at Davis, the Banco de Espana conference on ”Interactions between Monetary and Fiscal Policy”, the Einaudi
Institute for Economics and Finance and the Universidad de San Andres for comments and suggestions.
   † Department of Economics, European University Institute, Florence Italy and Department of Economics, University of

Texas, Austin, TX. 78712, russellcoop@gmail.com
  ‡ Banque de France and Paris School of Economics, kempf@univ-paris1.fr
  § Department of Economics, University of Haifa, Haifa 31905, Israel, dpeled@econ.haifa.ac.il




                                                                1
                                                                                           1   INTRODUCTION


   This paper is partly motivated by recent experience within the European Monetary Union. This is a
leading example of a federation in which member states conduct independent fiscal policies yet there is a
single central bank.
   Recent events make clear the presence of fiscal spillovers. The difficult fiscal situation of several countries
of the EMU, such as Greece, Spain and Portugal, resulted in a severe depreciation of the euro and increased
interest rate spreads in the first term of 2010, illustrating that fiscal spillovers are at work within the EMU.
   One way to deal with these fiscal spillovers is through the coordination of fiscal policy between the various
policymakers active in the monetary union. Alternatively, working through the institutional design of the
union, countries will attempt to insulate their economies from the fiscal policies of others.
   Of course, these spillovers were anticipated at the creation of the EMU. For various reasons, in particular
the pressures of national constituencies, the second option of insulation was chosen. There is no significant
European budget, able to make cross-border transfers. Article 105b of the Maastricht treaty (1993) forbid
any direct transfer between two public authorities. The Amsterdam Treaty included a Stability and Growth
Pact, with the aim of severely limiting the capacity of a national fiscal authority to create deficit. In addition,
the European Central Bank, the sole supranational authority existing in the eurozone, is probably the most
independent central bank in the world, its independence being guaranteed by international Treaties ratified
by twenty-seven countries.
   Yet, despite these provisions expressing a common desire to insulate the rest of the union from profligate
fiscal policy adopted by one member country, the outcome since the creation of the euro in 1999 has not
met this goal. The Stability and Growth Pact has been vastly relaxed in 2005, and the Greek debacle
constrained the European ministers of Finance to state that Greece would not be allowed to default on its
public debt, but without being precise on their commitment to help Greece. The ECB itself attempted to
reassure markets on the credibility of the Greek adjustment program. In other words, the monetary stance
to be followed in the eurozone is a key element for the capacity of heavily indebted European countries to
restore their public finances. Our paper is a theoretical attempt to reflect on the difficult situation of the
eurozone and understand why a Union’s central bank cannot guarantee fiscal insulation.
   The analysis is part of a more general issue of bailout. Within any federation, member countries have a
desire to spread their tax burden onto others. This might arise through a bailout of regional obligations by
a central entity, either a monetary authority, as in Cooper, Kempf, and Peled (2008), or a Treasury, as in
Cooper, Kempf, and Peled (2010).
   Beyond these explicit bailouts, there are more subtle channels of interaction across countries within a
federation. These linkages arise in two forms. First, the debt policies of large regions may impact equilibrium
prices, which we term “fiscal spillover”. Second, depending on the monetary rule in place, debt policy may
elicit a response by the monetary authority. If, for example, the central bank responds to variations in prices,
then fiscal spillovers create a dependence of monetary policy on regional fiscal policy. This response might
not be termed a “bailout” since any reaction of the monetary authority appears to be part of the normal
operating procedure of the central bank. Thus our analysis highlights the inescapable interplay between fiscal
policy and monetary rules. The choice of monetary policy rules will impact on the conduct and consequences
of fiscal policy by governments within a federation.


                                                        2
                                                                                              2   MULTI-REGION MODEL


     We explore these issues in a multi-region overlapping generations model with money, capital and bonds.
In this model, a monetary policy rule specifies region specific transfers as a function of economy aggregates.
We study the effects of the debt issued by one region on the steady state of this economy, focusing on
spillovers from one region to another.
     In our analysis, we provide sufficient conditions on monetary policy for crowding out: an increase in the
debt of one region reduces the capital stock of the federation. We further argue that there does not exist a
monetary policy rule which would eliminate these fiscal spillovers. In particular, there is no monetary policy
rule which makes the equilibrium allocation of region 2 agents independent of region 1 fiscal policy. That
is, region 2 agents cannot be insulated from the level of region 1 debt. Moreover, no monetary policy rule
can prevent equilibrium consumptions of agents in the two regions and the capital stock from varying with
region 1 fiscal policy. From these two findings we conclude that steady state allocations cannot be insulated
from the fiscal policy of region 1.
     We also use our framework to highlight the interaction between the effects of monetary policy and market
structure. If, for example, some agents do not save through intermediaries, then these agents will bear any
inflation tax induced by fiscal actions of a regional government. If all capital flows are eliminated across
regions, then there will exist a monetary policy to insulate agents of one region from the fiscal actions of
other regional governments. In this case, insulation is possible but it requires the complete disintegration of
capital market links.



2      Multi-Region Model
We study a multi-region (multi-country) infinite overlapping generations model with three stores of value:
capital, money and bonds.1 Agents live for two periods in one of two regions, i = 1, 2. The size of each
generation is normalized to 1 with a fraction η i of the agents living in region i = 1, 2.
     As our focus is on the interaction between the regions and the choice of monetary rules, we study the
unique monetary steady state of the overlapping generations model. Thus the presentation of the basic
model ignores time subscripts.


2.1         Households
Households are endowed with one unit of time in youth which is inelastically supplied to the labor market
in return for a real wage ω. Consumption occurs in both youth and old age. Hence, households consume a
portion of their wage and save the rest via an intermediary which pays a real rate of return R.
     The household in region i receives a transfer g i from its regional government in the first period and pays
a tax of τti in period t = y, o for i = 1, 2 where t = y denotes youth and t = o denotes old age. The household
in region i chooses how much to save, denoted si , to solve

                                                       maxs u(ciy ) + v(cio )                                                 (1)
    1 The   structure is similar to that in Kehoe (1987) except that we consider a monetary economy and allow regional governments
to run deficits.



                                                                  3
                                                                                               2   MULTI-REGION MODEL


where ciy = ω + g i − τyi − s and cio = sR − τoi . The first-order condition for the household is

                                                        u0 (ciy ) = Rv 0 (cio ).                                                (2)

    Here R is interpreted as the rate of return offered by competitive financial intermediaries, described
below. These intermediaries are open to all agents regardless of region (country). Thus financial markets
are fully integrated.
    Let s(ω, R, τy , τo ) denote the savings function of a household.2 We assume sR (ω, R, τy , τo ) > 0 so that
the substitution effect dominates and, as usual, sω (ω, R, τy , τo ) > 0.


2.2       Firms
Firms in both regions have access to the same constant returns to scale technology which converts labor (L)
and capital (K) into the single consumption good: Y = F (K, L). Firms maximize profits of F (K, L)−ωL−rK
                                                                  K
leading to ω = FL (K, L) and r = FK (K, L). If k ≡                L    is the per worker capital stock, then these first order
                                          0                 0
conditions become ω = f (k) − kf (k) and r = f (k) where f (k) = F (k, 1). Capital fully depreciates in the
production process.


2.3       Regional Governments
The government in region 1, denoted RG1 , is the sole active government.3 It transfers an exogenous amount
g 1 to young agents of each generation and levies taxes on young and old agents. It issues a quantity B 1 , per
region 1 agent, of one-period debt in each period. In addition, it receives a real transfer from the central
bank of T 1 , per region 1 agent.
    For this analysis, the fiscal policy of RG1 is characterized by the amount of debt it issues, B 1 . The
difference between government transfers and taxes collected from young agents is financed by issuing debt.
The taxes collected from old agents plus the real value of transfers from the central bank, T 1 , are used to
retire the debt in the next period.4 These flows are summarized by


                                              B 1 = g 1 − τy1 ,        B 1 r = τo1 + T 1 .                                      (3)

Here the region 1 government must pay the same return on its debt, r, paid to lenders by firms.
    Region 2 does not make transfers to young agents, g 2 = 0. However, depending on the nature of operations
of the central bank, the region 2 government receives transfers, T 2 , which are then rebated to old agents,
τo2 = −T 2 .


2.4       Intermediaries
There are intermediaries who provide the link between households and assets (loans to firms and government
debt) and these intermediaries are subject to a reserve requirement. This reserve requirement creates a
  2 The    dependence of s(·) on g is suppressed since g is held constant throughout the analysis.
  3 This   exercise could also be viewed as characterizing the marginal effects of region 1 fiscal policy given the fiscal policy of
region 2.
   4 Thus the budget balance requirement is within a generation and abstracts from any intergenerational transfers.




                                                                   4
                                                                                          2   MULTI-REGION MODEL


demand for money even when the return on bonds and loans exceeds the return on money.5
   The intermediaries take in total deposit, S = i η i si , and lend them to firms, k, and to the region 1
                                                P

government, b. There is a reserve requirement that a fraction λ of the deposit must be held as money. Hence

                                          M
                                            = λS         and       b + k = (1 − λ)S.                                      (4)
                                          p
    The return on deposits R satisfies

                                                                           λ
                                                      R = r(1 − λ) +                                                      (5)
                                                                           π
where r is, as above, the rental rate on capital, and π is one plus the inflation rate. Government bonds, as
they compete with loans in the portfolio of the intermediary, must also have a return of r.


2.5        Central Bank
The Central Bank (CB ) controls the supply of money. Changes in the supply of money are brought about
through transfers to regional governments and thus to agents in those regions.6
    Let T (k, b) be the total transfer function of the CB where k is the per capita capital stock in the economy
and b is the per capita level of region 1 debt, where b = η 1 B 1 .7 We characterize the conduct of monetary
policy and its dependence on the aggregate state of the economy, summarized by the state vector (k, b),
through this transfer function. We do not consider monetary policy rules dependent upon region specific
variables.
   In general, both regional governments receive transfers from the CB. The region i government receives a
transfer of φi T (k, b) from the CB, where φi ∈ [0, 1] and i φi = 1. The transfer T (k, b) is per capita in the
                                                          P

federation. Denote by T i (k, b) the transfer per capita made to region i agents: η i T i (k, b) = φi T (k, b).8
    We assume the CB is able to commit to a monetary policy rule, defined by a transfer function, T (k, b),
along with the shares, (φ1 , φ2 ). We explore the implications of T (k, b) for the fiscal policy of region 1. The
policy response of the CB noted in the introduction is embedded in the transfer function.
    In our analysis, we also emphasize three particular monetary policy rules. The first is an inflation target
in which the CB commits to a money growth rate. The second is an interest rate rule in which the CB
commits to target an interest rate.9 Finally, we study a rule in which the CB pays interest in reserves. For
a given rule, we specify the corresponding T (k, b) policy function of the CB.
   5 The    introduction of a reserve requirement follows Smith (1994).
   6 We    do not consider open market operations. In some settings, as discussed in Smith (1994) these two forms of monetary
operations may not be equivalent.
   7 In the analysis, we use B 1 when referring to the debt (per member of region 1) of a regional government and use b as the

debt of region 1 per capita to describe equilibrium objects.
   8 Thus the total transfer is T (k, b) =
                                           P i i
                                            i η T (k, b).
   9 We explore a variety of pegs distinguished by which rate is pegged.




                                                               5
                                                                                          2   MULTI-REGION MODEL


2.6    Equilibrium Conditions
We focus on steady state equilibrium of this economy, given a stock of region 1 debt. We then characterize
the dependence of the steady state equilibrium on regional debt.
   Given a transfer function, T (k, b) and fiscal policy of region 1, b, a steady state equilibrium satisfies the
following conditions:

   • Household optimization characterized by the first order condition for a representative region i house-
      hold:


                                                    u0 (ciy ) = Rv 0 (cio )                                   (6)



                                      ciy = ω + g i − τyi − si ,        cio = Rsi − τoi                       (7)

      for i = 1, 2.

   • budget constraint for region i government determining τyi and τoi from (k, b):


                                          b                         b
                                            = g 1 − τy1 ,             r = τo1 + T 1 ,                         (8)
                                         η1                        η1
      and


                                             g 2 = τy2 = 0,         τo2 = −T 2 .                              (9)

   • factor market equilibrium conditions: ω(k) = f (k) − kf 0 (k) and r(k) = f 0 (k).

   • zero-profit condition for intermediary: R = (1 − λ)r(k) + πλ .

   Given the assumption of constant returns to scale, the number of producers is not determined in equi-
librium. We assume that there is a single firm producing, hiring workers from all regions.
   The integration of capital markets implies that in each period, the markets of money, capital rentals,
labor and government bonds must clear. The functions ω(k) and r(k) guarantee that the markets for capital
and labor clear at the given levels of factor supply. The market for government bonds will clear as long as
the government pays the market clearing rate of interest.
   Finally, the rate of inflation is determined by the growth in the money supply which in turn depends on
the transfer policy of the CB. In particular, the change in the nominal money supply equals the nominal
value of the total transfers:


                                           Mt+1 − Mt = pt+1 T (k, b).                                        (10)

Let σ(k, b) be defined as one plus the rate of money growth, so

                                        Mt+1 − Mt = (σ(k, b) − 1)Mt .                                        (11)


                                                          6
                                                                                         3   EQUILIBRIUM ANALYSIS


The rate of money growth is linked to the transfer policy by:
                                                             
                                             σ(k, b) − 1      λ
                                T (k, b) =                        (k + b).                                               (12)
                                               σ(k, b)      1−λ

From this, (5) and using π = σ in steady state, the return on deposits depends on the transfer function,
                                                                             
                                                                     T (k, b)
                                        R(k, b) = λ + (1 − λ) r(k) −            .                                        (13)
                                                                      k+b
    Putting these conditions together, we can rewrite the first-order conditions for the households in regions
i = 1, 2 as
                                                                                    
                                    b                                    b
                          u0 ω(k) + 1 − s1 = R(k, b)v 0 R(k, b)s1 − r(k) 1 + T 1 (k, b) ,                                (14)
                                   η                                    η
and


                                   u0 ω(k) − s2 = R(k, b)v 0 R(k, b)s2 + T 2 (k, b) .
                                                                                  
                                                                                                                         (15)

These two conditions, since they incorporate the regional governments’ budget constraints, factor market
clearing and the determination of the return on deposits, are used for the equilibrium analysis. Together,
(13)-(15) along with (4) determine the equilibrium values of (s1 , s2 , k) given a transfer function, T (k, b), a
level of b and φi , i = 1, 2.



3       Equilibrium Analysis
The analysis characterizes two types of steady state equilibria. The first occurs when the reserve requirement
is not binding so that money earns the same return as other assets. In this case, there may be no fiscal
spillovers from regional fiscal policy.
    The second corresponds to an economy in which the reserve requirement binds. Then, the fiscal policy
of one region is not neutral and instead impacts on equilibrium wages and interest rates. That is, there are
fiscal spillovers.


3.1      Non-binding Reserve Requirements
As a benchmark, we start the analysis by studying economies in which the reserve requirement does not
bind. Then, the rates of return on money, capital and bonds must be equal in equilibrium.10 In equilibrium,
(14) and (15) hold with R = r. Since the reserve requirement does not bind, (12) does not hold.
    We distinguish two cases: one in which the transfer function depends on k only and a second in which
transfers depend directly on b. These two cases are economically important. If the CB conditions its policy
on b, then its response to the fiscal policy of the regional government is direct: changes in the amount of
 10 A   stationary monetary equilibrium exists in an overlapping generation model with real assets, no productivity growth and
no asset markets frictions if and only if the real rate of return on assets in the non-monetary equilibrium is lower than the
population growth rate.




                                                               7
                                                                                       3   EQUILIBRIUM ANALYSIS


regional debt elicits a monetary response. In this case, it is not surprising that fiscal policy of one region
has monetary consequences.
   If, instead, the CB conditions policy only on k, then the link between regional fiscal actions and a
monetary response will be indirect. This dependence of monetary policy on capital arises from the dependence
of wages and interest rates on the capital stock. As we shall see, in this case, variations in fiscal policy which
induce changes in the capital stock lead to changes in prices. Under some policy rules, a monetary response
arises. The key to this linkage between fiscal and monetary policy is the ability of regional fiscal policy to
affect the aggregate capital stock.


3.1.1    Transfer Function Independent of b

Suppose the transfer function depends only on k. Any feedback of monetary policy is through variations in k
induced by the regional fiscal policy. From the next proposition, the steady state equilibrium is independent
of the fiscal policy of region 1. Thus, in the steady state equilibrium, the transfers are independent of the
region 1 policy.

Proposition 1 If Tb (k, b) ≡ 0, then the steady state equilibrium is independent of b.

Proof.     The first-order conditions and consumption levels are given by (14) and (15). At a monetary
steady state equilibrium with a non-binding reserve requirement, R(k, b) = r(k). With the assumption of
                                                                                                           b
Tb (k, b) ≡ 0, the only impact of region 1 fiscal policy on these conditions is through the term          η1   in (14). In
                                                                                   1          T
particular, T 1 and T 2 do not depend on b by assumption, and r(k) =               σ   = 1−   Q   where Q is real money
balances. Accordingly, the first-order condition for region 1 agents determines only the difference between
                                               b
saving and bonds in that region, (s1 −        η 1 ).   Real money balances, Q = η 1 s1 + η 2 s2 − k − b, do not depend
                 b
on b as (s1 −   η1 )   is invariant to b. Thus variations in region 1 debt are matched by variations in the saving
of that region.
   This is a standard Ricardian result. Essentially region 1 conducts fiscal policy in isolation from region 2
and from the CB. Variations in taxes set in youth influence the level of debt and taxes in the future. House-
holds in region 1 fully anticipate the link between current and future taxes and adjust savings accordingly.
There are no equilibrium effects of region 1 fiscal policy. That is, equilibrium interest rates and wages are
                    b
independent of     η1 .   In equilibrium the transfers of the CB are independent of the fiscal policy of region 1.


3.1.2    Transfer Function Dependent on b

Consider Tb (k, b) 6= 0 so the CB is induced to respond to region 1 fiscal policy directly. That is, even if
region 1 policy has no direct effect on the capital stock, the CB responds directly to variations in b. Given
this direct dependence of monetary policy on the per capita debt in the economy, it is not surprising that
the steady state depends on the fiscal policy stance of region 1.

Proposition 2 If Tb (k, b) 6= 0, then the steady state equilibrium depends upon b.

Proof. The conditions for equilibrium at the steady state are given by (14) and (15).


                                                               8
                                                                                              3   EQUILIBRIUM ANALYSIS


                                               b
    The equilibrium determines (s1 −                 2
                                              η 1 , s , k).   By assumption, T 1 (k, b) and T 2 (k, b) vary with b, given k.
                                                                               b
Hence (14) and (15) cannot hold at different values of b if (s1 −                    2
                                                                              η 1 , s , k)   remains unchanged.
    There are equilibrium effects of region 1 fiscal policy through a CB rule in which Tb (k, b) 6= 0. If this was
the only link between regions, a policy of limiting fiscal spillovers would be simple: the CB should adopt a
rule in which Tb (k, b) ≡ 0.


3.2       Binding Reserve Requirements
In this section, we study an economy in which the reserve requirement is binding. This friction in asset
markets breaks the equalization of returns on money and other assets and will lead to a couple of important
findings. First, Ricardian equivalence fails: the fiscal policy choice of region 1 will have real effects on the
capital stock and thus on wages and interest rates. Second, unless the CB adopts a rule in which T (k, b) is
independent of (k, b), the fiscal policy of region 1 will induce a monetary policy response.
    We study steady state equilibria with valued fiat money given the transfer function of the CB and the
fiscal policy of region 1. We compare steady states for different levels of debt issued by region 1.11
    Our starting point for the analysis is to study the case in which the CB commits not to make any
transfers, T (k, b) ≡ 0. This case is useful as it highlights the existence of fiscal spillovers: the impact of
region 1 fiscal policy on the steady state even for an inactive monetary authority.

Proposition 3 For T (k, b) ≡ 0, the steady state equilibrium is dependent on b.

Proof.        To see that region 1 fiscal policy does impact the steady state equilibrium, we assume that it
does not and reach a contradiction. Suppose the region 1 government alters the level of taxes in youth and
thus changes the level of debt it issues: ∆ ηb1 = −∆τy1 . If this change in fiscal policy was neutral, then
R would not change since, from (13), R does not depend on b when T (k, b) ≡ 0. In that case, region 1
agents would simply adjust their savings with the change in taxes. The change in aggregate saving would
be given by ∆S = η 1 ∆ ηb1 , where η 1 is again the size of the region 1 population. Using b + k = (1 − λ)S,
∆k = (1 − λ)∆S − ∆b. If the only change in aggregate saving is due to the change in region 1 debt, then
∆S = ∆b implies ∆k = (1 − λ)∆b − ∆b = −λ∆b 6= 0 when λ > 0. This contradicts the construction of an
equilibrium with neutral fiscal policy.
    Changes in b will thus affect k and hence the real interest rate and the real wage rate. The consumption
profile of region 2 agents is characterized by (14) and (15). Variations in ω and R induced by the fiscal policy
of region 1 will alter the consumption levels and welfare of region 2 agents. The equilibrium allocation is
                         b
not independent of      η1 .
    This proposition makes clear that the Ricardian result is not robust to the introduction of reserve re-
quirements. Given the differential in return between household saving and the interest on government debt,
r > R, the dependence of the steady state on region 1 fiscal policy is not surprising.
  11 We   use local dynamics only to obtain signs for comparative statics. Understanding how the transfer function of the CB
influences local dynamics is a topic for further study.




                                                                  9
                                                                                                                               3        EQUILIBRIUM ANALYSIS


       We study the local dynamics of the capital stock to determine the response of the economy to a change
in the debt of region 1. We do so in the neighborhood of a locally stable steady state with T (k, b) = 0 so,
from (12), σ(k, b) = 1. However, we now allow transfers to vary in response to changes in (k, b).

                            dkt+1                                                                                             dk
Proposition 4 If             dkt     ∈ (0, 1) at the steady state and Tb (k, b) ≥ 0, then                                     db   < 0.

Proof.
       The dynamic equation for the capital stock is:

                                                                 X
                                    kt+1 = (1 − λ)                       η i si (ω(kt ), R(kt+1 , b), τyi , τoi (kt+1 , b)) − b.                                           (16)
                                                                   i

where si (ω, R, τyi , τoi ) is the savings function for a region i agent given factor prices and taxes from (6). Here
                   r(kt+1 )b
τo1 (kt+1 , b) =      η1       − T 1 (kt+1 , b) and τo2 (kt+1 , b) = −T 2 (kt+1 , b) as in (8).
       Capital dynamics are governed by:

                                                         (1 − λ) i η i siω ω 0 (kt )
                                                                    P
                                    dkt+1
                                          =                                             ∂τ i (k ,b)
                                                                                                    .                                                                      (17)
                                     dkt    1 − (1 − λ)[ i η i (siR Rk (kt+1 , b) + siτo o ∂kt+1 )]
                                                        P

From the region 1 budget constraint, the tax when old depends on the capital stock as well as the transfers
                                                                       ∂τo1 (kt+1 ,b)       r 0 (kt+1 )b                                  ∂τo2 (kt+1 ,b)
from the CB.12 Thus, using (8) and (9),                                      ∂k         =         η1       − Tk1 (kt+1 , b) and                 ∂k         = −Tk2 (kt+1 , b).
       The proposition assumes that the steady state is locally stable: dkdkt+1
                                                                             t
                                                                                ∈ (0, 1) at the steady state. If the
                                                                                                                           dkt+1
CB is not responsive to variations in the capital stock, Tk (k, b) ≡ 0, then                                                dkt         < 1 iff
                                                                                                                                    !
                                               X
                                  (1 − λ)              η   i
                                                               (siω ω 0 (kt )   +   siR Rk (kt+1 , b))       +   s1τo r0 (kt+1 )b         < 1.                             (18)
                                                 i

As in the standard Diamond (1965) model, this inequality must be assumed to hold at a steady state.
                                    ∂τo1 (kt+1 ,b)       r 0 (kt+1 )b                          ∂τo2 (kt+1 ,b)
       With Tk (k, b) ≡ 0,                ∂k          =        η1              < 0 and               ∂k          = 0. Using siτo > 0 from consumption
                                                             i
smoothing, and the assumptions                       that sR > 0               and siω > 0, the numerator and the denominator of (17) are
                          dkt+1                                                                                 dkt+1
positive so that           dkt    > 0. From this and assuming (18) holds,                                        dkt    ∈ (0, 1) in the neighborhood of the
steady state.
                                                                                                                                                                      Tk (k,b)
       In general we will allow Tk (k, b) 6= 0. If Tk (k, b) ≥ 0, then from (13) , Rk (k, b) = (1 − λ)[r0 (k) −                                                        k+b       −
T (k,b)
(k+b)2 ] <     0. Therefore, the denominator of (17) remains positive, using                                                   siτo     > 0. Hence, we will have
dkt+1                                                              dkt+1
 dkt > 0.      This along with (18) implies                         dkt        ∈ (0, 1).
       The effect of a change in the level of region 1 debt on the steady state capital stock is:
                                                             dτ i       dτ i
                                                                                            
                                   −[1 − (1 − λ) i η i siτy dby + siτo dbo + siR Rb (k, b) ]
                                                  P
                           dk
                               =                                                     ∂τ i (k,b)
                                                                                                   .                                                                       (19)
                           db
                                               P i i
                                  1 − (1 − λ)[     η (s Rk (k, b) + siω ω 0 (k) + siτ o
                                                                           i        R           )]                        o        ∂k

                                                                                                                                   dτy1       −1 dτo
                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                               r
The denominator of (19) is positive based on local stability. From (8) and (9),                                                     db    =   η 1 , db     =   η1   −Tb1 (k, b),
dτy2               dτo2
 db    = 0 and      db    = −Tb2 (k, b). We use this to evaluate the numerator of (19). We find:
  12 As   the capital stock evolves, we assume that the regional government budget constraint is met by changes in taxes on
agents in old age only.




                                                                                        10
                                                                                                  4   INSULATION IMPOSSIBLE



                                                                                                                             !
                                                                         X
                                                                                   i
                                                                                                dτyi    i dτo
                                                                                                             i
                                                         −[1 − (1 − λ)         η         siτy        + sτo        i
                                                                                                               + sR Rb (k, b) ]
                                                                           i
                                                                                                db         db
    = −[1 − (1 − λ)(−s1τy + s1τo (r − Tb1 (k, b)η 1 ) + (1 − λ)η 2 Tb2 (k, b)s2τo − (1 − λ)(η 1 s1R + η 2 s2R )Rb (k, b)]
                                                                                       = −[1 − (1 − λ)(−s1τy + s1τo r) + Γ]
                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                              = −[λ − s1τo λ(R − ) + Γ]
                                                                                                                   σ
                                                                                                    1         1 1
                                                                                        = −[λ(1 − sτo R) + λsτo ( ) + Γ]
                                                                                                                   σ
where Γ = (1 − λ)[s1τo Tb1 (k, b)η 1 + s2τo Tb2 (k, b)η 2 − (η 1 s1R + η 2 s2R )Rb (k, b)]]. As noted earlier, siτo > 0, siR > 0
and Rb (k, b) < 0 from (13) at T (k, b) = 0. Thus Γ > 0.
     From the household’s optimization problem, Rsτo − sτy = 1 along with sτy < 0 and sτo > 0. Hence,
(1 − s1τo R) = −s1τy > 0.
     If Tb (k, b) ≥ 0, the numerator of (19) is negative as each of the three terms inside the bracket is positive.
         dk
Hence    db   < 0.
     This result provides sufficient conditions for the spillover of debt by RG1 to reduce the steady state
capital stock. Crowding out in this case is, in fact, somewhat counter-intuitive.
     If a household earns a return of R on its saving and the return on debt is r where r > R, then an increase
in government debt will lead the household to save more than the increase in b. In this way, the household
smoothes consumption in the face of the increased tax burden in old age. This expected ’crowding-in’ result
is not what we get in Proposition 4.
     Our model delivers a different result because of the binding reserve requirement. There are two con-
sequences of λ > 0. The first, as noted already, creates r > R. The second, as is seen in the capital
accumulation equation (16) is that only a fraction of saving goes into the accumulation of capital. It is this
second effect which is key to the result. While a household may want to increase saving beyond the increase
in debt when r > R, the presence of the reserve requirement means that a portion of this extra saving is in
the form of real money and not capital. Thus we obtain a crowding out result.
     This proposition assumes Tb (k, b) ≥ 0. If instead Tb (k, b) < 0, an increase in region 1 debt would induce
a reduction in transfers. Anticipating this, young region 1 agents will choose to save more in anticipation of
higher future taxes. If this response is large enough, the crowding out effect could be overturned.
     Included in the proposition is the assumption of local stability in order to sign the effect of debt on the
steady state capital stock. In this economy, local stability depends, as usual, on the properties of s(·) and
also on the transfer function. As is clear from (17), the dynamics of the capital stock depend upon Tk (k, b).
Thus another avenue for influence of the CB is through capital dynamics in the neighborhood of the steady
state.


4        Insulation Impossible
Proposition 4 indicates that an increase in region 1 debt can lead to a reduction in the capital stock and thus
influence the wage rate and rate of return of region 2 agents. In this way, there are spillover effects. Moreover,

                                                               11
                                                                                                       4   INSULATION IMPOSSIBLE


these effects also work through the transfer function, T (k, b), of the monetary authority. Proposition 4 relied
on some properties of these transfer functions in order to obtain crowding out.
    Now we look at the transfer functions from a different perspective. Can the choice of a transfer function
insulate region 2 from the fiscal policy of region 1? As noted in our introductory comments, one interpretation
of EMU policy design has been to construct fiscal and monetary policies to minimize fiscal spillovers.
    Taking this as given, does there exist a CB policy, (T (k, b), φ1 , φ2 ), which completely eliminates the
fiscal spillover highlighted by Proposition 3? That is, do there exist transfer functions which insulate the
consumption and thus utility of region 2 agents from the fiscal policy of region 1? And, more generally, are
there transfer functions which can neutralize the effects of region 1 fiscal policy on the consumption levels
of all agents as well as the capital stock? We answer both questions in the same way: such insulation is
impossible.13 This remains true even if we broaden monetary policy to allow for two independent transfer
functions, T i (k, b) for i = 1, 2 instead of restricting monetary policy to make transfers according to the fixed
shares, (φ1 , φ2 ).

Proposition 5 There does not exist a monetary policy, (T (k, b), φ1 , φ2 ), such that the steady state equilib-
rium levels of consumption of region 2 agents, (c2y , c2o ), are independent of b.

Proof.         From the first-order condition of region 2 agents, (15), their consumption levels, (c2y , c2o ), are
independent of b iff both R(k, b) and their lifetime income are independent of b. By independent of b we
mean independent of the direct effects of changes in b and the effects of changes in b on the steady state
equilibrium value of k.
                                                                                                                         
                                                    T (k,b)                                                       T (k,b)
    From R(k, b) = λ + (1 − λ) r(k) −                k+b          , R(k, b) is independent of b iff r(k) −         k+b          is independent
of b. For that to be the case at a steady state with zero inflation, (T (k, b) = 0), the following must hold:
                                                                     Tb (k, b) + Tk (k, b)kb
                                                    r0 (k)kb =                                                                            (20)
                                                                              k+b
where kb is the change in the steady state capital as b changes.
    Further, given a portfolio return that does not depend on b, (c2y , c2o ) are independent of b if the discounted
                                                                            T 2 (k,b)
present value of lifetime income and transfers, ω(k) +                          R         is independent of b. This implies that

                                                              φ2
                                                0             η 2 [Tb (k, b)   + Tk (k, b)kb ]
                                               ω (k)kb +                                         =0                                       (21)
                                                                               R
                           φ2
where we have used         η 2 T (k, b)   = T 2 (k, b).
    Using ω(k) = f (k)−kf (k) and r(k) = f 0 (k), −ω 0 (k) = kr0 (k). This condition, along with the substitution
                                  0

of Tb (k, b) + Tk (k, b)kb from (20) into (21), implies

                                                                        φ2 k + b
                                                                  k=(     )                                                               (22)
                                                                        η2 R
so that

                                                                              2
                                                                         ( ηφ2 R )b
                                                                   k=           φ2
                                                                                      .                                                   (23)
                                                                        1−     η2 R
  13 As   with Proposition 4, these results hold in the neighborhood of a locally stable steady state with σ(k, b) = 1.


                                                                         12
                                                                                        4   INSULATION IMPOSSIBLE


This condition implies that the steady state level of the capital stock is increasing in the stock of region 1
debt.
                                                            λ σ−1
    If R(k, b) is independent of b, then Tb (k, b) =       1−λ σ       = 0 at a locally stable steady state with no money
growth. Thus Proposition 4 holds. The fact that k is increasing in b, from (23), contradicts the crowding-out
of that proposition.
    Thus if the monetary authority takes as its goal to stabilize the consumption of region 2 agents in the face
of variations in the fiscal policy of region 1, it does not have the power to do so: insulation impossible. To
do so, the monetary authority would have to stabilize both the return on deposits and the lifetime income of
region 2 agents. But evidently that policy is not able to offset variations in ω(k) and thus stabilize lifetime
income of region 2 agents.
    Proposition 5 refers to the impossibility of insulating the consumption levels of region 2 agents from
variations in b. There is a closely related result that there does not exist a monetary policy which can offset
the real effects of region 1 debt on agents in both regions. This is a generalization of Proposition 3: the lack
of Ricardian equivalence reported in that proposition cannot be offset by an appropriately chosen monetary
policy of (T (k, b), φ1 , φ2 ).
    In fact, there is a stronger result. Even if we allow monetary policy to be determined by two independent
transfer functions, T i (k, b) for i = 1, 2, insulation of the consumption of all agents along with the capital
stock is still impossible.

Proposition 6 There do not exist T i (k, b) transfer functions, for i = 1, 2, such that the steady state equi-
librium levels of consumption for agents in regions i = 1, 2 and the capital stock are independent of b.

Proof. In equilibrium, the first-order conditions for region i agents are given by (14) and (15). These are:

                                               b                        b
                                    u0 (ω +      − s1 ) = Rv 0 (Rs1 − r 1 + T 1 (k, b))                             (24)
                                              η1                       η
    and


                                            u0 (ω − s2 ) = Rv 0 (Rs2 + T 2 (k, b)).                                 (25)

    Suppose, to the contrary, that there exist transfer functions T i (k, b) such that the steady state consump-
tion levels of all agents and the capital stock are independent of b. From (25), the consumption levels of
region 2 agents would be independent of b iff both R and T 2 (k, b) are independent of b.
    With R = r(k)(1 − λ) + σλ , if R and k are independent of b, then σ must be as well. The growth rate of
the money supply is related to the transfer function by
                                                                 λ(k + b)
                                                    T (k, b) =            σ̃                                        (26)
                                                                  1−λ
             σ−1
                                         η i T i (k, b). If (26) holds for all b, given (k, σ), then
                                    P
where σ̃ ≡    σ    and T (k, b) =    i


                                                                        λ
                                                    η 1 Tb1 (k, b) =       σ̃.                                      (27)
                                                                       1−λ
At the steady state with no money growth, σ̃ = 0. Hence Tb (k, b) = 0.

                                                                13
                                   5   FISCAL POLICY UNDER SPECIFIC MONETARY POLICY RULES


    For the consumption of region 1 agents to be independent of b, (24) must hold for all b. From this
                                                      b
condition, if c1y is independent of b then so must   η1   − s1 . In order for c1o to be independent of b,

                                                           b
                                               (R − r)       + T 1 (k, b)                                     (28)
                                                          η1
must be independent of b. For (28) to hold for all b, it follows that


                                              η 1 Tb1 (k, b) = −(R − r).                                      (29)

Since the reserve requirement is binding in the steady state, R < r so Tb1 (k, b) > 0.
    Equations (27) and (29) are two conditions on the derivative of the same transfer function in response
to variations in b. These conditions are inconsistent. Thus the consumption levels of agents in both regions
are not independent of b.


    Taken together, Propositions 5 and 6 show that the effects of region 1 fiscal policy cannot be offset by a
monetary policy rule. Essentially, even a general monetary policy rule consisting of two independent transfer
functions is not enough to provide insulation. There are two spillover channels at work in a monetary
union. The first one is linked to the remuneration of production factors, which depends on the amount of
debt circulating in the economy. The other is linked to the monetary transfers to regional governments,
associated with the implementation of a money policy rule.
    A monetary rule generally depending on k and b implies transfers. There is no rule such that these
transfers do not affect the macroeconomic outcome of the union and thus the welfare in any region: one
spillover channel cannot be used to nullify the other one. This is the essence of the insulation impossible
result.
    Note that while the model is cast with only a single active region, the results reflect the marginal effects
of regional debt. Thus, if the multiple regions were pursuing independent fiscal policies, our results would
still hold: the monetary authority would be unable to design a transfer function to insulate agents from the
fiscal policy choices of any single region.



5     Fiscal Policy Under Specific Monetary Policy Rules
One might argue that a typical CB does not operate through the state contingent transfer functions studied
thus far. Accordingly, we focus on some particular, more familiar, policy rules. The objective is to understand
how these rules are nested in our framework and to evaluate their influence on fiscal spillovers.
    The first policy rule of interest is inflation targeting. In our model, this is equivalent to fixing the growth
rate of the nominal money supply. Since the level of real money demand is endogenous, this policy is not
equivalent to fixing the growth rate of the real money stock. Thus, as we shall see, variations in regional
debt will lead to policy responses.
    The second policy rule pegs the return on deposits. While this policy has the advantage of insulating
interest rates from regional debt, it has other consequences since the process of pegging an interest rate


                                                           14
                                        5      FISCAL POLICY UNDER SPECIFIC MONETARY POLICY RULES


requires transfers to the regional governments. By focusing on these two types of rules, we are able to
highlight the indirect effects of monetary interventions.
    We also look at a third policy of paying interest on reserves.14 This is of interest given the importance of
a binding reserve requirement for our analysis. If the payment of interest on reserves can relax the reserve
requirement, then regional fiscal policy might become neutral and thus one region could be insulated from
the other.
    In this analysis, we continue to assume that the steady state is locally stable. In this way, our results
build upon the crowding-out result of Proposition 4.


5.1       Inflation Target
In our model, an inflation target is equivalent to the choice of a fixed money growth rule, denoted a σ − rule.
Here we assume a non-negative inflation target, in keeping with usual CB practice. We then discuss deflation
below in the context of paying interest on reserves.
    From (12), the transfers required to support a given growth rate in the money supply are given by

                                                               (σ − 1)   λ(k + b)
                                               T (k, b) = λS           =          σ̃                                      (30)
                                                                  σ      (1 − λ)
               σ−1
where σ̃ ≡      σ    is the policy choice. From (30), the rate of money growth determines the transfer policy of
the CB.15
                                      λ
    For this case, Tk (k, b)) =     (1−λ) σ̃   > 0. So, as noted earlier, if the Diamond conditions for stability hold,
       dkt+1
then    dkt    ∈ (0, 1) at the steady state.
    With this specific policy, we find, following Proposition 4, there is crowding out:

Corollary 1 Under a σ − rule with σ̃ ≥ 0, an increase in b leads to a reduction in the capital stock, an
increase in the real interest rate and a reduction in the real wage.

Proof.
                                  λ
    From (30), Tb (k, b)) =     (1−λ) σ̃.   This is positive if σ̃ ≥ 0 so Proposition 4 holds.


    When the monetary authority follows a constant money growth rate policy, an increase in the debt of
region 1 has the traditional crowding out effect of reducing the capital stock. Though this fiscal policy of
region 1 does not directly effect region 2 agents, the change in the capital stock leads to changes in real
wages and interest rates. These price changes do impact on region 2 agents.
    In addition, even though the CB is fixing the money growth rate, real transfers are influenced by (k, b)
from (30). As a consequence, fiscal actions in region 1 impact (k + b) and thus real transfers to region 2
unless φ2 = 0.
    Again, referring to the European experience of the post-2008 crisis, it is clear that a Central Bank which
operates with an inflation target, like the ECB, may be induced to increase real transfers and thus add
  14 We   are grateful to Kevin Lansing for questions and discussions of this issue.
  15 Importantly,   this is not the same policy as T (b, k) ≡ 0, except when σ = 1. Else, a fixed money growth rule creates new
money and the level of real transfers depends on (k, b).


                                                                 15
                                   5     FISCAL POLICY UNDER SPECIFIC MONETARY POLICY RULES


liquidity when a country raises its level of public expenditures and indebtedness for stabilization purposes.
This is what has happened in 2009 and 2010 when European countries benefited de facto from large ECB
purchases of bonds of various countries, as part of its quantitative easing program.
   In our model, if (k + b) is increasing in b, then an increase in b will, from (30), increase real transfers.
Thus a commitment by the CB to an inflation target does not preclude state dependent variations in real
transfers which accommodate fiscal expansions.
   Another avenue is through increased demand for real money balances due to increased uncertainty in the
intermediation process. In this case, a fixed nominal money growth target will imply a higher level of real
transfers. The CB will again be accommodating even though it operates with an inflation target.


5.2     Interest Rate Targets
To eliminate this fiscal interaction, a CB may choose to peg an interest rate, denoted R − rule. The value
of a peg may be to insulate interest rates from the effects of regional debt. This type of policy is often
thought of as the monetization of debt. While the CB can certainly act to offset the effects of regional debt
on interest rates, it is not be able to insulate region 2 agents from region 1 fiscal policy.
   In this economy there are a number of candidate interest rates to target. We start with a peg of the real
return on saving and then discuss alternatives.


5.2.1    Pegging the Real Return on Deposits

We consider a CB policy to peg the interest rate on deposits, R, by making money transfers to the region 1
government. With this policy the central bank is indeed “weak”: it is forced to respond to the fiscal policy
of region 1.
   To understand this policy, recall that in equilibrium the return R is given by

                                                                    λ
                                                R = r(k)(1 − λ) +     .                                     (31)
                                                                    σ
If the CB pegs R, then the rate of money growth is set such that (31) holds for all k. This makes the rate
of money growth dependent on k but independent of b. From (30), CB transfers are then determined by the
σ(k) rule that pegs R.

Corollary 2 Under a R − rule pegging R, if σ̃ ≥ 0, an increase in b leads to a reduction in the capital stock
and an increase in the rate of inflation.

Proof.
                              λ
   From (30), Tb (k, b) =   (1−λ) σ̃   since σ̃ does not vary with b. This is positive if σ̃ ≥ 0 so Proposition 4
holds. Hence as b increases, k falls.
   The reduction in k leads to an increase in r. In order for R to remain unchanged, the rate of money
creation must be higher, from (31). In steady state, the rate of inflation will be higher.




                                                         16
                                    5   FISCAL POLICY UNDER SPECIFIC MONETARY POLICY RULES


   Under this monetary policy rule, region 1 debt affects both the capital stock and the rate of inflation.
Increased debt of region 1 is inflationary. The inflation is caused by the response of the CB to the increased
interest rate caused by the debt of a region.
   In this case, region 1 debt spills over to region 2 agents through two channels: the direct effect of b on
k and the induced transfers from the CB. Though the pegging of R does not neutralize the effects of region
1 debt on region 2 households, it can isolate those effects. This policy insulates the agents in region 2 from
the inflation tax induced by the fiscal policy of region 1.
   Region 2 can be further insulated if φ2 = 0 so that all transfers go to the region 1 government. This
restriction along with the pegging of R implies that region 2 agents are affected by b only through equilibrium
wages. Once R is set, the consumption of region 2 agents solves (6) with c2y = ω(k) − s2 and c2o = Rs2 .
                       b
While variations in   η1   will induce a response by the monetary authority, the consumption levels in region
                                                                       b
2 are not influenced by the inflation tax since R is independent of   η1   and φ2 = 0. As before, the wage of
region 2 agents in youth will be affected by k.
   Consider the case of countries in a monetary union experiencing increased risk premia (like Greece, Spain
and Portugal after 2008). While the basis for the increase in premia is outside of our model, the response of
a CB intent on pegging the real interest rate would be to let the rate of inflation increase in order to bring
real rates back to the target. In this sense, the model would again predict an accommodating response by
the CB.


5.2.2     Pegging the Return on Capital

We focused on the peg of R since that policy provides insulation from the inflation tax for region 2 agents
from the policy of region 1. It does so by fixing the return on saving. But, as we have seen, the level of
capital and hence the wage rate varies with region 1 debt.
   Alternatively, the CB could take action to peg r. In this case, the capital stock will clearly be independent
of b. But there are other effects of changes in b.

Proposition 7 Under a R − rule pegging r, k is independent of b. Further, increases in b will increase the
return on saving and lower the rate of inflation.

Proof.
   If the CB pegs the real return on capital, this implies that the capital stock and thus wages are indepen-
dent of the fiscal policy in region 1. This insulates region 2 from any effects of region 1 debt on the capital
stock and thus on wages. But, in order for the increased region 1 debt to be purchased, the return on saving,
R, must increase. Given a fixed r, the increase in R arises from a lower rate of inflation and thus a lower
rate of money creation. This lower inflation and higher R will impact on region 2 agents.




                                                       17
                                        5    FISCAL POLICY UNDER SPECIFIC MONETARY POLICY RULES


5.3      Relaxing the Reserve Requirement
Given that the fiscal policy of region 1 matters only if the reserve requirement binds, it is natural to consider
monetary policy rules which relax the reserve requirement.16 Equivalently, one can look at policies such that
the rate of deflation is large enough to equalize the rates of return on money and capital.
   While it is beyond the scope of this paper to undertake a complete analysis of the equilibria with interest
on reserves, our discussion serves two purposes. First, we argue that a policy of paying interest on reserves
fits into our general framework. Second, we can extend our results on insulation impossible to conclude that
the payment of interest on reserves is not sufficient to neutralize the fiscal policy of region 1.
   Suppose the CB chooses to pay a nominal interest of ρ on reserves. Following Freeman and Haslag
(1996), we assume that the interest paid to the intermediaries is financed through taxation. In our setting
with regional governments, the CB “taxes” the regional governments to finance interest on reserves through
the transfer function, T (k, b). The regional governments pass these obligations to the households.
   With this modification to our model, the interest rate paid to depositors is given by:

                                                                             (1 + ρ)
                                              R(k, b) = (1 − λ)r(k) + λ              .                      (32)
                                                                                π
  In steady state, the CB pays out interest of ρλS, as λS is real money demand by the intermediaries as
   Pi i i
S≡     η s is total saving. Thus the total tax levied on the regional governments must be enough to finance
this transfer (which is actually a tax since it is negative), T (k, b) = −ρλS. The tax depends on (k, b) since
                       k+b                             k+b
total savings, S =     1−λ ,   implying T (k, b) = −ρλ 1−λ .
   The budget constraints of the regional governments are modified to

                                                        b                 k+b
                                                   r     1
                                                           = τo1 − φ1 (ρλ     )                             (33)
                                                       η                  1−λ
   and

                                                                 k+b
                                                        φ2 (ρλ       ) = τo2 .                              (34)
                                                                 1−λ
These constraints are the same as (8) and (9) except that now there is a transfer from the regional govern-
ments to the CB in order to finance the interest payment on reserves. Of course, as indicated by these two
budget constraints, the tax on the regional government by the CB appears as a tax on old households, as in
Freeman and Haslag (1996).
   With these flows, the steady state consumption of old agents in regions 1 and 2 become:

                                                   br   φ1                   br   φ1 ρλS
                                    c1o = s1 R −      −    T (k, b) = s1
                                                                         R −    −                           (35)
                                                   η1   η1                   η1     η1
and
                                                           φ2                   φ2 ρλS
                                            c2o = s2 R −      T (k, b) = s2
                                                                            R −        .                    (36)
                                                           η2                     η2
 16 We   are grateful to Kevin Lansing for discussions leading to the development of this section.




                                                                   18
                                                                                    6   MARKET SEGMENTATION


    These consumption levels in old age have the same structure as consumption in old age in (14) and (15).
There is only a difference in the sign of the transfer since the transfer is from the households to the regional
government and then to the CB.
                         k+b
    Since T (k, b) = −ρλ 1−λ , except for the sign of the transfer, the monetary transfers underlying the
payment of interest on reserves fits into our general framework. In fact, the allocation is analogous to one
with a negative inflation target, i.e. deflation.17
    In addition, we can extend the logic of Freeman and Haslag (1996) to understand the properties of the
equilibrium with interest on reserves. One of the interesting points in Freeman and Haslag (1996) is that the
choice of the interest rate on reserves has a substitution but no income effect. This is because the payment
of interest on reserves eventually flows to the same households who pay the tax to finance this payment.
In the multiple region economy, there is the potential for redistribution because of the sharing of the tax
obligation through (φ1 , φ2 ).
    Finally, the payment of interest on reserves is not enough to “undo” the reserve requirement and return
to the case of a non-binding constraint. Even in the one region model of Freeman and Haslag (1996), if the
government pays interest on reserves equal to the return on physical capital, thus appearing to overcome the
reserve requirement, the tax obligation of the household’s reflects the reserve requirement. So, in the end,
the allocation is still not identical to that arising from a model without any reserve requirement.
    For our multi-region model, the analogue of that result is that insulation is not possible, even with the
payment of interest on reserves. We see that from the fact that our earlier results, Propositions 5 and 6,
cover this policy as well.



6     Market Segmentation
Our model economy has thus far assumed the free flow of capital and intermediated activity across the
regions. We have focused on how the design of monetary policy influences spillovers across regions. It is
interesting to study the interrelationship between fiscal spillovers and market segmentation in which there
are barriers to the flows of financial and physical capital. As we shall see, these barriers can themselves
provide some insulation and can also influence the impact of monetary policy.


6.1       Financial Market Segmentation
From Corollaries 1 and 2, it appears that a peg of the return on deposits limits the fiscal spillovers compared
to a σ − rule. The point of this section is to illustrate that those results are quite sensitive to the assumed
capital market structure. To make this point, we consider an extreme version of our multi-region economy
in which a subset of agents hold money directly, rather than going to the intermediary.
    In particular, we assume that only region 1 agents have access to intermediaries. Region 2 agents just
hold money. This can be rationalized through the existence of costs of accessing intermediaries which differ
 17 One   can formally show the equivalence of the outcomes under deflation and the payment of interest on reserves in this
environment.




                                                            19
                                                                                           6   MARKET SEGMENTATION


across regions.18
    The key finding here is that the insulation from the inflation tax through the R − rule disappears. That
is, the inflation induced by fiscal policy in region 1 is passed onto region 2 agents. In contrast, a σ − rule
limits the spillover to the effect of region 1 fiscal policy on real wages.
    Region 1 agents have the same budget constraints and hence the same first-order conditions as earlier.
So, (6) continues to hold for region 1 agents. Inserting the government and intermediary constraints into
the budget constraints of the private agents, we can determine equilibrium consumption levels. For region 1
which has an active fiscal authority, we again find

                                              k + λb                      k          b
                                 c1y = w −                    c1o =              R − 1 λπ̃ + T 1 .                           (37)
                                             (1 − λ)η 1               (1 − λ)η 1    η
    For region 2 agents, their first order condition is

                                              u0 (w − s2 ) = π̃v 0 (s2 π̃ + T 2 (k, b)).                                     (38)

            1
Here π̃ =   π   is the inverse of the inflation rate. For region 2 agents, s2 is just their real money demand. The
consumption levels of region 2 agents are given in (38).


Fixed Money Growth Under a σ − rule, the money supply grows at a constant rate and this determines
the transfer function T (k, b). With λ > 0, it is not possible to satisfy (37) with a fixed value of k as b varies.
That is, b matters for equilibrium allocations here, as in Proposition 4.
    Looking at the consumption levels in (38), region 2 agents are insulated from the effects of region 1 fiscal
policy on the return to their saving. That is, by fixing the money growth rate the CB is fixing the inflation
rate which is the return on saving of region 2 agents. As was the case under the R − rule before, the real
wage is influenced by b. Further, unless φ2 = 0, region 2 agents will be directed affected by the transfers of
the CB. Thus when region 2 agents hold only real money balances, the σ − rule rule partially insulates them
from region 1 fiscal policy.


Pegging the Return on Deposits If the CB pegs the interest rate on deposits, agents in region 2 will
pay the inflation tax. The interest rate is again given by R = (1 − λ)r(k) + λπ̃. As before, if b increases, k
must fall given R. This will increase r and hence π̃ will be lower to keep R fixed so π will be higher.
    The inflation has a welfare effect on region 2 agents since they hold money as a store of value. An
increased deficit in region 1 induces an inflation tax on region 2. This effect comes on top of the effects of b
on the wage and the interest rate.
  18 Allowing   access to both forms of savings by some agents in both regions is also of interest. One could also imagine a model
with endogenous market segmentation along the lines of Chatterjee and Corbae (1992). Regions may differ in terms of access
to intermediaries as well as in the distribution of income within a region. Both of these factors would influence the return to
holding money versus deposits. The regions with higher costs of intermediation and lower levels of income would have more
money holders and thus would be more exposed to regional fiscal policy that induces inflation.




                                                                 20
                                                                                              7   CONCLUSION


6.2    Complete Segmentation within a Monetary Union
We can also study an extreme case in which there are no physical capital flows, no flows of goods and no
intermediary flows between the regions. Then the only link between agents in the different regions is a
common currency.
    With region specific capital stocks, the CB transfer function would be written as T (k1 , k2 , b). In this way
the transfers to each of the regions would depend on the bonds issued by region 1 and the capital stocks of
the two regions.
    With this economic structure, the only effects of region 1 fiscal policy on region 2 agents would be through
the effects of b on T (·). The insulation of region 2 agents could arise from the adoption of a monetary policy
which provided no transfers to region 2 agents: φ2 = 0. It could also arise if the transfer function for region
2 was by design independent of the capital stock in region 1. If, to the contrary, the CB undertook a policy
to stabilize interest rates in the federation, then fiscal spillovers could reemerge.



7     Conclusion
This paper studies the contribution of monetary policy to the interactions of regional fiscal policies. In the
presence of frictions, modeled here as a reserve requirement, the fiscal policy decisions of one region will
generally affect relative prices, and thus spillover to other regions.
    Propositions 5 and 6 indicate there will not exist a CB policy which can insulate agents in the two regions
from the fiscal policy of region 1. A key to these results is that any attempt to offset the fiscal policy of
one region requires active intervention of the CB through transfers. Even if the CB succeeds in offsetting
the effects of one region’s fiscal policy on interest rates and/or wages, the required intervention will create
income effects through transfers.
    Under some conditions stipulated in Proposition 4, increased debt by region 1 leads to lower capital
economy wide. These effects impact on the wages and interest rates of region 2 agents.
    The exact nature of the spillover is influenced by monetary policy. This is brought out by our analysis
of three leading policies: fixing the growth rate of the nominal money supply, pegging an interest rate or
paying interest on reserves. Paradoxically, some rules that appear to be ‘accommodating’ and responsive to
fiscal actions of regional governments, actually mitigate these spillovers. As we have seen, a monetary rule
that pegs the interest rate may partially insulate one region from another. This insulation happens despite
the fact that the monetary authority is using an inflation tax to peg a real interest rate.
    We have briefly highlighted the fact that the insulating properties of monetary policy depend on asset
market participation of agents. We leave to future research more general study of fiscal and monetary
interactions when asset market participation is endogenous.
    Our analysis has focused on steady states. As in Smith (1994), the choice of rules may also have interesting
implications for local dynamics.




                                                       21
                                                                                         REFERENCES


References
Chatterjee, S., and D. Corbae (1992): “Endogenous Market Participation and the General Equilibrium
  Value of Money,” Journal of Political Economy, 100(3), 615–46.

Cooper, R., H. Kempf, and D. Peled (2008): “Is it is or is it Ain’t my Obligation? Regional Debt in a
  Fiscal Federation,” International Economic Review, 49(4), 1469–1504.

        (2010): “Regional Debt in a Monetary Union: Is it Inflationary?,” European Economic Review, 54,
  345–58.

Diamond, P. (1965): “National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model,” American Economic Review, 55(5),
  1126–50.

Freeman, S., and J. H. Haslag (1996): “On the optimality of interest-bearing reserves in economies of
  overlapping generations,” Economic Theory, 7, 557–565.

Kehoe, P. (1987): “Coordination of Fiscal Policies in a World Economy,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
  19, 349–76.

Smith, B. (1994): “Efficiency and Determinacy of Equilibrium under Inflation Targeting,” Economic Theory,
  4(3), 327–44.




                                                   22
