                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               ANTICIPATED BUDGET DEFICITS AND THE
                 TERM STRUCTURE OF INTEREST RATES


                      Daniel Valente Dantas

                        Eudiger Dornbusch



                      Working Paper No. 1518




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          December 1984




The research reported here is part of the NBEE's research program
in Economic Fluctuations and project in Government Budget. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #1518
                                                 December 1984




                    Anticipated Budget Deficits and the
                     Term Structure of Interest Rates

                                    ABSTRACT




         This paper investigates the implications of government deficits in an

 overlapping generations consumption loan model with longterm assets. The

 only asset in the economy is a real consol issued by the government and

 serviced by lunipsum taxes on the young. We explore here the time path of

 short and longterm interest rates following the announcement of a future,

 transitory budget deficit under two alternative assumptions. In one case the

 deficit arises from transitory government spending, in the other case from a

 transfer.

      We show that a deficit policy ultimately raises longterm interest rates

 and lowers consol prices. The exact shape of the path of short—term rates

depends on the source of the deficit and on the saving response to interest

rates. In general, though, the term structure will be v-shaped.

      The interest of the model resides in the fact that the prices of

longterni assets link the current generations to future disturbances. Because

future disturbances affect future interest rates they affect the current

value of debt outstanding and hence equilibrium short—term       rates. The exact
manner in which the disturbances are transmitted to prior periods depends on

the extent to which consumers substitute easily across time or, on the

contrary, have a strong preference for consumption smoothing.


Daniel Valente Dantas                            Rudiger Dornbusch
Pundacao Qetulio llargas                         Department of Economics
EPGE, 100 andar                                  MIT E52-357
190 Praia de Bolafogo                            Cambridge, MA 02139
Rio de Janiero, I.j.                             (617)253—3648
Brazil
                                                           Revised
                                                           November 1984



         ANTICIPATED BUDGET DEFICITS AND THE TERM STRUCTURE OF INTEREST RATES*

           Daniel Valente Dantas                 Rudiger Irnbusch
          Fundacao Getulio Vargas        Massachusetts Institute of Technology
                                                           and
                                         National Bureau of Economic Research



          This paper investigates the implications of government deficits in an

 overlapping generations consumption loan model with longterm assets. The

macroeconomic implications of deficit finance have been studied in a number

 of approaches. The results depend sharply on the extent to which generations

are linked or people view their lives as finite or infinite. But they are

also affected by the longevity of assets that links present and future

generations even if there were no other source of overlap. The standard

question is the following: suppose the government reduces taxes today and

finances the resulting budget deficit by debt issue. Future taxes, starting

some periods hence, will be raised to assure the balanced—budget service of

the increased debt. In such a setting are there any effects on private

spending or on asset prices?

         Barro (1974) has shown that when generations are linked by bequest

motives the present value of the prospective taxes offsets the current tax

cut leaving spending unchanged and raising saving to build up increased

income with which to service the debt. Thompson (1967) by contrast has

argued that those who enjoy the tax cuts are not those who pay the taxes and

that accordingly a net expansion of demand should be expected at the time of

deficit finance. This same line has been formalized by Blanchard where

finitely lived individuals value current income in excess of corresponding


*   We   are indebted to Stanley Fisher for helpful suggestions.
                                        2




 future taxes because they do not expect to bear the full burden of the taxes.

 In such a framework Blanchard (1984a, 1984b). has shown that anticipated

 future deficits would lead to an increase in net wealth and hence an increase

 in aggregate demand.

      In this paper we address the effects of anticipated future deficits in a

closed—economy exchange model with overlapping generations and longterm

assets. Following Dornbusch (1984) the only asset in the economy is a real

consol issued by the government and serviced by lumpsum taxes on the young.

We explore here the time path of short and longterm interest rates following

the announcement of a future, transitory budget deficit under two alternative

assumptions. In one case the deficit arises from transitory government

spending, in the other case from a transfer.

     We show that a deficit policy ultimately raises longterm interest rates

and lowers consol prices. The exact shape of the path of shortterm rates

depends on the source of the deficit and on the saving response to interest

rates. In general, though, the term structure will be v—shaped. In the

longrun the increased stock of debt, although serviced by increased taxes,

leads to an increase in the short and longterin interest rate to achieve full

crowding out. The shortterm rate also rises in the period of deficit

finance, independently of the saving response to interest rates and the kind

of deficit,——spending or transfers. But in prior periods the rise in

longterm interest rates reduces the value of debt outstanding and therefore

tends to reduce the shortterm rate required for saving to equal the supply of

debt outstanding. These nearterm results, though, depend on the saving

response to interest rates.

     The interest of the model resides in the fact that the prices of

longterm assets link the current generations to future disturbances. Because
                                                         3



 future disturbances affect future interest rates they affect the current

value of debt outstanding and hence equilibrium shortterm rates. The exact

manner in which the disturbances are transmitted to prior periods depends on

 the extent to which consumers substitute easily across time or, on the

contrary, have a strong preference for consumption smoothing.



1. The Model

        We assume that households live for two periods and allocate consumption

so as to maximize the intertemporal utility function:


(1) U =
               V(c1)
                       +
                           V(c2)
                                    ; V =
                                             j—-
                                                   c1°           0 >0


subject to the budget constraint

(2) C1 +               =w —        +
                              bt         vt+i      at

where

      w                       the given endonent of output

           =                  the one period discount factor
               1/(1+r.)
                              the amount of taxes equal to the number of consols
                              each of which yields a coupon of one unit of output
                              the present value of transfers received when old

                              lifetime disposable income
      at
      Maximization of the utility function gives a consumption and a saving

function that depends on disposable income and the shortterrn interest rate:


(3)   c1 =                         s =              -        ;
               1    A at,                1   A at                41_e)/8

The elasticity of saving with respect to the shortterm rate is positive or

negative depending on the magnitude of elasticity of the marginal utility of

consumption. The elasticity of saving is:

(4)            =   a(1—1/0)
                                                  4



   where a is the marginal propensity to consume in the first period.

          Saving responds positively or negatively to the shortterm interest rate

   depending whether the elasticity of marginal utility, e, is smaller or larger

  than unity. A case of U close to zero corresponds to
                                                                  extremely easy
  intertemporal substitution while a value of 0 tending to infinity
                                                                              corresponds
  to a strong preference for consumption smoothing and hence income effects

  that dominate substitution.

         Goods market equilibrium, given a constant population requires, that

  consumption of the government, g, and the young, c1, plus consumption of the

 old equal the available output. Consumption of the old is equal to the

 coupon payments plus resale value of their bonds plus transfer receipts or

               v. Thus a goods market equilibrium requires:

 (5) w = g + c1 + (1+p)b +
                                          Vt

 where Pt =              is the price of a consol or the reciprocal of the
                 1/Rt
 longterm interest rates. An alternative way of stating the equilibrium

condition, using (5), is the following:

 (5a) s(a,q) = g + ptb + Vt

where saving, s, is defined as current income, w_bt, less current

consumption.

       The model is completed by an arbitrage equation that links current and

next period's consol prices via the shortterm interest rate:

(6) Pt =             +


Using (5), the first order conditions qV'(c1) =                   and (6) we can state
                                                         V'(c2)
the equilibrium condition as follows:
                                             5




(    p(w_g_v       *
                       (1+pt)b)
                                  =
                                      (1+p+i)V'(pt+i(l+b)
                                                                  +



     Figure   1 shows the steady state of the model for the case of zero

transfers or government spending. In the steady state short and longterm

interest rates are equal and hence Pt            1/Rt =   l/rt.       Therefore we can plot

the value of the stock of consols outstanding as a function of the shortterm

rate. The downward sloping schedule thus represents the value of consols

given a fixed number b. The saving schedule which depends on the shortterm

rate is shown upward sloping, representing the case where saving responds

positively to the interest rate. As noted above, this case arises when 6 < 1

so that substitution effects dominate the income effect. In the borderline

logarithmic case the saving schedule is vertical and when 6 > 1 it is

negatively sloped, though steeper than the schedule showing the value of

consols.1

Comparative Steady States: The model can be applied now to determine the

steady state effects of an increase in government debt. At this stage we do

not ask how the debt was introduced but rather look at the longrun effects of

higher debt, matched by increased taxation of the young to service the debt.

     In terms of Figure 1 an increase in debt shifts the value—of—debt

schedule out and to the right. The saving schedule shifts left since the

imposition of taxes reduces life—time income and hence lowers both

consumption and saving. The steady state interest rate unambiguously rises,

whatever the response of saving to the interest rate. The increase in the

interest rate and the fall in bond prices is larger the lower the elasticity

of the marginal utility of consumption.


1From (4) above the maximum value of the saving response is ci. as 0 tends to
infinity. Thus the saving schedule must be steeper than the schedule showing
the value of consols.
rt


                s(o,q,)




 r




                     b



                  s,pb

     Figure I
                                                  6




      Prom (6a), using the definition of the saving eleasticity in (4) we

derive the steady state effect of increased debt, serviced by luinpsuin taxes

on the young, as:
      A              1+1        A
(8)   p =   —
                    —           b                         bt/a
                1       (1—q)
where a      denotes a percentage change and a bar denotes a steady state value.

Note that the denominator of (8) is always positive. Therefore an increase

in debt must reduce the value of debt outstanding, pb, unless the saving

elesticity, ,           is   sufficiently negative. Only when consumers show little

preference for consumption smoothing, so that intertemporal substitution is

high, can an increase in debt lead to an increased value of debt outstanding.

Otherwise the rise in longterm interest rates depresses asset prices out of

proportion with the increase in the number of consols outstanding.

      These longrun effects of an increase in debt, with debt service financed

by increased taxation, are part of the adjustment to transitory deficits.

These are the longrun effects, beyond the deficit. We now turn to the

effects during the period of deficit finance and the period of anticipation.

We split that discussion, starting with the case of a current deficit,

financed by debt issue.



2. Current Deficits: Consider now a situation where the government during

the current period effects an unanticipated transfer, or an unanticipated

goernment expenditure. Debt            finance   covers the deficit. At the same time it

is announced that taxes, starting next period lumpsum taxes will be

permanently         increased by an amount   sufficient   to match the higher coupon

payments associated with the once and for all increase in debt.
                                                               7




       A current transfer accruing to the old raises their consumption by the

full amount of the transfer. The current young are not directly affected by

the measure because they neither receive transfers now nor pay taxes next

period. The goods and capital market equilibrium is also affected by the

prospect of lower bond prices in period t+1. We already saw above that the

steady state price of bonds will decline in response to higher debt. That

decline will spill—over to some extent to the current period. This must be

the case because consol prices today and next period are linked by an

arbitrage equation using the shortterm rate. Equation (6) above implies that

an increase in future consol prices, given the current shortterm rate, must

lower also the current consol price. This longrun implication of debt

finance thus tends to depress present consol prices thereby partly offsetting

the increased purchasing power of the old due to the transfer.

       The solution is given by the equilibrium conditions in todays capital

market and in the market next period which is also the new steady state.2

Using (6) and denoting a steady state value by a bar, they are respectively:

fr\
       w — Li)       1(4       -r          —
                                           — )tL)   -r   --        -   -- — — LI
                                                                       Vt —              = Lu -r
                                                                                         —

                                                          Vt

(io)   s(w   —
                 , /(t     +        )) =
where b' is the number of bonds the government sells, the proceeds being

distributed as a transfer to the old, i.e. v. =                         ptb'.      We already saw in (8)

the effect on the steady state price p. Using that result we obtain from (9)

the impact on the current consol price:


21n Dornbusch (1q84) it is shown that given debt and income the only
perfect foresight path consistent with the budget constraint is an immediate
move to the steady state.
                                                                    a




(ii)
       A              —1 +        (i      +
                                                               b
        Pt =
                 (i       -           - 8(1      -       q)j
Equation (ii) shows the effect on consol prices: Specifically if saving

responds positively to the interest rate the consol price will fall already

today or, equivalently, the longterin rate rises immediately. But if 8 is

positive this is also the case. Note that in the extreme case of no

substitution 8 =                so that the consol price will fall if (l +                  gb/a)       < 1.

This condition is satisfied and hence, whatever the saving response, current

debt financed deficits must cause the present consol price to fall or

longterm rates to rise.3

       In the same way we can show that the shortterm interest rate must

already rise during the period of deficit finance, whatever the saving

response. Only in the extreme case of no intertemporal substitution does the

shortterni rate remain unchanged. Equation (12) shows the these results.

(12) rt =      b(a    -       8)/(1   -   8)[i       -    8(i-q)]
       We now have shown that present transfer payments financed by debt, with

increased debt service financed by higher taxes starting next period must

raise interest rates both in the longrun and during the period of deficit

finance. This holds for short and                              longterm   rates independent of the saving

response. Furthermore, the same result holds if instead of transfer payment

we had considered a transitory, current government spending. This
                                                                                                    =
is apparent from equation (9) where in place of vt we would have                                         pb'.
3We can write the inequality as a(1+qb/a) < 1 or   gb/a < 1—     pb/a. Since
  is a fraction and gb/a is less than pb/a the condition must be
satisfied.

8 is at most equal to a in the case of no intertemporal substitution. The
equation is derived by noting that in equilibrium pb/a is egual to the
savings ratio and hence pb/a = 1— a.
                                               9



 Therefore we can generalize to state that unanticipated, transitory transfers

to the old, or government spending, must raise interest rates as they occur.

Before proceeding to the case of anticipations we offer a brief diagrammatic

explanation of these results.

        In   Figure 2   we show the effect of the current transfer on on the supply

of   securities outstanding by     the   rightward shift of the schedule showing the
value    of consols. The steady state saving schedule shifts left due to

increased taxes. The steady state interest rate therefore rises from r to

r'. Now consider the effect in the preceding period where deficit finance

occurs. Here saving is still given by the initial schedule. But the supply

of debt is now equal to the value q(1+')b, with p'            1/r'. The   dashed
schedule shows the value of the increased stock of consols, given ', as a

function of the current shortterm rate. Since the next period price is

given, changes in the shortterm rate have only a minor effect on the value of

debt. Thus the schedule JJ is relatively steep compared to the schedule

showing the value of debt. Of course it must pass through point A' since at

a current short rate equal to the new steady state rate the value of debt

today is equal to what it will be next period.

      The current equilibrium is at point A" where saving equals the value of

securities outstanding. The equilibrium corresponds to equation (9) above

with p' determined by (10). In this case the shortterm rate rises less than

the longterm rate and the total value of consols rises. The interpretation

is simply the following: At the initial interest rate r, the value of consols

exceeds saving. To restore capital market equilibrium the shortterm must

rise to increase saving and to depress the value of securities. Thus the
r
             J
                 S




                               S




r
                               pb

                         pb
                     J

                              s,pb

    Figure
                                             10




 shortterna rate must increase from A to A".5

 Welfare Implications: Consider next the welfare implications. Welfare of

 the old depends only on their current purchasing power b +            This welfare
                                                                Ptb.
 of the old must rise if the value of total debt increases as it does in the

case shown in Figure 2. Now note that if saving is unresponsive to the

interest rate we have a borderline case where the value of total assets

remains unchanged so that the old generation derives no benefit from the

transfers because there are offsetting capital losses on their existing

holdings of bonds. If saving responds negatively to the interest rate the old

actually lose since capital losses outweigh the transfers.6

     Consider next the impact of deficits on the the generation that is

young. They are net savers and lenders. Accordingly an increase in the

shortterm rate improves their terms of trade and hence increases their

welfare. But whereas the currently young generation must gain there is a

steady state loss in welfare. The increased taxes more than outweigh their

benefits of higher interest rates and thus welfare of future generations

deteriorates.7 A debt—financed transfer thus redistributes welfare from

future generations toward the current young and, perhaps, toward the current

old. The interesting possibility, of course, is that the transfer

receipients lose arid   the   current young who neither receive transfers nor pay


5The diagram makes it easy to study the case where the current young
generation receives the transfers and future generations pay the taxes to
servive the increased debt.

6To show these results we note that the change in the value of securities
ptb ( +        Using (ii) we derive the results in the text.
7See Dornbusch (1984) where this result is demonstrated.
                                                   11




 taxes are the net beneficiaries. This case always obtains when there is

little intertemporal substitutability.

Anticipated Government Spending: We now consider the effects on asset prices

and shortterm interest rates of transitory, future government spending.

Specifically, starting in a steady state it becomes known at time T0 that in

period T4 the government will spend an amount g, financing the spending by

debt issue. The government is assumed to sell an amount b' of consols so

that spending equals g =              In period 5 and beyond taxes are increased by
                             p4b'.
   so that henceforth the budget is again balanced at a higher level of debt

service.

        The solution for short and longterm interest rates and asset prices is

determined by equations (12). The equations are ordered in the sequence of

solution, starting from the new steady state in period 5             to   the initial

period:

(12a)        s(w—5,/(1+))       =                 ;       = b+b'

(12b)        s(w-b,p4/(1+p)) = p4b        +   g         g =
                                                  ;
                                                              p4b'

(12c)
             s(w—b,p3/(1+p4))       p3b

(12d)        s(w—b,p2/(1+p3)) = p2b


(12e)        s(w—b,p1/(1+p2)) = p1b


(12f)        s(w—b,p0/(1+p1)) = p0b


where s( )   is   given in (3) above. Note from the equations that deficit

financed spending change equilibrium asset prices prior to the actual

spending. Spending first appears in period 4 and carries over via increased

debt and debt service to the new steady state in (12a). It affects earlier

periods via the impact on asset prices already seen in equations (11)              and
                                                  12




 (7). We now consider how anticipations of the debt financed spending change

 equilibrium asset prices prior to the actual spending. We start with a

benchmark case where the utility function is logarithmic in which case saving

is unresponsive to the interest rate.

The Logarithmic Case: We saw in equation (ii) that an increase in government

spending (or transfers) lead to a fall in asset prices in the period of

deficit finance. In terms equations (12b) that implies a decline in p4 in

proportion to the increase in debt since 8 =            0.   Thus we have   = —b. With

saving unresponsive to interest rates and no change in debt or the lifetime

income of the young in period 3 the equilibrium consol price in that period

remains unchanged. By equation (6) the unchanged consol price of period 3

and the fall in p4 imply that the shortterm rate in period 3 must fall

sufficiently to offset the lower future consol price. The same unchanged

asset price applies to periods 2, 1, and zero.

       We thus obtain a term structure of interest rates defined by the

condition that asset prices in periods 0 to 3 remain unchanged at a common

level P0=P1=P9=P3. Applying equation (6) we find that that the new shortterm

rate in period 3, r'3, must be negative:

                                      =
(13)        r'3 =
                    (p   —
                             p3)/p3       (R3   —R)/R
The shortterm rate must turn negative since, as we saw in Figure 2 the

longterm rate in period 4 (the average of r and ') exceeds the initial rate

  so that the righthand side of (13) is negative. The manner in which the

spill over is split between short and longterm interest rates depends on the

saving response to the interest rate. In the present extreme case of no

saving response the adjustment falls entirely on the short rate so as to keep

the consol price constant.
                                         13




       Note next that applying (6) to the equality of consol prices in periods

0 to 3 implies that the shortterm rate in periods 0, 1 and 2 must be equal to

the initial long rate L8 Figure 3 shows the path of shorttertn rates and of

the long rate from the announcement in period 1 to the new steady state.

       The logarithmic case serves as an interesting benchmark in showing that

future disturbances, via their effect on asset prices must spill over to

earlier periods. This spill—over determines the welfare effects of the

policy. In the case of logarithmic utility welfare of the generations living

in periods 0 to 2 is unaffected. The young in period 3 lose as the shortterm

rate declines and welfare is transferred from them to the young of period 4

who benefit from the increased shortterni rates since they are lenders.

Crowding out thus takes place at the expense of bond holders at the time of

the government spending, sheltering all previous generations. This is a very

special case resulting from the assumption of a zero saving response as we

shall now see.

Alternative Savings Behavior: Figures 4 and 5 show the time path of interest

rates for an example of positive and negative saving response. The diagrams

show the solutions to equations (12) for particular parameter values with

elasticities of the marginal utility of consumption of 0.5 and 1.5

respectively.

       In both Figures 4 and 5 the effects in periods 3 to 5 are qualitatively

the same. The steady state rate increases and that increase spreads to the

periodin which government spending rises. In period 3, at a short rate

r3 =    the value of debt outstanding thus has fallen relative to saving. To


8We have P2 = (14-p3)/(1÷r) = p3 where p3 =   i/L   Thus r = It. The same
argument applies to p1.
                0                  u1




            0       announcement




T1
'a
C
'1,
            N




      -'0
       CD
       -i           Spending



            0I      Tcixe S
26-
                     Long term
                     Rci t e
22
              —. —

18

14-
             Short term                    U,
                                           D
             Rate                          C)
10-                                        C-,

                                     C     —
                                     C)

6                                    (I)

         0     I          2      3   4     5

      Notez w100, b10, b3, e=D.5


                     Figure 4
                                            14




restore capital market equilibrium saving must rise and/or the price of bonds

must rise. Independent of the saving response the shortterm rate in both

cases must fall. But in periods 0, 1 and 2 the interest rate behavior,

however, differs markedly. We first consider the case of a positive saving

response.
       In period 3 the decline in the value of bonds at a shortterm rate

    R implies an excess of saving over the value of debt. Hence the

shortterm rate must fall below the initial long rate, raising the value of

debt and discouraging saving. Thus in period 3, with saving lower, the value

of debt also is lower than in the initial stady state. Since the stock of

console has not changed this implies that the longterm rate has risen.

       Going to period 2 we apply the same argument: At the initial rate

   =     the value of debt is reduced and    hence   the shortterm rate must fall

below , though less than r3. Once more the argument applies to period 1 and

0. Thus we generate a V-shaped path for the shortterm rate and an upward

trending path of the long rate. For welfare purposes that implies an

immediate loss for the old and a loss for the young up to period 3. They

bear thecosts of increased goverrilnent spending while the young of period 4

are net beneficiaries. In the steady state, as noted above there is a

deterioration of welfare as increased taxes outweigh the benefits of higher

interest rates.

       In Figure 5 we look at the case where saving responds negatively to the

interest rate. The period 3 interest rate must fall because the impact of

the short rate on the value of debt exceeds the saving elasticity.9 In the


9From the equilibrium condition s     q(1-'-p4)b we have:
A-     r
q = - (qbp4/q(1+p4)b/(1 - )Jp4.
                                                        •
                                0                       I                    .2       .3



          Note:            0         CC  0     CU 0)   E a)


                           1
                                                 Rate




                           2                            Shortterrn




Figure


 5
                           3
         wO0,bI0,b'3,e05
                                                                                  /    Rate



                                                                                              Longterm

                           4   Cl)   C. a) C    C
                                                                                      V
                                                                                       •

                                     D   'C    CU      C)            U) C)
                           5
                                         15




case of a positive saving response the fall in the interest rate tends

to reduce saving and thus helps restore equilibrium both on the demand and

supply side of the capital market. Here, by contrast, the fall in the

interest rate raises saving and hence a larger fall in interest rates is

required to achieve balance between saving and the value of debt outstanding.

But note that equilibrium saving in period 3 is higher and so-must

accordingly be the value of debt. That means the short rate has fallen so

much as to lower the period 3 longterm rate and raise consol prices above the

initial sterady state This is the explanation for the oscillating longterm

rate in Figure 5.

     going back to period 2 we now have an increased value of debt at a short

rate r2   F. Thus there is an excesss supply of debt and the short rate must

rise to reduce saving and the value of debt. With the short rate now above

R, savings is reduced below the initial steady state and thus we have shown

that ther longterm rate must have risen above F. This implies that in period

1 the shortterm rate must fall to equilibrate the capital market.

     The welfare consequences in this case are the same as above in periods

3, 4 and in the new steady state. But in prior periods gaining and losing

generations alternate. Figure 5 shows that the highest shortterm rate

prevails in period 2 thus making the young in that period best off.




3. Transfers.

    We now turn to the case where in period 4 the government makes a

transfer to the old in the amount v =          and finances the transfer by
                                        p4b'
issuing debt. In period 5 and beyond the increased debt will be financed by
                                          16




an increase in lumpsum taxes. Figure 6 shows the short and longterm interest

rates for the case where saving responds positively to interest rates and

parameters are the same as in Figure 4. While the general shape of the term

structure is the same there is an important difference in that the minimum

shortterin rate, in this case, prevails in period 2.

     The longrun results are identical to those in Figure 4. This must be

the case because in the longrun the two applications are identical:

increased debt and increased taxes to service the debt. Also in period 4 the

applications are identical. In one case there is increased government

spending in the other case increased spending by the old, but the amount of

increased spending v = g =          is the same. Accordingly interest rates in
                             p4b'
that period, too, are the same as in Figure 4. The difference arises in

period 3. Government spending had been treated as if it did not affect

private welfare. But the transfers discussed now do enter the private

lifetime budget constraint of the young in period 3. They look ahead to a

transfer receipt and hence reduce the saving they would otherwise do.

     Accordingly equation (12c) now is modified to include in lifetime income

of the young the present value of the transfers they will receive in period

4. Noting the saving equation in (3) the condition for capital market

equilibrium in period 3 becomes:

                                                                                   +
(12c)' s(w - b +   q3v1   q3v1, q3) = p3b      ;   Vt+l =   p4b',   q3 =   p3/(1       p4)

In particular we note from (3) that a future transfer reduces saving by the

young by a fraction x/(i + x) of the prospective transfer. This decline in

saving modifies the response of asset prices to the deficit by comparison

with the government spending ease. The analysis is made easy by keeping in
26                     Longterm
                       Rote

22-
     __. .__._
                                          kJuIulIsuJuI
                                             +4        r'uI
18                                        (Spending Case)

          Short term
14        Rate



I0              a.
                 C                        C)
                 C)                       In
                 E                        C)
                 C)
                 U                        U
 6               C                        C
                 0
                 C
                 C                    D
                               A3 Lf)
                 I                I       I
                       I
                           2345
                           I          I

                0      I



                 Figure 6
                                       17




mind the spending case, which leaves the analysis unchanged from period 4 on,

and superimposing now the reduction in period 3 saving due to the transfer.

     The comparison in Figure 6 reveals that in the transfer case shortterm

rates decline less than in the spending case. Moreover the lowest rate is

reached in period 2, not 3. The explanation is the following. At the rate

r3 of the spending case at point A3 in Figure 6 there is now an excess of

debt outstanding over savings because the young who look ahead to transfer

receipts reduce their saving. Accordingly interest rates must rise to clear

the asset market. The interest rate rises to point A to compensate for the

extra effect of anticipated transfers that depress saving.

     The higher interest rate in period 3, with the same rates in periods 4

and beyond, imply that the value of existing debt p3b is less than in the

transfer case.   Accordingly going back toward period zero shortterm rates of

interest will be lower in period 2, 1 and zero since it only takes smaller

rates of saving to clear the asset market.

     The saving response to interest rates affects the relative shortterm

interest rates of the spending and transfer case in periods 0 to 3. We saw

above that with a positive saving response to interest rates the trough of

interest rates occurs in period 2. When saving responds negatively to

interest rates the analysis of Figure 7 applies. Again we show for

comparison the shortterm rate of the spending case. The negative response of

saving to the interest rate reverses the relative magnitude of interest rate

changes by comparison with Figure 6 as well as the period in which the trough

occurs.

     The anticipation of transfers reduces saving in period 3 compared to the

spending case. The resulting excess supply of debt at the shortterm rate of

the spending case, at point A3, requires a rise in interest rates to
                          Long term
3D                        Rate




20-
      • Shortterm
          Rate
                 /                    Short term Rate
                                      (Spending Case)

I0-


       C
       C)-
       E                                   0U,C)


                                 i
0     C)
       U
                                      0)
       C                                   C)
                                           C
      0C                         CC)
       C                         00.       0
                           .43
      0              2     3      4          5

                     Figure 7
                                        18




 eliminate the excess supply of securities.10 The shortterm rate in the

transfer case thus is shown by point A. We also note that in period 3     the
longterm rate exceeds the initial steady state so that the value of debt is

below the initial value. This fact implies that in period 2, at the intitial

interest rate, the value of debt falls short of saving. Accordingly the

shortterm interest rate in period 2 must be below the initial-steady state as

shown in Figure 7.

     The case of a negative saving response to interest rates arises when

there is a dominant preference for consumption smoothing. Given the

exogeneous income and disturbances this preference implies large

accommodating fluctuations in shortterm interest rates. Moreover these

fluctuations in shortterm rates are sufficently large to even make the

longterm rate oscillate and thus the value of debt. The flubtuations in the

value of debt, in turn, feed back into preceding periods, forcing further,

though dampened, adjustments in shortterm rates to balance the capital

market.

Concluding Remarks: A Limiting Case

     An interesting limiting case considers only shortterm assets. Suppose

that the government instead of issuing consols issues one period bonds.

Every period the maturing debt with a face value bt is retired by selling new

debt. The difference between the face value and the market value of new

issues is covered by lump—sum taxes on the young amounting to (1_q)b. The

equilibrium condition in the asset market now is:


10From the capital market equilibrium condition s(q,w)q(l+)b we have
q = z/(l—a)(l—1/6) where z denotes the effect on saving of the second
period transfer. The term z is. negative and the saving elasticity with
respect to q, a(1—1/0) is positive. Therefore we have shown that the
shortterm rate must rise.
                                         19




           =
(8)            s(q,w)
      In this case where anticipated future deficit finance has no irriinediate

effect on the economy. In the case of government spending there is no effect

on interest rates until period 4, in the case of transfers effects occur

first in period 3 when anticipated transfers reduce saving.

      The two limiting cases——the logarithmic case studied above and the

shortterm bond case——show that in the case of finitely lived individuals it

takes both longterrn assets and a saving response to interest rates in order

for future disturbances to affect current asset prices. The longer the

maturity of assets and the lower the intertemporal elasticity of substitution

the more future events affect current prices of assets.
                                       20




                                 References
Barro, R. (1974), "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth," Journal of Political
     Econ, November.
Blanchard, 0. (1984a), "Debt, Deficits, and Finite Horizons," NBEE   Working
     Paper No.1389, June 1984.

            (1984b), "Current and Anticipated Deficits, Interest Rates and
     Economic Activity," European Economic Review, June.

Dornbusch, R. (1983), "Intergenerational and International Trade," Journal of
     International Economics, forthcoming.

Thompson, E. (1967), "Debt Instruments in both Macroeconomic Theory and
     Capital Theory," American Economic Review, December.
