NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAPITAL BUDGETING VS. MARKET TIMING:
AN EVALUATION USING DEMOGRAPHICS
Stefano DellaVigna
Joshua M. Pollet
Working Paper 15184
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15184

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2009

We thank Malcolm Baker, Patrick Bolton, James Choi, Ron Giammarino, Gur Huberman, Christopher
Polk, Michael Weisbach, Jeffrey Wurgler, the audiences at Amsterdam University, Columbia University,
Dartmouth College, Emory University, Harvard University, Rotterdam University, Tilburg University,
UCLA, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, the 2008 AFA Annual Meetings, and the 2008
Texas Finance Festival for comments. We also thank Jay Ritter for providing us with the IPO data
set. Finally, we gratefully acknowledge the support of the NSF through grant SES-0418206. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Stefano DellaVigna and Joshua M. Pollet. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Capital Budgeting vs. Market Timing: An Evaluation Using Demographics
Stefano DellaVigna and Joshua M. Pollet
NBER Working Paper No. 15184
July 2009
JEL No. G31,G32
ABSTRACT
An ongoing debate sets capital budgeting against market timing. The primary difficulty in evaluating
these theories is finding distinct exogenous proxies for investment opportunities and mispricing. We
use demand shifts induced by demographics to address this problem, and hence, provide a more definitive
analysis of the theories. According to capital budgeting, industries anticipating positive demand shifts
in the near future should issue more equity (and debt) to finance additional capacity. To the extent
that demographic shifts in the more distant future are not incorporated into equity prices, market timing
implies that industries anticipating positive demand shifts in the distant future should issue less equity
due to undervaluation. We find evidence supporting both capital budgeting and market timing: new
listings and equity issuance by existing listings respond positively to demand shifts up to 5 years ahead,
and negatively to demand shifts 5 to 10 years ahead.

Stefano DellaVigna
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
sdellavi@econ.berkeley.edu
Joshua M. Pollet
Eli Broad College of Business
315 Eppley Center
Michigan State University
E. Lansing, MI 48824
pollet@msu.edu

1

Introduction
The determinants of equity issuance are the subject of an ongoing debate in corporate

finance. Are initial and seasoned oﬀerings best explained by the demands for external finance,
or are they driven by market timing in response to company misvaluation?
Capital budgeting holds that firms issue equity (and debt) to invest the proceeds in positive
net-present-value projects, for example to expand production when demand is high (Modigliani
and Miller, 1958). Market timing instead holds that firms issue equity to take advantage of
mispricing by investors. (Baker, Ruback, and Wurgler, forthcoming; Stein, 1996).
One crucial diﬃculty in evaluating these theories is the lack of exogenous proxies for investment opportunities, on the one hand, and for misvaluation, on the other hand. For instance,
the relationship between the market-to-book ratio and corporate decisions could reflect investment opportunities (Campello and Graham, 2006), mispricing related to accruals or dispersion
of opinion (Gilchrist, Himmelberg, and Huberman, 2005; Polk and Sapienza, forthcoming),
or both (Hertzel and Yi, 2007). These issues are also linked to whether market-to-book is
a proxy for risk (Fama and French, 1992) or a measure of mispricing relative to accounting
fundamentals (Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1994).
We use demographic variables as proxies for both in a novel evaluation of these two theories.
We consider industries that are aﬀected by predictable shifts in cohort sizes, such as breweries
and long-term care facilities. These industries have distinctive age profiles of consumption.
Therefore, forecastable changes in the age distribution produce forecastable shifts in demand
for various goods. Even though these demand shifts only capture a small component of the
variation in investment opportunities and mispricing, they are exogenous from the perspective
of the manager. As such, they allow us to address the endogeneity problem and identify
separately the managerial response to variation in investment opportunities and mispricing.
We distinguish between shifts that will aﬀect an industry in the near future, up to 5 years
ahead, and shifts that will occur in the more distant future, 5 to 10 years ahead. As the model
in Section 2 demonstrates, traditional capital budgeting indicates that industries aﬀected by
positive demand shifts in the near future should raise capital to increase production. Positive
demand shifts increase marginal productivity and the optimal level of investment; in turn, the

1

desire for more investment induces demand for additional capital. Therefore, demand shifts
due to demographics in the near future should be positively related to equity issuance.
Another prediction relies on the assumption that investors are short-sighted and hence
partially neglect forecastable demographic shifts further in the future (5 to 10 years ahead).
Indeed, demand shifts due to demographics 5-10 years ahead significantly predict industry-level
abnormal returns (DellaVigna and Pollet, 2007). In our model, we assume that managers in a
particular industry have longer foresight horizons than investors–perhaps because managers
usually develop in-depth knowledge essential to long-term planning. Under this assumption,
demand shifts in the distant future serve as proxies for mispricing and managers react to
this mispricing by modifying their equity issuance decisions. Companies in industries with
positive demand shifts 5 to 10 years ahead will tend to be undervalued and managers respond
by reducing equity issuance (or repurchasing equity). Conversely, companies in industries
with negative demand shifts 5 to 10 years ahead will tend to be overvalued, and managers
react by issuing additional equity. This analysis assumes that the announcement of issuing or
repurchasing equity does not cause investors to fully eliminate the mispricing.
We also consider a special case in which time-to-build considerations create a trade-oﬀ
between raising equity to finance investment and repurchasing equity to exploit mispricing.
In this setting firms facing high demand growth in the distant future have favorable longterm investment opportunities but cannot delay investment until the associated undervaluation
eventually disappears. Hence, the model indicates that the predictions outlined in the two
previous paragraphs should be attenuated in high time-to-build industries compared to low
time-to-build industries.
Although the model in Section 2 does not include debt, we analyze a prediction regarding
debt. Capital budgeting suggests that companies aﬀected by positive demand shifts in the
near-term should raise capital. These companies can raise capital by borrowing through loans
or by issuing bonds (debt issuance) in addition to issuing equity. Market timing does not have
a clear prediction about the relationship between long-term demand shifts and debt issuance.1
1

In this context the extent to which debt is mispriced when equity is mispriced is unclear. In addition,
it is possible that debt issuance is a substitute for equity issuance if equity is mispriced. For instance,
a firm with undervalued equity might issue debt to repurchase equity or to finance greater investment.

2

To summarize, capital budgeting predicts that demand shifts due to demographics in the
near future should be positively related to debt and equity issuance, while market timing
suggests that demand shifts further in the future should be negatively related to equity issuance.
We note that these two predictions are not mutually exclusive. We test these predictions using
various measures of debt and equity. In Section 3 we describe the construction of demand
shifts due to demographics by combining forecasts of future cohort sizes and estimates of age
profiles of consumption and we introduce the measures of external corporate financing.
In Section 4 we analyze the impact of demographics on the likelihood of initial public oﬀerings (IPOs) and additional equity issuance by listed firms in an industry. We find that demand
shifts due to demographics up to 5 years ahead are positively related to the ratio of new listings
to existing listings, consistent with capital budgeting. Demand shifts due to demographics 5
to 10 years are significantly negatively related with this IPO measure, consistent with market
timing. We find similar results for the ratio of listing with large additional equity issuance to
existing listings. This measure exhibits a (significant) positive response to predicted demand
shifts up to 5 years ahead, but a significant negative response to predicted demand shifts 5 to
10 years ahead. As predicted, the results for equity issuance are stronger for industries that
are less competitive and for industries that have a lower time-to-build.
We also consider the impact of demand shifts on debt issues and repurchases. The evidence
regarding debt is imprecisely estimated. For most of the specifications, the sign of the coeﬃcient
estimates for demand shifts in the near future is consistent with capital budgeting but the
estimates are not statistically significant. There is also little statistical evidence that demand
shifts in the distant future are related to debt policy.2
Finally, we provide evidence on the channels underlying these results. The model in Section
2 links equity and debt decisions to demand shifts due to demographics through investment.
We find that positive demand shifts up to 5 years ahead increase investment. We also find
that these demand shifts increase Research and Development (R&D). These results provide
evidence that investment, broadly defined, is a determinant of the demand for external capital.
2

However, in a few specifications long-term demand shifts are negatively related to debt repurchases.
This result could support market timing if debt is used as a substitute for equity, that is, undervalued
firms repurchase equity but do not repurchase debt due to financing constraints.

3

In Section 5 we discuss five alternative explanations: signalling, agency problems, large
fixed costs of equity issuance, globalization, and the presence of unobserved time patterns
correlated with the demographic variables.
This paper is related to the literature on the empirical evidence of market timing.3 Relative
to this literature, we consider a novel exogenous proxy for mispricing. The paper is also related
to the literature on corporate response to anticipated demand shifts. Acemoglu and Linn (2005)
document that research and investment in classes of pharmaceuticals responds to anticipated
shifts in demand. Ellison and Ellison (2000) document that pharmaceutical firms respond to
anticipated patent expiration by altering their advertising decisions. Goolsbee and Syverson
(2008) document that airline companies cut their fare in response to the anticipated entry of a
competitor. Unlike these papers, we focus on equity and debt financing decisions. This paper
also addresses the literature on the eﬀect of demographics on corporate outcomes (Acemoglu
and Linn, 2005; Mankiw and Weil, 1989) and on aggregate stock returns (Poterba, 2001).
Finally, we also extend the discussion of the role of attention allocation in economics and
finance.4 The evidence in this paper suggests that the inattention of investors with respect to
long-term information (DellaVigna and Pollet, 2007) aﬀects corporate financing decisions.

2

A Model
We consider a simple two-period model of investment and equity issuance. The investment

opportunity is a long-term project. This long-term project may be financed in either period 1
or period 2 and the cash flow from this project is realized at the end of period 2. In the second
period the manager and the investors have the same (correct) expectations about the expected
value of the investment opportunity. However, in the first period investors do not correctly
foresee the expected value of the investment opportunity in period 2, since the level of demand is
3

Baker, Ruback, and Wurgler, forthcoming; Campello and Graham, 2006; Chirinko and Schaller,
2007; Gilchrist, Himmelberg, and Huberman, 2005; Hertzel and Yi, 2007; Jenter, Lewellen, and Warner,
2007; Polk and Sapienza, forthcoming.
4
Barber and Odean, forthcoming; Cohen and Frazzini, forthcoming; Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam, 1998; DellaVigna and Pollet, 2009; Hirshleifer, Lim, and Teoh, 2004 and forthcoming; Hong
and Stein, 1999; Huberman and Regev, 2001; Peng and Xiong, 2006

4

beyond their foresight horizon.5 Only the manager foresees the expected value of the investment
opportunity correctly since s/he has a longer foresight horizon. Therefore, limited attention
induces time-varying asymmetric information between the investors and the manager. We also
consider the rational expectations case where investors have correct expectations throughout.
To match the empirical evidence, it helps to think of the two periods as approximately
5 years apart. We assume that investors are naive about their limited foresight, and hence,
do not use the equity issuance policy to make inferences about the information known by the
manager. Also, since our goal is to focus on the impact of investor foresight, we do not consider
other forms of asymmetric information. We assume that the manager maximizes the price per
share for the existing shareholders that hold their shares until the end of period 2. We do not
incorporate other agency problems in the model.
We capture potential time-to-build aspects associated with the production process by considering two polar cases: (i) investment in period 1 or period 2 is equally productive (no
time-to-build), and (ii) investment in period 2 is completely unproductive (severe time-tobuild). The second case describes industries in which cost-eﬀective investment in new plants
must begin many years before production, that is, in period 1 not period 2. For example, it is
much less costly to build a new aircraft assembly plant over a multi-year period than building
it in one year.
We start by analyzing the investment decision. The firm chooses the level of investments,
I1 , and I2 ∈ [0, ∞), with a gross product αf (I1 + g (I2 )) in period 2 where g (.) captures
the (potential) time-to-build considerations. The marginal productivity of investment in the
project is determined by α = {α, α}. When demand due to demographics is high, α is high:
α = α; when demand due to demographics is low, α is low: α = α < α. We assume that
the production function is increasing and concave: f 0 (I) > 0 and f 00 (I) < 0 for all I ≥ 0.
To guarantee positive and finite investment for each project, we assume standard limiting
conditions: limI→0 f 0 (I) = ∞ and limI→∞ f 0 (I) = 0. For convenience, we consider two limiting
cases for g (I). In the absence of time-to-build aspects, we let g (I) = I so that there is no
5

This mistake in expectations is an error in the perception of the average return for the project. It
is not related to any misperception of the risk properties associated with the project.

5

reduction in the marginal productivity of investment even if the investment is implemented
in period 2. In the presence of time-to-build considerations, we let g(I) = 0 to eliminate
productive investment in the second period due to the prohibitive cost of delayed investment.
The manager uses internal funds or raises external finance (equity) in period 1 or 2 to
raise suﬃcient funds for the investments I1 , and I2 . In our simplified set-up, equity is the
only financial instrument that is aﬀected by the limited foresight horizon of the investor. We
discuss an extension with riskless debt at the end of this section. In period 1, the firm has
cash C available and N shares outstanding. We assume that the financing constraints are only
binding when demand is high. The firm always has enough cash to undertake the first-best
investment with low demand α, but not enough cash to undertake the first-best investment
with high demand α without some equity issuance. This assumption simplifies the analysis
without altering the basic insights of the model.
The firm can issue n1 shares in period 1 (at price P1 ) and n2 shares in period 2 (at price P2 ).
The equity issuance in either period can be negative, that is, we allow the firm to repurchase
equity. We assume that there is a maximum amount of total equity issuance or repurchases:
0 < N ≤ N + n1 + n2 ≤ N , with N < N . We impose a similar constraint in period 1:
N ≤ N + n1 ≤ N . We select N to be large enough so that it is always possible to issue enough
equity to finance the first best levels of investment, however it may not be optimal for the
manager to do so. These technical assumptions rule out infinite share issuance and complete
share repurchase. Finally, we assume that the manager incurs an extremely small fixed cost
K each time equity is issued or repurchased. This technical assumption simplifies the analysis
in the cases in which the firm is indiﬀerent with respect to equity issuance.
The manager maximizes the price per share of the firm for the long-term shareholders, that
is, total firm value scaled by the number of shares outstanding at the end of period 2. The
firm’s value is the sum of the initial cash holdings C, the equity raised in the two periods,
n1 P1 + n2 P2 , plus the value of the investment, αf (I1 + g (I2 )), net of the investment expense,
I1 + I2 . The interest rate between the two periods is normalized to zero. The manager’s

6

maximization problem is
max

n1 ,n2 ,I1 ,I2

1
(C + n1 P1 + n2 P2 + αf (I1 + g (I2 )) − I1 − I2 ) .
N + n1 + n2

(1)

s.t. I1 ≤ C + n1 P1 ,
I1 + I2 ≤ C + n1 P1 + n2 P2 ,
N

≤ N + n1 + n2 ≤ N ,

N

≤ N + n1 ≤ N .

While the manager knows the realization of the demand parameter α, investors in period 1
b ≤ α. This assumption captures
neglect demographic factors and make a forecast α
b , with α ≤ α

the (potential) short-sightedness of the investors. In period 2, investors and managers agree
about the level of demand, since investors observe α directly.
We assume that the manager extracts all the surplus from outside investors. Hence, we

compute the highest prices P1 and P2 at which outside investors are willing to buy shares of
the company. Investors in period 1 are willing to purchase shares if
P1 =

¡
¡
¡
¢¢
¢
1
b f I1,eα + g I2,eα − I1,eα − I2,eα ,
C + n1 P1 + α
N + n1

where I1,eα and I2,eα are the levels of investment consistent with the (potentially incorrect)
demand forecast α
b in period 2. In the absence of time-to-build aspects (g (I) = I), we assume

that the predicted levels of investment in the long-term project, I1,eα and I2,eα satisfy the
¡
¢
equation α
b f 0 I1,eα + I2,eα − 1 = 0. In the presence of time-to-build considerations (g (I) = 0),

we assume that the predicted levels of investment in the long-term project, I1,eα and I2,eα satisfy
¡
¢
the equations α
b f 0 I1,eα − 1 = 0 and I2,eα = 0. These conditions define the first-best levels of
investment for the project in each of the relevant cases if the true demand level is α
b.
In period 2, investors are willing to purchase shares if
P2 =

1
(C + n1 P1 + n2 P2 + αf (I1,α + g (I2,α )) − I1,α − I2,α ) ,
N + n1 + n2

where I1,α is the level of investment correctly observed by investors at the end of period 1 and

7

I2,α is the forecast of investment in the second period that is consistent with the correct demand
¡ ¡
¡
¢¢
¢
b f I1,eα + g I2,eα − I1,eα − I2,eα
α. We define Vα = αf (I1,α + g (I2,α )) − I1,α − I2,α and Vαe = α
to simplify notation and solve the two equations for the levels of P1 and P2 : P1 = N −1 (C + Vαe )

and P2 = (N + n1 )−1 (C + n1 P1 + Vα ) .

First, we analyze investment and equity issuance in period 2 (with no mispricing) and then
we consider equity issuance in period 1 (with mispricing).
Period 2. After substituting in the solution for P2 and rearranging, the problem of the
manager in period 2 is
max
n2 ,I2

1
1
(C + n1 P1 )+
N + n1
N + n1 + n2

µµ

n2
N + n1

¶

¶
Vα + αf (I1,α + g (I2 )) − I1,α − I2 . (2)

The first-order condition of this problem with respect to the level of investment in the second
period is equivalent to
αf 0 (I1,α + g (I2∗ )) g 0 (I2∗ ) − 1 = 0.
Given our assumptions about f (.) and g (.), there is a unique solution for I2∗ . If g(I) = I, the
¡ ∗
¢
+ I2∗ − 1 = 0. Alternatively, if
solution is the first-best level of investment given by αf 0 I1,α

g(I) = 0, the solution is still the first-best level of investment where I2∗ = 0 (a corner solution).
In either case the solution for I2∗ does not depend on the issuance decision n∗2 ., To solve for

the optimal n∗2 we substitute I2 = I2∗ and I2,α = I2∗ in expression (2). The manager’s problem
simplifies to
max
n2

1
(C + n1 P1 + αf (I1,α + g (I2∗ )) − I1,α − I2∗ ) ,
N + n1

which is independent of the equity issuance n2 . Hence, optimal equity issuance in period 2 is
determined only by the need to raise suﬃcient funds to finance the optimal level of investment
in period 2. This result is not surprising because there is no divergence in expectations in the
last period and there are no other capital market distortions. Given the small fixed cost of
share issuance (repurchase) K, the firm does not raise equity in the second period (n∗2 = 0)
if it already has enough funds to finance the investment, that is, if I2∗ + I1,α − C − n1 P1 < 0
or if I2∗ = 0. Otherwise, the firm issues a suﬃcient number of new shares to ensure that

8

n∗2 P2 ≥ I2∗ + I1,α − C − n1 P1 .
Period 1. Using the solution for I2∗ , we solve for the optimal equity issuance (repurchase)
decision in period 1. After substituting in the values for P1 and P2 and rearranging, the
maximization problem is
max
n1 ,I1

1
1
(C + Vαe ) +
(αf (I1 + g (I2∗ )) − I1 − I2∗ − Vαe ) .
N
N + n1

(3)

The first term in expression (3) is the value of the company according to the outside investors
(based on incorrect expectation that the demand shift will be α
b ). The second term captures

the value to the manager of exploiting the biased beliefs of investors by issuing or repurchasing
equity via n1 . Note that the issuance (repurchase) decision in period 2 is irrelevant for the
maximization problem in period 1.We consider the standard case first and then proceed to the
case with time-to-build aspects.
If g (I) = I (no time-to-build), the optimal level of investment in period 1 for the long-term
project satisfies αf 0 (I1∗ + I2∗ ) − 1 = 0. This first-best level of investment, I1∗ + I2∗ , is always
attained because the manager can raise suﬃcient equity in the second period to finance the
optimal investment. Hence, in the absence of time-to-build aspects, the expected value of the
investment opportunity is independent of the decision to issue or repurchase equity in the first
period. Given the assumptions about f (.), the optimal investment policy, I1∗ + I2∗ , in the
project is an increasing function of α.
Next, we determine the optimal level of equity issuance/repurchase. Since the first term
of (3) is not a function of n1 , the solution only depends on the numerator of the second
term, αf (I1∗ + I2∗ ) − I1∗ − I2∗ − Vαe (substituting I1∗ for I1 ). If there is high future demand and

b , this term is positive and the manager chooses to minimize
shortsighted investors, α = α > α

N +n1 . Since the company is undervalued, the manager repurchases as many shares as possible

in period 1, n∗1 = N − N, and then issues equity in the second period to finance the optimal

b,
level of investment. If there is low future demand and shortsighted investors, α = α < α
the term is negative and the manager chooses to maximize N + n1 . Because the company is
overvalued, the manager issues as much equity as possible, n∗1 = N − N and there is no need

9

to issue shares in the second period to finance the optimal level of investment. If g (I) = I, the
optimal level of investment in period 1 for the long-term project satisfies αf 0 (I1∗ + I2∗ ) − 1 = 0
and given the functional form of f (.), the optimal investment policy, I1∗ + I2∗ , in the project is
an increasing function of α.
If g(I) = 0 (time-to-build), then I2∗ = 0 and the manager maximizes
max
n1 ,I1

1
1
(αf (I1 ) − I1 − Vαe ) .
(C + Vαe ) +
N
N + n1

(4)

¡
¢
where the first-best level of investment is characterized by αf 0 I1F B − 1 = 0. When demand

is low (α = α), the term αf (I1 ) − I1 − Vαe is negative. The manager issues as much equity

as possible (n∗1 = N − N ) and selects the first-best investment level I1F B . When demand is
high, (α = α), the manager would like to repurchase shares up to n∗1 = N − N. However, this

action would make it impossible to undertake the first-best investment I1F B because the firm
does not have suﬃcient cash on hand to finance the first best level of investment when demand
is high. In this case, there is a trade-oﬀ between exploiting mispricing by repurchasing equity
and financing the investment opportunity by issuing (or not repurchasing) equity in the first
period. Hence, the motivation to repurchase shares due to market timing will generally be
attenuated by the need to finance investment in the presence of time-to-build aspects. This
trade-oﬀ implies that it is not obvious if investment is greater when demand is high than when
demand is low. However, the investment opportunity and any potential mispricing are both
quantitatively related to the magnitude of the demand shift and we are able to show that
investment is greater if demand is high (see appendix).
The next proposition summarizes these results. We use the notation ST to indicate the
standard case where g (I) = I and the notation T B to indicate time-to-build considerations
where g (I) = 0.
b)
Proposition 1 (Inattentive investors). (i) In the case with high demand ( α = α > α

and no time-to-build ( g (I) = I), the manager repurchases shares in period 1 and issues shares

b)
in period 2: n∗1,ST = N −N < 0 and n∗2,ST > 0. (ii) In the case with high demand ( α = α > α

and time-to-build ( g (I) = 0), the manager repurchases (weakly) fewer shares of the company

10

compared to case (i) and does not issues shares in period 2: n∗1,T B ≥ n∗1,ST and n∗2,T B = 0.
b ), the manager issues shares in period 1 and
(iii) In either case with low demand ( α = α < α

does not issue in period 2: n∗1,ST = n∗1,T B = N − N > 0 and n∗2,ST = n∗2,T B = 0.(iv) Total
investment ( I1∗ + I2∗ ) is greater in the case with high demand ( α = α) than in the case with

low demand ( α = α).
Restating this discussion brings us to our empirical tests. Demand shifts in the near future
should be positively related to net equity issuance, but demand shifts in the more distant
future should be negatively related to net equity issuance. The second relationship should
be attenuated by time-to-build considerations. Finally, investment should increase with the
demand shift in the absence of time-to-build considerations
Attentive Investors. So far, we considered the case of short-sighted investors, for which
b < α. We also consider the case in which investors are fully aware of the demand shift
α<α

α. The solution for the investment I2∗ and equity issuance n∗2 in period 2 do not change. The
maximization problem in period 1 becomes
max
n1 ,I1

1
(C + αf (I1 + g (I2∗ )) − I1 − I2∗ )
N

(5)

In this case investors have correct expectations for demand in the first period, and therefore,
investors also have correct expectations of investment. Hence, the firm has no incentive to issue
(or repurchase) equity in period 1, except to finance the investment. If g (I) = I, the manager
will raise equity in either period 1 or period 2 but not in both periods when demand is high.
If g (I) = 0, the manager will raise equity in period 1 when demand is high. If demand is low,
investment is financed internally in either case. Because investment is first-best, expression (4)
and the functional form of f (.) imply that the optimal level of investment, I1∗ + I2∗ , must be
an increasing function of α. The predictions are summarized in the next Proposition.
b ),
Proposition 2 (Fully attentive investors). (i) In the case of high demand ( α = α = α

there is positive issuance in one of the two periods ( n∗1 > 0 or n∗2 > 0); in the presence of timeto-build, there is issuance in the first period only. (ii) In the case of low demand ( α = α = α
b ),

there is no equity issuance ( n∗1 = n∗2 = 0). (iii) Total investment ( I1∗ + I2∗ ) is greater in the

11

case with high demand ( α = α) than the case with low demand ( α = α).
For attentive investors, the only motive to issue equity is capital budgeting. Both equity
issuance and investment respond positively to the demand shift α. Equity issuance can increase
well in advance of the demand shift (period 1) or immediately before the demand shift (period
2) if time-to-build is not an important consideration.
Extensions. We briefly discuss possible extensions and simplifying assumptions. It is
straightforward to generalize the model to allow issuance and/or repurchases of (correctly
priced) riskless debt in either period. Since riskless debt is issued for capital budgeting rather
than for market timing reasons, the main diﬀerential prediction would occur for high demand
due to demographics (α = α). Instead of raising equity to finance investment, the firm could
raise debt in either period. Hence, we test the additional prediction that debt responds positively to demand shifts due to demographics in Section 4.8.
We also assumed that the demand for equity is not downward sloping. Agency problems or
more sophisticated versions of asymmetric information would induce additional capital market
distortions and generate downward sloping demand curves. These factors would also distort
the investment decision and the discussion of the model would become substantially more
complicated. Optimal issuance and repurchase levels in the presence of mispricing would be
determined by the shape of the demand curve rather than the technical assumption of a
minimum and maximum number of shares. Nevertheless, we doubt that introducing these
modifications would change the key insights.

3

Data
In this Section, we summarize the construction of the measures of demand growth due to

demographics.6 We also briefly summarize the results about abnormal return predictability using demographic information to motivate our test of market timing. Next, we provide summary
statistics on the benchmark measures of equity issuance.
6

See DellaVigna and Pollet (2007) for additional details regarding this procedure.

12

3.1

Demand Shifts Due to Demographics

To obtain demographic-based forecasts of demand growth by industry, we generate demographic forecasts and combine them with estimated age patterns in consumption by industry.
Demographic Forecasts. We combine data from the Census on cohort size, mortality,
and fertility rates to form forecasts of cohort sizes. We use demographic information available
in year t to forecast the age distribution by gender and one-year age groups for years u > t.
We assume that fertility rates for the years u > t equal the fertility rates for year t. We also
assume that future mortality rates equal mortality rates in year t except for a backward-looking
percentage adjustment. Using cohort size in year t and the forecasts of future mortality and
fertility rates, we form preliminary forecasts of cohort size for each year u > t, which we the
adjust for net migration. We compute an adjustment for net immigration by regressing the
percentage diﬀerence between the actual cohort size and the preliminary forecasted cohort size
formed the year before, on a constant. We produce these adjustment coeﬃcients separately
for each 10-year age group using data from the most recent five-year period prior to year t.
h
i
We define Âg,u|t = Âg,0,u|t , Âg,1,u|t , Âg,2,u|t , ... as the forecasted age distribution. Âg,j,u|t

is the number of people of gender g alive at u with age j forecasted using information available

at t. Ag,j,u is the actual cohort size of gender g alive at u with age j. These estimates, we
can forecast the actual population growth rate over the next 5 years, log Ag,j,t+5 − log Ag,j,t ,
with an R2 of 0.83. The forecasts 5 to 10 years in the future are only slightly less precise.
Our forecasts also closely parallel publicly available demographic forecasts, in particular the
Census Bureau population forecasts created using data from the 2000 Census.7
Age Patterns in Consumption. We use data from the Survey of Consumer Expenditures, 1972-1973 and the 1983-1984 cohorts of the ongoing Consumer Expenditure Survey to
estimate the age patterns in consumption. We cover all major expenditures on final goods
included in the survey data. The selected level of aggregation attempts to distinguish goods
with diﬀerent age-consumption profiles. For example, within the category of alcoholic bever7

We do not use the Census population forecasts because they are unavailable for many of the years
in the sample.

13

ages, we separate beer and wine from hard liquor expenditures. Similarly, within insurance we
distinguish among health, property, and life insurance expenditures.
In Figure 1, we illustrate the age profile for two goods using kernel regressions of household
annual consumption on the age of the head of household8 . Figure 1 plots the normalized
expenditure on bicycles and drugs for the 1972-73 and 1983-84 surveys.9 Across the two
surveys, the consumption of bicycles peaks between the ages of 35 and 45. At these ages, the
heads of household are most likely to have children between the ages of 5 and 10. The demand
for drugs, instead, is increasing with age, particularly in the later survey. Older individuals
demand more pharmaceutical products.
This evidence on age patterns in consumption supports three general statements. First,
the amount of consumption for each good depends significantly on the age of the head of
household. Patterns of consumption for most goods are not flat with respect to age. Second,
these age patterns vary substantially across goods. Some goods are consumed mainly by
younger household heads (child care and toys), some by heads in middle age (life insurance
and cigars), others by older heads (cruises and nursing homes). Third, the age profile of
consumption for a given good is quite stable across time. For example, the expenditure on
furniture peaks at ages 25-35, whether we consider the 1972-73 or the 1983-84 cohorts. Taken
as a whole, the evidence suggests that changes in age structure of the population have the
power to influence consumption demand in a substantial and consistent manner.
Demand Forecasts. We combine the estimated age profiles of consumption with the
demographic forecasts in order to forecast demand for diﬀerent goods. For example, consider
a forecast of toys consumption in 1985 made as of 1975. For each age group, we multiply the
forecasted cohort sizes for 1985 by the age-specific consumption of toys estimated on the most
recent consumption data as of 1975, that is, the 1972-73 survey. Next, we aggregate across all
the age groups to obtain the forecasted overall demand for toys for 1985.
In Table 1, we present summary statistics on the consumption forecasts. Columns 2 and
8

We use an Epanechnikov kernel with a bandwidth of 5 years of age for each consumption good and
survey year.
9
For each survey-good pair we divide age-specific consumption for good k by the average consumption
across all ages for good k.

14

4 present the five-year predicted growth rate due to demographics, ln Ĉk,t+5|t−1 − ln Ĉk,t|t−1 ,
respectively for years t = 1975 and t = 2000. The bottom two rows present the mean and
the standard deviation across goods of this measure. In each case, data from the most recent
consumer expenditure survey is used. In 1975, the demand for child care and toys is low due
to the small size of the ‘Baby Bust’ generation. The demand for most adult-age commodities
is predicted to grow at a high rate (1.5-2 percent a year) due to the entry of the ‘Baby Boom’
generation into prime consumption age. In 2000 the demand for child-related commodities is
relatively low. The aging of the ‘Baby Boom’ generation implies that the highest forecasted
demand growth is for goods consumed later in life, such as cigars, cosmetics, and life insurance.
Demographic Industries. We also categorizes goods by their sensitivity to demographic
shifts. For example, the demand for oil and utilities is unlikely to be aﬀected by shifts in the
relative cohort sizes, while the demand for bicycles and motorcycles depends substantially on
the relative size of the cohorts aged 15-20 and 20-30, respectively. We construct a measure of
Demographic Industries using information available at time t − 1 to identify the goods where
demographics shifts are likely to have the most impact. In each year t and industry k, we
compute the standard deviation of the one-year consumption forecasts up to 15 years ahead
´
³
given by ln Ĉk,t+s+1|t−1 − ln Ĉk,t+s|t−1 for s = 0, 1, ..., 15. We define the set of Demographic

Industries10 in each year t as the 20 industries with the highest standard deviation of demand

growth. In these industries, the forecasted aging of the population induces diﬀerent demand
shifts at diﬀerent times in the future, enabling the estimation of investor horizon. Table 1 lists
all industries and indicates which industries belong to the subset of demographics industries in
1975 (Column 3) and 2000 (Column 5). Column 6 summarizes the percentage of years in which
an industry belongs to the Demographic Industries subsample. The Demographic Industries
are associated with high demand by children (child care, toys) and by young adults (housing).
Return Predictability. The evidence supporting return predictability is summarized in
10

Ideally, we would like to select industries in which demographics better predicts contemporaneous
profitability or revenue growth. Unfortunately, this avenue is not feasible for two reasons. First,
demographics is a small predictor of revenue and profit, so one would need a long time series to identify
the industries with the highest predictive power. For univariate series with 20-30 observations, the
estimation would be poor. Second and relatedly, it would be impossible to do such test in the early
years of data without violating the requirement of only using backward-looking information.

15

Figure 2. This figure plots the coeﬃcient of univariate regressions of abnormal annual industry
stock returns in year t on forecasted demand growth due to demographics in year t + h. The
panel regression includes up to 48 industries over the years 1974-2004. As Figure 2 shows, while
contemporaneous demand shifts (h equal to 1 or 2) do not significantly forecast stock returns,
demand shifts 5-10 years ahead (h equal to 5-10) significantly predicts returns.11 We interpret
this result as evidence that investors neglect forecastable determinants of fundamentals that
are more than 5 years in the future. The abnormal return for an industry increases when the
inattentive investors incorporate the upcoming demand shift 5 years in the future.12

3.2

Equity and Debt Issuance

IPOs. The first measure of equity issuance captures the decision of firms in an industry
to go public. We construct the benchmark measure of IPOs as the share of traded companies
in industry k and year t that are new equity listings in year t. The measure of new equity
listings is available for the full sample (1974-2004) for the large majority of the industries.
The average share of new listings ranges from 0.011 (Books: College Texts) to 0.126 (Cruises).
As an alternative measure, we also use the share of companies in industry k and year t that
undertake an IPO according to data from Jay Ritter. The main disadvantage of this alternative
measure is that the data is available only from 1980 until 2003. During the sample in which
both measures exist, the correlation between the two measures is .8228.
Net Equity Issuance. The measures of equity issuance for public companies in year t and
industry k are based on net equity issuance in year t scaled by industry book value of assets in
year t − 1 (Frank and Goyal, 2003). The measures are available for the entire sample period
for most industries, even though the number of companies included in the industry is smaller
than the corresponding number for the IPO measure, given the additional data requirement
that the company is in Compustat as well as CRSP. We define the measure of substantial
equity issuance as the fraction of companies in industry k that in a given year t that have net
11

The the standard errors in Figure 2 are estimated using the methodology described in Section 4.
More detailed evidence supporting abnormal return predictability is available in DellaVigna and
Pollet (2007).
12

16

equity issuance greater than three percent of the book value of assets. This threshold, albeit
arbitrary, allows us to eliminate equity issues that are part of ordinary transactions, such as
executive compensation. The mean of this variable is .108, with a standard deviation of .190.
Similarly, we define a measure of substantial equity repurchases as the fraction of companies in
industry k that in a given year t that have net equity repurchases greater than three percent of
the book value of assets. The mean of this variable is .067, with a standard deviation of .164.
Net Debt Issuance. The measures of debt issuance for public companies in year t and
industry k are based on the net long-term debt issuance in year t scaled by industry book value
of assets in year t − 1. We define measures of substantial debt issuance and substantial debt
repurchases following the same approach described for equity issuance.

4

Empirical Analysis

4.1

Baseline Specification

In the baseline specification we regress the equity issuance variables on the forecasted growth
rate of demand due to demographics from t to t + 5 (the present and the near future) and t + 5
to t + 10 (the further future). The specification of the regression is
ek,t+1 = γ + δ 0 [ĉk,t+5|t−1 − ĉk,t|t−1 ]/5 + δ 1 [ĉk,t+10|t−1 − ĉk,t+5|t−1 ]/5 + β m em,t+1 + β b mbk,t+1 + εk,t
(6)
Since the consumption growth variables are scaled by 5, the coeﬃcients δ 0 and δ 1 represent
the average increase in issuance for one percentage point of additional annualized growth in
demographics at the two diﬀerent horizons. (The forecasts of consumption as of time t only
use information available in period t − 1.) The specification controls for market-wide patterns
in equity issuance, em,t+1 , and the industry market-to-book ratio, mbk,t+1 .13
In this panel setting it is unlikely that the errors from the regression are uncorrelated across
industries and over time because there are persistent shocks that aﬀect multiple industries at
13

We also show in Table 4 that including lagged profitability and lagged investment does not aﬀect
the results.

17

the same time. We allow for heteroskedasticity and arbitrary contemporaneous correlation
across industries by calculating standard errors clustered by year. In addition, we correct
these standard errors to account for autocorrelation in the error structure.14
Let X be the matrix of regressors, θ the vector of parameters, and ε the vector of errors. The
q
panel has T periods and K industries. Under the appropriate regularity conditions, T1 (θ̂ −
P
0
θ) is asymptotically distributed N (0, (X 0 X)−1 S(X 0 X)−1 ) where S = Γ0 + ∞
q=1 (Γq + Γq )
P
PK
0
and Γq = E[( K
k=1 Xkt εkt ) ( k=1 Xkt−q εkt−q )]. The matrix Γ0 captures the contemporaneous
covariance, while the matrix Γq captures the covariance structure between observations that are
q periods apart. While we do not make any assumptions about contemporaneous covariation,
0 ε follows an autoregressive process given by X 0 ε = ρX 0
0
we assume that Xkt
kt
kt kt
kt−1 εkt−1 + η kt
P
PK
0
where ρ < 1 is a scalar and E[( K
k=1 Xkt−q εkt−q ) ( k=1 η kt )] = 0 for any q > 0.

These assumptions imply Γq = ρq Γ0 and therefore, S = [(1 + ρ) / (1 − ρ)]Γ0 . (Derivation

and details are in DellaVigna and Pollet, 2007) The higher the autocorrelation coeﬃcient
ρ, the larger the terms in the matrix S. Since Γ0 and ρ are unknown, we estimate Γ0 with
0
0
1 PT
t=1 Xt ε̂t ε̂t Xt where Xt is the matrix of regressors and ε̂t is the vector of estimated residuals
T

0 ε̂ on
for each cross-section. We estimate ρ from the pooled regression for each element of Xkt
kt

0
ε̂kt−1 .
the respective element of Xkt−1

We use the set of Demographic Industries for the years 1974-2004 as the baseline sample
for the paper. As discussed above, the Demographic Industries are more likely to be aﬀected
by demographic demand shifts.

4.2

IPO Results

In Table 2, we estimate specification (6) for the share of new equity listings, the benchmark
measure of IPOs. Columns 1 through 4 present the estimates for the sample of Demographic
Industries. In the specification without industry or year fixed eﬀects (Column 1), the impact
of demographics on new equity listings is identified by both between- and within-industry vari14

This method is more conservative than clustering by either industry or year. In the empirical
specifications that follow, the standard errors computed with either of these methodologies are almost
uniformly lower than our standard errors.

18

ation in demand growth. The coeﬃcient on short-term demographics, δ̂ 0 = 3.35, is marginally
significantly diﬀerent from zero, while the coeﬃcient on long-term demographics, δ̂ 1 = −4.84,
is significantly diﬀerent from zero. Introducing the controls for the industry market-to-book
ratio mbk,t and for the aggregate share of new listings em,t (Column 2) reduces the eﬀect of
long-term demographics to a marginally significant δ̂ 1 = −2.49 and the eﬀect of short-term
demographics becomes insignificant. The control for the aggregate share of new listings is
highly significant and close to 1, suggesting the importance of controlling for market waves in
IPOs. In this and the subsequent specifications in Table 2, the estimate of ρ is approximately
p
0.17, resulting in a proportional correction for the standard errors of (1 + ρ̂) / (1 − ρ̂) = 1.19.
In Column 3 we introduce industry fixed eﬀects. In this case, the identification depends

only on within-industry variation in demand growth. The demand growth in the near-future
has a marginally significant positive eﬀect on the share of new listings (δ̂ 0 = 2.45), while
the demand growth in the further future has a significant negative eﬀect (δ̂ 1 = −3.07). We
obtain similar results in Column 4, where we introduce year fixed eﬀects. In this specification,
the identification depends on within-industry variation in demand growth after controlling for
common time-series patterns.15
For the specifications in Columns 2-4, a one percent annualized increase in demand from
year 0 to 5 increases the share of net equity issues by about 2.5 percentage points from an average of 6.33 percentage points. (A one percentage point increase in demand growth corresponds
approximately to a 1.7 standard deviations.16 ) A one percentage point annualized increase in
demand from year 5 to 10 decreases the share of net equity issues by about 3 percentage points,
a significant and economically large eﬀect. While this eﬀect is large, we note that a decrease
of .5 percentage points is inside the confidence interval for the coeﬃcient estimate.
In Columns 5 and 6 we use the alternative measure of IPOs based on the share of IPOs
according to data from Jay Ritter. Similar to the results obtained with the benchmark measure,
we find that long-term demand growth due to demographics is negatively related to the share
15

We find quantitatively similar results using the Fama-MacBeth regression methodology. This alternative approach provides results that are largely consistent with the evidence from panel regressions.
16
For this sample, the mean forecasted demand growth 0-5 (respectively, 5-10) years ahead is .0139
(.0118), with standard deviation .0059 (.0059).

19

of IPOs. While the coeﬃcient estimate is positive for short-term demand growth due to
demographics, this eﬀect is not significant.
Finally, in Columns 7 and 8 we present the results for the benchmark measure of IPOs, but
for the sample of non-demographic industries. The coeﬃcient estimates are similar but the
standard errors are about twice as large, despite the higher number of observations. For this
set of industries, the demographic shifts are not important enough determinants of demand. If
we group the two samples together and consider the sample of all industries (not shown), the
results are slightly stronger than those for the demographic sample.
To summarize, the impact of demand shifts on the share of new equity listings depends
on the horizon of the demand shifts. Demand shifts occurring in the near future increase the
share of IPOs, consistent with capital budgeting, although this eﬀect is not always significant.
Demand shifts occurring further in the future, instead, significantly decrease the share of IPOs,
consistent with market timing. In both cases, the eﬀect is economically large.

4.3

Net Equity Issuance Results

In Table 3, we estimate specification (6) for the measures of net equity issuance by existing
firms in the sample of Demographic Industries.17
In Columns 1-3 we present the results for the measure of large equity issues, the share of
companies in an industry with net issuance above three percent of assets. In the specification
without industry or year fixed eﬀects (Column 1), the coeﬃcient on short-term demographics
is positive but insignificant (δ̂ 0 = 4.05), while the coeﬃcient on long-term demographics is
significantly negative (δ̂ 1 = −7.24). Once we introduce the controls for the industry marketto-book ratio mbk,t+1 and aggregate net equity issuance em,t+1 as well as industry fixed eﬀects
(Column 2), the coeﬃcient estimates for both the short-term demographics and the long-term
demographics are statistically significant. In this and the subsequent specifications in Table 6,
the estimate of ρ varies between 0 and .30, for an average of 0.15, resulting in a proportional
p
correction for the standard errors of (1 + ρ̂) / (1 − ρ̂) = 1.16. In Column 3 we introduce year
17

The results are qualitatively similar but much imprecisely estimated for the sample of NonDemographic Industries.

20

fixed eﬀects, which lowers the coeﬃcient on short-term demographics considerably, rendering
it insignificant.
In Columns 4-6 we present the results for the large equity repurchases, the share of companies in an industry with net repurchases above 3 percent of assets. The qualitative results are,
as predicted, the opposite sign compared to the estimates for large equity issuance. However,
the estimates are less precisely estimated. Near-term demographic shifts are not significantly
related to repurchases. Long-term demographic shifts increase the repurchases in Columns 4
and 5 but not in Column 6.
Finally, in Columns 7 and 8 we analyze the continuous measure of net equity issuance.
We find evidence that near-term demographic shifts increase net equity issuance and longterm demographic shifts decrease net equity issuance. In results not shown, we revisit the
specifications in Columns 7 and 8 using an alternative measure of net equity issuance in the
spirit of Baker and Wurgler (2002) defined as the change in book equity minus the change in
retained earnings (scaled by lagged assets) and the results are qualitatively similar.
To summarize, the evidence matches the predictions of the model and is consistent with
the findings for new listings. Demand shifts occurring in the near future increase net equity
issuance, consistent with capital budgeting. Demand shifts occurring in the distant future significantly decrease the net equity issues by both decreasing issuance and increasing repurchases,
consistent with market timing. In both cases, the estimates are economically large.

4.4

Combined Issuance Results

Since the results for new equity listings and the results and large additional equity issuance
are consistent, we introduce a combined measure of equity issuance. This measure provides
additional power and reduces the number of specifications we consider in the subsequent analysis.
The combined measure of equity issuance is defined as the fraction of companies in an
industry that issued equity either through an IPO or through a secondary issuance. More
precisely, the dependent variable is the average of the benchmark measure of IPOs used in
Columns 1 through 4 of Table 2 and the measure of large equity issuance used in Columns 1

21

through 3 of Table 3.
The results for combined measure of equity issuance match the findings for each of the
constituent measures (Columns 1 through 3 of Table 4).. The improved statistical power associated with the combined measure leads to the more consistent rejection of the null hypothesis
for both short-term and long-term demographics significant.
In Columns 4-6, we provide evidence regarding the appropriateness of the standard errors
employed in the paper. In particular, we replicate the regressions in the first three columns using
the double-clustering procedure described by Thompson (2006). In general, the standard errors
based on Thompson (2006) are similar to those in Columns 1 through 3. In most regressions
the standard errors for the coeﬃcient on long-term demand growth are more conservative using
our approach than those using the double-clustering procedure.
In the last two columns of Table 4 we introduce additional controls for lagged accounting
return on equity and lagged investment even though these variables are themselves aﬀected
by the demographic shifts. Indeed, investment should be endogenously related to investment
opportunities (and perhaps mispricing). Profitability is also related to demand shifts as documented in DellaVigna and Pollet (AER, 2007), and therefore, it may capture a portion of the
exogenous information embedded in demographics. Neither of these control variables have an
appreciable impact on the point estimates or standard errors of the coeﬃcients for short-term
or long-term demand growth.

4.5

Graphical Evidence

Using the same combined issuance measure, we present graphical evidence on how equity
issuance respond to demographic shifts at diﬀerent time horizons.
For diﬀerent time horizons h, we estimate the regression:
ek,t+1 = λ + δ H [ĉk,t+h+1|t−1 − ĉk,t+h|t−1 ] + β m em,t+1 + β b mbk,t+1 + ηk + εk,t

(7)

for the sample of Demographic Industries, for horizon h between 0 and 13 years. The coeﬃcient
δ H measures the extent to which demand growth h years ahead forecasts stock returns in

22

year t + 1. The specification controls for market-wide patterns in issuance, as captured by
em,t+1 , for industry market-to-book, as captured by mbk,t+1 , and for industry fixed eﬀects.
This specification diﬀers from the main specification in the paper in two ways: (i) we do
not require the short-term eﬀect to occur within 5 years and the long-term eﬀect to occur
5 to 10 years ahead, but estimate the eﬀect at diﬀerent horizons; (ii) the specification is a
univariate regression of equity issuance on demographic shifts h years ahead. Since demand
shifts at diﬀerent horizons h are positively related, the estimates capture the weighted impact
at diﬀerent horizons.
Figure 3 presents the results of the estimation of (7) Demand growth due to demographics
0 to 1 years ahead is associated with a small (not significant) increase in IPOs according to the
benchmark measure. Demand growth due to demographics 2 or more years ahead, instead, has
a negative impact on IPO issuance. The impact is most negative (and statistically significant)
for demand shifts 7 to 9 years ahead. Demographic shifts more than 10 years in the future
have a smaller (though still negative) impact on IPO decisions.
Overall, the pattern in this figure is remarkably consistent with the pattern for abnormal
returns in Figure 2: the horizons for which returns display significant positive predictability
(4-8 years ahead) are approximately the same horizons for which we observe the significant
negative impact on equity issuance, consistent with market timing.
This figure does not provide any statistical support for capital budgeting. However, this
lack of evidence should not be particularly surprising because demand growth at diﬀerent
horizons in the future are positively correlated with each other. If market timing is a stronger
motivation than capital budgeting (as suggested by the coeﬃcient magnitudes in Table 4),
the negative impact of market timing will swamp the capital budgeting eﬀect in a univariate
setting even for short term demand growth.

4.6

Time-To-Build

The model indicates that the impact of both long-term and short-term demographics is
attenuated by time-to-build. The investment required to expand production in response to
future demographic demand could take several years. In the empirical specifications above,

23

the proxy for short-term investment opportunities includes a time-to-build of up to five years.
In some industries, however, the time required for investment could be longer. In these industries the lengthy time-to-build will attenuate the negative relationship between the long-term
demand due to demographics and security issuance. Essentially, long-term demand captures
not only the market timing (which induces a negative relation), but also the capital budgeting
(which induces a positive relation). In addition, in the presence of a substantial time-to-build,
short-term demand is unrelated to equity issuance because it is diﬃcult to build additional
capacity quickly enough to take advantage of a positive demand shift.
To provide evidence on the importance of time-to-build, we separate the sample based on
a proxy of time-to-build. We measure the amount of work in progress (Compustat data item
77) divided by the book value of the firm. Firms that have a higher share of work in progress
are more likely to have a lengthy production process and greater diﬃculty adjusting capacity
rapidly. We split observations in two groups, above and below the median value of .005.
In Columns 1 through 4 of Table 5 we present the results. Indeed, for the high time-tobuild industries (Columns 1-2), both coeﬃcient estimates are closer to zero and not statistically
significant. For the low time-to-build industries (Columns 3-4), we find coeﬃcient estimates
that are larger (in absolute value) than those for the benchmark sample, and long-term demand
is statistically significant. Time-to-build appears to modify how firms respond to demand shifts
in a manner that is consistent with the predictions of the model.

4.7

Industry Concentration

The impact of a demand shift on equity issuance could depend on the market structure of
each industry. In a perfectly competitive industry there is no impact on abnormal profitability, and hence, no possibility of mispricing associated with long-term demand shifts. At the
other extreme, a monopolist with substantial market power generates abnormal profits from a
positive demand shift, and therefore, demand in the distant future generates mispricing in the
presence of limited attention. Hence, evidence of market timing should be more substantial for
industries with high market power. Similarly, the evidence of capital budgeting may also be
more considerable for industries with high market power because the potential to earn abnor-

24

mal profits motivates the expansion of capacity. We address these issues issue by estimating
how the impact of demand shifts on equity issuance varies with the market power.
We use the concentration ratio C-4 from the Census of Manufacturers to measure market
power. This ratio is the fraction of revenue within an industry produced by the 4 largest
companies (including privately held firms). This measure is available for firms with 4-digit
SIC codes between 2000 and 3999. We define the measure for each industry as a weighted
average of the C-4 ratio for the SIC codes included in the definition of each industry. We
use the concentration ratios from 1972 (or 1970 if the 1972 data is missing) to guarantee that
the information about industrial organization is collected before the beginning of the sample
period. Among the 31 industries with concentration data the median C-4 ratio is 0.35.
We estimate the impact for industries with above-median and below-median concentration
ratios separately. The industries with above-median concentration (Columns 5 and 6) have
statistically significant and economically large evidence of both market timing and capital
budgeting. For the industries with below-median concentration (Columns 7 and 8), the impact
of demographic shifts, while directionally consistent, is smaller and not statistically significant.

4.8

Net Debt Issuance Results

In Table 6, we estimate specification (6) for the measures of debt issuance in the sample of
Demographic Industries. We present the findings for large debt issuance (Columns 1 through
3); for large debt repurchases (Columns 4 through 6); and for the results using the continuous
measure of net issuance (Columns 7 and 8). The impact of macroeconomic conditions on debt
issuance, such as the yield spread and the credit spread, will be captured by the control for
market-wide activity or by the time fixed eﬀects.
The sign of the coeﬃcient estimates for demand shifts in the near future is usually consistent
with capital budgeting but none of the estimates are statistically significant. The statistical
evidence that demand shifts in the distant future are related to debt policy is more mixed.
Long term demographics are not statistically related to large debt issuance (Columns 1 through
3) or the continuous measure of net debt issuance (Columns 7 and 8). In Columns 4 through
6 debt repurchases are negatively related to demand shifts in the distant future. This result

25

could support market timing if debt is used as a substitute for equity, that is, undervalued
firms repurchase equity but do not repurchase debt due to financing constraints. Since market
timing does not have a clear prediction about the relationship between long-term demand shifts
and debt policy, this evidence is only suggestive.

4.9

Investment and R&D

In this Section, we provide evidence about the channels underlying the issuance results, and
in particular the capital budgeting response. The model in Section 2 links equity and debt
issuance to demand shifts due to demographics through investment. We document this link
using expenditures on investment and research and development (R&D).
The measure of investment for public companies in year t and industry k is the share of
companies with capital expenditures in year t (scaled by property, plant, and equipment in
year t − 1) greater than 0.8.18 Columns 1-3 of Table 7 display the results of the estimation
of specification (6) for the measure of investment. Demand shifts in the near future due to
demographics are associated with higher investment. The estimate is significantly diﬀerent
from zero in the specifications in Columns 1 and 2 and marginally significant in Column 3.
The eﬀect of these demand shifts is economically large. In the specification of Column 2, a
one percent annualized increase in demand from year 0 to 5 increases the share of companies
conducting substantial investment by 3.2 percentage points (compared to the average share of
6.8 percentage points). A one standard deviation increase in the annualized demand growth
due to demographics 0 to 5 years ahead (0.59 percentage points), increases this measure of
investment by about 1.9 percentage points (more than 25% of the average industry share).
[Delete: (The mean share of companies investing is 6.8 percent)] There is no significant eﬀect
instead of demand shifts 5 to 10 years ahead. If investment opportunities are the only motivation for equity issuance, there is no reason for the issuance/repurchase decision to be linked
to demand shifts in the distant future.
Next, we consider as an alternative measure of broadly defined investment, Research and
18

The cutoﬀ for investment of 0.8 and the cutoﬀ for R&D of 0.1 correspond approximately to the
90th percentile of the respective distributions.

26

Development (Columns 4-6). The measure of R&D is the share of companies with R&D
expenditures in year t (scaled by assets in year t − 1) larger than 0.1. While the evidence is
somewhat mixed, demand shifts in the near future are associated with higher R&D. There is
no evidence of a relation between R&D and demand shifts in the more distant future.
To summarize, we find evidence that positive demand shifts up to 5 years ahead increase
both investment and R&D. Altogether, these results suggest that investment and R&D are
likely to be drivers of the capital budgeting response.

5

Alternative explanations
We analyze several alternatives that could potentially explain these results.
Signalling. Consider a variant of the dividend-signalling model of Miller and Rock (1985)

where equity issuance replaces the dividend as the signal and long-term demographic patterns
are characterized as (quasi-)private information observed only by managers. If managers are
unable to credibly signal to investors, then the firm’s equity is mispriced with respect to this
information. Investors are rational and understand that they are not fully informed. The
manager of an undervalued firm will attempt to convey this information to the public through
a costly signal, in this case a net decrease in equity issuance. The signal is costly because less
issuance leads to under-investment.
In principle, this signalling equilibrium could rationalize the observed response to longterm demand shifts due to demographics. First, such a signalling equilibrium eliminates firm
misvaluation at the cost of an investment distortion. However, there is no evidence that firms
with high demand in the distant future invest less than firms with low demand in the distant
future (Table 7). Second, disseminating this information directly to investors is a less costly
strategy. The manager of the undervalued firm could disclose verifiable cohort size data and age
profiles of consumption to the investors. Third, it is not clear that the single-crossing condition
necessary for a separating equilibrium would be satisfied. The undervalued firm (which foregoes
the equity issuance) does not suﬀer less from the investment distortion. Indeed, these firms
have high demand due to demographics in the long-term and hence plausibly face a greater

27

(marginal) cost of under-investment. Finally, the signalling model would not easily explain
the decision to remain private by an undervalued private firm because there is no benefit from
price correction for private firms.
Agency problems. Firms that intend to expand capacity may delay equity issuance
until the time when funds are needed to avoid the agency problems associated with excess
cash. This motivation to delay issuance could link investment opportunities in the distant
future to equity issuance. However, as the subsequent analysis indicates, agency problems do
not provide a plausible explanation for the findings. Consider two firms with identical shortterm investment opportunities and agency problems that make it extremely costly to raise
funds many years in advance of an investment opportunity. The first firm also has a favorable
investment opportunity in the distant future while the second other firm does not. If the only
motivation for equity issuance is to finance expansion, then both firms raise the same amount
of equity in the first period to finance the short-term investment opportunity, regardless of the
long-term opportunity. In the next period, the firm with the favorable long-term opportunity
in the previous period (transformed into a short-term opportunity by the passage of time)
issues more equity while the other firm does not issue equity. This example indicates that
equity issuance is related to short-term investment opportunities but unrelated to long-term
opportunities. Whether opportunities are favorable or unfavorable in the distant future, both
firms delay making a decision until just before the funds might be needed for investment in each
period Hence, agency problems alone do not generate a relation between long-term investment
opportunities and equity issuance.
Large fixed costs of equity adjustments. A large fixed cost of equity issuance has the
potential to generate an intertemporal linkage between issuance and investment opportunities
in the distant future. However, this linkage would be of the opposite sign compared to the
findings. We revisit the setting in which two firms have identical investment opportunities in
the near future and diﬀerent investment opportunities in the distant future. Assume that both
firms have favorable investment opportunities in the near future. If the fixed cost of issuance is
suﬃciently large, then the firm with favorable investment opportunities in the near future and
the distant future, might prefer to raise suﬃcient funds for both projects all at once rather than

28

issuing equity each period. Essentially, incurring the fixed cost twice is worse than incurring
the fixed cost once and enduring any agency problems generated by plentiful cash for the next
several years. In this case equity issuance is positively (not negatively) related to investment
opportunities in the distant future. If both firms have unfavorable investment opportunities
in the near future, then neither firm issues equity in the first period and the first firm issues
equity in the second period just in time to finance investment. Neither situation leads to the
negative relation between equity issuance and investment opportunities in the distant future.
Globalization. Demographic patterns in the United States do not fully capture demand
shifts induced by demographics because the goods and services produced by these industries
are not exclusively consumed by United States residents. To first a approximation, this complication creates an additional measurement error problem and biases the results against the
stated findings. Indeed, there are many factors that may predict demand shifts but are not
related to demographics at all. The severity of this problem is mitigated by two factors: 1) agespecific growth rates in the United States are positively correlated with the analogous growth
rates for other OECD countries, and 2) the trade sector is still a relatively small fraction of
US GDP. In terms of explaining the findings, any aggregate patterns linking globalization to
equity issuance would be captured by the control for market-wide issuance in any case. It is
possible that industry-specific globalization patterns could be an omitted variable, but such
changes in demand would have to be strongly negatively related to demographic patterns in
the distant future.
Unobserved time patterns. The results could be driven by (unobserved) time patterns
that are correlated with demographic shifts. These time patterns may confound the estimation
to the extent that they are correlated with, for example, unobserved investment opportunities.
While we cannot reject this possibility, the findings in this paper still hold after controlling
for market-wide issuance patterns and, in most specifications, year fixed eﬀects. An omitted
variable could explain the results only if it has a diﬀerential impact across industries over time.

29

6

Conclusion
Are equity and debt financing decisions explained by capital budgeting, by market timing,

or by both? In this paper, we attempt to answer this question by using distinct and exogenous
proxies for investment opportunities and equity mispricing.
We construct predictable short-term and long-term demand shifts across industries generated by size changes in diﬀerent cohorts and by the age profile of demand. We use short-term
shifts in demand due to demographics to examine capital budgeting. Positive short-term demand shifts should increase the demand for capital and lead to more equity and debt issuance.
We use long-term shifts in demand due to demographics to analyze market timing. We assume that the information about profitability in the distant future predicted by demographics
is not fully incorporated into asset prices; hence, long-term demand shifts proxy for mispricing.
Corporate managers, to the extent that they have longer horizons than investors, should respond to this mispricing by modifying their equity issuance decisions. Companies in industries
with positive demand shifts 5 to 10 years ahead will tend to be undervalued and managers
should reduce equity issuance (or repurchase equity). Conversely, companies in industries with
negative demand shifts 5 to 10 years ahead will tend to be overvalued, and managers should
issue additional equity.
Our empirical analysis suggests that both market timing and capital budgeting play substantial roles in the decision to issue new or seasoned equity. We find that demand shifts due to
demographics in the short-term are positively related with the occurrence of IPOs in an industry and with additional equity issuance by public firms. Demand shifts due to demographics in
the long-term are significantly negatively related to the share of IPOs and to the net issuance
of firms. Finally, there is considerable evidence that investment and R&D expenditures are
related to short-term demand shifts as predicted by capital budgeting. While our estimates
do not allow us to establish whether one channel is more important than the other, we find
evidence that both channels have economically large impacts.

30

A

Appendix

Proof of Proposition 1. We prove Proposition 1 (iv) for the case of time-to-build (g (I) = 0).
The rest of the proposition is proved in the text. In this case, I2∗ = 0, so we only show
∗ > I ∗ . If α = α there are no financing constraints, and hence, I ∗ = I F B . If α = α,
I1,α
1,α
1,α
1,α
the first-best investment is not attainable without equity issuance and the manager wishes
to repurchase shares due to mispricing. Therefore, the financing constraint will be binding.
Hence, the maximization problem for α = α is
max
n1 ,I1

1
1
n1
(C + Vαe ) +
(C + Vαe )
(αf (I1 ) − I1 − Vαe ) s.t. I1 = C +
N
N + n1
N

We can solve for n1 in terms of I1 using the constraint to rewrite the objective function as
¶
µ
1
C + Vαe
(αf (I1 ) − I1 − Vαe ) .
max (C + Vαe ) +
I1 N
N (Vαe + I1 )

The first order condition of this objective function with respect to I1 is equivalent to (scaled
by a constant)
¡
¢
(Vαe + I1∗ )−1 αf 0 (I1∗ ) − 1 − (Vαe + I1∗ )−2 (αf (I1∗ ) − I1∗ − Vαe ) = 0.
Further rearranging this expression and substituting the definition of Vαe yields
¢
¢
¡ ¡
b f I1,eα − I1,eα + I1∗ − f (I1∗ ) = 0.
f 0 (I1∗ ) α

(8)

Notice that α disappears from the first order condition. Hence, the optimal level of investment
will be independent of the level of α given a particular constant α̂. This property of optimal
investment arises because any increase in α simultaneously increases the marginal productivity
of investment (leading to share issuance) and the marginal motivation to exploit mispricing
(leading to share repurchases). These two forces perfectly oﬀset each other so that the net
issuance policy and the investment policy remain unchanged in response to an increase in α.
F B the left hand side of expression (8) is positive
We show that for any level of I1 lower than I1,α
for α = α. Therefore, the objective function must be a monotonically increasing function of
F B . The corollary of such a statement is that
investment at least until the investment reaches I1,α
∗ > I ∗ = I F B . First,
investment must be greater for high demand than for low demand, I1,α
1,α
1,α
F B there exists an α
we note that for any level of I1 ≤ I1,α
I1 ≤ α such that I1 is the first-best
F B . Next, since the expression
level of investment for that level of demand αI1 , that is, I1 = I1,α
I1
´
³
¢
¡
b f I1,eα − I1,eα > αI1 f I1,αI1 − I1 because
αf (I1,α ) − I1,α is increasing in α, we know that α
α
b > α ≥ αI1 . Hence, we obtain the following relation
¡ ¡
¡
¢
¢
¢
f 0 (I1 ) α
b f I1,eα − I1,eα + I1 − f (I1 ) > f (I1 ) f 0 (I1 ) αI1 − 1 = 0.
This inequality demonstrates that the left hand side of the first order condition is always
F B , and therefore, I ∗ > I ∗ .
greater than zero for any I1 ≤ I1,α
1,α
1,α

31

References
[1] Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua Linn. “Market Size in Innovation: Theory and Evidence
From the Pharmaceutical Industry”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 199 (3), 1049—
1090, 2004.
[2] Baker, Malcolm, Richard Ruback, and Jeﬀrey Wurgler. “Behavioral Corporate Finance:
A Survey.” In The Handbook of Corporate Finance: Empirical Corporate Finance, edited
by Espen Eckbo. New York: Elsevier/North Holland, forthcoming.
[3] Baker, Malcolm, and Jeﬀrey Wurgler. “Market Timing and Capital Structure”, Journal
of Finance, Volume 57 (1), 2002.
[4] Barber, Brad M. and Terrance Odean. “All that Glitters: The Eﬀect of Attention and
News on the Buying Behavior of Individual and Institutional Investors”, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
[5] Campello, Murillo and John R. Graham. “Do Stock Prices Influence Corporate Decisions?
Evidence from the Technology Bubble”, mimeo, 2006.
[6] Chirinko, Robert S. and Huntley Schaller. “Fundamentals, Misvaluation, and Investment:
The Real Story”, Working paper, 2007.
[7] Cohen, Lauren, and Andrea Frazzini. “Economic Links and Predictable Returns”, Journal
of Finance, forthcoming.
[8] Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam. “Investor Psychology and
Security Market Under- and Overreactions”, Journal of Finance, Vol. 53 (6), 1839-1885,
1998.
[9] DellaVigna, Stefano and Joshua M. Pollet. “Demographics and Industry Returns”, American Economic Review, Vol. 97, 1167-1702, 2007.
[10] DellaVigna, Stefano and Joshua M. Pollet. “Investor Inattention and Friday Earnings
Announcements”, Journal of Finance, Vol. 64, pp. 709-749, 2009.
[11] DeLong, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert J. Waldmann.
“Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 98 (4),
703-738, 1990.
[12] Ellison, Glenn and Sara Fisher Ellison. “Strategic Entry Deterrence and Behavior of
Pharmaceutical Incumbents Prior to Patent Expiration”, mimeo, 2000.
[13] Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth French. “The Cross-Section of Expected Stock Returns”,
Journal of Finance, Vol. 47 (2), 427-465, 1992.
[14] Frank, M. and V. K. Goyal. “Testing the pecking order theory of capital structure”,
Journal of Financial Economics Vol. 67 (2), 217—248, 2003.

32

[15] Gilchrist, Simon, Charles Himmelberg, and Gur Huberman. “Do Stock Price Bubbles
Influence Corporate Investment?” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 52 (4), 805-827,
2005.
[16] Gooslbee, Austan and Chad Syverson. “How Do Incumbents Respond to the Threat of
Entry? The Case of Major Airlines”, Quartely Journal of Economics, 2008.
[17] Hertzel, Michael G. and Zhi Li. “Behavioral and rational explanations of stock price
performance around SEOs: Evidence from a decomposition of market-to-book ratios”.
Working paper, 2007.
[18] Hirshleifer, David, Sonya S. Lim, and Siew H. Teoh. “Disclosure to an Audience with
Limited Attention”, Working paper, 2004.
[19] Hirshleifer, David A., Sonya S. Lim, and Siew Hong Teoh. “Driven to Distraction: Extraneous Events and Underreaction to Earnings News” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
[20] Hong, Harrison and Jeremy Stein. “A Unified Theory of Underreaction, Momentum Trading, and Overreaction in Asset Markets”, Journal of Finance, Vol. 54 (6), 2143-2184, 1999.
[21] Huberman, Gur, and Tomer Regev. “Contagious Speculation and a Cure for Cancer: A
Nonevent that Made Stock Prices Soar”, Journal of Finance, Vol. 56 (1), 387-396, 2001.
[22] Jenter, Dirk, Katharina Lewellen, and Jerold B. Warner. “Security Issue Timing: What
Do Managers Know, and When Do They Know It?” Working paper, 2007.
[23] Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. “Contrarian Investment, Extrapolation, and Risk”, Journal of Finance, Vol. 49 (5), 1541-1578, 1994.
[24] Mankiw, N. Gregory and David N. Weil. “The Baby Boom, the Baby Bust, and the
Housing Market”, Regional Science and Urban Economics, Vol. 19 (2), 235-258, 1989.
[25] Miller, Merton H. and Kevin Rock. “Dividend Policy under Asymmetric Information,”
Journal of Finance, Vol. 40 (4), 1031-1051, 1985.
[26] Modigliani, Franco and Merton H. Miller. “The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and
the Theory of Investment”, American Economic Review, Vol. 48, 261-297, 1958.
[27] Peng, Lin and Wei Xiong. “Investor Attention, Overconfidence and Category Learning”,
Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 80 (3), 563-602, 2006.
[28] Polk, Christopher, and Paola Sapienza. “The Stock Market and Corporate Investment: A
Test of Catering Theory”, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
[29] Poterba, James M. “Demographic Structure and Asset Returns”, The Review of Economics & Statistics, Vol. 83 (4), 565-584, 2001.
[30] Shleifer, Andrei. Ineﬃcient Markets: An Introduction to Behavioral Finance. Clarendon
Lectures in Economics. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2000.
[31] Stein, Jeremy C. “Rational Capital Budgeting in an Irrational World”, Journal of Business, Vol. 69 (4), 429-455, 1996.

33

Figure 1. Age Profile for the Consumption of Bicycles and Drugs
2.5

Bicycles
(1972-73)

2
n
io
t
p
m
u 1.5
s
n
o
C
d
e
z
il 1
a
m
r
o
N

Bicycles
(1983-84)

Drugs
(1972-73)

Drugs
(1983-84)

0.5

0
20

30

40

50

60

70

Age for the Head of Household
Notes: Figure 1 displays a kernel regression of normalized household consumption for each good as a function of the age for the head of the
household. The regression uses an Epanechnikov kernel and a bandwidth of 5 years. Each different line for a specific good uses an ageconsumption profile from a different consumption survey. Expenditures are normalized so that the average consumption for all ages is equal to 1 for
each survey-good pair.

34

Figure 2: Return Predictability Coefficient for Demand Growth Forecasts at Different Horizons
16

Estimated Coefficient for Forecasted Demand Growth
Between Periods t+h and t+h+1

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

-2
-4
-6

Coefficient Estimate
Upper Bound
Lower Bound

-8
Horizon (h)

Notes: The estimated coefficient for each horizon is from a univariate OLS regression of abnormal returns at t+1 on forecasted consumption growth
between t+h and t+h+1 for the subsample of Demographic Industries during the period 1974-2004. The confidence intervals are constructed using
standard errors clustered by year and then scaled by a function of the autocorrelation coefficient estimated from the sample orthogonality
conditions.

35

Figure 3: Combined Equity Issuance Predictability Coefficient Using Growth at Different Horizons
4
3

Estimated Coefficient for Forecasted Demand Growth
Between Periods t+h and t+h+1

Coefficient Estimate

2

Upper Bound
Lower Bound

1
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
-7
-8
Horizon (h)

Notes: The estimated coefficient for each horizon is from a univariate OLS regression of the share of companies in an industry that issued equity
either through a new listing in CRSP or through a seasoned issuance for year t+1 on forecasted consumption growth between t+h and t+h+1 for the
subsample of Demographic Industries during the period 1974-2004. Each regression includes controls for market-wide patterns in new listings,
industry-level book-to-market, and industry fixed effects.

36

Table 1. Summary Statistics: Predicted Demand Growth Rates Due to Demographics
Expenditure Category

No.
Years
(1)

Child Care
Children's Books
Children's Clothing
Toys
Books -- college text books
Books -- general
Books -- K-12 school books
Movies
Newspapers
Magazines
Cruises
Dental Equipment
Drugs
Health Care (Services)**
Health Insurance
Medical Equipment**
Funeral Homes and Cemet.
Nursing Home Care
Construction Equipment*
Floors
Furniture
Home Appliances Big
Home Appliances Small
Housewares
Linens
Residential Construction*
Residential Development*
Residential Mortgage
Beer (and Wine)
Cigarettes
Cigars and Other Tobacco
Food
Liquor
Clothing (Adults)
Cosmetics
Golf
Jewelry
Sporting Equipment
Life Insurance
Property Insurance
Airplanes
Automobiles
Bicycles
Motorcycles
Coal
Oil
Telephone
Utilities
Mean 0-5 Cons. Growth
Std. Dev. 0-5 Cons. Growth

30
28
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
28
30
30
30
30
30
28
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
28
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
28
30
30
28
30
30
30
30

Forecasted
Demogr.
0-5 Growth
Industry
1975
(2)
(3)
0.0001
.
0.0226
0.0044
0.0270
0.0205
-0.0087
0.0232
0.0174
0.0206
.
0.0138
0.0167
0.0173
0.0168
0.0173
.
0.0198
0.0200
0.0177
0.0201
0.0169
0.0153
0.0192
0.0170
0.0200
0.0168
0.0164
0.0209
0.0178
0.0141
0.0145
.
0.0197
0.0222
0.0217
0.0189
0.0183
0.0140
0.0177
.
0.0199
0.0027
.
0.0149
0.0161
0.0185
0.0149

Yes
.
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
.
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
.
Yes
Yes
.
No
No
No
No

0.0165
0.0064

Forecasted Demogr.
0-5 Growth Industry
2000
(4)
(5)
0.0024
0.0077
0.0138
0.0084
0.0156
0.0103
0.0092
0.0118
0.0140
0.0122
0.0143
0.0133
0.0153
0.0135
0.0142
0.0135
0.0166
0.0113
0.0121
0.0140
0.0105
0.0117
0.0132
0.0138
0.0130
0.0121
0.0130
0.0070
0.0110
0.0133
0.0159
0.0127
0.0144
0.0130
0.0149
0.0146
0.0134
0.0096
0.0150
0.0133
0.0139
0.0112
0.0040
0.0115
0.0135
0.0129
0.0129
0.0136

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No

% Dem.
Industry
(6)
100%
93%
100%
77%
100%
84%
100%
26%
0%
29%
28%
35%
10%
0%
16%
0%
59%
87%
100%
81%
58%
0%
0%
58%
52%
100%
13%
77%
48%
10%
6%
0%
14%
29%
6%
68%
68%
42%
48%
10%
14%
26%
71%
76%
0%
0%
0%
0%

0.0123
0.0028

Notes: Complete list of expenditure categories, with number of years of availability of data (Column 1) and average predicted five-year demand growth
rate due to demographic changes in 1975 (Column 2), and in 2000 (Column 4). The last two Rows present the Mean and Standard Deviation of the 5-year
predicted consumption growth across all the goods in the relevant year. Table 3 also indicates whether the industry belongs to the subsample of
Demographic Industries in 1975 (Column 3), and in 2000 (Column 5). Each year the subset Demographic Industries includes the 20 industries with the
highest standard deviation of forecasted annual consumption growth over the next 15 years. Column 6 presents percentage of the years 1974-2004 in
which the expenditure category belongs to the subsample of "Demographic Industries".

37

Table 2. Predictability of New Equity Listings Using Demographics
Dependent variable

Share of Firms That Are New Equity Listings

Industry Sample

Demographic
(1)

Forecasted annualized
demand growth between
t and t+5
Forecasted annualized
demand growth between
t+5 and t+10

(2)

(3)

(4)

Non-Demographic
(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

3.349

2.237

2.446

2.785

1.994

2.831

1.687

-0.525

(1.847)*

(1.474)

(1.270)*

(1.304)**

(1.877)

(2.273)

(2.866)

(4.502)

-4.843

-2.486

-3.071

-3.153

-4.793

-3.572

-4.955

-6.930

(1.453)***

(1.384)*

(1.403)**

(1.360)**

(1.949)**

(1.913)*

(3.289)

(4.270)

Industry market to book
ratio

0.000

0.003

0.004

0.006

0.002

0.004

0.011

(0.0065)

(0.007)

(0.010)

(0.009)

(0.012)

(0.009)

(0.009)

Aggregate share of new
listings

0.890

0.841

1.229

0.716

(0.143)***

(0.151)***

(0.1507)***

(0.072)***

Industry fixed effects

X

Year fixed effects

X

X

X

Jay Ritter's IPO sample

X

X

X
X

X

X
X

R2

0.040

0.133

0.245

0.306

0.260

0.315

0.264

0.297

N

N = 580

N = 580

N = 580

N = 580

N = 451

N = 451

N = 848

N = 848

Notes: Columns 1 through 4 report the coefficients of OLS regressions of the share of firms in an industry that are new listings in CRSP for year t+1 on the forecasted annualized demand growth due
to demographics between t and t+5 and between t+5 and t+10 for the subset of Demographic Industries. Columns 5 and 6 report regression results for the subset of Demographic Industries where
the dependent variable is defined using new listings recorded in Jay Ritter's IPO sample (from 1980 until 2003). Columns 7 and 8 report the regression coefficients for the subset of NonDemographic Industries. The forecasts are made using information available as of year t-1. The coefficients on the forecasted annual demand growth are normalized by the number of years of the
forecast (5 for both coefficients). Each year the subset of Demographic Industries includes the 20 industries with the highest standard deviation of forecasted annual consumption growth over the
next 15 years. Standard errors are clustered by year and then scaled by a function of the autocorrelation coefficient estimated from the sample orthogonality conditions. A thorough description of the
standard errors is available in the text.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

38

Table 3. Predictability of Net Equity Issuance and Net Equity Repurchases Using Demographics
Dependent variable

Large Net Equity Issues
(1)

Forecasted annualized
demand growth between
t and t+5
Forecasted annualized
demand growth between
t+5 and t+10

(2)

Large Net Equity Repurchases

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Net Equity Issuance
(7)

(8)

4.046

4.564

2.304

-4.209

-1.688

-0.939

-2.529

-1.782

(2.539)

(1.955)**

(1.637)

(1.839)**

(1.357)

(1.619)

(0.9970)**

(0.821)**

-7.241

-5.267

-4.294

3.080

3.699

3.222

2.852

1.533

(2.588)***

(2.170)**

(2.013)**

(1.760)*

(1.859)**

(2.070)

(1.034)***

(1.048)

Industry market to book
ratio

0.016

0.037

0.056

0.046

-0.010

-0.012

(0.021)

(0.023)

(0.016)***

(0.019)**

(0.007)

(0.009)

Aggregate share of large
net equity issues

(0.125)***

0.892

1.047

Aggregate share of large
net equity repurchases

(0.353)***

2.557

Aggregate net equity
issuance

(0.677)***

Industry fixed effects

X

Year fixed effects

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

R2

0.030

0.284

0.349

0.013

0.169

0.213

0.230

0.286

N

N = 575

N = 575

N = 575

N = 575

N = 575

N = 575

N = 575

N = 575

Notes: Columns 1 through 3 report the coefficients of OLS regressions of the share of firms in an industry with stock issues minus stock repurchases divided by the lagged book value of assets that is greater
than 3% for year t+1 on the forecasted annualized demand growth due to demographics between t and t+5 and between t+5 and t+10. Columns 4 through 6 report regression coefficients of the share of firms in
an industry with stock repurchases minus stock issues divided by the lagged book value of assets that is greater than 3% for year t+1 on the forecasted annualized demand growth. Columns 7 and 8 report
regression coefficients of industry stock issues net of stock repurchases scaled by industry book value of assets (a continuous measure) for year t+1 on the forecasted annualized demand growth. The demand
forecasts are made using information available as of year t-1. The coefficients on the forecasted annual demand growth are normalized by the number of years of the forecast (5 for both coefficients).
All specifications only include observations from the subset of Demographic Industries which are the 20 industries with the highest standard deviation of forecasted annual consumption growth over the next 15
years. Standard errors are clustered by year and then scaled by a function of the autocorrelation coefficient estimated from the sample orthogonality conditions. A thorough description of the standard errors is
available in the text.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

39

Table 4. Predictability of Combined Equity Issuance Using Demographics
Dependent variable

Share of Firms That Are New Listings or Conducted a Large Net Equity Issuance
(1)

Forecasted annualized
demand growth
between t and t+5
Forecasted annualized
demand growth
between t+5 and t+10

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

3.717

3.509

2.564

3.717

3.509

2.564

3.194

2.436

(2.250)*

(1.506)**

(1.247)**

(1.741)**

(1.691)**

(1.802)

(1.363)**

(1.168)**

-6.103

-3.907

-3.749

-6.103

-3.907

-3.749

-3.674

-3.519

(2.052)***

(1.571)**

(1.517)**

(1.863)***

(1.476)**

(1.345)***

(1.477)**

(1.412)**

Industry market to
book ratio

0.009

0.021

0.009

0.021

0.006

0.014

(0.011)

(0.012)*

(0.011)

(0.014)*

(0.011)

(0.012)

Industry investment
Industry accounting
return on equity

-0.032

-0.023

(0.034)

(0.032)

0.117

0.141

(0.047)**

(0.050)***

Aggregate combined
equity issues

0.947

0.947

0.974

(0.134)***

(0.148)***

(0.135)***

Industry fixed effects

X

Year fixed effects

X

X

X

Double Clustering

X

X

X
X

X

X

X
X

R2

0.046

0.349

0.413

0.046

0.349

0.413

0.359

0.426

N

N = 572

N = 572

N = 572

N = 572

N = 572

N = 572

N = 572

N = 572

Notes: Columns 1 through 8 report the coefficients of OLS regressions of the share of companies in an industry that issued equity either through a new listing in CRSP or through a seasoned issuance
for year t+1 on the forecasted annualized demand growth due to demographics between t and t+5 and between t+5 and t+10. The forecasts are made using information available as of year t-1. The
coefficients on the forecasted annual demand growth are normalized by the number of years of the forecast (5 for both coefficients). All specifications only include observations from the subset of
Demographic Industries which are the 20 industries with the highest standard deviation of forecasted annual consumption growth over the next 15 years. Standard errors are clustered by year and then
scaled by a function of the autocorrelation coefficient estimated from the sample orthogonality conditions. A thorough description of the standard errors is available in the text. In columns 4-6 we use an
alternative methodology to calculate standard errors based on the double-clustering approach recommended by Thompson (2006).
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

40

Table 5. The Impact of Industry Concentration and Time-To-Build on Combined Equity Issuance
Dependent variable
Sample

Share of Firms That Are New Listings or Conducted a Large Net Equity Issuance
High Time-To-Build
(1)

Forecasted annualized
demand growth
between t and t+5
Forecasted annualized
demand growth
between t+5 and t+10

(2)

Low Time-To-Build
(3)

(4)

High Concentration
(5)

(6)

Low Concentration
(7)

(8)

1.101

1.617

5.225

2.078

5.478

6.746

1.057

0.866

(1.855)

(1.725)

(3.239)

(3.477)

(2.262)**

(3.425)**

(2.337)

(1.980)

-1.600

-2.951

-6.640

-6.283

-7.358

-8.934

-1.551

-2.302

(2.413)

(2.762)

(2.874)**

(2.469)***

(3.745)**

(4.017)**

(2.917)

(2.790)

Industry market to
book ratio

0.018

0.020

0.022

0.033

0.000

0.000

0.029

0.038

(0.008)**

(0.012)

(0.013)*

(0.013)***

(0.008)

(0.009)

(0.008)***

(0.007)***

Aggregate net equity
issues

0.897

0.751

0.754

0.958

(0.102)***

(0.136)***

(0.115)***

(0.132)***

Industry fixed effects

X

Year fixed effects
R
N

2

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

0.428

0.471

0.313

0.357

0.279

0.317

0.420

0.499

N = 661

N = 661

N = 746

N = 746

N = 447

N = 447

N = 451

N = 451

Notes: Columns 1 through 8 report the coefficients of OLS regressions of the industry share of companies that issued equity either through a new listing in CRSP or through a large equity issuance for year
t+1 on the forecasted annualized demand growth due to demographics between t and t+5 and between t+5 and t+10. The forecasts are made using information available as of year t-1. The coefficients on the
forecasted annual demand growth are normalized by the number of years of the forecast (5 for both coefficients). The sample in Columns 1 through 4 is split using a measure of industry time-to-build (work in
progress divided by the book value of assets, industries where this share is higher than 0.005 are categorized as high time-to-build industries.) The sample in Columns 5 through 8 is split using a measure of
industry concentration (C-4 in 1972). The analysis of each split sample is not limited to the subset of Demographic Industries. Standard errors are clustered by year and then scaled by a function of the
autocorrelation coefficient estimated from the sample orthogonality conditions. A thorough description of the standard errors is available in the text.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

41

Table 6. Predictability of Net Debt Issuance and Net Debt Repurchases Using Demographic Changes
Dependent variable

Large Net Debt Issues
(1)

Forecasted annualized
demand growth between
t and t+5
Forecasted annualized
demand growth between
t+5 and t+10

(2)

Large Net Debt Repurchases
(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Net Debt Issuance
(7)

(8)

3.515

3.665

2.510

-1.537

-1.281

1.601

1.408

0.569

(5.240)

(4.397)

(4.630)

(2.425)

(1.807)

(1.576)

(0.795)*

(0.723)

0.712

2.060

2.004

-2.709

-4.026

-3.416

0.886

0.825

(4.388)

(3.941)

(4.213)

(1.860)

(1.464)***

(1.483)**

(0.793)

(0.785)

Industry market to book
ratio

0.101

0.116

-0.028

-0.056

0.011

0.018

(0.030)***

(0.036)***

(0.018)*

(0.020)***

(0.005)**

(0.006)***

Aggregate share of large
net debt issues

(0.433)***

1.319

0.509

Aggregate share of large
net debt repurchases

(0.261)*

0.168

Aggregate net debt
issuance

(0.641)

Industry fixed effects

X

Year fixed effects

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

R2

0.012

0.315

0.338

0.016

0.144

0.202

0.187

0.224

N

N = 575

N = 575

N = 575

N = 575

N = 575

N = 575

N = 575

N = 575

Notes: Columns 1 through 3 report the coefficients of OLS regressions of the share of firms in an industry with debt issues minus debt repurchases divided by the lagged book value of assets that is greater
than 3% for year t+1 on the forecasted annualized demand growth due to demographics between t and t+5 and between t+5 and t+10. Columns 4 through 6 report regression coefficients of the share of firms in
an industry with debt repurchases minus debt issues divided by the lagged book value of assets that is greater than 3% for year t+1 on the forecasted annualized demand growth. Columns 7 and 8 report
regression coefficients of industry debt issues net of debt repurchases scaled by industry book value of assets (a continuous measure) for year t+1 on the forecasted annualized demand growth. The demand
forecasts are made using information available as of year t-1. The coefficients on the forecasted annual demand growth are normalized by the number of years of the forecast (5 for both coefficients).
All specifications only include observations from the subset of Demographic Industries which are the 20 industries with the highest standard deviation of forecasted annual consumption growth over the next 15
years. Standard errors are clustered by year and then scaled by a function of the autocorrelation coefficient estimated from the sample orthogonality conditions. A thorough description of the standard errors is
available in the text.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

42

Table 7. Predictability of Investment and R&D Using Demographic Changes
Dependent variable

Forecasted annualized
demand growth between t
and t+5

Share of Firms With Large Investment

Share of Firms With Large R&D

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

2.746

2.990

2.113

0.833

3.849

3.728

(1.285)**

(1.383)**

(1.287)*

(3.453)

(1.891)**

(2.147)*

Forecasted annualized
demand growth between
t+5 and t+10

-0.530

-0.174

0.727

0.381

-0.721

0.161

(1.325)

(1.685)

(1.709)

(2.667)

(1.348)

(1.616)

Industry market to book
ratio

0.008

0.004

0.012

0.025

-0.005

-0.004

(0.010)

(0.014)

(0.015)

(0.031)

(0.006)

(0.007)

Aggregate investment

0.934

0.870

(0.305)***

(0.289)***

Aggregate R&D
Industry fixed effects

X

Year fixed effects

0.089

0.310

(0.237)

(0.136)**

X

X

X

X
X

R2

0.066

0.231

0.282

0.055

0.506

0.537

N

N = 582

N = 582

N = 582

N = 582

N = 582

N = 582

Notes: Columns 1 through 3 report the coefficients of OLS regressions of the industry share of companies undertaking significant investments (capital expenditures scaled by lagged
property, plant and equipment) for year t+1 on the forecasted annualized demand growth due to demographics between t and t+5 and between t+5 and t+10. Columns 4 through 6 report
similar regressions for the industry share of companies doing significant R&D spending (research and development scaled by lagged assets). The forecasts are made using information
available as of year t-1. The coefficients on the forecasted annual demand growth are normalized by the number of years of the forecast (5 for both coefficients).
All specifications only include observations from the subset of Demographic Industries which are the 20 industries with the highest standard deviation of forecasted annual consumption
growth over the next 15 years. Standard errors are clustered by year and then scaled by a function of the autocorrelation coefficient estimated from the sample orthogonality conditions. A
thorough description of the standard errors is available in the text.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

43

