                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      A FACTOR ANALYSIS OF BOND RISK PREMIA

                                       Sydney C. Ludvigson
                                           Serena Ng

                                       Working Paper 15188
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15188


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2009




We thank Jushan Bai for helpful suggestions and Matt Smith for excellent research assistance. We
also thank the Conference Board for providing us with some of the data. Financial support from the
National Science Foundation (Grant No. 0617858 to Ludvigson and SES-0549978 to Ng) is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Sydney C. Ludvigson and Serena Ng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
A Factor Analysis of Bond Risk Premia
Sydney C. Ludvigson and Serena Ng
NBER Working Paper No. 15188
July 2009
JEL No. G12

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper uses the factor augmented regression framework to analyze the relation between bond excess
returns and the macro economy. Using a panel of 131 monthly macroeconomic time series for the
sample 1964:1-2007:12, we estimate 8 static factors by the method of asymptotic principal components.
We also use Gibb sampling to estimate dynamic factors from the 131 series reorganized into 8 blocks.
Regardless of how the factors are estimated, macroeconomic factors are found to have statistically
significant predictive power for excess bond returns. We show how a bias correction to the parameter
estimates of factor augmented regressions can be obtained. This bias is numerically trivial in our application.
The predictive power of real activity for excess bond returns is robust even after accounting for finite
sample inference problems. Forecasts of excess bond returns (or bond risk premia) are countercyclical.
This implies that investors are compensated for risks associated with recessions.


Sydney C. Ludvigson
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10002
and NBER
sydney.ludvigson@nyu.edu

Serena Ng
Department of Economics
Columbia University
440 W. 118 St.
International Affairs Building, MC 3308
New York
NY 10027
serena.ng@columbia.edu
1   Introduction

The expectations theory of the term structure posits that variables in the information set
at time t should have no predictive power for excess bond returns. Consider the predictive
regression
                                    rt+h = a + b0 Zt + eth

where rt+h is excess returns for holding period h, and Zt is a set of predictors. Conventional
tests often reject the null hypothesis that the parameter vector b is zero. Some suggest
that over-rejections may arise if r is stationary and the variables Z are highly persistent,
making inference highly distorted in finite samples. For this reason, researchers often use
finite sample corrections or the bootstrap to conduct inference. However, it is often the case
that robust inference still points to a rejection of the null hypothesis.
    For a long time, the Zs found to have predictive power are often financial variables such
as default premium, term premium, dividend price ratio, measures of stock market variability
and liquidity. Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) find that a linear combination of five forward
spreads explains between 30 and 35 percent of the variation in next year’s excess returns on
bonds with maturities ranging from two to five years. Yet theory suggests that predictive
power for excess bond returns should come from macroeconomic variables. Campbell (1999)
and Wachter (2006) suggest that bond and equity risk premia should covary with a slow-
moving habit driven by shocks to aggregate consumption. Brandt and Wang (2003) argue
that risk premia are driven by shocks to inflation as well as aggregate consumption; notably,
both are macroeconomic shocks.
   In an effort to reconcile theory and evidence, recent work has sought to establish and
better understand the relation between excess returns and macroeconomic variables. Pi-
azzesi and Swanson (2004) find that the growth of nonfarm payroll employment is a strong
predictor of excess returns on federal funds futures contracts. Ang and Piazzesi (2003) uses
a no-arbitrage factor model of the term structure of interest rates that also allows for time-
varying risk premia and finds that the pricing kernel is driven by a few observed macroeco-
nomic variables and unobserved yield factors. Kozicki and Tinsley (2005) uses affine models
to link the term structure to perceptions of monetary policy. Duffie (2008) finds that an
‘expectations’ factor unrelated to the level and the slope has strong predictive power for
short term interest rates and excess returns, and that this expectations factor has a strong
inverse relation with industrial production. Notably, these studies have focused on the rela-
tion between expected excess bond returns, risk premia, and a few selected macroeconomic


                                              1
variables. The evidence falls short of documenting a direct relation between expected excess
bond returns (bond risk premia) and the macro economy.
    In Ludvigson and Ng (2007), we used a new approach. We used a small number of
estimated (static) factors instead of a handful of observed predictors in the predictive re-
gressions, where the factors are estimated from a large panel of macroeconomic data using
the method of asymptotic principal components (PCA). Such a predictive regression is a
special case of what is known as a ‘factor augmented regression’ (FAR). 1 The factors enable
us to substantially reduce the dimension of the predictor set while still being able to use
the information underlying the variables in the panel. Furthermore, our latent factors are
estimated without imposing a no-arbitrage condition or any parametric structure. Thus, our
testing framework is non-structural, both from an economic and a statistical point of view.
We find that latent factors associated with real economic activity have significant predictive
power for excess bond returns even in the presence of financial predictors such as forward
rates and yield spreads. Furthermore, we find that bond returns and yield risk premia are
more countercyclical when these risk premia are constructed to exploit information in the
factors.
      This paper investigates the robustness of our earlier findings with special attention paid
to how the factors are estimated. We first re-estimate the FAR on a panel of 131 series over
a longer sample. As in our previous work, these (static) factors, denoted fbt , are estimated
by PCA. We then consider an alternative set of factor estimates, denoted gbt , that differ from
the PCA estimates in two important ways. First, we use a priori information to organize the
131 series into 8 blocks. Second, we estimate a dynamic factor model for each of the eight
blocks using a Bayesian procedure.
   Compared with our previous work, we now use information in the large macroeconomic
panel in a different way, and we estimate dynamic factors using a Bayesian method. It is
thus useful to explain the motivation for doing so. The factors estimated from large panels of
data are often criticized for being difficult to interpret, and organizing the data into blocks
(such as output and price) provides a natural way to name the factors estimated from a
block of data. At this point, we could have used PCA to estimate one static factor for each
block. We could also have estimated dynamic factors using dynamic principal components,
which is frequency-domain based. Whichever principal components estimator we choose, the
estimates will not be precise as the number of series in each block is no longer 131 but a much
smaller number. Bayesian estimation is more appropriate for the newly organized panels of
  1
      See Bai and Ng (2008) for a survey on this literature.



                                                       2
data and Bayesian estimation yields a direct assessment of sampling variability. Using an
estimator that is not principal components based also allows us to more thoroughly assess
whether the FAR estimates are sensitive to how the factors are estimated. This issue, to
our knowledge, has not been investigated in the literature. Notably, the factors that explain
most of the variation in the large macroeconomic panel of data need not be the same as
the factors most important for predicting excess bond returns. Thus for each of the two
sets of factor estimates, namely, fbt and gbt , we consider a systematic search of the relevant
predictors, including an out-of-sample criterion to guard against overfitting the predictive
regression with too many factors. We also assess the stability of the relation between excess
bond returns and the factors over the sample.
                                                         √
    An appeal of FAR is that when N and T are large and T /N tends to zero, the estimated
factors in the FAR can be treated as though they are the true but latent factors. There is no
need to account for sampling error incurred when the factors are estimated. Numerous papers
have studied the properties of the (static and dynamic) principal components estimators in
a forecasting context.2 To date, little is known about the properties of the FAR estimates
      √
when T /N is not negligible. We show that principal components estimation may induce a
bias in the parameter estimates of the predictive regression and suggest how a bias correction
can be constructed. For our application, this bias is very small.
   Our main finding is that macro factors have strong predictive power for excess bond
returns and that this result holds up regardless of which method is used to estimate the
factors. The reason is that both methods are capable of isolating the factor for real activity,
which contributes significantly to variations in excess bond returns. However, the prior in-
formation that permits us to easily give names to the factors also constrains how information
in the large panel is used. Thus, as far as predictability is concerned, the factors estimated
from the large panel tend to be better predictors than the factors estimated from the eight
blocks of data, for the same total number of series used in estimation. Recursive estimation
of the predictive regressions finds that the macroeconomic factors are statistically significant
throughout the entire sample, even though the degree of predictability varies over the 45
years considered. While the estimated bond and yield risk premia without the macro factors
are acyclical, these premia are counter-cyclical when the estimated factors are used to fore-
cast excess returns. This implies that investors must be compensated for risks associated
with recessions.
      Our empirical work is based on a macroeconomic panel of 131 series. This panel extends
  2
      See, for example, Boivin and Ng (2005).



                                                3
the one used in Stock and Watson (2005), which has since been used in a number of factor
analyses.3 The original data set consists of monthly observations for 132 macroeconomic
time series from 1959:1-2003:12. We extend their data to 2007:12 and our panel consists of
131 series. Our empirical work uses data from 1964:1 to 2007:12.

2       Predictive Regressions
                              (n)
For t = 1, . . . T , let rxt+1 denote the continuously compounded (log) excess return on an
                                                                                 (n)         (n)   (1)
n-year discount bond in period t + 1. Excess returns are defined rxt+1 ≡ rt+1 − yt , where
 (n)
rt+1 is the log holding period return from buying an n-year bond at time t and selling it as
                                                  (1)
an n − 1 year bond at time t + 1, and yt                is the log yield on the one-year bond. That is, if
 (n)                                                                                   (n)               (n)
pt      is log price of n-year discount bond at time t, then the log yield is yt             ≡ − (1/n) pt .
    A standard approach to assessing whether excess bond returns are predictable is to select
a set of K predetermined conditioning variables at time t, given by the K × 1 vector Zt , and
then estimate
                                                 (n)
                                            rxt+1 = β 0 Zt + t+1                                         (1)

by least squares. For example, Zt could include the individual forward rates studied in Fama
and Bliss (1987), the single forward factor studied in Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005), or other
predictor variables based on a few macroeconomic series. Such a procedure may be restrictive
when the number of eligible predictors is quite large. In particular, suppose we observe a
T × N panel of macroeconomic data with elements xt = (x1t , x2t , . . . xN t )0 , t = 1, ..., T , where
the cross-sectional dimension, N , is large, and possibly larger than the number of time
periods, T . The set of eligible predictors consists of the union of xt and Zt . With standard
econometric tools, it is not obvious how a researcher could use the information contained
in the panel because unless we have a way of ordering the importance of the N series in
forming conditional expectations (as in an autoregression), there are potentially 2N possible
combinations to consider. The regression
                                           (n)
                                        rxt+1 = γ 0 xt + β 0 Zt + t+1                                    (2)

quickly run into degrees-of-freedom problems as the dimension of xt increases, and estimation
is not even feasible when N + K > T .
        The approach we consider is to posit that xit has a factor structure so that if these factors
were observed, we would have replaced (2) by the following (infeasible) ‘factor augmented
    3
        See, for example, Bai and Ng (2006b) and DeMol, Giannone, and Reichlin (2006).


                                                          4
regression’
                                       (n)
                                    rxt+1 = α0 Ft + β 0 Zt + t+1 ,                        (3)

where Ft is a set of k factors whose dimension is much smaller than that of xt but has good
predictive power for rxt+1 . Equation (1) is nested within the factor-augmented regression,
making (3) a convenient framework to assess the importance of xit via Ft , even in the presence
of Zt . The Zt that we will use as benchmark is the forward rate factor used in Cochrane and
Piazzesi (2005). This variable, hereafter referred to as CP , is a simple average of the one
year yield and four forward rates.. These authors find that the predictive power of forward
rates, yield spreads, and yield factors are subsumed in CPt . To implement the regression
given by (3), we need to resolve two problems. First, Ft is latent and we must estimate it
from data. Second, we need to isolate those factors with predictive power for our variable of
              (n)
interest, rxt+1 .

3     Estimation of Latent Factors

The first problem is dealt with by replacing Ft with an estimated value Fbt that is close
to Ft in some well defined sense, and this involves making precise a model from which Ft
can be estimated. We will estimate two factor models, one static and one dynamic, using
data retrieved from the Global Insight database and the Conference Board. The data are
collected to incorporate as many series as that used in Stock and Watson (2005). However,
one series (ao048) is no longer available on a monthly basis after 2003. Accordingly, our new
dataset consists of 131 series from 1959:1 to 2007:12, though our empirical analysis starts in
1964:1 because of availability of the bond yield data. As in the original Stock and Watson
data, some series need to be transformed to be stationary. In general, real variables are
expressed in growth rates, first differences are used for nominal interest rates, and second
log differences are used for prices. The data description is given in Appendix A. This
data can be downloaded from our website http://www.econ.nyu.edu/user/ludvigsons/
Data&ReplicationFiles.zip.

3.1    Static Factors

Let N be the number of cross-section units and T be the number of time series observations.
For i = 1, . . . N, t = 1, . . . T , a static factor model is defined as

                                         xit = λ0i ft + eit .                              (4)



                                                   5
In factor analysis, eit is referred to as the idiosyncratic error and λi are the factor loadings.
This is a vector of weights that unit i put on the corresponding r (static) common factors
ft . In finance, xit is the return for asset i in period t, ft is a vector of systematic risk, λi
is the exposure to the risk factors, and eit is the idiosyncratic returns. Although the model
specifies a static relationship between xit and ft , ft itself can be a dynamic vector process
that evolves according to
                                          A(L)ft = ut

where A(L) is a polynomial (possibly of infinite order) in the lag operator. The idiosyncratic
error eit can also be a dynamic process, and eit can also be cross-sectionally correlated.
   We estimate ft using the method of asymptotic principal components (PCA) originally
developed by Connor and Korajzcyk (1986) for a small T large N environment. Letting
                                                      √
“hats” denote estimated values, the T × r matrix fb is T times the r eigenvectors corre-
sponding to the r largest eigenvalues of the T × T matrix xx0 /(T N ) in decreasing order with
fb0 fb = Ir . The normalization is necessary as the matrix of factor loadings Λ and f are not
                                                       b = x0 fb/T . Intuitively, for each t, fbt
separately identifiable. The normalization also yields Λ
is a linear combinations of each element of the N × 1 vector xt = (x1t , ..., xN t )0 , where the
linear combination is chosen optimally to minimize the sum of squared residuals xt − Λft .
Bai and Ng (2002) and Stock and Watson (2002a) showed that the space spanned by ft can
be consistently estimated by fbt defined as above when N, T → ∞. The number of static
factors in xt can be determined by the panel information criteria developed in Bai and Ng
(2002). For the panel of 131 series under investigation, the IC2 criterion finds 8 factors over
the full sample of 576 observations (with the maximum number of factors set to 20).
   A common criticism of the method of principal components estimator is that the factors
can be difficult to interpret. Our interpretation of the factors is based on the marginal R2 s,
obtained by regressing each of the 131 series on the eight factors, one at a time. Because the
factors are mutually uncorrelated, the marginal R2 is also the explanatory power of the factor
in question holding other factors fixed. Extending the sample to include three more years of
data did not change our interpretation of the factors. Figures 1 through 8 show the marginal
R-square statistics from regressing the series number given on the x-axis onto the estimated
factor named in the heading. As in Ludvigson and Ng (2007), fb1 is a real activity factor that
loads heavily on employment and output data. The second factor loads heavily on interest
rate spreads, while the third and fourth factors load on prices. Factor 5 loads on interest
rates (much more strongly than the interest rate spreads). Factor 6 loads predominantly on
the housing variables while factor 7 loads on measures of the money supply. Factor 8 loads


                                               6
on variables relating to the stock market. Thus, loosely speaking, factors 5 to 8 are more
strongly related to money, credit, and finance.
  While knowing that there are eight factors in the macroeconomic panel is useful infor-
mation in its own right, of interest here are not the N variables xt = (x1t , . . . xN t )0 , but the
scalar variable rxt+1 which is not in xt . Factors that are pervasive for the large panel of data
                                              (n)
need not be important for predicting rxt+1 . For this reason, we make a distinction between
Ft ⊂ ft and ft . The predictive regression of interest is

                                    rxt+1 = α0F Fbt + β 0F Zt + t+1 ,
                                      (n)
                                                                                                      (5)

which has a vector of generated regressors, Fbt .
   Consistency of αb F follows from the fact that the difference between fbt and the space
spanned by ft vanishes at rate min[N, T ], a result established in Bai and Ng (2002).4 Bai
                               √
and Ng (2006a) showed that if T /N → 0 as N, T → ∞, the sampling uncertainty from
first step estimation is negligible. The practical implication is that standard errors can be
computed for the estimates of αF as though the true Ft were used in the regression. This is
in contrast to the case when Fbt is estimated from a first step regression with a finite number
of predictors. As shown in Pagan (1984), the standard errors for α
                                                                 b F in such a case are
incorrect unless they are adjusted for the estimation error incurred in the first step of Ft .

3.2    Dynamic factors

An advantage of the method of principal components is that it can handle a large panel
of data at little computation cost, one reason being that little structure is imposed on
the estimation. To be convinced that factor augmented regressions are useful in analyzing
economic issues of interest, we need to show that estimates of the FAR are robust to the
choice of the estimator and to the specification of the factor model. To this end, we consider
an alternative way of estimating the factors with two fundamental differences.
    First, we use prior information to organize the data into 8 blocks. These are (1) output,
(2) labor market, (3) housing sector, (4) orders and inventories, (5) money and credit (6)
bond and forex, (7) prices and (8) stock market. The largest block is the labor market which
has 30 series, while the smallest group is the stock market block, which only has 4 series.
The advantage of estimating the factors (which will now be denoted gt ) from blocks of data
is that the factor estimates are easy to interpret.
   4
   It is useful to remark that the convergence rate established in Stock and Watson (2002a) is too slow to
permit consistent estimation of the parameters in (5).


                                                    7
   Second, we estimate a dynamic factor model specified as

                                     xit = β 0i (L)gt + exit                                   (6)

where β i (L) = (1 − λi1 L − . . . − λis Ls ) is a vector of dynamic factor loadings of order s and
gt is a vector of q ‘dynamic factors’ evolving as

                                          ψ g (L)gt = gt ,

where ψ g (L) is a polynomial in L of order pG , gt are iid errors. Furthermore, the idiosyncratic
component exit is an autoregressive process of order pX so that

                                         ψ x (L)exit = xit .

This is the factor framework used in Stock and Watson (1989) to estimate the coincident
indicator with N = 4 variables. Here, our N can be as large as 30.
   The dimension of gt , (which also equals the dimension of t ), is referred to as the number
of dynamic factors. The main distinction between the static and the dynamic model is best
understood using a simple example. The model xit = β i0 gt + β i1 gt−1 + eit is the same as
xit = λi1 f1t + λi2 f2t with f1t = gt and f2t = gt−1 . Here, the number of factors in the static
model is two but there is only one factor in the dynamic model. Essentially, the static model
does not take into account that ft and ft−1 are dynamically linked. Forni, Hallin, Lippi,
and Reichlin (2005) showed that when N and T are both large, the space spanned by gt can
also be consistently estimated using the method of dynamic principal components originally
developed in Brillinger (1981). Boivin and Ng (2005) finds that static and dynamic principal
components have similar forecast precision, but that static principal components are much
easier to compute. It is an open question whether to use the static or the dynamic factors
in predictive regressions though the majority of factor augmented regressions use the static
factor estimates. Our results will shed some light on this issue.
    We estimate a dynamic factor model for each of the eight blocks. Given the definition
of the blocks, it is natural to refer to g1t as an output factor, g7t as a price factor, and so
on. However, as some blocks have a small number of series, the (static or dynamic) princi-
pal components estimator which assumes that N and T are both large will give imprecise
estimates. We therefore use the Bayesian method of Monte Carlo Markov Chain (MCMC).
MCMC samples a chain that has the posterior density of the parameters as its stationary
distribution. The posterior mean computed from draws of the chain are then unbiased for
gt . For factor models, Kose, Otrok, and Whiteman (2003) uses an algorithm that involves

                                                  8
inversion of N matrices that are of dimension T × T , which can be computationally demand-
ing. The algorithms used in Aguilar and West (2000), Geweke and Zhou (1996) and Lopes
and West (2004) are extensions of the MCMC method developed in Carter and Kohn (1994)
and Fruhwirth-Schnatter (1994). Our method is similar and follows the implementation in
Kim and Nelson (2000) of the Stock-Watson coincident indicator closely. Specifically, we
first put the dynamic factor model into a state-space framework. We assume pX = pG = 1
and sg = 2 for every block. For i = 1, . . . Nb (the number of series in block b), let xibt be the
observation for unit i of block b at time t. Given that pX = 1, the measurement equation is

                  (1 − ψ bi L)xbit = (1 − ψ bi L)(β bi0 + β bi1 L + β bi2 L2 )gbt + Xbit

or more compactly,
                                        x∗bit = β ∗i (L)gbt + Xbit .

Given that pG = 1, the transition equation is

                                         gbt = ψ gb gbt−1 + gbt .

We assume Xbit ∼ N (0, σ 2Xbi ) and gb ∼ N (0, σ 2gb ). We use principal components to initialize
gbt . The parameters β b = (β b1 , . . . β b,N b ), ψ Xb = ψ Xb1 , . . . ψ Xb,N b are initialized to zero.
Furthermore, σ Xb = (σ Xb1 , . . . σ Xb,Nb ), ψ gb , and σ 2gb are initialized to random draws from the
uniform distribution. For b = 1, . . . 8 blocks, Gibbs sampling can now be implemented by
successive iteration of the following steps:

    i draw gb = (gb1 , . . . gbT )0 conditional on β b , ψ Xb , σ Xb and the T × Nb data matrix xb .

   ii draw ψ gb and σ 2gb conditional on gb .

   iii for each i = 1, . . . Nb , draw β bi , ψ Xbi and σ 2Xbi conditional on gb and xb .

   We assume normal priors for β bi = (β i0 , β i1 , β i2 ), ψ Xbi and ψ gb .          Given conjugacy,
β bi , ψ Xbi , ψ gb , are simply draws from the normal distributions whose posterior means and
variances are straightforward to compute. Similarly, σ 2gb and σ 2Xbi are draws from the inverse
chi-square distribution. Because the model is linear and Gaussian, we can run the Kalman
filter forward to obtain the conditional mean gbT |T and conditional variance PbT |T . We then
draw gbT from its conditional distribution, which is normal, and proceed backwards to gen-
erate draws gbt|T for t = T − 1, . . . 1 using the Kalman filter. For identification, the loading
on the first series in each block is set to 1. We take 12,000 draws and discard the first 2000.

                                                     9
The posterior means are computed from every 10th draw after the burn-in period. The gbt s
used in subsequent analysis are the means of these 1000 draws.
   As in the case of static factors, not every gbt need to have predictive power for excess
bond returns. Let Gt ⊂ gt = (g1t , . . . g8t ) be those that do. The analog to (5) using dynamic
factors is
                                    (n)      bt + β 0G Zt + t+1 ,
                                 rxt+1 = α0G G                                                 (7)

We have now obtained two sets of factor estimates using two distinct methodologies. We
can turn to an assessment of whether the estimates of the predictive regression are sensitive
to how the factors are estimated.

3.3   Comparison of fbt and gbt

Table 1 reports the first order autocorrelation coefficients for ft and gt . Both sets of factors
exhibit persistence, with fb1t being the most correlated of the eight fbt , and gb3t being the
most serially correlated amongst the gbt . Table 2 reports the contemporaneous correlations
between fb and gb. The real activity factor fb1 is highly correlated with the gbt estimated from
output, labor and manufacturing blocks. fb2 , fb4 , and fb5 are correlated with many of the gb, but
the correlations with the bond/exchange rate seem strongest. fb3 is predominantly a price
factor, while fb8 is a stock market factor. fb7 is most correlated with gb5 , which is a money
market factor. fb8 is highly correlated with gb8 , which is estimated from stock market data.
   The contemporaneous correlations reported in Table 2 does not give a full picture of the
correlation between fbt and gbt for two reasons. First, the gbt are not mutually uncorrelated,
and second, they do not account for correlations that might occur at lags. To provide a
sense of the dynamic correlation between fb and gbt , we first standardize fbt and gbt to have
unit variance. We then consider the regression
                                                     p−1
                                                     X
                             fbrt = a + Ar.0 gbt +         Ar.i ∆b
                                                                 gt−i + eit
                                                     i=1

where for r = 1, . . . 8 and i = 0, . . . p − 1, Ar.i is a 8 × 1 vector of coefficients summarizing
the dynamic relation between fbrt and lags of gbt . The coefficient vector Ar.0 summarizes
the long run relation between gbt and fbt . Table 3 reports results for p = 4, along with the
R2 of the regression. Except for fb6 , the current value and lags of gbt explain the principal
components quite well. While it is clear that fb1 is a real activity factor, the remaining fbs
tend to load on variables from different categories. Tables 2 and 3 reveal that gbt and fbt reduce
the dimensionality of information in the panel of data in different ways. Evidently, the fbt s

                                                 10
are weighted averages of the gbt s and their lags. This can be important in understanding the
results to follow.

4    Predictive Regressions

    bt ⊂ b
Let H    ht , where b
                    ht is either fbt or gbt . Our predictive regression can generically be written
as
                                  (n)      b t + β 0 CPt + t+1 .
                                rxt+1 = α0 H                                                     (8)

                                            b t has predictive power for excess bond returns,
   Equation (8) allows us to assess whether H
conditional on the information in CPt . In order to assess whether macro factors H   b t have
unconditional predictive power for future returns, we also consider the restricted regression
                                           (n)    b t + t+1 .
                                       rxt+1 = α0 H                                              (9)

   Since Fbt and G bt are both linear combinations of xt = (x1t , . . . xN t )0 , say Ft = q 0 xt and
                                                                                            F
      0
Gt = qG xt , we can also write (8) as
                                     (n)
                                  rxt+1 = α∗0 xt + β 0 CPt + t+1
                            0
where α∗0 = α0F qF0 or α0G qG . The conventional regression (1) puts a weight of zero on all but
a handful of xit . When H   b t = Fbt , qF is related to the k eigenvectors of xx0 /(N T ) that will
not, in general, be numerically equal to zero. When H      bt = G
                                                                bt , qG and thus α∗ will have many
                           bt is estimated using a subset of xt . Viewed in this light, a factor
zeros since each column of G
augmented regression with PCA down-weights unimportant regressors. A FAR estimated
using blocks of data sets put some but not all coefficients on xt equal to zero. A conventional
regression is most restrictive as it constrains almost the entire α∗ vector to zero.
    As discussed earlier, factors that are pervasive in the panel of data xit need not have
                        (n)
predictive power for rxt+1 , which is our variable of interest. In Ludvigson and Ng (2007),
b t = Fbt was determined using a method similar to that used in Stock and Watson (2002b).
H
We form different subsets of fbt , and/or functions of fbt (such as fb2 ). For each candidate set
                                                                       1t
of factors, Fbt , we regress rxt+1 on Fbt and CPt and evaluate the corresponding in-sample BIC
                               (n)


and R̄2 . The in-sample BIC for a model with k regressors is defined as
                                                           log T
                                                 b2k + k
                                     BICin (k) = σ
                                                             T
      b2k is the variance of the regression estimated over the entire sample. To limit the
where σ
number of specifications we search over, we first evaluate r univariate regressions of returns

                                                 11
on each of the r factors. Then, for only those factors found to be significant in the r
univariate regressions, we evaluate whether the squared and the cubed terms help reduce
the BIC criterion further. We do not consider other polynomial terms, or polynomial terms
of factors not important in the regressions on linear terms.
       In this paper, we again use the BIC to find the preferred set of factors, but we perform
a systematic and therefore much larger search. Instead of relying on results from prelimi-
nary univariate regressions to guide us to the final model, we directly search over a large
number models with different numbers of regressors. We want to allow excess bond re-
turns to be possibly non-linear in the eight factors and hence include the squared terms
as candidate regressors. If we additionally include all the cubic terms, and given that we
have eight factors and CP to consider, we would have over thirteen million (227 ) poten-
tial models. As a compromise, we limit our candidate regressor set to eighteen variables:
(fb1t , . . . f8t , fb2 , . . . f 2 , fb3 , CPt ). We also restrict the maximum number of predictors to eight.
                1t     8t   1t
This leads to an evaluation of 106762 models.5
   The purpose of this extensive search is to assess the potential impact on the forecasting
analysis of fishing over large numbers of possible predictor factors. As we show, the factors
chosen by the larger, more systematic, search are the same as those chosen by the limited
search procedure used in Ludvigson and Ng (2007). This suggests that data-mining does
not in practice unduly influence the findings in this application, since we find that the same
few key factors always emerge as important predictor variables regardless of how extensive
the search is.
       It is well known that variables found to have predictive power in-sample do not necessar-
ily have predictability out-of-sample. As discussed in Hansen (2008), in-sample overfitting
generally leads to a poor out-of-sample fit. One is less likely to produce spurious results
based on an out-of-sample criterion because a complex (large) model is less likely to be cho-
sen in an out-of-sample comparison with simple models when both models nests the true
model. Thus, when a complex model is found to outperform a simple model out of sample,
it is stronger evidence in favor of the complex model. To this end, we also find the best
amongst 106762 models as the minimizer of the out-of-sample BIC. Specifically, we split
the sample at t = T /2. Each model is estimated using the first T /2 observations. For
t = T /2 + 1, . . . T , the values of predictors in the second half of the sample are multiplied
into the parameters estimated using the first half of the sample to obtain the fit, denoted
   5
    This is obtained by considering C18,j for j = 1, . . . 8, where Cn,k denotes choosing k out of n potential
predictors.



                                                     12
                                                      PT
rbxt+12 . Let eet = rxt+12 −b          e2k =
                            rxt+12 and σ        1
                                               T /2
                                                                    e2t
                                                           t=T /2+1 e     be the out-of-sample error variance
corresponding to model j. The out-of-sample BIC is defined as
                                                              dimj log(T /2)
                                                 e2j +
                                BICout (j) = log σ
                                                                   T /2
where dimj is the size of model j. By using an out-of-sample BIC selection criterion, we
guard against the possibility of spurious overfitting. Regressors with good predictive power
only over a subsample will not likely be chosen. As the predictor set may differ depending
on whether the CP factor is included (ie. whether we consider (8) or (9)), the two variable
selection procedures are repeated with CP excluded from the potential predictor set. Using
the predictors selected by the in- and the out-of-sample BIC, we re-estimate the predictive
regression over the entire sample. In the next section, we show that the predictors found by
this elaborate search are the same handful of predictors found in Ludvigson and Ng (2007)
and that these handful of macroeconomic factors have robust significant predictive power
for excess bond returns beyond the CP factor.
    We also consider as predictor a linear combination of b
                                                          ht along the lines of Cochrane and
                                         b                b0 b
Piazzesi (2005). This variable, denoted H8t is defined as γ  h+t where γ
                                                                       b is obtained from the
following regression:
                                       1X n
                                          5
                                            rx = γ 0 + γ 0b
                                                          h+t ,                                         (10)
                                       4 n=2 t+1

with b
     h+     b           b b3
       t = (h1t , . . . h8t , h1t ). The estimates are as follows:


                                            ht = fbt        ht = gbt
                                          γ
                                          b         tγb   γ
                                                          b         tγb
                                h1     -1.681 -4.983 0.053 0.343
                                h2     0.863 3.009 -1.343 -2.593
                                h3     -0.018 -0.203 -0.699 -1.891
                                h4     -0.626 -2.167 0.628 1.351
                                h5     -0.264 -1.463 -0.001 -0.012
                                h6     -0.720 -2.437 -0.149 -0.691
                                h7     -0.426 -2.140 -0.018 -0.210
                                h8     0.665 3.890 -0.418 -2.122
                                h31    0.115 3.767 0.049 1.733
                               cons    0.900 2.131 0.764 1.518
                                R̄2    0.261            0.104

   Notice that we could also have replaced b ht in the above regression with Hb t , where H
                                                                                          b t is
comprised of predictors selected by either the in- or the out-of-sample BIC. However, H8 b t is

                                                      13
a factor-based predictor that is arguable less vulnerable to the effects of data mining because
it is simple a linear combination of all the estimated factors.
    Tables 4 to 7 report results for maturities of 2, 3, 4, and 5 years. The first four columns
                                                   b t = Fbt ) , while columns 5 to 8 are based on
of each table are based on the static factors (ie. H
the dynamic factors (ie. Hbt = Gbt ). Of these, columns 1, 2, 5, and 6 include the CP variable,
while columns 3, 4, 7, and 8 do not include the CP. Columns 9 and 10 report results using Fb8
with and without CP and columns 11 and 12 do the same with G8  b in place. Our benchmark
is a regression that has the CP variable as the sole predictor. This is reported in last column,
ie. column 13.

4.1    Two Year Returns

As can be seen from Table 4, the CP alone explains .309 of the variance in the two year
excess bound returns. The variable Fb8 alone explains 0.279 (column 10), while G  b8 alone
explains only .153 of the variation (column 12). Adding Fb8 to the regression with the CP
                                                    b (column 11) to CP yields an R̄2 of
factor (column 9) increases R̄2 to .419, and adding G8
.401. The macroeconomic factors thus have non trivial predictive power above and beyond
the CP factor.
   We next turn to regressions when both the factors and CP are included. In Ludvigson and
Ng (2007), the static factors fb1t , fb2t , fb3t , fb4t , fb8t and CP are found to have the best predictive
power for excess returns. The in-sample BIC still finds the same predictors to be important,
but adds fb6t and fb5t
                    2
                       to the predictor list. It is however noteworthy that some variables
selected by the BIC have individual t statistics that are not significant. The resulting model
has an R̄2 of 0.460 (column 1). The out-of-sample BIC selects smaller models and finds
fb1 , fb8 , fb2 , fb3 and the CP to be important regressors (column 2).
        5   1
   Amongst the dynamic factors, gb2 (labor market), gb8 (stock market), gb62 (bonds and foreign
exchange) along with CP are selected by both BIC procedures as predictors (columns 5 and
6). Interestingly, the output factor gb1 is not significant when the CP is included. The out-
of-sample BIC has an R̄2 of 0.407, showing that there is a substantial amount of variation
in the two-year excess bond returns that can be predicted by macroeconomic factors. The
in-sample BIC additionally selects gb3t , gb6t and some higher order terms with an R̄2 of 0.477.
Thus, predictive regressions using fbt and gbt both find a factor relating to real activity (fb1t
or gb1t ) and one relating to the stock market (fb8t or gb18 ) to have significant predictive power
for two-year excess bond returns.
    Results when the regressions do not include the CP variable are in columns 3, 4, 7, and


                                                    14
8. Evidently, fb2 is now important according to both the in- and out-of-sample BIC, showing
that the main effect of CP is to render fb2 redundant. Furthermore, the out-of-sample BIC
now selects a model that is only marginally more parsimonious than that selected by the
in-sample BIC. The regressions with Fb alone have an R̄2 of 0.283 and 0.258 respectively,
slightly less than what is obtained with CP as the only regressor.
      Regressions based on the dynamic factors are qualitatively similar. The factors gb1 , gb3 , and
gb4 , found not to be important when CP is included are now selected as relevant predictors
when CP is dropped. Without CP, the dynamic factors selected by the in-sample BIC explain
0.2 of the one-year-ahead variation in excess bond returns, while the more parsimonious
model selected by the out-of-sample BIC has an R̄2 of 0.192 These numbers are lower than
what we obtain in columns (3) and (4) using Fbt as predictors.
      It is important to stress that we consider the two sets of factor estimates not to perform a
horse race of whether the PCA or the Bayesian estimator is better. The purpose instead is to
show that macroeconomic factors have predictive power for excess bond returns irrespective
of the way we estimate the factors. Although the precise degree of predictability depends
on how the factors are estimated, a clear picture emerges. At least twenty percent of the
variation in excess bound returns can be predicted by macroeconomic factors even in the
presence of the CP factor.

4.2     Longer Maturity Returns and Overview

Table 5 to 7 report results for returns with maturity of three, four, and five years. Most of
                                                             (2)
the static factors found to be useful in predicting rxt+1 by the in-sample BIC remain useful
in predicting the longer maturity returns. These predictors include fb1t , fb4t , fb6t , fb7t , fb8t , fb3 ,
                                                                                                         1t
and CP. Of these, fb1t , fb8t , and CP are also selected by the out-of-sample BIC procedure. The
non-linear term fb3 is an important predictor in equations for all maturity returns except the
                    1t
five year. The factors add at least ten basis points to the R̄2 with CP as the sole predictor.
      The dynamic factors found important in explaining two year excess return are generally
also relevant in regressions for longer maturity excess returns. The in-sample BIC finds gb2t ,
                2      2
gb3t , gb8t , gb4t , gb6t along with the CP to be important in regressions of all maturities. The
output factor is again not significant in regressions with three and four year maturities. It
is marginally significant in the five year maturity, but has the wrong sign. While gb8 was
relevant in the two year regression, it is not an important predictor in the regressions for
longer maturity returns. The out-of-sample BIC finds dynamic factors from the labor market
(b
 g2t ), the bond and foreign exchange markets (b
                                               g6t ). Together, these factors have incremental


                                                    15
predictive power for excess bond returns over CP, improving the R̄2 by slightly less than 10
basis points.
   The relevance of macroeconomic variables in explaining excess bond returns is reinforced
by the results in columns 10 and 12, which show that a simple linear combination of the eight
factors still adds substantial predictive power beyond the CP factor. This result is robust
                                                                               b increases
across all four maturities considered, noting that the coefficient estimate on H8
with the holding period without changing the statistical significance of the coefficient.
   To see if the predictability varies over the sample, we also consider rolling regressions.
Starting with the first regression that spans the sample 1964:1-1974:12, we add twelve
monthly observations each time and record the R̄2 . Figure 9 shows the R̄2 for regressions with
CP included. Apart from a notable drop around the 1983 recession, R̄2 is fairly constant.
Figure 10 depicts the R̄2 for regressions without CP. Notice that the R̄2 that corresponds
                                                b t . As noted earlier, each of the eight fbt is
to Fb8t tends to be 15 basis points higher than G8
itself a combination of the current and lags of the eight gbt . This underscores the point that
imposing a structure on the data to facilitate interpretation of the factors comes at the cost
of not letting the data find the best predictive combination possible.
    The results reveal that the estimated factors consistently have stronger predictive power
for one- and multi-year ahead excess bond returns. The most parsimonious specification has
                     b and CPt - explaining over forty percent of the variation in rxnt+1 of
just two variables - H8
every maturity. A closer look reveals that the real activity factor fb1t is the strongest factor
predictor, both numerically and statistically. As gb1t tends not to be selected as predictor,
this suggests that the part of fb1t that has predictive power for excess bond returns is derived
from real activity other than output. However, the dynamic factors gb2t (labor market) and
gb3t (housing) have strong predictive power. Indeed, fb1t is highly correlated with gb2t and the
coefficients for these predictors tend to be negative. This means that excess bond returns
of every maturity are counter-cyclical, especially with the labor market. This result is in
accord with the models of Campbell (1999) and Wachter (2006), which posit that forecasts
of excess returns should be counter-cyclical because risk aversion is low in good times and
high in recessions. We will subsequently show that yield risk premia, which are based on
forecasts of excess returns, are also counter-cyclical.

5   Inference Issues
                                                                √
The results thus far assume that N and T are large and that       T /N tends to zero. In this
                                                                                 √
section, we first consider the implication for factor augmented regressions when T /N may

                                               16
not be small as is assumed. We then examine the finite sample inference issues.

5.1     Asymptotic Bias

If excess bond returns truly depend on macroeconomic factors, then consistent estimates
of the factors should be better predictors than the observed variables because these are
                                                                               √
contaminated measures of real activity.6 An appealing feature of PCA is that if T /N → 0
as N, T → ∞, then Fbt can be treated in the predictive regression as though it were Ft . To
see why this is the case, consider again the infeasible predictive regression, dropping the
observed predictors Wt for simplicity. We have

                               rxnt+1 = α+0
                                         F Ft + t+1

                                      = α0 Fbt + α0 (HFt − Fbt ) + t+1
                                                  F       F


where αF = αH −1 , and H is a r × r matrix defined in Bai and Ng (2006a). Let SFbFb =
    P
T −1 Tt=1 Fbt Fbt0 . Then
                                                                                        
                                             1 Xb                    1 Xb
                                                 T                       T
          √
              T (b
                 αF − αF ) =   SbF−1
                                  bFb       √                  −1
                                                    Ft t+1 + SFbFb √       Ft (HFt − Fbt ) αF .    (11)
                                              T t=1                   T t=1

But T −1 Fb0 (F H 0 − Fb) = Op (min[N, T ]−1 ), a result that follows from Bai (2003). Thus if
√
  T /N → 0, the second term is negligible. It follows that
                                                                  
                               √                d
                                 T (b
                                    αF − αF )−→N (0, Avar(b   αF )

where
                                       αF ) = plim SF−1
                                  Avar(b                 [         −1
                                                     bFb Avar(gt )SFbFb ,

[ t ) is an estimate of the asymptotic variance of gt+1 = bt+1 Fbt .
Avar(g
                                 √
    Consider now the case when T is comparable to N . Although the first term on the
right hand size of (11) is mean zero, the second term is a Op (1) random variable that may
not be mean zero. This generates a bias in the asymptotic distribution for α
                                                                           bF .

Proposition 1 Suppose Assumptions A-E of Bai and Ng (2006a) hold and let Fbt ⊂ fbt ,
where fbt are the principal component estimates of ft , xit = λ0it ft + eit . Let α
                                                                                  b F be obtained
   6
    Moench (2008) finds that factors estimated from a large panel of macroeconomic data explain the short
rate better than output and inflation.



                                                         17
from least squares estimation of the FAR yt+h = α0F Fbt + et+h . An estimate of the bias in α
                                                                                            bF
is                                                                 
                                                  1 X \b
                                                      T
                             b1 ≈
                             B      −SF−1                Avart (Ft ) αbF
                                       bFb
                                                 N T t=1
where Avart (Ft ) = V −1 Γt V −1 , V is a r×r diagonal matrix of the eigenvalues of (N ·T )−1 xx0 ,
          P            P PN                                              b1 be the biased corrected
and Γt = N →∞ N −1 N       i=1
                                             0
                                                              bB
                                   j=1 E(λi λj eit ejt ). Let α F = α
                                                                    bF − B
estimate. Then                                                       
                              √       B           d
                                 T (bαF − αF )−→N 0, Avar(b       αF ) .

     The asymptotic variance for the bias corrected estimator is the same as α
                                                                             bF .
     Proposition 1 makes use of the fact that

          1Xb                     1X b
             T                       T
                          b   0
                Ft (HFt − Ft ) =        (Ft − HFt )(HFt − Fbt )0 + HFt (HFt ) − Fbt )
          T t=1                   T t=1
                                      X  T                            
                                       1
                                = −E         (Fbt − HFt )(HFt − Fbt ) + op (1)
                                                                     0
                                       T t=1

                                        1 X
                                            T
                                 = −           Avar(Fbt ) + op (1).
                                       N T t=1

The estimation of Avart (Fbt ) was discussed at in Bai and Ng (2006a). If E(e2it ) = σ 2 for all i
and t, Avart (Ft ) is the same for all t. Although Γt will depend on t if eit is heteroskedastic, a
consistent estimate of Γt can be obtained for each t when the errors are not cross-sectionally
correlated, ie. E(eit ejt ) = 0. Alternatively, if E(eit ejt ) = σ ij 6= 0 for some or all t, panel
data permit an estimate of Avar(Fbt ) that does not depend on t even when the eit are cross-
sectionally correlated. This estimator of Γt , referred to as CS-HAC in Bai and Ng (2006a),
will be used below.
     As this result on bias is new, we consider a small Monte Carlo experiment to gauge the
magnitude of the bias as N and T changes. We consider a model with r = 1 and 2 factors.
We assume λi ∼ N (0, 1) and Ft ∼ N (0, 1). These are only simulated once. Samples of
xit = λi Ft + eit and yt = α0 Ft + t are obtained by simulating eit ∼ σN (0, 1) and t ∼ N (0, 1)
for i = 1, . . . N, t = 1, . . . T . We let α = 1 when r = 1 and α = (1, 2) when r = 2. We
consider three values of σ. The smaller σ is, the more informative are the data for the factors.
The results are as follows:




                                                    18
                                      Estimated Bias for α
                                                         b1
                            DGP: yt = Ft0 α + t ,      xit = λi Ft + eit
                            σ=1                                σ=4
                   T=50      100    200      500            50      100      200      500
          r=1
          N=50     -0.025   -0.020    -0.022   -0.019    -0.171    -0.156   -0.210   -0.242
           100     -0.009   -0.009    -0.009   -0.012    -0.107    -0.107   -0.115   -0.138
           200     -0.004   -0.004    -0.005   -0.004    -0.058    -0.058   -0.068   -0.071
           500     -0.002   -0.002    -0.002   -0.002    -0.024    -0.030   -0.031   -0.034
          r=2
            50     0.014 -0.035 0.026 0.017 0.002 -0.244 -0.077 -0.124
           100     -0.020 0.003 -0.018 -0.020 0.116 -0.170 -0.056 -0.158
           200     -0.010 0.001 0.007 -0.009 -0.104 -0.036 0.077 -0.092
           500     -0.005 0.002 -0.004 0.001 -0.047 -0.043 0.028 0.031

    As the true value of α is one, the entries can also be interpreted as percent bias. For
large N and T , the bias is quite small and ignoring the sampling error in Fbt should be
inconsequential. Bias is smaller when T /N = c than when N/T = c for the same c >
1, confirming that the factors are more precisely estimated when there are more cross-
section units to wash out the idiosyncratic noise. However, when σ is large and the data are
uninformative about the factors, the bias can be well over 10% and as large as 20%. In such
cases, the bias is also increasing in the number of estimated factors.

5.1.1   Bias When the Predictors are Functions of fbt

Our predictive regression has two additional complications. First, some of our predictors are
powers of the estimated factors. Second, Fb8t is a linear combination of a subset of fbt and fb1t
                                                                                               3
                                                                                                  ,
which is a non-linear function of fb1t . To see how to handle the first problem, consider the
                              b t = m(fb1t ) and let mt = m(Hf1t ) where m takes its argument
case of the scalar predictor, m
to the power b. The factor augmented regression becomes

                                         b t + α0F (mt − m
                                yt = α0F m               b t ) + t

where αF = αH −b . The required bias correction is now of the form
                                      X  T             0 
                                −1    1
                         B2 = Smbmb0        mb mt − m b t αF .
                                      T t=1

But since m is continuous in fb1t ,

                              m(fb1t ) = m(ft ) + mfb1 ,t (fb1t − Hf1t )

                                                 19
                ∂m bt
where mfb,t =         |
                ∂ fb1t fb1t =Hf1t
                                  .   We have

                         b t − mt = b(Hf1t )b−1 (fb1t − Hf1t ) = Op (min[N, T ]−1 ).
                         m

Given the foregoing result, it is then straightforward to show that

                         X
                         T                          X
                                                     T                           
                T   −1
                               m
                               b t (mt − m      0
                                         b t) = T −1
                                                       mfb1 ,t Avar(fb1t )mfb1 ,t + op (1).
                                                                           0

                         t=1                                 t=1

Extending the argument to the case when mt is a vector leads to the bias correction
                                                     X
                                                      T                       
                               b2 =
                               B         −1
                                       −Sm       T −1
                                                        mFb,t Avar(Fb1t )mFb,t αF .
                                                                          0
                                         bmb0
                                                       t=1

   Finally, consider the predictive regression

                                                             ct + t
                                                    yt = α0F M

      ct = γ
where M         b0 m
           b0 + γ  b t . The bias can be estimated by

                                                     b3 = γ
                                                     B       b2 γ
                                                          b0 B  b.

In our application, γ
                    b is obtained from estimation of (10).
                                                                                 √
   While in theory, these bias corrections are required only when      T /N does not tend to
                                                                          √
zero, in finite samples, the bias correction might be desirable even when T /N is small. We
calculate the biased corrected estimates for two specifications of the predictive regressions.
The first is when the predictors are selected by the in-sample BIC (column 1 of Tables 4-7).
As this tends to lead to a larger model, the bias is likely more important. The second is
when Fb8t is used as predictor (column 9 of Table 4-7), which is the most parsimonious of
our specifications. Note that the observed predictor CP is not associated with first step
estimation error. As such, this predictor does not contribute to bias.
   Reported in Table 8 are results using the CS-HAC, which allows the idiosyncratic errors
to be cross-sectionally correlated. Results when the errors are heteroskedastic but cross-
sectionally uncorrelated are similar. The results indicate that the bias is quite small. For
the present application, the effect of the bias correction is to increase the absolute magnitude
of the coefficient estimates in the predictive regressions. The t statistics (not reported) are
correspondingly larger. The finding that the macroeconomic factors have predictive power
for excess bond returns is not sensitive to the assumption underlying the asymptotically
validity of the FAR estimates.

                                                             20
5.2     Bootstrap Inference

According to asymptotic theory, heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent standard
errors that are asymptotically N (0, 1) can be used to obtain robust t-statistics for the in-
                                          √
sample regressions. Moreover, provided T /N goes to zero as the sample increases, the
Fbt can be treated as observed regressors, and the usual t-statistics are valid (Bai and Ng
(2006a)). To guard against inadequacy of the asymptotic approximation in finite samples,
we consider bootstrap inference in this section.
                                                                                          (n)
   To proceed with a bootstrap analysis, we need to generate bootstrap samples of rxt+1 ,
and thus the exogenous predictors Zt (here just CPt ), as well as of the estimated factors Fbt .
                            (n)
Bootstrap samples of rxt+1 are obtained in two ways: first by imposing the null hypothesis
of no predictability, and second, under the alternative that excess returns are forecastable
by the factors and conditioning variables studied above. The use of monthly bond price data
to construct continuously compounded annual returns induces an MA(12) error structure in
the annual log returns. Thus, under the null hypothesis that the expectations hypothesis is
true, annual compound returns are forecastable up to an MA(12) error structure, but are
not forecastable by other predictor variables or additional moving average terms.
      Bootstrap sampling that captures the serial dependence of the data is straightforward
when, as in this case, there is a parametric model for the dependence under the null hypoth-
esis. In this event, the bootstrap may be accomplished by drawing random samples from the
                                            √
empirical distribution of the residuals of a T consistent, asymptotically normal estimator
of the parametric model, in our application a twelfth-order moving average process. We use
this approach to form bootstrap samples of excess returns under the null. Under the alterna-
tive, excess returns still have the MA(12) error structure induced by the use of overlapping
data, but estimated factors Fbt are presumed to contain additional predictive power for excess
returns above and beyond that implied by the moving average error structure.
      To create bootstrapped samples of the factors, we re-sample the T × N panel of data, xit .
For each i, we assume that the idiosyncratic errors eit and the errors ut in the factor process
are AR(1) processes. Least squares estimation of ebit = ρi ebit−1 +vit yields the estimates b       ρi and
                                                     0
                                                    b fbt . These errors are then re-centered. To generate
vbit , t = 2, . . . T , recalling that ebit = xit − λi
a new panel of data, for each i, vbit is re-sampled (while preserving the cross-section correlation
structure) to yield bootstrap samples of ebit . In turn, bootstrap values of xit are constructed
by adding the bootstrap estimates of the idiosyncratic errors, ebit , to λ b0 Fbt . Applying the
                                                                                    i
method of principal components to the bootstrapped data yields a new set of estimated
factors. Together with bootstrap samples of CPt created under the assumption that it is an


                                                   21
AR(1), we have a complete set of bootstrap regressors in the predictive regression.
      Each regression using the bootstrapped data gives new estimates of the regression coeffi-
cients. This is repeated B times. Bootstrap confidence intervals for the parameter estimates
and R̄2 statistics are calculated from B = 10, 000 replications. We compute 90th and 95th
               b and α
percentiles of β        b F , as well as the bootstrap estimate of the bias. This also allows us
                  F
to compare the adequacy of our calculations for asymptotic bias considered in the previous
subsection. The exercise is repeated for two-, three-, four- and five-year excess bond returns.
   To conserve space, results are only reported for the largest model (corresponding to
column 1 of Tables 4 to 7). The results based on bootstrap inference are consistent with
asymptotic inference. In particular, the magnitude of predictability found in the historical
data is too large to be accounted for by sampling error of the size we currently have. The
coefficients on the predictors and factors are statistically different from zero at the 95% level
and are well outside the 95% confidence interval under the null of no predictability. The
bootstrap estimate of the bias on coefficients associated with the estimated factors are small,
and the R̄2 are similar in magnitude to what was reported in Tables 4 to 7.

5.3     Posterior Inference

In Tables 4 to 7, we have used the posterior mean of Gt in the predictive regression computed
from 1000 draws (taken from a total of 25000 draws) from the posterior distribution of Gt .
The αb do not reflect sampling uncertainty about Gt . To have a complete account of sampling
variability, we estimate the predictive regressions for each of the 1000 draws of Gt . This gives
us the posterior distribution for α as well as the corresponding t statistic.
      Reported in Table 10 are the posterior mean of αG along with the 5 and 95% percentage
points of the t statistic. The point estimates reported in Tables 4 to 7 are very close to the
posterior means. Sampling variability from having to estimate the dynamic factors has little
effect on the estimates of the factor augmented regressions.
   So far we find that macroeconomic factors have non-trivial predictive power for bond
excess returns and that the sampling error induced by Fbt or G
                                                             bt in the predictive regressions
are numerically small. Multiple factors contribute to the predictability of excess returns, so
it is not possible to infer the cyclicality of return risk premia by observing the signs of the
individual coefficients on factors in forecasting regressions of excess returns. But Tables 4-7
provide a summary measure of how the factors are related to future excess returns by showing
that excess bond returns are high when the linear combinations of all factors, Fb8t and G8
                                                                                         b t,
are high. Figures 11 and 12 show that Fb8t and G8
                                                b t are in turn high when real activity (as


                                               22
measured by industrial production growth) is low. The results therefore imply that excess
returns are forecast to be high when economic activity is slow or contracting. That is, return
risk premia are counter-cyclical. This is confirmed by the top panels of Figures 13 and 14,
which plot return risk premia along with industrial production growth. The bottom panels
of these figures show that the factors contribute significantly to the countercyclicality of risk-
premia. Indeed, when factors are excluded (but CPt is included), risk-premia are a-cyclical.
Of economic interest is whether yield risk-preimia are also counter-cyclical. We now turn to
such an analysis.

6   Counter-cyclical Yield Risk Premia

The yield risk premium or term premium, should not be confused with the term spread,
which is simply the difference in yields between the n-period bond and the one-period bond.
Instead, the yield risk premium is a component of the the n-period yield:

                    (n)   1  (1)     (1)        (1)
                                                       
                                                                   (n)
                  yt = Et yt + yt+1 + · · · + yt+n−1 +          κt          .                (12)
                          n
                          |             {z                      |{z}
                                                       } yield risk premium
                                  expectations component

                                                                  (n)
Under the expectations hypothesis, the yield risk premium, κt , is assumed constant.
  It is straightforward to show that the yield risk premium is identically equal to the average
of expected future return risk premia of declining maturity:

                 (n)   1 h  (n)          
                                               (n−1)
                                                                  
                                                                      (2)
                                                                           i
               κt =       Et rxt+1 + Et rxt+2          + · · · + Et rxt+n−1 .                (13)
                       n
                                                                        (n)
To form an estimate of the risk premium component in yields, κt , we need estimates of
the multi-step ahead forecasts that appear on the right-hand-side of (13),. Denote estimated
variables with “hats.”˙Then
                  (n)  1 h b  (n)  b  (n−1)         
                                                      bt rx(2)
                                                                 i
                κ
                bt =      Et rxt+1 + Et rxt+2    +···+E    t+n−1    ,                        (14)
                       n
      bt (·) denotes an estimate of the conditional expectation Et (·) formed by a linear
where E
projection. As estimates of the conditional expectations are simply linear forecasts of excess
returns, multiple steps ahead our earlier results for the FAR have direct implications for risk
premia in yields.
    To generate multi-step ahead forecasts we estimate a monthly pth-order vectorautoregres-
sion (VAR). The idea behind the VAR is that multi-step ahead forecasts may be obtained


                                                  23
by iterating one-step ahead linear projections from the VAR. The VAR vector contains ob-
                                                                    b t , where H
servations on excess returns, the Cochrane-Piazzesi factor, CPt and H           b t are the
estimated factors (or a linear combination of them). Let
                                  h                                i0
                                     (5)  (4)        (2)       b t
                            ZtU ≡ rxt , rxt , ..., rxt , CPt , H8

      b is either Fb8 or G8.
where H8                 b For comparison, we will also form bond forecasts with a
restricted VAR that excludes the estimated factors, but still includes CPt as a predictor
variable:                                 h                          i0
                                             (5)   (4)        (2)
                                   ZtR   ≡ rxt , rxt , ..., rxt , CPt .

      We use a monthly VAR with p = 12 lags, where, for notational convenience, we write the
VAR in terms of mean deviations:7
                                                                     
  Zt+1/12 − µ = Φ1 (Zt − µ) + Φ2 Zt−1/12 − µ + · · · + Φp Zt−11/12 − µ + εt+1/12 .       (15)

   Let k denote the number of variables in Zt . Then (15) can be can be expressed as a
V AR (1):
                                           ξ t+1/12 = Aξ t + vt+1/12 ,                   (16)

where,
                                                                                  
                                             Zt − µ                        εt+1/12
                                          Zt−1/12 − µ                      0      
                                                                                  
                                                ·                          ·      
                        ξ t+1/12   ≡ 
                                     
                                                            
                                                                  vt ≡ 
                                                                        
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                         (kp×1)                 ·              (kp×1)      ·      
                                                ·                          ·      
                                           Zt−11/12 − µ                       0
                                                                            
                                           Φ1 Φ2 Φ3         ·   · Φp−1 Φp
                                          In 0 0           ·   ·    0   0 
                                                                            
                                          0 In 0           ·   ·    0   0 
                                                                            
                           A       = 
                                           ·  ·  ·         ·   ·     ·   · .
                         (kp×kp)           ·  ·  ·         ·   ·     ·   · 
                                                                            
                                           ·  ·  ·         ·   ·     ·   · 
                                           0 0 0            ·   · In     0

Multi-step ahead forecasts are straightforward to compute using the first-order VAR:

                                              Et ξ t+j/12 = Aj ξ t .
  7
      This is only for notational convenience. The estimation will include the means.


                                                       24
When j = 12, the monthly VAR produces forecasts of one-year ahead variables, Et ξ t+1 =
A12 ξ t ; when j = 24, it computes two-year ahead forecasts, and so on. Define a vector ej
                                                               (5)
that picks out the j-th element of ξ t , i.e., e10 ξ t ≡ rxt . In the notation above, we have
e1(kp×1) = [1, 0, 0, ...0]0 , e2(kp×1) = [0, 1, 0, ...0]0 , analogously for e3 and e4. Thus, given
estimates of the VAR parameters A, we may form estimates of the conditional expectations
on the right-hand-side of (14) using the VAR forecasts of return risk premia. For example,
                                                                                          the
estimate of the expectation of the five-year bond, one year ahead, is given by E  bt rxt+1 =
                                                                                       (5)


e10 A 12
     ξ t ; the estimate of the expectation of the four-year bond, two years ahead, is given by
bt rx(4)
E                   0 24
         t+2 = e2 A ξ t , and so on.

    Letting H                                                         3 b
            b t = Fb5t where Fb5t is a linear combination of fb1t , fb1t , f3t , fb4t and fb8t . we showed
in Ludvigson and Ng (2007) that both yield and return risk premia are more countercyclical
and reach greater values in recessions than in the absence of H       b t . Here, we verify that this
                                         b t . To this end, we let H
result holds up for different choices of H                         b t be the static and dynamic
factors selected by the out-of-sample BIC. These two predictor sets embody information in
                                                          b or F 5t used in Ludvigson and
fewer factors than the ones implied by the in-sample BIC, H8,
Ng (2007). The point is to show that a few macroeconomic factors are enough to generate
an important difference in the properties of risk premia. Specifically, without Fbt in Z U , the  t
correlation between the estimated return risk premium and IP growth is -0.014. With Fbt in
ZtU , the correlation is -0.223. These correlations are -0.045 and -0.376 for yield risk premia.
With G  bt in Z U , the correlation of IP growth with return and yield risk premium are -0.218
               t
and -0.286 respectively. Return and yield risk premia are thus more countercyclical when
the factors are used to forecast excess returns.
    Figure 15 shows the twelve month moving-average of risk-premium component of the
five-year bond yield. As we can see, yield risk premia were particularly high in the 1982-83
recession, as well as shortly after the 2001 recession. Figure 16 shows the yield risk premia
estimated with and without using Fbt to forecast excess returns, while Figure 17 shows a
similar picture with and without G  bt . The difference between the risk premia estimated with
and without the factors is largest around recessions. For example, the yield risk premium
on the five-year bond estimated using the information contained in Fbt or G
                                                                          bt was over 2% in
                                                         bt . The return risk premia (not
the 2001 recession, but it was slightly below 1% without G
reported) show a similar pattern.
   When the economy is contracting, the countercyclical nature of the risk factors con-
tributes to a steepening of the yield curve even as future short term rates fall. Conversely,
when the economy is expanding, the factors contribute to a flattening of the yield curve even


                                                   25
as expectations of future short-term rates rise. This implies that information in the factors
is ignored. Too much variation in the long term yields is attributed to the expectations
component in recessions. Information in the macro factors are thus important in accurate
decomposition of risk premia, especially in recessions.

7   Conclusion

There is a good deal of evidence that excess bond returns are predictable by financial vari-
ables. Yet, macroeconomic theory postulates that it is real variables relating to macroeco-
nomic activity that should forecast bond returns. This paper presents robust evidence in
support of the theory. Macroeconomic factors, especially the real activity factor, has strong
predictive power for excess bond returns even in the presence of financial predictors. Our
analysis consists of estimating two sets of factors and a comprehensive specification search.
We also account for sampling uncertainty that might arise from estimation of the factors.
While the estimated risk premia without using the macro factors to forecast excess returns
are acyclical, both bond returns and yield risk premia are counter-cyclical when the factors
are used. The evidence indicate that investors seek compensation for macroeconomic risks
associated with recessions.




                                             26
References
Aguilar, G., and M. West (2000): “Bayesian Dynamic Factor Models and Portfolio
 Allocation,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 18, 338–357.
Ang, A., and M. Piazzesi (2003): “A No-Arbitrage Vector Autoregression of Term Struc-
 ture Dynamics With Macroeconomic and Latent Variables,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
 nomics, 50, 745–787.
Bai, J. (2003): “Inferential Theory for Factor Models of Large Dimensions,” Econometrica,
 71:1, 135–172.
Bai, J., and S. Ng (2002): “Determining the Number of Factors in Approximate Factor
 Models,” Econometrica, 70:1, 191–221.
         (2006a): “Confidence Intervals for Diffusion Index Forecasts and Inference with
  Factor-Augmented Regressions,” Econometrica, 74:4, 1133–1150.
         (2006b): “Forecasting Economic Time Series Using Targeted Predictors,” Journal
  of Econometrics, forthcoming.
         (2008): “Large Dimensional Factor Analysis,” Foundations and Trends in Econo-
  metrics, 3:2, 89–163.
Boivin, J., and S. Ng (2005): “Undertanding and Comparing Factor Based Forecasts,”
 International Journal of Central Banking, 1:3, 117–152.
Brandt, M. W., and K. Q. Wang (2003): “Time-Varying Risk Aversion and Unexpected
 Inflation,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50, 1457–1498.
Brillinger, D. (1981): Time Series: Data Analysis and Theory. Wiley, San Francisco.
Campbell, J. Y. J. H. C. (1999): “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation
 of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 107, 205–251.
Carter, C. K., and R. Kohn (1994): “On Gibbs Sampling for State Space Models,”
 Biometrika, 81:3, 541–533.
Cochrane, J. H., and M. Piazzesi (2005): “Bond Risk Premia,” The American Eco-
 nomic Review, 95(1), 138–160.
Connor, G., and R. Korajzcyk (1986): “Performance Measurement with the Arbitrage
 Pricing Theory: A New Framework for Analysis,” Journal of Financial Economics, 15,
 373–394.
DeMol, C., D. Giannone, and L. Reichlin (2006): “Forecasting Using a Large Number
 of Predictors: Is Bayesian Regression a Valid Alternative to Principal Components,” ECB
 Working Paper 700.
Duffie, G. (2008): “Information in (and not in) the Term Structure,” mimeo, Johns Hop-
 kins University.
Fama, E. F., and R. H. Bliss (1987): “The Information in Long-Maturity Forward Rates,”
  American Economic Review, 77(4), 680–692.

                                           27
Forni, M., M. Hallin, M. Lippi, and L. Reichlin (2005): “The Generalized Dynamic
 Factor Model, One Sided Estimation and Forecasting,” Journal of the American Statistical
 Association, 100, 830–840.
Fruhwirth-Schnatter, S. (1994): “Data Augmentation and Dynamic Linear Models,”
 Journal of Time Series Analysis, 15, 183–202.
Geweke, J., and G. Zhou (1996): “Measuring the Pricing Error of the Arbitrage Pricing
 Theory,” Review of Financial Studies, 9:2, 557–87.
Hansen, P. (2008): “In-Sample and Out-of-Sample Fit: Their Joint Distribution and its
 Implications for Model Selection,” manuscript, Stanford University.
Kim, C., and C. Nelson (2000): State Space Models with Regime Switching. MIT Press.
Kose, A., C. Otrok, and C. Whiteman (2003): “International Business Cycles: World
 Region and Country Specific Factors,” American Economic Review, 93:4, 1216–1239.
Kozicki, S., and P. Tinsley (2005): “Term structure transmission of monetary policy,”
 Fed. Reserve Bank of Kansas city Working Paper 05-06.
Lopes, H., and M. West (2004): “Bayesian Model Assessment in Factor Analysis,” Sta-
 tistical Sinica, 14, 41–87.
Ludvigson, S., and S. Ng (2007): “Macro Factors in Bond Risk Premia,” Review of
 Financial Studies, p. forthcoming.
Moench, E. (2008): “Forecasting the Yield Curive in a Data-Rich Environment: A No-
 Arbitrage Factor-Augmented VAR Approach,” Journal of Econometrics, 46, 26–43.
Pagan, A. (1984): “Econometric Issues in the Analysis of Regressions with Generated
  Regressors,” International Economic Review, 25, 221–247.
Piazzesi, M., and E. Swanson (2004): “Futures Prices as Risk-Adjusted Forecasts of
  Monetary Policy,” NBER Working Paper No. 10547.
Stock, J. H., and M. Watson (1989): “New Indexes of Coincident and Leading Eco-
  nomic Indications,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1989, ed. by O. J. Blanchard, and
  S. Fischer, Cambridge. M. I. T. Press.
Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson (2002a): “Forecasting Using Principal Components
  from a Large Number of Predictors,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 97,
  1167–1179.
         (2002b): “Macroeconomic Forecasting Using Diffusion Indexes,” Journal of Busi-
  ness and Economic Statistics, 20:2, 147–162.
           (2005): “Implications of Dynamic Factor Models for VAR analysis,” NBER WP
  11467.
Wachter, J. (2006): “A Consumption Based Model of the Term Structure of Interest
 Rates,” Journal of Financial Economics, 79, 365–399.



                                           28
                           Table 1: First Order Autocorrelation Coefficients
                                       fbt      t       gbt      t
                                 1 0.767 20.589 -0.361 -6.298
                                 2 0.748 18.085 0.823 22.157
                                 3 -0.239 -2.852 0.877 32.267
                                 4 0.456      7.594   0.660 14.385
                                 5 0.362      6.819 -0.344 -1.635
                                 6 0.422      4.232   0.448    4.552
                                 7 -0.112 -0.672 0.050         0.609
                                 8 0.225      4.526   0.157    2.794



                                   Table 2: Correlation between fbt     and gt
                     gb1       gb2         gb3      gb4      gb5            gb6        gb7         gb8
                  output     labor housing         mfg    money         finance     prices      stocks
            fb1    0.601     0.903      0.551     0.766 -0.067            0.489      0.126      -0.092
            fb2    0.181    -0.120       0.376    0.269    0.095         -0.462     -0.227       0.449
            fb3    0.037     0.027      -0.150   -0.010 -0.148           0.144      -0.800      -0.067
            fb4   -0.303    0.118        0.253   -0.128 0.185            -0.417     -0.194      0.092
            fb5    0.306     0.179      -0.365    0.026    0.046         -0.474     -0.009       0.183
            fb6    0.103    -0.140       0.321    0.179 -0.398            0.008      0.050      0.177
            fb7    0.064    -0.023       0.125    0.004    0.743          0.088     -0.078      0.100
            fb8   -0.241    0.073       -0.023    0.111 -0.057            0.119     -0.052      0.689




                           Table 3: Long run correlation between fbt and gbt .

                gb1       gb2        gb3         gb4       gb5         gb6          gb7        gb8     R2
             output     labor    housing        mfg     money      finance       prices     stocks
      fb1     0.447     0.536     0.215        0.066    -0.008       0.140       -0.002     -0.038    0.953
      fb2     0.548    -0.466      0.296       0.299    0.031       -0.536       -0.135      0.266    0.689
      fb3     0.100     0.026     -0.152      -0.036    -0.007      0.211        -0.390     -0.026    0.935
      fb4    -0.925    0.699       0.491      -0.242     0.004      -0.444       -0.077     -0.064    0.723
      fb5     0.682     0.417     -0.624      -0.135    -0.000      -0.488        0.018     0.146     0.790
      fb6     0.070    -0.357      0.467      -0.098    -0.294      0.144         0.061      0.100    0.490
      fb7     0.226    -0.252      0.136      -0.095    0.540        0.325       -0.080      0.180    0.692
      fb8    -0.986    0.447      -0.224       0.167     0.025      0.313        -0.049     0.905     0.797

                                                                                 Pp−1
Reported are estimates of Ar.0 , obtained from the regression: fbrt = Ar.0b
                                                                          gt +    i=1
                                                                                        Ar.i ∆gt−i + et with p = 4.
                                                       (2)          b t + β 0 CPt + t+1
                                Table 4: Regressions rxt+1 = a + α0 H

   b
   H                      b = Fb
                          H                                          b =G
                                                                     H   b                          b = Fb
                                                                                                    H                   b =G
                                                                                                                        H  b
            in        out       in         out          in       out      in          out
             1          2        3           4           5         6       7            8         9         10        11       12      13
  Hb1     -0.761     -0.793 -0.935        -0.931         -         -    0.147        0.170        -          -         -        -       -
 tstat    -5.387     -4.848 -5.748        -5.449         -         -    2.947        2.623        -          -         -        -       -
  Hb2        -          -     0.325       0.326      -0.494     -0.627 -0.699        -0.646       -          -         -        -       -
 tstat       -          -     2.663       2.520      -3.151     -3.623 -2.905        -3.062       -          -         -        -       -
  Hb3        -          -        -           -       -0.492        -    -0.532       -0.487       -          -         -        -       -
 tstat       -          -        -           -       -4.813        -    -2.889       -3.012       -          -         -        -       -
  Hb4     -0.291        -    -0.399       -0.399         -         -    0.186           -         -          -         -        -       -
 tstat    -2.716        -    -3.103       -2.974         -         -    1.039           -         -          -         -        -       -
  Hb6     -0.151        -    -0.281       -0.280      0.137        -    -0.163          -         -          -         -        -       -
 tstat    -1.322        -    -1.949       -1.795      1.679        -    -1.594          -         -          -         -        -       -
  Hb7     -0.128        -    -0.143       -0.144         -         -       -            -         -          -         -        -       -
 tstat    -1.577        -    -1.517       -1.365         -         -       -            -         -          -         -        -       -
  Hb8     0.240      0.241    0.302          -       -0.136        -    -0.164          -         -          -         -        -       -
 tstat    2.981      3.297    3.575          -       -1.562        -    -1.997          -         -          -         -        -       -
  b2
  H          -          -        -           -           -      -0.100     -            -         -          -         -        -       -
    2
 tstat       -          -        -           -           -      -2.147     -            -         -          -         -        -       -
  b2
  H          -          -        -           -       -0.074        -    -0.121       -0.118       -          -         -        -       -
    4
 tstat       -          -        -           -       -3.165        -    -3.167       -3.076       -          -         -        -       -
  b2
  H       -0.080     -0.110      -           -           -         -       -            -         -          -         -        -       -
    5
 tstat    -2.468     -2.925      -           -           -         -       -            -         -          -         -        -       -
  b2
  H          -          -        -           -       -0.086     -0.083 -0.084        -0.080       -          -         -        -       -
    6
 tstat       -          -        -           -       -6.245     -6.804 -3.642        -3.176       -          -         -        -       -
  b3
  H       0.044      0.047    0.057       0.056       0.019        -       -            -         -          -         -        -       -
    1
 tstat    2.912      2.887    3.081       3.338       2.254        -       -            -         -          -         -        -       -
  CP      0.385      0.411       -           -        0.452     0.433      -            -       0.336        -      0.413       -     0.455
 tstat    5.647      6.981       -           -        7.488     7.738      -            -       4.437        -      6.434       -     8.836
  b
  H8         -          -        -           -           -         -       -            -       0.332     0.482     0.427     0.544     -
 tstat       -          -        -           -           -         -       -            -       4.336     7.212     3.880     3.493     -
  R̄2     0.460      0.430    0.283       0.258       0.477     0.407   0.200        0.192      0.419     0.279     0.401     0.153   0.309



Notes: The table reports estimates from OLS regressions of excess bond returns on the lagged variables named in column 1.
The dependent variable rxn                                                              b
                            t+1 is the excess log return on the n year Treasury bond. Ht denotes a set of regressors formed from
                           b
consisting of functions of ft or b         b
                                 gt where ft is a set of eight factors estimated by the method of principal components, and bgt is
a vector of eight dynamic factors estimated by Bayesian factors. The panel of data used in estimation consists of 131 individual
                                        b t is the single factor constructed as a linear combination of the eight estimated factors
series over the period 1964:1-2007:12. H8
     b 3
and f1 . CPt is the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) factor that is a linear combination of five forward spreads. Newey and West
(1987) corrected t -statistics have lag order 18 months and are reported in parentheses. A constant is always included in the
regression even though its estimate is not reported in the Table.
                                                (3)          b t + β 0 CPt + t+1
                         Table 5: Regressions rxt+1 = a + α0 H

 b
 H                    b = Fb
                      H                                  b =G
                                                         H   b                      b = Fb
                                                                                    H             b =G
                                                                                                  H  b
          in      out       in     out        in     out      in       out
           1        2        3       4         5       6       7         8       9        10      11     12      13
 Hb1    -1.232   -1.280 -1.624    -1.592       -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
tstat   -5.079   -4.581 -5.553    -5.479       -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
 Hb2    -0.028      -     0.694   0.703    -0.782   -1.094 -1.259     -1.056     -         -       -      -       -
tstat   -0.147      -     2.851   2.982    -2.805   -3.773 -2.983     -3.092     -         -       -      -       -
 Hb3       -        -        -       -     -0.807      -    -0.843    -0.734     -         -       -      -       -
tstat      -        -        -       -     -4.297      -    -2.667    -2.548     -         -       -      -       -
 Hb4    -0.423      -    -0.588   -0.592       -       -    0.421        -       -         -       -      -       -
tstat   -2.193      -    -2.518   -2.496       -       -    1.225        -       -         -       -      -       -
 Hb6    -0.433      -    -0.598   -0.590       -       -    -0.356       -       -         -       -      -       -
tstat   -1.890      -    -2.294   -2.269       -       -    -2.006       -       -         -       -      -       -
 Hb7    -0.338      -    -0.360   -0.342       -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
tstat   -2.138      -    -2.109   -1.989       -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
 Hb8    0.389    0.428    0.550   0.553    -0.308      -    -0.329       -       -         -       -      -       -
tstat   2.593    3.190    3.718   3.738    -2.018      -    -2.143       -       -         -       -      -       -
 b2
 H         -        -     0.156      -         -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
   1
tstat      -        -     0.854      -         -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
 b2
 H         -        -        -       -         -    -0.208     -         -       -         -       -      -       -
   2
tstat      -        -        -       -         -    -2.668     -         -       -         -       -      -       -
 b2
 H      0.111       -        -       -         -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
   3
tstat   1.999       -        -       -         -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
 b2
 H         -        -        -       -     -0.190      -    -0.250    -0.275     -         -       -      -       -
   4
tstat      -        -        -       -     -3.925      -    -3.005    -3.622     -         -       -      -       -
 b2
 H         -     -0.161      -       -         -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
   5
tstat      -     -2.179      -       -         -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
 b2
 H         -        -        -       -     -0.152   -0.147 -0.140     -0.127     -         -       -      -       -
   6
tstat      -        -        -       -     -7.130   -6.883 -3.307     -2.551     -         -       -      -       -
 b2
 H         -        -        -       -      0.089      -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
   7
tstat      -        -        -       -      2.687      -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
 b3
 H      0.095    0.086    0.141   0.106     0.032      -    0.031        -       -         -       -      -       -
   1
tstat   3.235    3.204    2.922   3.445     2.233      -    1.942        -       -         -       -      -       -
 CP     0.760    0.784       -       -      0.847   0.821      -         -     0.644       -    0.786     -     0.856
tstat   5.329    6.885       -       -      7.516   7.770      -         -     4.661       -    6.381     -     8.301
 b
 H8        -        -        -       -         -       -       -         -     0.588    0.877   0.710   0.931     -
tstat      -        -        -       -         -       -       -         -     4.494    7.133   3.624   3.256     -
 R̄2    0.455    0.424    0.268   0.267     0.475   0.418   0.182     0.167    0.432    0.277   0.404   0.135   0.328
                                                (4)          b t + β 0 CPt + t+1
                         Table 6: Regressions rxt+1 = a + α0 H

 b
 H                    b = Fb
                      H                                  b =G
                                                         H   b                      b = Fb
                                                                                    H             b =G
                                                                                                  H  b
          in      out       in     out        in     out      in       out
           1        2        3       4         5       6       7         8       9        10      11     12      13
 Hb1    -1.521   -1.521 -2.011    -2.050       -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
tstat   -5.138   -4.149 -5.013    -5.290       -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
 Hb2       -        -     1.069   1.069    -0.952   -1.342 -1.619     -1.601     -         -       -      -       -
tstat      -        -     3.028   3.095    -2.680   -3.754 -2.812     -2.848     -         -       -      -       -
 Hb3       -        -        -       -     -1.036      -    -1.080    -1.078     -         -       -      -       -
tstat      -        -        -       -     -4.127      -    -2.486    -2.401     -         -       -      -       -
 Hb4    -0.436      -    -0.689   -0.681       -       -    0.590     0.452      -         -       -      -       -
tstat   -1.595      -    -1.957   -1.978       -       -    1.221     0.927      -         -       -      -       -
 Hb5       -        -    -0.321      -         -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
tstat      -        -    -1.475      -         -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
 Hb6    -0.668      -    -0.889   -0.889       -       -    -0.605       -       -         -       -      -       -
tstat   -2.160      -    -2.522   -2.449       -       -    -2.333       -       -         -       -      -       -
 Hb7    -0.534      -    -0.535   -0.541       -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
tstat   -2.401      -    -2.222   -2.209       -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
 Hb8    0.578    0.636    0.820   0.822    -0.474      -    -0.521       -       -         -       -      -       -
tstat   2.820    3.365    3.935   3.914    -2.344      -    -2.277       -       -         -       -      -       -
 b2
 H         -     -0.146      -       -         -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
   1
tstat      -     -0.770      -       -         -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
 b2
 H         -        -        -       -         -    -0.284     -         -       -         -       -      -       -
   2
tstat      -        -        -       -         -    -2.934     -         -       -         -       -      -       -
 b2
 H      0.177       -        -       -         -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
   3
tstat   2.527       -        -       -         -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
 b2
 H         -        -        -       -     -0.262      -    -0.354    -0.367     -         -       -      -       -
   4
tstat      -        -        -       -     -3.692      -    -2.976    -3.552     -         -       -      -       -
 b2
 H         -     -0.228      -       -         -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
   5
tstat      -     -2.309      -       -         -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
 b2
 H         -        -        -       -     -0.231   -0.227 -0.219     -0.189     -         -       -      -       -
   6
tstat      -        -        -       -     -6.923   -9.811 -4.375     -3.248     -         -       -      -       -
 b2
 H         -        -        -       -      0.148   0.104      -         -       -         -       -      -       -
   7
tstat      -        -        -       -      3.258   2.233      -         -       -         -       -      -       -
 b3
 H      0.131    0.081    0.142   0.148     0.037      -    0.036        -       -         -       -      -       -
   1
tstat   3.436    1.483    3.938   3.602     1.964      -    1.599        -       -         -       -      -       -
 CP     1.115    1.158       -       -      1.238   1.219      -         -     0.955       -    1.150     -     1.235
tstat   6.077    7.028       -       -      7.821   8.197      -         -     4.765       -    6.417     -     8.224
 b
 H8        -        -        -       -         -       -       -         -     0.777    1.204   0.864   1.188     -
tstat      -        -        -       -         -       -       -         -     4.474    7.247   3.388   3.061     -
 R̄2    0.473    0.441    0.263   0.260     0.496   0.445   0.171     0.155    0.452    0.273   0.416   0.114   0.357
                                                (5)          b t + β 0 CPt + t+1
                         Table 7: Regressions rxt+1 = a + α0 H

 b
 H                    b = Fb
                      H                                  b =G
                                                         H   b                      b = Fb
                                                                                    H             b =G
                                                                                                  H  b
          in      out       in     out        in     out      in       out
           1        2        3       4         5       6       7         8       9        10      11     12      13
 Hb1    -1.653   -1.373 -2.214    -2.277    0.308      -    0.326        -       -         -       -      -       -
tstat   -4.723   -3.686 -4.503    -4.819    1.701      -    2.049        -       -         -       -      -       -
 Hb2       -        -     1.355   1.355    -1.145   -1.573 -1.928     -1.609     -         -       -      -       -
tstat      -        -     3.111   3.195    -2.653   -3.691 -2.760     -2.994     -         -       -      -       -
 Hb3       -        -        -       -     -1.161      -    -1.199    -1.003     -         -       -      -       -
tstat      -        -        -       -     -3.615      -    -2.224    -2.021     -         -       -      -       -
 Hb4    -0.516      -    -0.818   -0.805       -       -    0.654        -       -         -       -      -       -
tstat   -1.478      -    -1.861   -1.881       -       -    1.128        -       -         -       -      -       -
 Hb5       -        -    -0.523      -         -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
tstat      -        -    -1.969      -         -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
 Hb6    -0.856      -    -1.120   -1.120       -       -    -0.678       -       -         -       -      -       -
tstat   -2.150      -    -2.566   -2.462       -       -    -2.049       -       -         -       -      -       -
 Hb7    -0.686      -    -0.685   -0.694       -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
tstat   -2.479      -    -2.321   -2.299       -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
 Hb8    0.702    0.725    0.985   0.988    -0.563      -    -0.608       -       -         -       -      -       -
tstat   2.756    3.292    3.956   3.907    -2.217      -    -2.156       -       -         -       -      -       -
 b2
 H         -     -0.563      -       -         -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
   1
tstat      -     -3.037      -       -         -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
 b2
 H         -        -        -       -         -    -0.339     -         -       -         -       -      -       -
   2
tstat      -        -        -       -         -    -2.955     -         -       -         -       -      -       -
 b2
 H      0.204       -        -       -         -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
   3
tstat   2.327       -        -       -         -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
 b2
 H         -        -        -       -     -0.357      -    -0.465    -0.466     -         -       -      -       -
   4
tstat      -        -        -       -     -4.429      -    -3.497    -3.684     -         -       -      -       -
 b2
 H         -        -        -       -     -0.269   -0.279 -0.253     -0.234     -         -       -      -       -
   6
tstat      -        -        -       -     -6.235   -9.685 -4.407     -3.596     -         -       -      -       -
 b2
 H         -        -        -       -      0.179      -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
   7
tstat      -        -        -       -      3.221      -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
 b3
 H      0.150       -     0.160   0.170        -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
   1
tstat   3.310       -     3.893   3.440        -       -       -         -       -         -       -      -       -
 CP     1.316    1.394       -       -      1.457   1.413      -         -     1.115       -    1.359     -     1.453
tstat   5.603    6.985       -       -      7.237   7.409      -         -     4.370       -    5.969     -     7.576
 b
 H8        -        -        -       -         -       -       -         -     0.938    1.437   0.955   1.338     -
tstat      -        -        -       -         -       -       -         -     4.542    7.281   3.078   2.854     -
 R̄2    0.435    0.392    0.251   0.245     0.453   0.408   0.152     0.135    0.422    0.259   0.377   0.097   0.330
                 Table 8: Biased Corrected Estimates: rxt+1 = a + α0 Fbt + β 0 CPt + t+1
                                                        (n)




                 Fb         n=2               n=3               n=4               n=5
                Hb1    -0.761   -        -1.232   -        -1.521   -        -1.653   -
                 αe    -0.785   -        -1.277   -        -1.576   -        -1.724   -
                bias   0.024    -         0.045   -        0.054    -         0.072   -

                Hb2      -        -      -0.028     -        -        -        -        -
                 α
                 e       -        -      -0.059     -        -        -        -        -
                bias     -        -       0.032     -        -        -        -        -

                Hb4    -0.291     -      -0.423     -      -0.436     -      -0.516     -
                 α
                 e     -0.307     -      -0.454     -      -0.472     -      -0.564     -
                bias   0.016      -       0.031     -      0.036      -       0.048     -

                Hb6    -0.151     -      -0.433     -      -0.668     -      -0.856     -
                 α
                 e     -0.168     -      -0.468     -      -0.710     -      -0.912     -
                bias   0.018      -       0.035     -      0.042      -       0.055     -

                Hb7    -0.128     -      -0.338     -      -0.534     -      -0.686     -
                 α
                 e     -0.145     -      -0.372     -      -0.573     -      -0.737     -
                bias   0.017      -       0.034     -      0.039      -       0.051     -

                Hb8    0.240      -      0.389      -      0.578      -      0.702      -
                 α
                 e     0.225      -      0.355      -      0.542      -      0.654      -
                bias   0.016      -      0.033      -      0.036      -      0.048      -

                Hb2      -        -       0.111     -      0.177      -       0.204     -
                  3
                 α
                 e       -        -       0.114     -      0.181      -       0.209     -
                bias     -        -      -0.004     -      -0.004     -      -0.006     -

                Hb2    -0.080     -        -        -        -        -        -        -
                  5
                 α
                 e     -0.078     -        -        -        -        -        -        -
                bias   -0.003     -        -        -        -        -        -        -

                Hb3    0.044      -       0.095     -      0.131      -       0.150     -
                  1
                 α
                 e     0.045      -       0.096     -      0.133      -       0.153     -
                bias   -0.001     -      -0.002     -      -0.002     -      -0.003     -

                CP     0.385    0.336    0.760    0.644    1.115    0.955    1.316    1.115
                 α
                 e     0.381    0.343    0.760    0.660    1.108    0.980    1.306    1.147
                bias   0.004    -0.007    --      -0.016   0.007    -0.026   0.010    -0.032

                 b
                H8       -       0.332     -       0.588     -       0.777     -       0.938
                 α
                 e       -       0.342     -       0.607     -       0.802     -       0.972
                bias     -      -0.010     -      -0.019     -      -0.025     -      -0.035



Note: The bias unadjusted estimates are reported in Columns 1 and 9 of Tables 4 to 7, respectively.
                                               bt = Fbt : Regression rx(n)
             Table 9: Bootstrap Estimates when H                              0b     0
                                                                       t+1 = α Ft + β CPt + t+1




                                                      Bootstrap                    Bootstrap under the Null
                b
                α           bias             95% CI               99% CI           95% CI           99% CI

                                                             n=2
    b1
    H         -0.761        0.012        ( -1.143 -0.343)   ( -1.071 -0.399)   ( -0.021 -0.015)   ( -0.021 -0.016)
    b
    H4        -0.291        -0.006       ( -0.554 -0.031)   ( -0.508 -0.073)   ( -0.003 0.003)    ( -0.002 0.003)
    b6
    H         -0.151        -0.002       ( -0.467 0.166)    ( -0.408 0.100)    ( -0.015 0.016)    ( -0.015 0.016)
    b7
    H         -0.128        -0.004       ( -0.285 0.027)    ( -0.258 -0.010)   ( -0.008 0.011)    ( -0.007 0.009)
    b8
    H          0.240         0.004        ( 0.054 0.425)     ( 0.088 0.404)    ( -0.011 0.010)    ( -0.010 0.008)
b52 -0.080
H              0.003   ( -0.187 0.040)   ( -0.170 0.015)    ( -0.010 -0.003)   ( -0.009 -0.003)
b13 0.044
H             -0.001   ( 0.010 0.076)     ( 0.016 0.071)    ( -0.000 0.000)    ( -0.000 0.000)
CP 0.385      -0.003   ( 0.262 0.516)     ( 0.276 0.490)     ( 0.003 0.009)     ( 0.003 0.008)
    R̄2        0.460                      ( 0.237 0.523)     ( 0.261 0.500)     ( 0.019 0.045)    ( 0.021 0.042)

                                                             n=3
    b1
    H         -1.232        0.027        ( -1.914 -0.506)   ( -1.797 -0.655)   ( -0.021 -0.015)   ( -0.021 -0.016)
    b2
    H         -0.028        -0.017       ( -0.574 0.505)    ( -0.486 0.426)    ( -0.001 0.005)    ( -0.000 0.005)
    b4
    H         -0.423        -0.004       ( -0.881 0.030)    ( -0.811 -0.050)   ( -0.003 0.003)    ( -0.003 0.003)
    b6
    H         -0.433        0.012        ( -0.969 0.093)    ( -0.870 0.024)    ( -0.014 0.015)    ( -0.013 0.014)
    b7
    H         -0.338        -0.002       ( -0.585 -0.094)   ( -0.549 -0.140)   ( -0.009 0.010)    ( -0.007 0.009)
    b8
    H          0.389        -0.002        ( 0.082 0.669)     ( 0.140 0.632)    ( -0.009 0.008)    ( -0.008 0.007)
b 2
H3 0.111      -0.003   ( -0.046 0.250)   ( -0.006 0.221)     ( 0.000 0.002)     ( 0.000 0.002)
b13 0.095
H             -0.002   ( 0.034 0.145)     ( 0.046 0.136)     ( 0.000 0.001)     ( 0.000 0.001)
   CP          0.760        -0.001        ( 0.546 0.980)     ( 0.582 0.935)     ( 0.003 0.009)    ( 0.003 0.008)
    R̄2        0.455                      ( 0.280 0.559)     ( 0.303 0.533)     ( 0.013 0.035)    ( 0.014 0.032)

                                                             n=4
   b1
   H          -1.521       0.047         ( -2.488 -0.480)   ( -2.323 -0.617)   ( -0.021 -0.015)   ( -0.021 -0.016)
   b
   H4         -0.436       0.001         ( -1.048 0.178)    ( -0.958 0.090)    ( -0.004 0.003)    ( -0.003 0.003)
   b6
   H          -0.668       -0.002        ( -1.410 0.131)    ( -1.297 0.002)    ( -0.014 0.015)    ( -0.013 0.014)
   b7
   H          -0.534       0.004         ( -0.942 -0.178)   ( -0.849 -0.230)   ( -0.009 0.010)    ( -0.007 0.008)
   b8
   H           0.578        0.004         ( 0.119 1.022)     ( 0.206 0.957)    ( -0.010 0.009)    ( -0.009 0.007)
   b32
   H           0.177       -0.001        ( -0.031 0.375)     ( 0.002 0.339)     ( 0.000 0.002)     ( 0.000 0.002)
   b13
   H           0.131       -0.003         ( 0.055 0.206)     ( 0.068 0.189)     ( 0.000 0.001)     ( 0.000 0.001)
   CP          1.115       -0.006         ( 0.820 1.401)     ( 0.861 1.348)     ( 0.003 0.009)     ( 0.003 0.009)
   R̄2         0.473                      ( 0.277 0.567)     ( 0.303 0.545)     ( 0.014 0.036)     ( 0.016 0.034)

                                                    n=5
   b1
   H          -1.653       0.026         ( -2.832 -0.429)   ( -2.648 -0.606)   ( -0.021 -0.015)   ( -0.021 -0.016)
   b4
   H          -0.516       -0.004        ( -1.306 0.321)    ( -1.190 0.169)    ( -0.003 0.003)    ( -0.003 0.003)
   b6
   H          -0.856       0.011         ( -1.870 0.190)    ( -1.666 0.012)    ( -0.014 0.014)    ( -0.013 0.014)
   b7
   H          -0.686       0.012         ( -1.182 -0.119)   ( -1.071 -0.244)   ( -0.007 0.010)    ( -0.006 0.009)
   b8
   H           0.702       -0.004         ( 0.139 1.286)     ( 0.224 1.160)    ( -0.009 0.008)    ( -0.009 0.007)
   b32
   H           0.204        0.000        ( -0.059 0.491)    ( -0.017 0.419)     ( 0.000 0.002)     ( 0.001 0.002)
   b13
   H           0.150       -0.001         ( 0.051 0.242)     ( 0.069 0.232)     ( 0.000 0.001)     ( 0.000 0.001)
   CP          1.316       -0.009         ( 0.896 1.723)     ( 0.945 1.663)     ( 0.003 0.009)     ( 0.003 0.008)
   R̄2         0.435                      ( 0.225 0.518)     ( 0.251 0.488)     ( 0.015 0.036)     ( 0.016 0.033)
                                                            (n)       bt + β 0 CPt + t+1
                             Table 10: Posterior Mean: rxt+1 = a + α0 G


                     Fb              n=2              n=3               n=4            n=5
                     b
                     H1          -         -      -         -       -         -    0.288   -
                     t.05        -         -      -         -       -         -    1.275   -
                     t.95        -         -      -         -       -         -    1.912   -

                     Hb2      -0.506       -   -0.801       -     -0.976      -    -1.159     -
                     t.05     -3.676       -   -3.239       -     -3.140      -    -3.099     -
                     t.95     -2.942       -   -2.622       -     -2.477      -    -2.397     -

                     Hb3      -0.456       -   -0.746       -     -0.959      -    -1.074     -
                     t.05     -5.335       -   -4.749       -     -4.616      -    -3.302     -
                     t.95     -4.050       -   -3.637       -     -3.482      -    -3.374     -

                     Hb6      0.139        -      -         -       -         -      -        -
                     t.05     1.819        -      -         -       -         -      -        -
                     t.95     1.712        -      -         -       -         -      -        -

                     Hb8      -0.139       -   -0.309       -     -0.473      -    -0.561     -
                     t.05     -1.872       -   -2.366       -     -2.622      -    -2.523     -
                     t.95     -1.332       -   -1.732       -     -1.994      -    -1.863     -

                     Hb42     -0.070       -   -0.183       -     -0.253      -    -0.348     -
                     t.05     -2.395       -   -2.982       -     -2.920      -    -3.713     -
                     t.95     -2.787       -   -3.319       -     -3.089      -    -3.681     -

                     Hb62     -0.086       -   -0.154       -     -0.235      -    -0.274     -
                     t.05     -5.427       -   -6.109       -     -6.109      -    -5.559     -
                     t.95     -6.629       -   -7.223       -     -6.838      -    -6.138     -

                     Hb72        -         -   0.087        -     0.146       -    0.178      -
                     t.05        -         -   2.408        -     2.866       -    2.852      -
                     t.95        -         -   2.404        -     3.006       -    2.914      -

                     Hb13     0.019        -   0.032        -     0.037       -      -        -
                     t.05     2.092        -   2.090        -     1.836       -      -        -
                     t.95     2.346        -   2.357        -     2.095       -      -        -

                     CP       0.452    0.416   0.845    0.790     1.236    1.155   1.456    1.365
                     t.05     7.200    6.334   7.285    6.300     7.568    6.348   7.012    5.900
                     t.95     7.566    6.919   7.641    6.770     7.926    6.760   7.331    6.262

                      b
                     H8          -     0.428      -     0.712       -      0.867     -      0.959
                     t.05        -     3.330      -     3.096       -      2.888     -      2.610
                     t.95        -     4.316      -     4.033       -      3.803     -      3.489

                      2
                    R̄0.95    0.471    0.399   0.469    0.403     0.489    0.415   0.448    0.377
                      2
                    R̄0.05    0.469    0.397   0.467    0.401     0.488    0.413   0.446    0.375



Note: Reported are the mean estimates when a predictive regression is run for each draw of Gt . Estimates when the
regressors are the posterior mean of the Gt are reported in Columns 5 and 10 of Tables 4 to 7, respectively.
                                                         Figure 1: Marginal R-squares for F1


           0.8


           0.7


           0.6


           0.5
R-square




           0.4


           0.3


           0.2


           0.1


            0
                 1   6   11   16    21   26   31   36    41   46   51   56   61    66   71   76   81    86   91   96 101 106 111 116 121 126 131
                     Output                      Emp.&Hrs               Orders & Housing              Money, Credit &                     Prices
                                                                                                      Finan
                 Notes: Chart shows the R-square from regressing the series number given on the x-axis onto the estimated factor named in the
                 heading. See the appendix for a description of the numbered series. The factors are estimated using data from 1964:1-2007:12.
                                                                    Figure 2: Marginal R-squares for F2

            0.7




            0.6




            0.5




            0.4
R-squares




            0.3




            0.2




            0.1




             0
                  1   5   9    13   17   21   25   29    33   37   41   45   49   53   57   61   65   69   73   77   81   85   89   93   97 101 105 109 113 117 121 125 129

                      Output                            Emp.&Hrs                  Orders & Housing                   Money, Credit & Finan                 Prices


                  Notes: See Figure 1.
                                                        Figure 3: Marginal R-squares for F3


           0.8



           0.7


           0.6



           0.5
R-square




           0.4


           0.3



           0.2


           0.1



            0
                 1   6   11   16    21   26   31   36   41   46   51    56   61   66      71   76   81   86   91   96 101 106 111 116 121 126 131

                     Output                    Emp.&Hrs                Orders & Housing             Money, Credit & Finan          Prices

                 Notes: See Figure 1.
                                                          Figure 4: Marginal R-squares for F4


            0.25




             0.2




            0.15
R-squares




             0.1




            0.05




              0
                   1    6   11   16   21   26   31   36   41   46   51 56 61 66 71       76   81 86 91 96 101 106 111 116 121 126 131
                       Output                   Emp.&Hrs              Orders & Housing        Money, Credit & Finan     Prices

                   Notes: See Figure 1.
                                                         Figure 5: Marginal R-squares for F5


            0.3




           0.25




            0.2
R-square




           0.15




            0.1




           0.05




             0
                  1   6   11   16   21   26   31    36   41   46   51    56 61 66 71       76   81 86 91 96 101 106 111 116 121 126 131
                      Output                       Emp.&Hrs             Orders & Housing          Money, Credit &          Prices
                                                                                                  Finan
                  Notes: See Figure 1.
                                                         Figure 6: Marginal R-squares for F6


           0.25




            0.2




           0.15
R-square




            0.1




           0.05




             0
                  1   6   11   16   21   26   31    36   41   46   51   56   61   66   71   76   81   86   91   96 101 106 111 116 121 126 131
                      Output                       Emp.&Hrs             Orders & Housing          Money, Credit &                Prices
                                                                                                  Finan
                  Notes: See Figure 1.
                                                         Figure 7: Marginal R-squares for F7


            0.5


           0.45


            0.4


           0.35


            0.3
R-square




           0.25


            0.2


           0.15


            0.1


           0.05


             0
                  1   6   11   16   21   26   31    36   41   46   51   56   61   66   71   76   81   86   91   96 101 106 111 116 121 126 131
                      Output                       Emp.&Hrs             Orders & Housing          Money, Credit &                Prices
                                                                                                  Finan
                  Notes: See Figure 1.
                                                                    Figure 8: Marginal R-squares for F8

            0.6




            0.5




            0.4
R-squares




            0.3




            0.2




            0.1




             0
                  1     5    9   13   17   21   25   29   33   37   41   45   49    53   57   61   65   69   73   77    81   85   89   93   97 101 105 109 113 117 121 125 129

                       Output                         Emp.&Hrs                     Orders & Housing                    Money, Credit & Finan                 Prices


                      Notes: See Figure 1.
                                                       Figure 9:




                                                            Rbar2, With CP
                0.6


               0.55


                0.5
                                                                                                               Gin
                                                                                                               Fin
               0.45                                                                 Fout

                                                                                                               F8
                0.4                                                     Gout
                             G8

               0.35

                                                                                                               CP
                0.3


               0.25
                                                                                                             Fin
                0.2                                                                                          Gin
                                                                                                             Fout
                                                                                                             Gout
               0.15                                                                                          F8
                                                                                                             G8
                                                                                                             CP
                0.1
                   70         75          80          85           90          95          100        105           110




Fin and Gin are the R̄2 from rolling estimation of (8), with predictors selected by the in-sample BIC. Fout and Gout use
predictors selected by the out-of-sample BIC. F8 and G8 use a linear combination of eight factors as predictors, where the
weights are based on (10).
                                                      Figure 10:




                                                           Rbar2, Without CP
                0.4



                                                       Fin
               0.35




                0.3

                                                                                                               F8

                                                                                                               Fout
               0.25




                0.2                                                                                            Gin
                                                                                                               Gout



               0.15                                                                                            G8


                                                                                                             Fin
                                                                                                             Gin
                0.1                                                                                          Fout
                                                                                                             Gout
                                                                                                             F8
                                                                                                             G8
               0.05
                   70         75          80          85           90          95         100         105           110




Fin and Gin are the R̄2 from rolling estimation of (8), with predictors selected by the in-sample BIC. Fout and Gout use
predictors selected by the out-of-sample BIC. F8 and G8 use a linear combination of eight factors as predictors, where the
weights are based on (10).
                                                            Figure 11:




                                                              F8 and IP Growth
                           3                                                                     F8
                                                                                                 IP growth

                               Correlation:
                           2
                               −0.731022


                           1
12 Month Moving Average




                           0



                          −1



                          −2



                          −3



                          −4
                                    1970      1975   1980        1985       1990   1995   2000    2005
                                                                     Year
                                                            Figure 12:




                                                              G8 and IP Growth

                               Correlation:                                                      G8
                           2                                                                     IP growth
                               −0.706927


                           1
12 Month Moving Average




                           0




                          −1




                          −2




                          −3




                          −4
                                    1970      1975   1980        1985       1990   1995   2000    2005
                                                                     Year
                                                                 Figure 13:




                                              Return Risk Premia Including F and IP Growth − 5 yr bond

                                                                                                 RiskPremium With F
                                                                                                 IP Growth
                               Correlation:
                           2
                               −0.223648


                           1
12 Month Moving Average




                           0



                          −1



                          −2



                          −3



                          −4
                                    1970        1975      1980        1985       1990   1995      2000       2005
                                                                          Year




                                           Return Risk Premia Excluding F and IP Growth − 5 yr bond
                           3                                                                   RiskPremium Without F
                                                                                               IP Growth

                               Correlation:
                           2
                               −0.0147215


                           1
12 Month Moving Average




                           0



                          −1



                          −2



                          −3



                          −4
                                    1970        1975      1980        1985       1990   1995      2000       2005
                                                                          Year
                                                              Figure 14:




                                           Return Risk Premia Including G and IP Growth − 5 yr bond

                                                                                              RiskPremium With G
                                                                                              IP Growth
                               Correlation:
                           2
                               −0.218217


                           1
12 Month Moving Average




                           0




                          −1




                          −2




                          −3




                          −4
                                    1970      1975     1980        1985       1990   1995      2000       2005
                                                                       Year




                                           Return Risk Premia Excluding G and IP Growth − 5 yr bond
                           3                                                                RiskPremium Without G
                                                                                            IP Growth

                               Correlation:
                           2
                               −0.0147215


                           1
12 Month Moving Average




                           0



                          −1



                          −2



                          −3



                          −4
                                    1970      1975     1980        1985       1990   1995      2000       2005
                                                                       Year
                                                          Figure 15:




                                        Yield Risk Premium with and without factors − 5 yr bond
                           3.5
                                                                                 RiskPremium including F
                                                                                 RiskPremium including G
                            3                                                    RiskPremium excluding Factors


                           2.5


                            2
12 Month Moving Average




                           1.5


                            1


                           0.5                                                                                F

                            0                                                                                 G


                          −0.5


                           −1


                          −1.5
                                                                                                                  no factor


                                 1970    1975      1980        1985       1990   1995       2000       2005
                                                                   Year
                                                                  Figure 16:




                                                Yield Risk Premia Including and Excluding F − 5 yr bond
                           3.5
                                                                                                RiskPremium With F
                                                                                                RiskPremium Without F
                            3


                           2.5

                                 Correlation:
                            2
                                 0.846505
12 Month Moving Average




                           1.5


                            1


                           0.5


                            0                                                                                           F


                          −0.5


                           −1


                          −1.5
                                                                                                                        no factor


                                      1970        1975     1980        1985       1990   1995      2000       2005
                                                                           Year
                                                                  Figure 17:




                                                Yield Risk Premia Including and Excluding G − 5 yr bond

                                                                                                RiskPremium With G
                            3                                                                   RiskPremium Without G


                           2.5

                                 Correlation:
                            2
                                 0.848091
12 Month Moving Average




                           1.5


                            1


                           0.5


                            0                                                                                           G

                          −0.5


                           −1


                          −1.5
                                                                                                                        no factor


                                      1970        1975     1980        1985       1990   1995      2000       2005
                                                                           Year
1      Data Appendix
This appendix lists the short name of each series, its mnemonic (the series label used in the source data-
base), the transformation applied to the series, and a brief data description. All series are from the Global
Insights Basic Economics Database, unless the source is listed (in parentheses) as TCB (The Conference
Board’s Indicators Database) or AC (author’s calculation based on Global Insights or TCB data). In the
transformation column, ln denotes logarithm, ∆ ln and ∆2 ln denote the first and second diﬀerence of the
logarithm, lv denotes the level of the series, and ∆ lv denotes the first diﬀerence of the series. The data are
available from 1959:01-1997:12.

Group 1: Output and Income

 No.    Gp   Short Name            Mnemonic     Tran    Descripton
 1      1    PI                    ypr          ∆ln     Personal Income (AR, Bil. Chain 2000 $) (TCB)
 6      1    IP: total             ips10        ∆ln     Industrial Production Index - Total Index
 7      1    IP: products          ips11        ∆ln     Industrial Production Index - Products, Total
 8      1    IP: final prod        ips299       ∆ln     Industrial Production Index - Final Products
 9      1    IP: cons gds          ips12        ∆ln     Industrial Production Index - Consumer Goods
 10     1    IP: cons dble         ips13        ∆ln     Industrial Production Index - Durable Consumer Goods
 11     1    IP: cons nondble      ips18        ∆ln     Industrial Production Index - Nondurable Consumer Goods
 12     1    IP: bus eqpt          ips25        ∆ln     Industrial Production Index - Business Equipment
 13     1    IP: matls             ips32        ∆ln     Industrial Production Index - Materials
 14     1    IP: dble matls        ips34        ∆ln     Industrial Production Index - Durable Goods Materials
 15     1    IP: nondble matls     ips38        ∆ln     Industrial Production Index - Nondurable Goods Materials
 16     1    IP: mfg               ips43        ∆ln     Industrial Production Index - Manufacturing (Sic)
 17     1    IP: res util          ips307       ∆ln     Industrial Production Index - Residential Utilities
 18     1    IP: fuels             ips306       ∆ln     Industrial Production Index - Fuels
 19     1    NAPM prodn            pmp          lv      Napm Production Index (Percent)
 20     1    Cap util              utl11        ∆lv     Capacity Utilization (SIC-Mfg) (TCB)
Group 2: Labor Market

 No.    Gp   Short Name          Mnemonic    Tran    Descripton
 21     2    Help wanted indx    lhel        ∆lv     Index Of Help-Wanted Advertising In Newspapers (1967=100;Sa)
 22     2    Help wanted/emp     lhelx       ∆lv     Employment: Ratio; Help-Wanted Ads:No. Unemployed Clf
 23     2    Emp CPS total       lhem        ∆ln     Civilian Labor Force: Employed, Total (Thous.,Sa)
 24     2    Emp CPS nonag       lhnag       ∆ln     Civilian Labor Force: Employed, Nonagric.Industries (Thous.,Sa)
 25     2    U: all              lhur        ∆lv     Unemployment Rate: All Workers, 16 Years &
 26     2    U: mean duration    lhu680      ∆lv     Unemploy.By Duration: Average(Mean)Duration In Weeks (Sa)
 27     2    U < 5 wks           lhu5        ∆ln     Unemploy.By Duration: Persons Unempl.Less Than 5 Wks (Thous.,Sa)
 28     2    U 5-14 wks          lhu14       ∆ln     Unemploy.By Duration: Persons Unempl.5 To 14 Wks (Thous.,Sa)
 29     2    U 15+ wks           lhu15       ∆ln     Unemploy.By Duration: Persons Unempl.15 Wks + (Thous.,Sa)
 30     2    U 15-26 wks         lhu26       ∆ln     Unemploy.By Duration: Persons Unempl.15 To 26 Wks (Thous.,Sa)
 31     2    U 27+ wks           lhu27       ∆ln     Unemploy.By Duration: Persons Unempl.27 Wks + (Thous,Sa)
 32     2    UI claims           claimuii    ∆ln     Average Weekly Initial Claims, Unemploy. Insurance (Thous.) (TCB)
 33     2    Emp: total          ces002      ∆ln     Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls: Total Private
 34     2    Emp: gds prod       ces003      ∆ln     Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Goods-Producing
 35     2    Emp: mining         ces006      ∆ln     Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Mining
 36     2    Emp: const          ces011      ∆ln     Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Construction
 37     2    Emp: mfg            ces015      ∆ln     Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Manufacturing
 38     2    Emp: dble gds       ces017      ∆ln     Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Durable Goods

 No.    Gp   Short Name         Mnemonic    Tran    Descripton
 39     2    Emp: nondbles      ces033      ∆ln     Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Nondurable Goods
 40     2    Emp: services      ces046      ∆ln     Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Service-Providing
 41     2    Emp: TTU           ces048      ∆ln     Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Trade, Transportation, And Utilities
 42     2    Emp: wholesale     ces049      ∆ln     Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Wholesale Trade.
 43     2    Emp: retail        ces053      ∆ln     Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Retail Trade
 44     2    Emp: FIRE          ces088      ∆ln     Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Financial Activities
 45     2    Emp: Govt          ces140      ∆ln     Employees On Nonfarm Payrolls - Government
 (46)   2    Emp-hrs nonag      a0m048      ∆ln     Employee Hours In Nonag. Establishments (AR, Bil. Hours) (TCB)
 47     2    Avg hrs            ces151      lv      Avg Weekly Hrs of Prod or Nonsup Workers On Private Nonfarm Payrolls - Goods-Producing
 48     2    Overtime: mfg      ces155      ∆lv     Avg Weekly Hrs of Prod or Nonsup Workers On Private Nonfarm Payrolls - Mfg Overtime Hours
 49     2    Avg hrs: mfg       aom001      lv      Average Weekly Hours, Mfg. (Hours) (TCB)
 50     2    NAPM empl          pmemp       lv      Napm Employment Index (Percent)
 129    2    AHE: goods         ces275      ∆2 ln   Avg Hourly Earnings of Prod or Nonsup Workers On Private Nonfarm Payrolls - Goods-Producing
 130    2    AHE: const         ces277      ∆2 ln   Avg Hourly Earnings of Prod or Nonsup Workers On Private Nonfarm Payrolls - Construction
 131    2    AHE: mfg           ces278      ∆2 ln   Avg Hourly Earnings of Prod or Nonsup Workers On Private Nonfarm Payrolls - Manufacturing
Group 3: Housing

 No.   Gp    Short Name        Mnemonic    Tran   Descripton
 51    3     Starts: nonfarm   hsfr        ln     Housing Starts:Nonfarm(1947-58);Total Farm&Nonfarm(1959-)(Thous.,Saar)
 52    3     Starts: NE        hsne        ln     Housing Starts:Northeast (Thous.U.)S.A.
 53    3     Starts: MW        hsmw        ln     Housing Starts:Midwest(Thous.U.)S.A.
 54    3     Starts: South     hssou       ln     Housing Starts:South (Thous.U.)S.A.
 55    3     Starts: West      hswst       ln     Housing Starts:West (Thous.U.)S.A.
 56    3     BP: total         hsbr        ln     Housing Authorized: Total New Priv Housing Units (Thous.,Saar)
 57    3     BP: NE            hsbne*      ln     Houses Authorized By Build. Permits:Northeast(Thou.U.)S.A
 58    3     BP: MW            hsbmw*      ln     Houses Authorized By Build. Permits:Midwest(Thou.U.)S.A.
 59    3     BP: South         hsbsou*     ln     Houses Authorized By Build. Permits:South(Thou.U.)S.A.
 60    3     BP: West          hsbwst*     ln     Houses Authorized By Build. Permits:West(Thou.U.)S.A.

Group 4: Consumption, Orders and Inventories

 61    4    PMI                pmi        lv    Purchasing Managers’ Index (Sa)
 62    4    NAPM new ordrs     pmno       lv    Napm New Orders Index (Percent)
 63    4    NAPM vendor del    pmdel      lv    Napm Vendor Deliveries Index (Percent)
 64    4    NAPM Invent        pmnv       lv    Napm Inventories Index (Percent)
 65    4    Orders: cons gds   a1m008     ∆ln   Mfrs’ New Orders, Consumer Goods And Materials (Mil. $) (TCB)
 66    4    Orders: dble gds   a0m007     ∆ln   Mfrs’ New Orders, Durable Goods Industries (Bil. Chain 2000 $ ) (TCB)
 67    4    Orders: cap gds    a0m027     ∆ln   Mfrs’ New Orders, Nondefense Capital Goods (Mil. Chain 1982 $) (TCB)
 68    4    Unf orders: dble   a1m092     ∆ln   Mfrs’ Unfilled Orders, Durable Goods Indus. (Bil. Chain 2000 $) (TCB)
 69    4    M&T invent         a0m070     ∆ln   Manufacturing And Trade Inventories (Bil. Chain 2000 $) (TCB)
 70    4    M&T invent/sales   a0m077     ∆lv   Ratio, Mfg. And Trade Inventories To Sales (Based On Chain 2000 $) (TCB)
 3     4    Consumption        cons-r     ∆ln   Real Personal Consumption Expenditures (AC) (Bill $) pi031 / gmdc
 4     4    M&T sales          mtq        ∆ln   Manufacturing And Trade Sales (Mil. Chain 1996 $) (TCB)
 5     4    Retail sales       a0m059     ∆ln   Sales Of Retail Stores (Mil. Chain 2000 $) (TCB)
 132   4    Consumer expect    hhsntn     ∆lv   U. Of Mich. Index Of Consumer Expectations(Bcd-83)
Group 5: Money and Credit

 No.   Gp    Short Name         Mnemonic       Tran    Descripton
 71    5     M1                 fm1            ∆2 ln   Money Stock: M1(Curr,Trav.Cks,Dem Dep,Other Ck’able Dep)(Bil$,Sa)
 72    5     M2                 fm2            ∆2 ln   Money Stock:M2(M1+O’nite Rps,Euro$,G/P&B/D & Mmmfs&Sav& Sm Time Dep(Bil$,Sa)
 73    5     Currency           fmscu          ∆2 ln   Money Stock: Currency held by the public (Bil$,Sa)
 74    5     M2 (real)          fm2-r          ∆ln     Money Supply: Real M2, fm2 / gmdc (AC)
 75    5     MB                 fmfba          ∆2 ln   Monetary Base, Adj For Reserve Requirement Changes(Mil$,Sa)
 76    5     Reserves tot       fmrra          ∆2 ln   Depository Inst Reserves:Total, Adj For Reserve Req Chgs(Mil$,Sa)
 77    5     Reserves nonbor    fmrnba         ∆2 ln   Depository Inst Reserves:Nonborrowed,Adj Res Req Chgs(Mil$,Sa)
 78    5     C&I loans          fclnbw         ∆2 ln   Commercial & Industrial Loans Outstanding + NonFin Comm. Paper (Mil$, SA) (Bci)
 79    5     C&I loans          fclbmc         lv      Wkly Rp Lg Com’l Banks:Net Change Com’l & Indus Loans(Bil$,Saar)
 80    5     Cons credit        ccinrv         ∆2 ln   Consumer Credit Outstanding - Nonrevolving(G19)
 81    5     Inst cred/PI       ccipy          ∆lv     Ratio, Consumer Installment Credit To Personal Income (Pct.) (TCB)

Group 6: Bond and Exchange rates

 86    6    Fed Funds          fyﬀ       ∆lv     Interest Rate: Federal Funds (Eﬀective) (% Per Annum,Nsa)
 87    6    Comm paper         cp90      ∆lv     Commercial Paper Rate
 88    6    3 mo T-bill        fygm3     ∆lv     Interest Rate: U.S.Treasury Bills,Sec Mkt,3-Mo.(% Per Ann,Nsa)
 89    6    6 mo T-bill        fygm6     ∆lv     Interest Rate: U.S.Treasury Bills,Sec Mkt,6-Mo.(% Per Ann,Nsa)
 90    6    1 yr T-bond        fygt1     ∆lv     Interest Rate: U.S.Treasury Const Maturities,1-Yr.(% Per Ann,Nsa)
 91    6    5 yr T-bond        fygt5     ∆lv     Interest Rate: U.S.Treasury Const Maturities,5-Yr.(% Per Ann,Nsa)
 92    6    10 yr T-bond       fygt10    ∆lv     Interest Rate: U.S.Treasury Const Maturities,10-Yr.(% Per Ann,Nsa)
 93    6    Aaa bond           fyaaac    ∆lv     Bond Yield: Moody’s Aaa Corporate (% Per Annum)
 94    6    Baa bond           fybaac    ∆lv     Bond Yield: Moody’s Baa Corporate (% Per Annum)
 95    6    CP-FF spread       scp90F    lv      cp90-fyﬀ (AC)
 96    6    3 mo-FF spread     sfygm3    lv      fygm3-fyﬀ (AC)
 97    6    6 mo-FF spread     sfygm6    lv      fygm6-fyﬀ (AC)
 98    6    1 yr-FF spread     sfygt1    lv      fygt1-fyﬀ (AC)
 99    6    5 yr-FF spread     sfygt5    lv      fygt5-fyﬀ (AC)
 100   6    10 yr-FF spread    sfygt10   lv      fygt10-fyﬀ (AC)
 101   6    Aaa-FF spread      sfyaaac   lv      fyaaac-fyﬀ (AC)
 102   6    Baa-FF spread      sfybaac   lv      fybaac-fyﬀ (AC)
 103   6    Ex rate: avg       exrus     ∆ln     United States;Eﬀective Exchange Rate(Merm)(Index No.)
 104   6    Ex rate: Switz     exrsw     ∆ln     Foreign Exchange Rate: Switzerland (Swiss Franc Per U.S.$)
 105   6    Ex rate: Japan     exrjan    ∆ln     Foreign Exchange Rate: Japan (Yen Per U.S.$)
 106   6    Ex rate: UK        exruk     ∆ln     Foreign Exchange Rate: United Kingdom (Cents Per Pound)
 107   6    EX rate: Canada    exrcan    ∆ln     Foreign Exchange Rate: Canada (Canadian $ Per U.S.$)
Group 7: Prices

 108   7    PPI: fin gds                pwfsa    ∆2 ln   Producer Price Index: Finished Goods (82=100,Sa)
 109   7    PPI: cons gds               pwfcsa   ∆2 ln   Producer Price Index: Finished Consumer Goods (82=100,Sa)
 110   7    PPI: int materials          pwimsa   ∆2 ln   Producer Price Index:I ntermed Mat.Supplies & Components(82=100,Sa)
 111   7    PPI: crude materials        pwcmsa   ∆2 ln   Producer Price Index: Crude Materials (82=100,Sa)
 112   7    Spot market price           psccom   ∆2 ln   Spot market price index: bls & crb: all commodities(1967=100)
 113   7    PPI: nonferrous materials   pw102    ∆2 ln   Producer Price Index: Nonferrous Materials (1982=100, Nsa)
 114   7    NAPM com price              pmcp     lv      Napm Commodity Prices Index (Percent)
 115   7    CPI-U: all                  punew    ∆2 ln   Cpi-U: All Items (82-84=100,Sa)
 116   7    CPI-U: apparel              pu83     ∆2 ln   Cpi-U: Apparel & Upkeep (82-84=100,Sa)
 117   7    CPI-U: transp               pu84     ∆2 ln   Cpi-U: Transportation (82-84=100,Sa)
 118   7    CPI-U: medical              pu85     ∆2 ln   Cpi-U: Medical Care (82-84=100,Sa)
 119   7    CPI-U: comm.                puc      ∆2 ln   Cpi-U: Commodities (82-84=100,Sa)
 120   7    CPI-U: dbles                pucd     ∆2 ln   Cpi-U: Durables (82-84=100,Sa)
 121   7    CPI-U: services             pus      ∆2 ln   Cpi-U: Services (82-84=100,Sa)
 122   7    CPI-U: ex food              puxf     ∆2 ln   Cpi-U: All Items Less Food (82-84=100,Sa)
 123   7    CPI-U: ex shelter           puxhs    ∆2 ln   Cpi-U: All Items Less Shelter (82-84=100,Sa)
 124   7    CPI-U: ex med               puxm     ∆2 ln   Cpi-U: All Items Less Midical Care (82-84=100,Sa)
 125   7    PCE defl                    gmdc     ∆2 ln   Pce, Impl Pr Defl:Pce (2000=100) (AC) (BEA)
 126   7    PCE defl: dlbes             gmdcd    ∆2 ln   Pce, Impl Pr Defl:Pce; Durables (2000=100) (AC) (BEA)
 127   7    PCE defl: nondble           gmdcn    ∆2 ln   Pce, Impl Pr Defl:Pce; Nondurables (2000=100) (AC) (BEA)
 128   7    PCE defl: service           gmdcs    ∆2 ln   Pce, Impl Pr Defl:Pce; Services (2000=100) (AC) (BEA)

Group 8: Stock Market

 No.   Gp    Short Name       Mnemonic    Tran   Descripton
 82    8     S&P 500          fspcom      ∆ln    S&P’s Common Stock Price Index: Composite (1941-43=10)
 83    8     S&P: indust      fspin       ∆ln    S&P’s Common Stock Price Index: & Industrials (1941-43=10)
 84    8     S&P div yield    fsdxp       ∆lv    S&P’s Composite Common Stock: Dividend Yield (% Per Annum)
 85    8     S&P PE ratio     fspxe       ∆ln    S&P’s Composite Common Stock: &Price-Earnings Ratio (%,Nsa)
