                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         ESTIMATION OF DSGE MODELS WHEN THE DATA ARE PERSISTENT

                                       Yuriy Gorodnichenko
                                            Serena Ng

                                       Working Paper 15187
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15187


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2009




This paper was presented at Brown University, the University of Michigan, the 2007 NBER Summer
Institute, Princeton University, UC Berkeley, and the New York Area Macro Conference. We thank
Marc Giannone,Tim Cogley, Anna Mikusheva, and two anonymous referees for many helpful comments.
The second author acknowledges financial support from the National Science Foundation (SES 0549978).
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Yuriy Gorodnichenko and Serena Ng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Estimation of DSGE Models When the Data are Persistent
Yuriy Gorodnichenko and Serena Ng
NBER Working Paper No. 15187
July 2009
JEL No. E3,F4,O4

                                             ABSTRACT

Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE) models are often solved and estimated under specific
assumptions as to whether the exogenous variables are difference or trend stationary. However, even
mild departures of the data generating process from these assumptions can severely bias the estimates
of the model parameters. This paper proposes new estimators that do not require researchers to take
a stand on whether shocks have permanent or transitory effects. These procedures have two key features.
First, the same filter is applied to both the data and the model variables. Second, the filtered variables
are stationary when evaluated at the true parameter vector. The estimators are approximately normally
distributed not only when the shocks are mildly persistent, but also when they have near or exact
unit roots. Simulations show that these robust estimators perform well especially when the shocks
are highly persistent yet stationary. In such cases, linear detrending and first differencing are shown
to yield biased or imprecise estimates.


Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu

Serena Ng
Department of Economics
Columbia University
440 W. 118 St.
International Affairs Building, MC 3308
New York
NY 10027
serena.ng@columbia.edu
1       Introduction

Dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models are now accepted as the primary framework
for macroeconomic analysis. Until recently, counterfactual experiments were conducted by assigning
the parameters of the models with values that are loosely calibrated to the data. More recently, serious
efforts have been made to estimate the model parameters using classical and Bayesian methods. This
permits researchers to assess how well the models fit the data both in and out of samples. Formal
estimation also permits errors arising from sampling or model uncertainty to be explicitly accounted
for in counterfactual policy simulations. Arguably, DSGE models are now taken more seriously as a
tool for policy analysis because of such serious econometric investigations.
        Any attempt to estimate DSGE models must confront the fact that macroeconomic data are highly
persistent. This fact often requires researchers to take a stand on the specification of the trends in
DSGE models. Specifically, to take the model to the data, a researcher needs to use sample analogs
of the deviations from steady states and, in doing so, must decide how to detrend the variables in
the model and in the data. Table 1 is a non-exhaustive listing of how trends are treated in some
notable papers.1 Some studies assume stochastic trends for the model and use first differenced data in
estimation. A number of studies specify deterministic trends for the model and use linearly detrended
data in estimation. Studies that apply the Hodrick-Prescott (HP) filter to the data differ in what
trends are specified for the model. Some assume simple linear trends, while others assume unit root
processes. Table 1 clearly demonstrates that a variety of trends have been specified for the model and
a variety of detrending methods have been used in estimation.
        The problem for researchers is that it is not easy to ascertain whether highly persistent data are
trend stationary or difference stationary in finite samples. While many have studied the implications
for estimation and inference of inappropriate detrending in linear models,2 much less is known about
the effects of detrending in estimation of non-linear models. From simulation evidence of Doorn
(2006) for an inventory model, it seems that HP filtering can significantly bias the estimated dynamic
parameters. As well, while the local-to-unit framework is available to help researchers understand the
properties of the estimated autoregressive root when the data are strongly persistent, it is unclear
to what extent the framework can be used in non-linear estimation even in the single equation case.
What makes estimation of DSGE models distinct is that they consist of a system of equations and
    1
     As of June 2009, these papers were cited almost 2500 times at the Web of Science (former Social Science Citation
Index) and almost 8000 times at Google Scholar.
   2
     For example, Nelson and Kang (1981) showed that linear detrending a unit root process can generate spurious cycles.
Cogley and Nason (1995a) found that improper filtering can alter the persistence and the volatility of the series while
spurious correlations in the filtered data was documented in Harvey and Jaeger (1993). Singleton (1988) and Christiano
and den Haan (1996) discussed how inappropriate filtering can affect estimation and inference in linear models.



                                                           1
misspecification in one equation can affect estimates in other equations.
   This paper develops robust estimation procedures that do not require researchers to take a stand on
whether shocks in the model have an exact or a near unit root, and yet obtain consistent estimates of
the model parameters. All robust procedures have two characteristics. First, the same transformation
(filter) is applied to both the data and the model variables. Second, the filtered variables are stationary
when evaluated at the true parameter vector. The estimators have the classical properties of being
√
  T consistent and asymptotically normal for all values of the largest autoregressive root.
   Our point of departure is that the not too uncommon practice of applying different filters to the
model variables and the data can have undesirable consequences. Indeed, as we will show, estimates
of parameters governing the propagation and amplification mechanisms in the model can be severely
distorted when the trend specified for the model is not consistent with the one applied to the data.
Accordingly, we insist on estimators that apply the same transformation to both the model and the
data. This, however, may still lead to biased estimates if the filter does not remove the trends actually
present in the data. Accordingly, we need to work with filters that can remove both deterministic and
stochastic trends without the researcher taking a stand before solving and estimating the model. The
idea of applying robust filters to both the model and the data is not new. Christiano and den Haan
(1996) as well as Burnside (1998) applied the HP filter to both the model and the data, but they
had to resort to simulation estimation to get around the large state vector that the HP filter induces.
The filters we consider have the same desirable feature as the HP in that they adapt to the trends
in the data. However, they can be implemented with simple modifications to the state space system
while keeping the dimension of the state vector small. Specifically, we consider four transformations:
(i) quasi-differencing, (ii) unconstrained first differencing, (iii) hybrid differencing, and (iv) the HP
filter. All filters can be used in GMM estimation but not every method can be implemented in the
likelihood framework. Importantly, one can use standard asymptotic inference as the finite sample
distribution of the estimators are well approximated by the normal distribution not only when the
large autoregressive root is far from one, but also when it is near or on the unit circle. The procedures
can be applied to DSGE models whose solution can be shown to exist and is unique, and can be solved
using variations of the method discussed in Blanchard and Kahn (1980) and Sims (2002).
   As discussed in Canova and Sala (2009), DSGE models are susceptible to identification failure, in
which case, consistent estimation of parameters is not possible irrespective of the treatment of trends.
In view of this consideration and to fix ideas, we use a basic stochastic growth model whose properties
are well understood. The model, which will be presented in Section 2, will also be used to perform
baseline simulation experiments. The new estimators are presented in Sections 3 and 4. Sections 5
and 6 use simulations to show that the robust approaches perform well especially when the shocks are


                                                    2
highly persistent yet stationary. These results also hold up in larger models though some filters are
more sensitive to the number of shocks than others. In contrast, linear detrending and first differencing
often lead to severely biased estimates. Implementation issues and related work in the literature are
discussed in Section 7. Section 8 concludes.

2   Preliminaries

Consider the one sector stochastic growth model. The problem facing the central planner is:
                                                     ∞
                                                     X
                                            max Et         β t ϑ(Ct , Lt )
                                                     t=0

subject to

                      ϑ(Ct , Lt ) = ln Ct − θLt
                                              α
                              Yt = Ct + It = Kt−1 (Zt Lt )(1−α)
                             Kt = (1 − δ)Kt−1 + It
                              Zt = exp(ḡt) exp(uzt ),        uzt = ρz uzt−1 + ezt ,   |ρz | ≤ 1

where Yt is output, Ct is consumption, Kt is capital, Lt is labor input, Zt is the level of technology,
ezt is an innovation in technology. Note that we allow ρz to be on the unit circle. The first order
conditions are:
                                                            (1−α)
                                               α
                                θCt = (1 − α)Kt−1  Zt    L−α
                                                          t
                                                                                  
                                            Ct   
                                                      α−1           (1−α)
                                  1 = Et β         αKt (Zt+1 Lt+1 )       + (1 − δ)
                                           Ct+1
                   α
                  Kt−1 (Zt Lt )(1−α) = Ct + Kt − (1 − δ)Kt−1 .

    Let lower case letters denote the natural logarithm of the variables, e.g. ct = log Ct . Let c∗t be such
that ct −c∗t is stationary; kt∗ and zt∗ are similarly defined. Given our assumptions, labor Lt is stationary
for all ρz ≤ 1 and thus lt∗ = 0. Collect the observed model variables into the vector mt = (ct , kt , lt )
and denote the trend component of the model variables by m∗t = (c∗t , kt∗ , lt∗ ). In general, how we define
m∗t , how we linearize the model, and how we estimate the parameters will depend on whether ρz < 1
or ρz = 1.
  When ρz < 1, we have c∗t = kt∗ = ḡt, and thus m∗t = (ḡt, ḡt, 0). The detrended variables in the
model are m
          b t = (b
                 ct , b    lt ) = (ct − ḡt, kt − ḡt, lt ) = mt − m∗ . The log-linearized model in terms of m
                      kt , b                                        t                                        b t is


              ct+1                    ct               ct−1
                                                                       
    0 0 0     b         −1 0   −α     b       0 α 0    b         0                1−α
Et 1 0 A0  b
              kt+1  =  1 A0   0  b                kt−1  + −A0  Et uzt+1 +  0  uzt
                                      kt  + 0 0 0 b
    0 0 0     lt+1
              b         A1 A2 α − 1   lt
                                      b       0 A4 0   lt−1
                                                       b         0                α−1

                                                        3
where we have suppressed the constants terms and
                                    1−δ
                     A∗0 = 1 − β           , A0 = (α − 1)A∗0 ,      A4 = −α − (1 − δ)A3 ,
                                    1 + ḡ
                                 αβ
                     A3 =                 , A2 = (1 + ḡ)A3 ,         1 = A1 + A2 − (1 − δ)A3 .
                              (1 + ḡ)A∗0

        Solving the system of expectation equations yields the reduced form

                                              m      b t−1 + Buzt
                                              b t = Πm                                                              (1)
                                               uzt = ρz uzt−1 + ezt .

We assume that all roots of Π are strictly less than one, so that non-stationarity can only arise because
ρz is on the unit circle. Note that when ρz = 1, the model needs to be linearized and solved with
m∗t = (ut + ḡt, ut + ḡt, 0) = (zt , zt , 0). Despite the fact that the permanent shock uzt is now part
of m∗t , (1) is still the reduced form representation for levels of the linearly detrended variables. In
other words, the reduced form representation for m
                                                 b t is continuous in ρz even though how we arrive
at this representation will depend on ρz . Hence, without loss of generality, we will always use the
representation (1) in subsequent discussions for all values of ρz .
        Note that by definition, m
                                 b t is the linearly detrended component of the model variables mt . In other
words, m
       b t is a model concept. Hereafter, we let dt denote the data analog of mt . For the stochastic
growth model, dt = (ct , kt , lt ) are the data collected for the empirical exercise. Let dbt be obtained by
removing deterministic trends from dt . Then dbt is the data analog of m
                                                                       b t.

3       Robust Estimators

In this section, we present robust methods that do not require the researcher to take a stand on the
properties of trends in the data. We use the stochastic neoclassical growth model to illustrate the
intuition behind the proposed methods.
        Many estimators have been used to estimate DSGE models.3 Our focus will be a method of
moments (MM) estimator that minimizes the distance between the second moments of data and
the second moments implied by the model, as in Christiano and den Haan (1996), Christiano and
Eichenbaum (1992). Adaptation to likelihood based estimation will be discussed in Section 6. Let Θ
denote the unknown structural parameters of the model and partition Θ = (Θ− , ρz ). The generical
MM estimator can be summarized as follows:
    3
    Likelihood and Bayesian based methods, (e.g. Fernandez-Villaverde and Rubio-Ramirez (2006) and Ireland (1997)),
two-step minimum distance approach (e.g., Sbordone (2006)), as well as simulation estimation (e.g., Altig et al. (2004))
have been used to estimate DSGE models. Ruge-Murcia (2007) provides a review of these methods.



                                                           4
                                                     b d (j), the estimated covariance matrix of the
  1: Apply a filter (if necessary) to dt and compute Ω
      filtered series at lag j. Collect the data moments in the vector

                                         b d (0))0 vec(Ω
                             b d = (vech(Ω
                             ω                         b d (1))0 . . . vec(Ω
                                                                           b d (M ))0 )0 .


  2: Solve the rational expectations model for a guess of Θ. Compute Ωm (j), the model implied
      autocovariances of the filtered m
                                      b t analytically or by simulation. Collect the model moments in
      the vector
                            ω m = (vech(Ωm (0))0 vec(Ωm (1))0 . . . vec(Ωm (M ))0 )0 .

  3: Estimate the structural parameters as Θ           b d − ω m (Θ) .
                                           b = argminΘ ω

The choice of moments in MM can be important for identification (see e.g. Canova and Sala (2009)).
We use the unconditional autocovariances but matching impulse responses can also be considered.
Although MM is somewhat less widely used than maximum likelihood estimators in the DSGE liter-
ature, it does not require parametric specification of the error processes and it is easy to implement.
The more important reason for using MM is practical as it can be used with many popular filters. We
will return to this point subsequently.
    The statistical properties of Θ
                                  b will depend on ρz and the filters used. The robust approaches we
consider always apply the same filter to the model and the data so that the filtered variables are
stationary when evaluated at the true parameter of ρz , which can be one or close to one. We now
consider four filters and then explore which of these have better finite samples properties. Properties
of estimators that do not have these features will also be compared.

3.1   The QD Estimator

Let ∆ρz = 1 − ρz L be the quasi-differencing (QD) operator and let ∆ρz m
                                                                       b t = (1 − ρz L)m
                                                                                       b t . Multiplying
both sides of (1) by ∆ρz and using uzt = ρz uzt−1 + ezt gives

                                       ∆ρz m
                                           b t = Π∆ρz m
                                                      b t−1 + Bezt .                                 (2)

Note that the error term in the quasi-differenced model is an i.i.d. innovation. As ∆ρz m
                                                                                        b t is stationary
for all ρz ≤ 1, its moments are well defined. In contrast, the moments of m
                                                                          b t are not well defined when
ρz = 1. This motivates estimation of Θ as follows:

  1: Initialize ρz .




                                                       5
  2: Quasi-difference dbt with ρz to obtain ∆ρz dbt . Compute Ω
                                                              b d ρz (j) = cov(∆ρz dbt , ∆ρz dbt−j ), the
                                                                ∆
        sample autocovariance matrix of the quasi-differenced data at lag j = 0, . . . , M . Define

                                            b d ρz (j) = Ω
                                            Υ            b d ρz (j) − Ω
                                                                      b d ρz (0)
                                              ∆            ∆            ∆


        and let ω d           bd       0              bd        0 0
                b∆  ρz = (vec(Υ∆ρz (1)) , . . . , vec(Υ∆ρz (M )) ) ;



  3: For a given ρz and Θ− , solve for the reduced form (1). Apply ∆ρz to m
                                                                          b t and compute Ωm
                                                                                           ∆ρz (j), j =
        1, . . . , M , the model implied autocovariance matrices of the quasi-differenced variables. Let

                                            Υm          m          m
                                             ∆ρz (j) = Ω∆ρz (j) − Ω∆ρz (0)

                m (ρ ) = (vec(Υm (1))0 , . . . , vec(Υm (M ))0 )0 ;
        Define ω∆ ρz z         ∆ρz                    ∆ρz

  4: Find the structural parameters Θ
                                    b QD = arg minΘ ω d (ρ ) − ω m (Θ) .
                                                    b∆ ρz z     ∆ρz


      The QD estimator is based on the difference between the model and the sample autocovariances
of the filtered variables, normalized by the respective variance matrix Ω∆ρz (0). The QD differs from
a standard covariance estimator in one important respect. The parameter ρz now affects both the
moments of the model and the data since the latter are computed for the data quasi-differenced
at ρz . As ρz and Θ− are estimated simultaneously, the filter is data dependent rather than fixed.
The crucial feature is that the quasi-transformed data are stationary when evaluated at the true ρz ,
which subsequently permits application of a central limit theorem. The normalization of the lagged
autocovariances by the variance amounts to using the moments

                                                                              b t − ∆ρz m
                                                                    b t , ∆ρz m
                      cov(∆ρz dbt , ∆ρz dbt − ∆ρz dbt−j ) − cov(∆ρz m                   b t−j )

for estimation. The j-th difference of ∆ρz dbt is always stationary and ensures that the asymptotic
distribution is well behaved. Finally, observe that since we solve the model in levels and use the
transformed variables only to compute moments, we preserve all equilibrium relationships between
variables.

3.2     The FD Estimator

If ∆ρz m
       b t is stationary when ρz ≤ 1, the data vector is also stationary when quasi-differenced at
ρz = 1. Denote the first-differencing (FD) operator by ∆ = 1−L and consider the following estimation
procedure:

  1: Compute Ω b d (j) = cov(∆dbt , ∆dbt−j ), the sample autocovariance matrix of the first differenced
                 ∆
                                                       b d (1))0 , . . . , vec(Ω
                                           b d = (vech(Ω
     data at lag j = 1, . . . , M . Define ω                                   b d (M ))0 )0 ;
                                              ∆              ∆                     ∆


                                                         6
   2: For a given Θ, solve for the reduced form (1). Compute Ωm
                                                              ∆ (j), the model implied autocovariance
        matrices of the first-differenced variables ∆m             m = (vech(Ωm (0))0 , . . . , vec(Ωm (M ))0 )0 ;
                                                     b t . Define ω∆          ∆                      ∆

                                     b F D = arg minΘ ω
   3: Find the structural parameters Θ                b∆d − ω m (Θ) .
                                                             ∆


      To be clear, we compute autocovariances for first difference of the data and the model variables,
but ρz is a free parameter which we estimate. Note that the QD and FD estimators are equivalent
when ρz = 1. The key difference between FD and QD is that FD is a fixed filter while the QD is a
data dependent filter.

3.3     The Hybrid Estimator

One drawback of the FD estimator is that when ρz is far from unity, over-differencing induces a non-
invertible moving-average component. The estimates obtained by matching a small number of lagged
                                                                                     b d ρz (j) is
autocovariances may be inefficient. The QD estimator does not have this problem, but Ω                  ∆
                                                                       b d ρz (j) by Ω
quadratic in ρz . As will be explained below, this is why we normalize Ω             b d ρz (0). These
                                                                         ∆             ∆
considerations suggest a hybrid estimator:

   1: Transform the observed data to obtain ∆ρz dbt (as in QD) and ∆dbt (as in FD).

   2: Compute Ωbd                      ρz b                            ρz b
                QD,∆ (j) = cov(∆ dt , ∆dt−j ), the covariance between ∆ dt and ∆dt−j . Define
                                              b                                 b
      ω d          bd
            = (vec(Ω          0              bd         0 0
      bQD,∆          QD,∆ (0)) , . . . , vec(ΩQD,∆ (M )) ) ;

   3: For a given Θ, solve for the reduced form (1), and compute the model implied autocovariances
        between the quasi-differenced and the first differenced variables. Define

                                  m                     0                         0 0
                                 ωQD,∆ = (vec(Ωm                        m
                                               QD,∆ (0)) , . . . , vec(ΩQD,∆ (M )) ) ;


   4: Find the structural parameters Θ
                                     b HD = arg minΘ ω d
                                                     bQD,∆          m
                                                           (ρz ) − ωQD,∆ (Θ) .

            bd
Notice that Ω                                       bd
              QD,∆ (j) is now linear in ρz , unlike Ω∆ρz (j). We denote this estimator with HD (hybrid
differencing).

3.4     The HP Estimator

Some linear filters such as the HP and the bandpass can also remove deterministic and stochastic
trends, see Baxter and King (1999) and King and Rebelo (1993). In this paper, we will focus only on
the HP filter, which is heavily used in empirical analysis. An HP detrended series is defined as


                                                     λ(1 − L)2 (1 − L−1 )2
                                  HP (L)dt =                                 dt .
                                                   1 + λ(1 − L)2 (1 − L−1 )2

                                                         7
    Given this transformation, the procedure can be summarized as follows:

                                                                   b d (0), . . . , Ω
    1: Compute the autocovariance matrices of the HP-filtered data Ω                b d (M ). Define
                                                                     HP               HP
       ω d           d    0               d    0 0
           = (vech(Ω (0)) , . . . , vec(Ω (M )) ) ;
                   b                    b
       bHP            HP                    HP

    2: For a given guess of Θ, solve for the reduced form (1), and compute Ωm (j), the autoco-
      variances of m
                   b t.    Apply the Fourier transform to obtain the spectrum for m
                                                                                  b t at frequen-
      cies 2πs/T , s = 0, . . . , T − 1. Multiply the spectrum by the gain of the HP filter. Inverse
      Fourier transform to obtain ΩHP (j), the autocovariances of the HP(L)m             m
                                                                           b t . Define ωHP =
      (vech(Ωm      0               m       0 0
             HP (0)) , . . . , vec(ΩHP (M )) ) .

    3: Find the structural parameters Θ
                                      b HP = arg minΘ ω d
                                                      bHP    m (Θ) .
                                                          − ωHP

    This approach is similar to Burnside (1998) who also applies the HP filter to both the model and
the data series, but he uses simulations to compute model-implied moments. Like the FD, the variables
in the model and the data will be stationary without ρz entering the filter. By construction of the HP
filter, both the filtered data and the filtered model variables are stationary for all ρz ≤ 1. Note that
HP filtering involves (implicitly or explicitly) estimation of many more autocovariances than the other
estimators considered above. Burnside (1998) reports that although the HP filter removes variation
potentially informative for estimation of the structural parameters, the HP filtered model and data
series have sufficient variability to discriminate competing theories of business cycles.

4    Properties of the Estimators

    bjd generically denote the j − th sample moments of the filtered variables while ωjm (Θ) denote the
Let ω
model moment based on the same filter. Define

                                                     bjd − ωjm (Θ)
                                           ḡj (Θ) = ω

                                                                              b = minΘ ||ḡ(Θ)|| is a non-
and let ḡ(Θ) = (ḡ0 (Θ), ḡ1 (Θ), . . . , ḡM (Θ)). Then the MM estimator is Θ
linear GMM estimator using an identity weighting matrix. This sub-optimal weighting matrix is used
because when there are fewer shocks than variables in the system, stochastic singularity will induce
collinearity in the variables resulting in a matrix of covariances that would be singular. Even if there
are as many shocks as endogenous variables, Abowd and Card (1989), Altonji and Segal (1996) and
others find that an identity matrix performs better than the optimal weighting matrix in the context of
estimating covariance structures. The optimal weighting matrix, which contains high order moments,
tends to correlate with the moments and this correlation undermines the performance of the estimator.


                                                     8
   Let Ḡ(Θ) be the matrix of derivatives of ḡ(Θ) with respect to Θ. In standard covariance structure
estimation, the parameters enter the model moments ω m (Θ) but not the sample ω
                                                                              b d , so that if ω
                                                                                               bd
are moments of stationary variables, then under regularity conditions such as stated in Newey and
McFadden (1994), we have the conventional result that the estimators are consistent and
                                          √              d
                                                 b − Θ0 )−→A · N (0, S)
                                              T (Θ
                                √             d
where A = (G00 G0 )−1 G00 and       T ḡ(Θ0 )−→N (0, S), and G0 is the probability limit of Ḡ(Θ) evaluated at
Θ = Θ0 . This distribution theory applies to the FD and the HP because these two filters do not depend
                                                                                              bd
on unknown parameters and the filtered variables are always stationary. For the HD estimator, ω
depends on ρz but its first derivative does not, so that a quadratic expansion of the objective function
can still be used to derive the asymptotic distribution of the estimator. Although Ḡ(Θ) for the HD
                                b d is a vector of covariances of stationary variables when evaluated
has a random limit when ρz = 1, ω
at the true value of ρz . Thus, the ’standardized’ estimator (or the t statistic) remains asymptotically
normal.
    To understand the properties of the QD estimator, we need to explain why we normalize the
                                                                      b d ρz (j) − Ωmρz (j) instead
lagged autocovariances by the variance. Suppose we had used gej (Θ) = Ω            ∆           ∆
of ḡj (Θ) = ω                                              b d ρz (0), and ω mρz is likewise defined.
                                               b d ρz (j) − Ω
               d (j) − ω m (j) where ω d (j) = Ω
             b∆ ρz      ∆ρz           ∆ρz        ∆            ∆              ∆
Minimizing ||e   g (Θ)|| over Θ yields an estimator that we can call QD0 . The problem here is that
b d ρz (j) is a cross-product of data quasi-differenced at ρz , and is thus quadratic in ρz . The quadratic
Ω ∆
expansion of ||e
               g (Θ)|| around Θ0 contains terms that are not negligible when ρz is one. As such, the
sample objective function cannot be shown to converge uniformly to the population objective function.
In fact, we show in Gorodnichenko et al. (2009) in a simpler setting that the QD0 estimator for ρz is
consistent but it has a convergence rate of T 3/4 and is not asymptotically normal. The QD estimator
is motivated by the fact that the offending term in the quadratic expansion of Ω   b d ρz (j) is collinear
                                                                                           ∆
     b d ρz (0) when ρz = 1.
with Ω ∆


Proposition 1 Consider a DSGE model whose reduced form is given by (1) and all roots of Π less
                                                               b QD be the QD estimator of Θ.
than one. Let Θ be the unknown parameters of the model and let Θ
      √               d
Then T (Θ b QD − Θ0 )−→N          b QD )).
                         (0, Avar(Θ

   A sketch of the argument is given in the Appendix for the baseline model whose closed-form solution
is known. By subtracting the variance from each lagged autocovariance, the quadratic terms in the
expansion of the objective function are asymptotically negligible. This leads to the rather unexpected
property that Θb is asymptotically normal even when ρz = 1. From a practical perspective, the
primary advantage of the robust estimators is that when properly studentized, the estimators are

                                                        9
normally distributed whether ρz < 1 or ρz = 1, which greatly facilitates inference. Since all estimators
are consistent and asymptotically normal, it remains to consider which estimator is more efficient in
finite samples.

4.1     Related Literature

Our approach is related to other methods considered in the literature. Cogley (2001) considers several
alternative estimation strategies and finds that using cointegration relationships in unconditional Euler
equations works quite well, as the moments used in GMM estimation remain stationary irrespective
of whether the data are trend or difference stationary. Our method is similar (and complementary)
to Cogley’s (2001) in that neither requires the researcher to take a stand on the properties of the
trend dynamics before estimation, but there are important differences. First, quasi-differencing can
easily handle multiple I(1) or highly persistent shocks. In contrast, using cointegration relationships
works only for certain types of shocks. For example, if the shock to disutility of labor supply is
an I(1) process, there is no cointegration vector to nullify a trend in hours. Second, cointegration
often involves estimating identities and therefore the researcher has to add an error term (typically
measurement error) to avoid singularity. Our approach does not estimate specific equations and hence
does not need to augment the model with additional, atheoretical shocks. Finally, using unconditional
cointegration vectors may make estimation of some structural parameters such as adjustment costs
impossible because adjustment costs are often zero by construction in the steady state. In contrast,
our approach utilizes short-run dynamics in estimation and thus can estimate the parameters affecting
short-run dynamics of the variables. Overall, our approach exploit different properties of the model
in estimation and hence can be used in a broader array of situations.
      Fukac and Pagan (2006) consider how the treatment of trends might affect estimation of DSGE
models, but their analysis is confined to a single equation framework. They propose to use the
Beveridge-Nelson decomposition to estimate and remove the permanent components in the data. Apart
from the fact that the permanent component in the Beveridge-Nelson decomposition may be different
from actual trend and is derived under some strong assumptions, our approach is a one-step procedure
that can handle multiple I(1) shocks as we discussed above.
      Canova (2008) explicitly treats the latent trends as unobserved components and estimates the
trends and cycles directly. While this allows the data to select the trend endogenously, the procedure
can be imprecise when the random walk component is small. Canova and Ferroni (2008) considered
many filters and treat each as the true cyclical component measured with error. They are primarily
concerned with the consequences of data filtering taking the model specification as given. We take
the view that the trends specified for the model should be consistent with the facts that we sought to


                                                   10
explain. As such, it cannot be taken as given.

5       Simulations: Baseline Model

In this section we use the stochastic growth model to conduct Monte Carlo experiments. We generate
data with either deterministic trends (ρz < 1) or stochastic trends (ρz = 1) using the model equations
for m
    b t . The model variables are then rescaled back to level form and treated as observed data dt =
(ct , kt , yt , lt ), which we take as given in estimation. We use the variance and first order autocovariance
(including cross variances) of the four variables as moments. Thus, M = 1. We also experimented
with alternative choices of observed variables, such as excluding the capital stock series, and we found
very similar results.
        We estimate Θ = (α, ρ, σ) and treat parameters (β, δ, θ) as known.4 We estimate only a handful
of parameters because we want to decouple the issues related to the treatment of trends from the
identification issues that might arise. We calibrate the model as follows: capital intensity α = 0.33;
disutility of labor θ = 1; discount factor β = 0.99; depreciation rate δ = 0.1; gross growth rate in
technology ḡ = γ̄ = 1.005. We restrict the admissible range of the estimates of α to [0.01,0.99]. We
vary the persistence parameter ρz to take values (0.95, 0.99, 1). We have only one shock in this
baseline model. Thus, we set the standard deviation of ezt to σz = 1 without loss of generality. We
perform 2,000 replications for each choice of parameter values. In each replication, we create series
with T=200 observations. Other sample sizes are also considered.
        In all simulations and for all estimators, we set the starting values in optimization routines equal
to the true parameter values. The model is solved using the Anderson and Moore (1985) algorithm.
We allow mildly explosive estimates as solutions for otherwise ρbz will be truncated to the right at one,
making the distribution of ρbz highly skewed. We only keep as solution those sets of estimates that are
consistent with a unique rational expectations equilibrium.5
        We report simulation results for the baseline neoclassical growth model in Table 2. The persistence
of technology shocks is given in the left column. The first and second rows indicate which filter
is applied to both the data and the model variables. Columns (1)-(4) report results for the four
estimators. By and large, all four filters yield estimates which are very close to the true values. Notice
that while ρz is always precisely estimated, the variance of the estimates varies substantially across
filters. The QD estimates has the lowest standard deviation while the HP estimates are two to five
    4
     The average growth rate ḡ is estimated in the preliminary step when we project series on linear time trend.
    5
     A rational expectations solution is said to be stable if the number of unstable eigenvalues of the system equals the
number of forward looking variables. Stability in this context refers to the internal dynamics of the system. This is
distinct from covariance stationarity of the time series data, which obtains when ρz < 1. It is possible for ρz to be mildly
explosive and yet the system has a stable, unique rational expectations equilibrium.



                                                            11
times more variable than the QD. The HD is more precise than the FD but is less precise than the
QD. This pattern is recurrent in all simulations.
      Figure 1 shows the root mean squared error (RMSE) for different estimators and sample sizes. The
QD estimator performs the best while the FD tends to have the largest RMSE in almost all cases.
The performance of the HP estimator varies with sample size. In small samples, the HP tends to lead
to large RMSE while in larger samples, the HP approaches the HD which is only slightly inferior to
the QD.
                                                                                             √
      Figures 2 through 4 present the kernel density of the normalized estimator (ie.               b − Θ))
                                                                                                 T (Θ
for sample sizes of T =150 and 300. Results are also reported for T=2000 to study the asymptotic
properties of the estimators. Approximate normality of ρbz when ρz is close to one, is totally unexpected,
given that the literature on integrated regressors prepared us to expect super consistent estimators with
Dickey-Fuller type distributions that are skewed. Instead, all densities are bell-shaped and symmetric
for all ρz ≤ 1 with no apparent discontinuity as we increase ρz to one. The normal approximation is
not perfect in small samples, suggesting that some size distortion will occur if we use the t statistic for
inference. In results not reported, we construct t-statistics using Newey-West standard errors and find
that the rejection rates tend to be greater than the nominal size for all estimators except the HP, which
can be undersized. For example, the rejection rate of the QD estimator for the two-sided t-test of ρz
at the true value of 1 is 0.055 when T=200 while for testing α at the true value of 0.33, the rejection
rate is 0.21. This is larger than the nominal size of 0.05. As the sample size increases, the actual
size gets closer (and eventually converges) to the nominal rates. For example, at T=1000 for QD, the
two-sided t-test of ρz = 1 has a rejection rate of 0.05, while the t test for α = .33 is 0.10. The QD and
HD generally have better size than the FD and the HP. The finite sample size distortion seems to be
a general problem with covariance structure estimators and not specific to the estimator we consider.
Burnside and Eichenbaum (1996) reported similar results in covariance structure estimation with as
many overidentifying restrictions as we have, and also using the Newey-West estimator of the variance
of moments.

5.1     Variations to the Baseline Model

In response to the finding in Cogley and Nason (1995b) that the basic real business cycle model has
weak internal propagation, researchers often augment the basic model to strengthen the propagation
and to better fit the data at business cycle frequencies. One consideration is to introduce serial
correlation in the growth rate of shocks to technology by assuming ut = (ρz + κ)ut−1 − κρz ut−2 + ezt .
This specification generates serial correlation of κ in the growth rate of technology when ρz ≈ 1. Our
baseline model corresponds to κ = 0. When we simulate data with κ = 0 and estimate κ freely, the


                                                    12
QD, HD, FD, and HP correctly find that κ = 0 (Table 3, Panel A).
      Habit in consumption is another popular way to introduce greater persistence in business cycle
models. Consider the utility function: ϑ(Ct , Ct−1 , Lt ) = ln(Ct − φCt−1 ) − θLt where φ measures the
degree of habit in consumption. We set φ = 0 and estimate φ along with other parameters to investigate
how the treatment of the trends might affect estimates of this internal propagation mechanism. The
robust estimators again find φb to be numerically small and not statistically from zero for all values of
ρz (Table 3, Panel B).
      We also augment our baseline model with a preference shock Qt such that the utility is ϑ(Ct , Lt ) =
ln Ct − θLt /Qt where qt = ln Qt = ρq qt−1 + eqt and eqt ∼ iid(0, σq2 ). In our simulations, we set ρq = 0.8
so that the preference shock is stationary. We let σq = (0.5, 1.0, 1.5). To conserve space, we only
report estimates for α in Table 3, Panel C. Consistent with the results thus far, the HP estimates have
the largest variability although the difference with other estimators is not as large as it was in the
baseline model. Note that as we increase σq , the difference across methods shrinks while the precision
for all estimators improves.
      A recurrent result is that the HP estimates have the largest variability. One possibility is that the
HP filters out more low frequency variation than other filters, and the parameters φ and κ are identified
from these frequencies (see also discussion in Burnside (1998)). Another possibility is that the HP
implicitly uses estimated autocovariances at many more lags than other filters (recall that we apply the
inverse Fourier transform to many autocovariances). This extensive use of sample autocovariances can
also introduce variability to the estimator. In addition, we find that HP is much more computationally
intensive than other robust estimators.

6     Non-Robust Estimators and a Model with Multiple Rigidities

In this section, we report results of the non-robust estimators applied to different models to illustrate
how treatment of trends can lead to misleading conclusions about the propagating mechanism of
shocks. We also compare the estimators using a model with many more endogenous variables.

6.1     Alternative Detrending Procedures

Up to this point, we have considered approaches where the same transformation is applied to the data
and the model variables. Much has been written about the effects of filtering on business cycle facts.
King and Rebelo (1993) and Canova (1998) showed that the HP filtered data are qualitatively different
from the raw data. Canova (1998) showed that the stylized facts of business cycles are sensitive to the
filter used to remove the trending components. Gregory and Smith (1996) used a calibrated business
cycle model to investigate what type of trend can produce a cyclical component in the data that is


                                                     13
similar to the cyclical component in the model. Although these authors did not estimate a DSGE
model on filtered data, they hinted that the estimates of the structural parameters can be adversely
affected by filtering.
   We now investigate the consequences of using different and/or inappropriate filters by considering
four combinations:

  A) The autocovariances are computed for linearly detrended model and data series;

  B) The autocovariances are computed for the first differenced model and data series with imposed
      ρz = 1;

  C) The sample autocovariances are computed for HP filtered data but the model autocovariances
      are computed for the linearly detrended variables;

  D) The sample autocovariances are computed for HP filtered data. The model autocovariances are
      computed for series normalized by the level of technology, i.e., mt − zt where zt is the level of
      technology.

Each combination has been used in the literature (see e.g. Table 1). (A) and (B) are aimed to show the
effects of imposing incorrect assumptions about trends. (C) and (D) illustrate the consequences when
different trends are applied to the model and the data. As a general observation, the starting values
are very important for non-robust methods as the optimization routines can get stuck in local optima.
With the robust estimators, the converged estimates do not change as we start the optimization from
values other than the true parameters, though the search for global minimum was often long.
   The results are reported in Table 2. For (A), which is reported in column (5), we see that when
ρz = 0.95, the parameter estimates are slightly biased. As ρz increases, the estimates are strongly
biased. This shows that when ρz is close to unity yet stationary, assuming trend stationarity still yields
imprecise estimates. At ρz = 1, the mean of ρbz is 0.694 (instead of 1), the mean of α
                                                                                     b is approximately
                                     bz is 19.8 (instead of 1). The case of ρz ≤ 1 is empirically relevant
0.905 (instead of 0.33), the mean of σ
because macroeconomic data are highly persistent and well approximated by unit root processes. Our
results show that linear detrending of nearly integrated data in non-linear estimation can lead to
biased estimates of the structural parameters. This resembles the univariate finding of Nelson and
Kang (1981) that projecting a series with a unit root on time trend can lead to spurious cycles.
   Turning to (B) in column (6) of Table 2, we find that while the estimates are fairly precise when ρz
is indeed equal to one, as ρz departs from one, the estimates get increasingly biased. Hence imposing
a stochastic trend when the data generating process is trend stationary can lead to seriously distorted
estimates. Results for combination (C) are reported in column (7) of Table 2. The estimates of ρz are

                                                   14
downward biased while α
                      b and σ
                            bz are upward biased. Taken at face value, these estimates suggest a
significant role for capital as a mechanism for propagating shocks in the model.
      Results for (D) are reported in column (8) of Table 2. Here, the estimates of α often hit the
boundary of the permissible space while estimates of σz are close to zero. The reason is that when zt
has a unit root, shocks to mt − zt are transitory. Thus, the endogenous variables such as consumption
adjust quickly to the permanent technology shock. But the HP filtered data are serially correlated.
Thus, the estimator is forced to produce parameter values that can generate a strong serial correlation
in the model variables. Results for (C) and (D) are consistent with the findings of Cogley and Nason
(1995a), King and Rebelo (1993) and Harvey and Jaeger (1993). These papers suggest that the HP
filter changes not only the persistence of the series but also the relative volatility and serial correlation
of the series. This translates into biased estimates of all parameters because the estimator is forced
to match the serial correlation of the filtered data.
      Clearly, the large estimates of α will alert the researcher that the model is likely misspecified.
Suppose the researcher allows for serially correlated shocks in technology growth by estimating κ
freely. Panel A, Table 3 shows that the non-robust methods now yield estimates of α around 0.4-0.5,
which seem more plausible than when κ was assumed zero. However, these estimates are achieved by
having κ
       b strongly negative and statistically significant when the true value is zero. Suppose now the
researcher modifies the model by allowing for habits in consumption. Evidently, the estimated habit
formation parameter φ is sensitive to which non-robust estimator is used. In particular, (A) has a
strong downward bias, while (B) produces a negative bias in φb when ρz departs from one. On the other
hand, (C) and (D) have a strong upward bias. With either modification, the fit of the misspecified
models improves relative to the correctly specified model. However, these modifications should not
have been undertaken as they do not exist in the data generating process. These examples indicate
how the treatment of trends can mislead the researcher to augment correctly specified models with
spurious propagation mechanisms to match the moments of the data.
      Results for the model with an additional labor supply shock are reported in Table 3, Panel C. The
estimates continue to be biased although the biases tend to be smaller than in the baseline model
with a single persistent shock. In general, a smaller ρz and a larger σq lead to smaller biases. In some
cases, we find σ
               bq > σ
                    bz , so that the researcher may be tempted to conclude that preference shocks have
larger volatility than shocks to technology while the opposite is true.

6.2     The Smets and Wouters Model

Although the baseline model is an illuminating laboratory to evaluate how the estimators work, it is
overly simplistic. We now consider the model of Smets and Wouters (2007) (henceforth SW). We use


                                                     15
SW’s estimates for the post-1982 sample as the true values. We then simulate series of size T=150
and apply the estimators to the simulated series. To separate identification issues from issues related
to the treatment of trends, we estimate only four parameters: persistence of technology shocks ρz
whose true value varies across simulations, investment adjustment cost φ whose true value is 5.48,
external habit formation in consumption λ whose true value is 0.71, and Calvo’s probability of wage
adjustment ξw whose true value is 0.73.
   The results are reported in Table 4. All robust methods yield precise estimates of the parameters.
Although the HP continues to be less precise, the difference with the other three robust estimators is
smaller than in the baseline model. This is similar to what we observed when we compare the two-
shock and one-shock neoclassical growth models. These differences between the baseline and the more
complicated models can occur for several reasons. First, the SW model has six other structural shocks
so that technology shocks explain only a fraction of variation in key macroeconomic variables. The HP
estimator may simply need more shocks to identify the parameters. Second, the SW model imposes
many cross equation restrictions on the handful of the parameters we estimate. These restrictions
may improve the efficiency of some estimators more than others. Third, some estimators may be more
sensitive to the size of the model than others. The general observation, however, is that our robust
estimators perform reasonably well for all values of ρz in simple and more complex models.
   In contrast, the non-robust estimators (A) through (D) have dramatic biases in all four parameters
being estimated when (i) the filter used for the model and the data are different, when (ii) the assumed
trends are different from trends in the data generating process, or when (iii) the data are stationary
but highly persistent. Obviously, the impulse responses (and other analyses about the role of rigidities
in amplification and propagation of shocks in business cycle models) based on these biased estimates
of the structural parameters will be misleading. As an illustration, Figure 5 highlights the difference
between the true response of key macroeconomic variables to a technology shock in the SW model and
the responses based on parameter estimates from approaches (A) through (D). For instance, consider
the response of consumption. Estimates from approaches (A) and (C) imply grossly understated
responses. Estimates from approach (D) suggest a considerably more delayed consumption response
than the true one. The consumption response implied by approach (B) is qualitatively similar to the
true response, but the responses are noticeably different quantitatively especially when ρz is further
away from one.




                                                  16
7     Extensions and Implementation Issues

7.1     Multiple shocks

The reduced form solution (1) can be easily generalized to other models and takes the form

                                            m
                                            b t = Πm
                                                   b t−1 + But                                               (3)
                                            ut = ρut−1 + Set ,

where ut is now a vector of exogenous forcing variables, et is a vector of innovations in ut , and the
matrices Π, B, S, ρ are of conformable sizes.
      Suppose there are J univariate shock processes, each characterized by

                                      (1 − ρj L)ujt = ejt ,    j = 1, . . . , J

where some J ∗ of the ρj may be on the unit circle. Define
                                                      J ∗
                                                      Y
                                              ρ
                                            ∆ (L) =         (1 − ρj L).
                                                      j=1

Now the quasi-differencing operator is the product of the J ∗ polynomials in lag operator. For example,
if one knows that shocks to tastes dissipate quickly while technology shocks zt are highly persistent, we
can still use (1 − ρz L) as ∆ρ . Once the model is solved to arrive at (3), we can compute moments for
the quasi-differences of m
                         b t . Whether none, one, or more shocks are permanent, the autocovariances
of the transformed variables are well defined.

7.2     Likelihood Estimation

As likelihood and Bayesian estimation is commonly used in the DSGE literature, one may wonder how
the ideas considered in this paper can be implemented in likelihood based estimation. Conceptually,
if we can write the model in a state space form, we can specify the likelihood which makes MLE
and Bayesian estimation possible. This involves using the measurement equations to establish a strict
correspondence between the detrended series in the model and in the data.
      As an example, consider the FD estimator for the generalized model (3). We can define the
measurement equation as
                                                      
                                      xt = Hst = Ψ −Ψ 0 st ,                                                 (4)

where xt is the vector of filtered variable, Ψ is the selection matrix, and s0t = (m
                                                                                   b t, m
                                                                                        b t−1 , ut ) is the state
vector. The corresponding transition equation is
                                                       
                            m
                            bt        Π 0 Bρ       mb t−1      BS
                         mb t−1  =  I 0 0  m   b t−2  +  0  et
                            ut         0 0 ρ        ut−1        S

                                                       17
or
                                               st = Π∗ st−1 + B ∗ et                                            (5)

with et ∼ i.i.d.(0, Σ). The measured variable xt is stationary irrespective of whether m
                                                                                       b t has stochastic
                                                                      
or deterministic trends. For the QD0 estimator, H = Ψ −ρΨ 0 . As with all quasi-differencing
estimators, the treatment of initial condition is important especially when there is strong persistence.
In simulations, we condition on the first observation being fixed and find that the MLE version of the
FD gives precise estimates, but the t statistics are less well approximated by the normal distribution
compared to MM-FD (see Figure 6).
      For the other three estimators, the extension to MLE is either not possible or not practical. For
MLE-HP, we would need to write out the entire data density of the HP filtered data, and the Jacobian
transformation from the unfiltered to filtered data involves an infinite dimensional matrix. For the QD
estimator, recall that we normalized the autocovariances by the variance in constructing the QD. By
analogy, MLE-QD would require modifying the score vector. Although such modification is possible in
theory, it is beyond the scope of this paper. We leave this promising idea for future research. For the
HD estimator, the MLE implementation is cumbersome because HD exploits covariances of variables
computed with different filters. The difference between the MM and MLE really boils down to a choice
of moments, and the MM is more straightforward to implement.6

7.3     Computation

Computing Filtered Autocovariance Moments of the filtered model variables can be computed
analytically or by using simulations. We use the analytical moments whenever possible since it tends to
be much faster than simulations and it does not have simulation errors. Although there are a variety of
methods for analytical calculations, methods that exploit measurement equations are computationally
attractive especially in large models. Combining the measurement equation xt = Hst and the state
equation st = Π∗ st−1 + B ∗ et , we have

                                          0 HΠ∗ xt−1      HB ∗
                                                        
                                 xt
                                      =                 +        et .
                                 st       0 Π∗    st−1     B∗

Let wt0 = (x0t , s0t ). We have

                                           wt = D0 wt−1 + D1 et .
   6
     One practical drawback of GMM is perhaps that when many parameters have to be estimated, the objective function
can be ill behaved which frustrates convergence. However, Chernozhukov and Hong (2003) suggest a novel approach
by which GMM can take advantage of MCMC methods. Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2008) use Chernozhukov-Hong’s
MCMC method based on GMM to estimate a relatively large DSGE model.




                                                        18
The variance matrix Ωw (0) = E(wt wt0 ) can be computed by iterating the equation

                                     Ω(i)         (i−1)
                                      w (0) = D0 Ωw     (0)D00 + D1 ΣD10                                              (6)

until convergence. The autocovariance matrices can then be computed as Ωw (j) = D0k Ωw (0). Since we
are only interested in computing the moments of variables in the measurement vector xt , we iterate
                                                                                   (i)        (i−1)
equation (6) until the block that corresponds to xt converges, i.e. kΩx (0) − Ωx                      (0)k < .7


Calculating moments of HP-filtered model series The HP filtered series can alternatively be
obtained as follows:
                                                              λ(1 − L)(1 − L−1 )2
                          HP (L)dt = HP + (L)∆dt =                                    ∆dt .
                                                            1 + λ(1 − L)2 (1 − L−1 )2

In practice, using HP + (L) and the autocovariances for ∆dt and ∆m
                                                                 b t tend to give more stable results
when ρz is close to one. It is possible to speed up estimation based on HP filtered series by using a
smaller number of leads and lags. This modification however would deteriorate the HP’s approximation
to the desired filter removing low frequencies.8


Treatment of stationary variables Recall that in the stochastic growth model, m∗t = (ḡt, ḡt, 0)
when |ρz | < 1 and m∗t = (ut +ḡt, ut +ḡt, 0) when |ρz | = 1, where the third component of m∗t is the trend
for labor supply, lt . Since lt has no deterministic or stochastic trend component, the autocovariances
are computed for lt and not b    lt , though the results do not change materially if we had filtered these
series as well. In general, if the j-th component of m∗t is zero, it is understood that the autocovariances
are computed for the level of the variable both in the model and in the data. An alternative is to
deal with these non-trending variables through the measurement equation. Then some variables can
be quasi-differenced or first-differenced, while others require no transformation.

8       Concluding Remarks

A realistic situation encountered with estimation of DSGE model is that (a) the data are trending; (b)
deviations from the trend are persistent; (c) the researcher does not know whether the data generating
process is difference or trend stationary. We document that the treatment of trends can significantly
affect the parameter estimates of DSGE models and propose several robust approaches that produce
    7
      Since parts of wt may be exploding, we found that it useful to limit the size of elements in the covariance matrix
 (i)
Ωw (0)   by a fixed large number. This introduces an error in the calculated moments of xt but we found that this error
is negligible in practice.
    8
      We also experimented with a simulation procedure. For each Θ, we use the model to generate j = 1, . . . , R samples
                                                                                                                 m
of size T . For each j we computed moments. Then we average the moments over j and use this average for ωHP         . This
procedure is computationally more intensive and the results are similar to the one considered here.


                                                           19
precise estimates without the researcher having to take a stand of trend specification. The key is
to apply the same filter to the data and the model variables to yield well-defined moments for the
estimation of the structural parameters. We consider several filters that can be used in methods
of moments estimation, and the estimators have approximately normal finite sample distributions.
Undoubtedly, the estimators require further scrutiny and can be improved in various dimensions.9
Our analysis is a first step in the sparse literature on non-linear estimation when the data are highly
persistent.


References
Abowd, J. M. and Card, D. 1989, On the Covariance Structure of Earnings and Hours Changes,
 Econometrica 57(2), 411–445.
Altig, D., Christiano, L., Eichenbaum, M. and Linde, J. 2004, Firm-Specific Capital, Nominal Rigidi-
  ties, and the Business Cycle, FRB Cleveland WP 2004-16.
Altonji, J. and Segal, L. 1996, Small-sample bias in GMM estimation of covariance structures, Journal
  of Business and Economic Statistics 14(3), 353–366.
Altug, S. 1989, Time-to-Build and Aggregate Fluctuations: Some New Evidence, International Eco-
  nomic Review 30, 889–920.
Anderson, G. and Moore, G. 1985, A linear algebraic procedure for solving linear perfect foresight
 models, Economic Letters 17(3), 247–252.
Baxter, M. and King, R. 1999, Measuring Business Cycles: Approximate Bandpass Filters for Eco-
  nomic Time Series, Review of Economics and Statistics 81:4, 575593.
Blanchard, O. and Kahn, C. 1980, The Solution of Linear Difference Models under Rational Expecta-
  tions, Econometrica 48, 1305–1313.
Bouakez, H., Cardia, E. and Ruge-Murcia, F. J. 2005, Habit Formation and the Persistence of Mone-
  tary Shocks, Journal of Monetary Economics 52, 1073–1088.
Burnside, C. 1998, Detrending and Business Cycle Facts: a Comment, Journal of Monetary Economics
  41, 513–532.
Burnside, C. and Eichenbaum, M. 1996, Small-sample Properties of GMM-based Wald Tests, Jornal
  of Business and Economic Statistics 14, 294–308.
Burnside, C., Eichenbaum, M. and Rebelo, S. 1993, Labor Hoarding and the Business Cycle, Journal
  of Political Economy 101, 245–273.
Canova, F. 1998, Detrending and Business Cycle Facts, Journal of Monetary Economics 41, 475–512.
Canova, F. 2008, Estimating DSGE models with Unfilterred Data, mimeo.
   9
    For example, one can use the bootstrap developed for covariance structures in Horowitz (1998) to correct for small-
sample biases because the asymptotic distribution of the t-statistic is normal. One might also consider a model-based
weighting matrix computed as follows. Given a set of parameters, simulate the model to generate series and compute the
moments. By repeating this many times, we can compute covariance of simulated moments rather than the Newey-West
estimates. Results in Burnside and Eichenbaum (1996) suggest that using a relatively small number of moments and as
much a priori information (e.g., model structure) as possible can improve coverage.


                                                          20
Canova, F. and Ferroni, F. 2008, Multiple Filtering Devices for the Estimation of Cyclical DSGE
  models, mimeo.
Canova, F. and Sala, L. 2009, Back to Square One: Identification Issues in DSGE Models, Journal of
  Monetary Economics 56, 431–449.
Chernozhukov, V. and Hong, H. 2003, An MCMC approach to classical estimation, Journal of Econo-
 metrics 115, 293 346.
Christiano, L. and den Haan, W. 1996, Small-Sample Properties of GMM for Business Cycle Analysis,
 Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 14, 309–327.
Christiano, L. and Eichenbaum, M. 1992, Current Real-Business-Cycle Theories and Aggregate Labor-
 Market Fluctuations, American Economic Review 82, 430–450.
Christiano, L., Eichenbaum, M. and Evans, C. 2005, Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic Effects of a
 Shock to Monetary Policy, Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, 1–45.
Clarida, R., Gali, J. and Gertler, M. 2000, Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability:
  Evidence and Some Theory, Quarterly Journal of Economics 115, 147–180.
Cogley, T. 2001, Estimating and Testing Rational Expectations Models When the Trend Specification
  is Uncertain, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 25, 1485–1525.
Cogley, T. and Nason, J. 1995a, Effects of the Hodrick-Prescott Filter on Trend and Difference Sta-
  tionary Time Series: Implications for Business Cycle research, Journal of Economic Dynamics and
  Control 19, 253–278.
Cogley, T. and Nason, J. 1995b, Output dynamics in real business cycle models, American Economic
  Review 85, 492511.
Coibion, O. and Gorodnichenko, Y. 2008, Strategic interaction among heterogeneous price-setters in
  an estimated DSGE model. NBER WP 14323.
Del Negro, M., Schorfheide, F., Smets, F. and Wouters, R. 2007, On the Fit of New Keynesian models,
  Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 25, 123–143.
Dib, A. 2003, An Estimated Canadian DSGE Model with Nominal and Real Rigidities, Canadian
  Journal of Economics 36, 949–972.
Doorn, D. 2006, Consequences of Hodrick-Prescott Filtering for Parameter Estimation in a Structural
 Model of Inventory, Applied Economics 38, 1863–1875.
Faia, E. 2007, Finance and International Business Cycles, Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 1018–
  1034.
Fernandez-Villaverde, J. and Rubio-Ramirez 2006, Estimating Macroeconomic Models: A Likelihood
  Approach, mimeo.
Fuhrer, J. 1997, The (Un)Importance of Forward-Looking Behavior in Price Specifications, Journal of
  Money, Credit, and Banking 29, 338–350.
Fuhrer, J. and Rudebusch, G. 2004, Estimating the Euler Equation for Output, Journal of Monetary
  Economics 51, 1133–1153.
Fukac, M. and Pagan, A. 2006, Limited Information estimation and Evaluation of DSGE Models,
  NCER Working Paper No. 6.
Gorodnichenko, Y., Mikusheva, A. and Ng, S. 2009, A Simple root-T Consistent and Asymptotically
 Normal Estimator for the Largest Autoregressive Root, mimeo.

                                                21
Gregory, A. and Smith, G. 1996, Measuring Business Cycles with Business-cycle Models, Journal of
  Economic Dynamics and Control 20, 1007–1025.
Harvey, A. and Jaeger, A. 1993, Detrending, Stylized Factors, and the Business Cycle, Journal of
 Applied Econometrics 8, 231–247.
Horowitz, J. 1998, Bootstrap Methods for Covariance Structures, Journal of Human Resources 33, 39–
 61.
Ireland, P. 1997, A Small Structural Quarterly Model for Monetary Policy Evaluaton, Carnegie-
   Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 47, 83108.
Ireland, P. 2001, Sticky-price models of the business cycle: Specification and stability, Journal of
   Monetary Economics 47, 3–18.
Ireland, P. 2004, Technology Shocks in the New Keynesian Model, Review of Economics and Statistics
   86, 923936.
Kim, J. 2000, Constructing and Estimating a Realistic Optimizing Model of Monetary Policy, Journal
  of Monetary Economics 45, 329–359.
King, R. and Rebelo, S. 1993, Low Frequency Filtering and Real Business Cycles, Journal of Economic
  Dynamics and Control 17, 207–231.
Kydland, F. and Prescott, E. 1982, Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations, Econometrica 50, 1345–
 1370.
Lubik, T. and Schorfheide, F. 2004, Testing for Indeterminacy: An Application to U.S. Monetary
  Policy, American Economic Review 94, 190–217.
McGrattan, E., Rogerson, R. and Wright, R. 1997, An Equilibrium Model of the Business Cycle with
 Household Production and Fiscal Policy, International Economic Review 38, 267–290.
Nelson, C. and Kang, H. 1981, Spurious Periodicity in Inappropriately Detrended time Series, Econo-
  metrica 49, 741–751.
Newey, W. and McFadden, D. 1994, Large Sample Estimators and Hypothesis Testing, Handbook of
  Econometrics, Vol. 4,Chapter 36, North Holland.
Ruge-Murcia, F. 2007, Methods to Estimate Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium Models, Journal
 of Economic Dynamics and Control 31, 2599–2636.
Sbordone, A. 2006, U.S. Wage and Price Dynamics: A Limited Information Approach, mimeo.
Sims, C. 2002, Solving Linear Rational Expectations Models, Computational Economics pp. 1–20.
Singleton, K. J. 1988, Econometric Issues in the Analysis of Equilibrium Business Cycle Models,
  Journal of Monetary Economics 21, 361–368.
Smets, F. and Wouters, R. 2003, An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium Model of
  the Euro Area, Journal of the European Economics Assocation 1:5, 1123–1175.
Smets, F. and Wouters, R. 2007, Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian DSGE
  Approach, American Economic Review 97, 586–606.
Wu, C. F. 1981, Asymptotic Theory of NonLinear Least Squares Estimation, Annals of Statistics
 9:3, 501–513.




                                                22
9   Appendix
Consistency of the estimators follow from Wu (1981):
Lemma 1 Let θ be the parameter of interest and let θ0 denote the true value of θ. Suppose that for
any δ > 0
                 lim inf inf (QT (θ) − QT (θ0 )) > 0 a.s. or in probability.
                      T →∞ kθ−θ0 k≥δ
         a.s.
Then θbT −→θ0 (or in probability) as T → ∞.
    From solving the baseline model, the endogenous variable yt has solution
                                           yt = vyk kt−1 + vyz zt
                                           kt = vkk kt−1 + vkz zt
                                           zt = ρzt−1 + et .
It is straightforward to show that yt is an ARMA(2,1) with
                                     yt (1 − vkk L)(1 − ρL) = (1 − θy L)et
where θy = vkk − αvkz . Note that vkk does not depend on ρ, but vkz does. A similar equation holds
for consumption. Let the true parameters be denoted by a superscript 0 and to focus on the issue, we
assume σ 2 and vkk are known. Generically, write

                                (1 − ρ0 L)(1 − vkk
                                                0
                                                   L)yt = et + b(ρ0 , vkk
                                                                       0
                                                                          )et−1
where b(ρ, vkk ) is continuous in ρ and vkk . Then the DGP is

                                               yt = ρ0 yt−1 + ut
where ut is ARMA(1,1). Let yet0 = (1 − ρ0 L)yt be yt quasi-differenced at the true ρ and let yet be yt
quasi-differenced at an arbitrary ρ. For any ρ that is assumed to be true, the analytical autocovariance
at lag j for yet is given by
                                             1 + b(ρ, vkk )2 + 2vkk b(ρ, vkk )
                              γ0 (ρ) = σ 2                     2
                                                         1 − vkk
                                                            0 ))(v
                                             (1 + vkk b(ρ, vkk     kk + b(ρ, vkk ))
                              γ1 (ρ) = σ 2                       2
                                                            1 − vkk
                                        0,j−1
                              γj (ρ) = vkk    γ1 (ρ),      j≥2


The derivatives of γj (ρ) with respect to ρ exists and is well defined.
   Let γT j (ρ) be the sample autocovariance of y quasi-transformed at an arbitrary ρ.
                       T
                     1X 0 0
        γT j (ρ) =       yet yet−j − (ρ − ρ0 )yt−1 yet−j
                                                     0
                                                         − (ρ − ρ0 )yt−j−1 yet0 + (ρ − ρ0 )2 yt−1 yt−j−1 .
                     T
                       t=1

Without loss of generality, consider j = 1 and focus on the last term of the expression above. Now
yt−1 = ρ0 yt−2 + ut−1 . At ρ0 = 1,
                               T                        T
                             1X               2       1X
                                 yt−1 yt−2 − yt−1 = −     yt−1 ut−1 = Op (1).
                             T                        T
                               t=1                          t=1


                                                      23
It is easy to see that for any ρ in the              √1    neighborhood of ρ0 ,
                                                       T

         √
                                                           T
                                                            X                                
                                                     −1/2
             T (γT 1 (ρ) − γT 0 (ρ)) =           T                yet0 yet−1
                                                                         0
                                                                               −    yt0 )2
                                                                                   (e
                                                            t=1
                                              √             T                                    
                                                       0 1
                                                            X
                                                                       0            0           0
                                             − T (ρ − ρ )       yt−1 yet−1 + yt−2 yet − 2yt−1 yet + op (1)
                                                          T
                                                                         t=1
                        PT
since (ρ − ρ0 )2 T −1    t=1 yt ut   = Op (T −1/2 ). The scaled sample orthogonality condition is

                 √
                                      T                                         
                                   1 X 0 0                             0 2
                  T ḡ(ρ) =       √        yet yet−1 − γ1 (ρ) − (e    yt ) − γ0 (ρ)
                                    T t=1
                                  √                 T                                     
                                                1X
                                 − T (ρ − ρ0 )                 0
                                                        yt−1 yet−1 + yt−2 yet0 − 2yt−1 yet0 + op (1).
                                                T
                                                             t=1
                                                          
                     PT
Let GT (ρ) =     1
                 T             et−1 + yt−2 yet − 2yt−1 yet . The first order condition is G0T (b
                      t=1 yt−1 y
                                 0           0           0                                     ρ)ḡ(b
                                                                                                    ρ) = 0.
Evaluated at γ1 (ρ0 ) and γ0 (ρ0 ), the terms in the first square bracket obeys a central limit theorem.
Let ξ1 and ξ0 be two independent normal random variables. Then
                            √                               √
                                    ρ) = ξ1 − ξ0 + G0T (ρ0 ) T (b
                               T ḡ(b                           ρ − ρ0 ) + op (1)

Direct calculations yield
                     √
                          ρ − ρ0 ) = −(G0T (b
                       T (b                 ρ)GT (ρ0 ))−1 G0T (ρ0 )(ξ1 − ξ0 ) + op (1).

Now ξ1 − ξ0 has variance 2σ 4 and
                                           T                                    
                                         1X           0            0           0
                        GT (ρ) =               yt−1 yet−1 + yt−2 yet − 2yt−1 yet
                                         T
                                             t=1
                                              T
                                         1   X
                                     =               (yt−2 + ut−1 )ut−1 + yt−2 ut − 2yt−1 ut → σ 2
                                         T
                                             t−1
                                                                                              R1
since T −1 Tt=1 yt−2 ut−1 , T −1 Tt=1 yt−1 ut and T −1 Tt=1 yt−2 ut all converge weakly to ω 2 0 W (r)dW (r),
           P                    P                     P
                                                                                    √            d
W (r) is a standard Brownian motion, and ω 2 is the long run variance of ut . Thus T (b  ρ−ρ0 )−→N (0, 2).
When other parameters are estimated, the asymptotic variance will be different√but the developments
are analogous. A local to unity framework can be used to show that ρb is also T consistent when ρ0
is in the local neighborhood of one. A more rigorous analysis is given in Gorodnichenko et al. (2009).




                                                                      24
                                    Table 1: Summary of Selected Work
               Paper                 Equations     Forcing        Model            Data      Estimator
                                                   variable       Filter           Filter
   Kydland and Prescott (1982)         system    ARMA(1,1)          LT              HP       calibration
           Altug (1989)                system        I(1)            FD1            FD1        MLE
 Christiano and Eichenbaum (1992)      system        I(1)             zt            HP         GMM
       Burnside et al. (1993)          system       AR(1)             LT            HP         GMM
 Burnside and Eichenbaum (1996)        system        I(1)             zt            HP         GMM
      McGrattan et al. (1997)          system      VAR(2)            LT            LT,HP       MLE
           Fuhrer (1997)              equation   not specified   not specified   HP,LT,QT      GMM
        Clarida et al. (2000)         equation      AR(1)        not specified   LT,HP,CBO     GMM
            Kim (2000)                 system       AR(1)             LT            LT         MLE
           Ireland (2001)              system       AR(1)             LT            LT         MLE
     Smets and Wouters (2003)          system       AR(1)            LT             HP       Bayesian
            Dib (2003)                 system       AR(1)            LT             LT         MLE
   Fuhrer and Rudebusch (2004)        equation   not specified   not specified   HP,CBO,QT   MLE,GMM
   Lubik and Schorfheide (2004)        system       AR(1)            LT            HP,LT     Bayesian
         Altig et al. (2004)           system      ARI(1,1)          FD1            FD1        GMM
           Ireland (2004)              system        I(1)            FD1            FD1        MLE
       Bouakez et al. (2005)           system       AR(1)             LT            LT         MLE
      Christiano et al. (2005)         system    not specified   not specified     VAR         GMM
      Del Negro et al. (2007)          system      ARI(1,1)          FD1            FD1      Bayesian
            Faia (2007)                system       AR(1)             LT            HP       calibration
     Smets and Wouters (2007)          system       AR(1)            FD             FD       Bayesian

    Note: CBO denotes actual series minus the Congress Budget Office’s measure of potential output.
I(1) and ARI(1,1) denote forcing variables with stochastic trends. VAR, AR and ARMA denote trend
stationary forcing variables. FD is first differencing, FD1 is first differencing with the restriction
that the forcing variable has a unit root (e.g., ρz = 1), LT is projection on linear time trend, QT
is projection on quadratic time trend, HP is Hodrick-Prescott filter, zt is detrending by the level of
technology. The second column shows whether a paper estimates a system of equations (“system”) or
a single structural equation (“equation”).




                                                   25
                                  Table 2. Neoclassical Growth Model
           ρz          data filter   QD      HD      FD     HP     LT         FD1      HP      HP
                       model filer QD        HD      FD     HP     LT         FD1      LT       zt
                                      (1)    (2)     (3)    (4)    (5)        (6)      (7)     (8)
     Estimate of α
         0.95             mean      0.318   0.333    0.367   0.350   0.480    0.400   0.675   0.990
                         st.dev.    0.052   0.061    0.110   0.103   0.120    0.083   0.022
          0.99            mean      0.308   0.324    0.372   0.360   0.810    0.377   0.789   0.990
                         st.dev.    0.053   0.066    0.115   0.120   0.201    0.109   0.024
          1.00            mean      0.304   0.312    0.349   0.351   0.905    0.357   0.817   0.990
                         st.dev.    0.054   0.061    0.105   0.115   0.183    0.113   0.022
     Estimate of ρz
          0.95            mean      0.949   0.949    0.950   0.950   0.914    1.000   0.541   1.000
                         st.dev.    0.006   0.014    0.017   0.015   0.042            0.049
          0.99            mean      0.989   0.990    0.991   0.991   0.864    1.000   0.485   1.000
                         st.dev.    0.002   0.005    0.007   0.016   0.094            0.041
          1.00            mean      0.999   1.000    0.998   1.000   0.694    1.000   0.461   1.000
                         st.dev.    0.001   0.003    0.005   0.011   0.123            0.039
     Estimate of σz
          0.95            mean      0.981   1.021    1.157   1.076    1.135   1.334   1.949   0.046
                         st.dev.    0.123   0.187    0.441   0.291    0.283   0.285   0.167   0.006
          0.99            mean      0.962   1.001    1.154   1.107    4.348   1.185   2.912   0.042
                         st.dev.    0.111   0.170    0.367   0.303    2.169   0.347   0.397   0.006
          1.00            mean      0.955   0.974    1.073   1.087   19.803   1.107   3.289   0.041
                         st.dev.    0.108   0.145    0.295   0.513   10.681   0.341   0.478   0.005

    Note: The number of simulations is 2,000. Sample size is T=200. LT is linear detrending, HP
is Hodrick-Prescott filter, FD is first differencing, FD1 is first differencing with the restriction that
ρz = 1, QD is quasi differencing, HD is hybrid differencing, zt is detrending by the level of technology.




                                                    26
                   Table 3. Augmented Versions of the Neoclassical Growth Model
               data filter     QD      HD       FD      HP       LT      FD1    HP          HP
         ρz    model filer     QD      HD       FD      HP       LT      FD1    LT           zt
                               (1)      (2)     (3)      (4)     (5)     (6)    (7)         (8)
                         Panel A: serially correlated growth rate in technology
                                            Estimate of κ = 0
        0.95      mean       -0.010 -0.001 0.001 -0.019 -0.180 -0.100 -0.224              -0.369
                 st.dev.      0.063 0.058 0.050 0.160 0.165 0.035 0.038                    0.106
        0.99      mean       -0.014 -0.003 0.002 -0.016 -0.498 -0.021 -0.255              -0.429
                 st.dev.      0.044 0.046 0.041 0.155 0.088 0.030 0.038                    0.070
        1.00      mean       -0.014 -0.003 0.003 -0.020 -0.600 -0.002 -0.256              -0.446
                 st.dev.      0.038 0.039 0.035 0.161 0.029 0.028 0.038                    0.058
                               Panel B: habit formation in consumption
                                            Estimate of φ = 0
        0.95      mean        0.020 0.008 0.006 -0.014 -0.410 -0.086 0.193                 0.679
                 st.dev.      0.075 0.073 0.071 0.255 0.339 0.066 0.382                    0.074
        0.99      mean        0.019 0.009 0.008 0.023 -0.647 -0.018 0.495                  0.637
                 st.dev.      0.070 0.074 0.069 0.168 0.241 0.083 0.400                    0.070
        1.00      mean        0.018 0.023 0.011 0.025 -0.702 0.011 0.603                   0.622
                 st.dev.      0.067 0.087 0.076 0.156 0.174 0.095 0.373                    0.068
                                     Panel C: preference shocks qt
                                          Estimate of α = 0.33
                σq = 0.5
        0.95      mean        0.344 0.335 0.361 0.329 0.465 0.299 0.591                    0.337
                 st.dev.      0.040 0.025 0.080 0.075 0.126 0.043 0.037                    0.137
        1.00      mean        0.353 0.342 0.352 0.335 0.508 0.352 0.665                    0.485
                 st.dev.      0.052 0.034 0.067 0.072 0.357 0.063 0.050                    0.265

                σq = 1.0
        0.95      mean       0.339    0.341    0.349    0.331   0.431    0.316    0.504    0.344
                 st.dev.     0.023    0.030    0.049    0.060   0.103    0.022    0.031    0.022
        1.00      mean       0.347    0.347    0.357    0.340   0.611    0.341    0.529    0.364
                 st.dev.     0.028    0.034    0.050    0.055   0.257    0.025    0.036    0.023

                σq = 1.5
        0.95      mean       0.338    0.343    0.349    0.333   0.399    0.326    0.469    0.378
                 st.dev.     0.021    0.030    0.042    0.053   0.078    0.017    0.020    0.024
        1.00      mean       0.341    0.346    0.353    0.338   0.515    0.338    0.477    0.391
                 st.dev.     0.020    0.029    0.038    0.049   0.203    0.017    0.021    0.023

    Note: Panels A and B: other parameters fixed at α = 0.33 and σz = 1. Panel C: five parameters
are estimated (α, ρz , ρq , σz , σq ). The number of simulations is 2,000. Sample size is T=200. LT is
linear detrending, HP is Hodrick-Prescott filter, FD is first differencing, FD1 is first differencing with
the restriction that ρz = 1, QD is quasi differencing, HD is hybrid differencing, zt is detrending by the
level of technology.


                                                   27
                              Table 4. Smets and Wouters (2007) model.
                  data filter   QD      HD      FD      HP      LT    FD1    HP          HP
            ρz    model filer QD        HD      FD      HP      LT    FD1    LT           zt
                                (1)     (2)     (3)     (4)     (5)    (6)   (7)         (8)
                            Estimate of persistence in technology shocks ρz
           0.95     mean       0.965 0.967 0.962 0.945 0.864 1.000 -0.100               1.000
                   st.dev.     0.038 0.037 0.044 0.137 0.142                0.157
           0.99     mean       0.986 0.984 0.986 0.967 0.836 1.000 -0.114               1.000
                   st.dev.     0.027 0.027 0.028 0.123 0.227                0.090
           1.00     mean       0.990 0.989 0.993 0.971 0.744 1.000 -0.123               1.000
                   st.dev.     0.027 0.026 0.025 0.123 0.305                0.075
                           Estimate of investment adjustment cost φ = 5.48
           0.95     mean       5.057 5.381 5.227 5.066 3.932 4.700 4.447                9.818
                   st.dev.     2.236 2.548 2.306 3.354 1.917 2.487 0.265                0.609
           0.99     mean       5.432 5.563 5.373 5.095 5.595 5.236 4.366                9.662
                   st.dev.     2.321 2.463 2.404 3.012 2.647 2.794 0.257                0.588
           1.00     mean       5.863 6.253 6.014 5.617 6.173 6.049 4.377                9.541
                   st.dev.     2.375 2.775 2.781 3.279 2.983 3.046 0.230                0.548
                                 Estimate of habit formation λ = 0.71
           0.95     mean       0.725 0.730 0.749 0.753 0.730 0.864 3.932                0.673
                   st.dev.     0.057 0.063 0.062 0.049 0.063 0.142 1.917                0.134
           0.99     mean       0.699 0.718 0.719 0.718 0.543 0.744 0.908                0.941
                   st.dev.     0.056 0.053 0.062 0.134 0.177 0.053 0.033                0.006
           1.00     mean       0.686 0.711 0.716 0.709 0.470 0.731 0.912                0.940
                   st.dev.     0.056 0.055 0.064 0.145 0.261 0.057 0.028                0.005
                          Estimate of wage adjustment probability ξw = 0.73
           0.95     mean       0.704 0.730 0.734 0.686 0.657 0.759 0.484                0.220
                   st.dev.     0.073 0.063 0.075 0.117 0.105 0.077 0.085                0.019
           0.99     mean       0.686 0.704 0.709 0.659 0.530 0.718 0.458                0.213
                   st.dev.     0.081 0.065 0.079 0.125 0.214 0.084 0.078                0.016
           1.00     mean       0.673 0.697 0.700 0.641 0.457 0.700 0.444                0.210
                   st.dev.     0.092 0.068 0.083 0.138 0.262 0.091 0.072                0.015

    Note: The number of simulations is 2,000. Sample size is T=150. LT is linear detrending, HP
is Hodrick-Prescott filter, FD is first differencing, FD1 is first differencing with the restriction that
ρz = 1, QD is quasi differencing, HD is hybrid differencing, zt is detrending by the level of technology.




                                                   28
                                   α                                                ρz                                          σz
               0.14                                        0.04                                              0.7


               0.12                                       0.035                                              0.6

                                                           0.03
                0.1                                                                                          0.5

                                                          0.025
               0.08                                                                                          0.4
                                                           0.02




     ρz=0.95
               0.06                                                                                          0.3
                                                          0.015

               0.04                                                                                          0.2
                                                           0.01

               0.02                                       0.005                                              0.1


                 0                                           0                                                0
                      150   200           300   500               150        200           300        500          150   200           300   500
                              sample size T                                    sample size T                               sample size T


                                                                        QD         HD            FD   HP




29
               0.14                                       0.018                                              0.4

                                                          0.016                                             0.35
               0.12
                                                          0.014
                                                                                                             0.3
                0.1
                                                          0.012
                                                                                                            0.25
               0.08                                        0.01
                                                                                                             0.2




     ρz=1.00
               0.06                                       0.008
                                                                                                            0.15
                                                          0.006
               0.04
                                                                                                             0.1
                                                          0.004
               0.02                                                                                         0.05
                                                          0.002

                 0                                           0                                                0
                      150   200           300   500               150        200           300        500          150   200           300   500
                              sample size T                                    sample size T                               sample size T




                                                      Figure 1: Root mean squared errors.
                     QD                     HP                                         FD             HD
               0.7            0.35                                0.35                          0.7

               0.6             0.3                                 0.3                          0.6

               0.5            0.25                                0.25                          0.5

               0.4             0.2                                 0.2                          0.4

               0.3            0.15                                0.15                          0.3




     ρz=0.95
               0.2             0.1                                 0.1                          0.2

               0.1            0.05                                0.05                          0.1

                0               0                                    0                           0
                −5   0    5     −5           0               5       −5                0    5    −5   0    5




               0.7            0.35                                0.35                          0.7

               0.6             0.3                                 0.3                          0.6

               0.5            0.25                                0.25                          0.5

               0.4             0.2                                 0.2                          0.4

               0.3            0.15                                0.15                          0.3




     ρz=0.99
               0.2             0.1                                 0.1                          0.2




30
               0.1            0.05                                0.05                          0.1

                0               0                                    0                           0
                −5   0    5     −5           0               5       −5                0    5    −5   0    5




               0.7            0.35                                0.35                          0.7

               0.6             0.3                                 0.3                          0.6

               0.5            0.25                                0.25                          0.5

               0.4             0.2                                 0.2                          0.4

               0.3            0.15                                0.15                          0.3




     ρz=1.00
               0.2             0.1                                 0.1                          0.2

               0.1            0.05                                0.05                          0.1

                0               0                                    0                           0
                −5   0    5     −5           0               5       −5                0    5    −5   0    5
                                                     T=150       T=300        T=2000



                                                                          √
                              Figure 2: Kernel density of simulated           T (b
                                                                                 α − α).
                                      QD                                     HP                                         FD                                              HD
                 5                                              3                                1.4                                                2

                                                               2.5                               1.2
                 4
                                                                                                                                                   1.5
                                                                                                   1
                                                                2
                 3                                                                               0.8
                                                               1.5                                                                                  1
                                                                                                 0.6




       ρz=0.95
                 2
                                                                1
                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                 1
                                                               0.5                               0.2

                 0                                              0                                  0                                                0
                        −0.2   −0.1   0    0.1   0.2   0.3      −1    −0.5   0     0.5       1    −1.5   −1      −0.5   0    0.5         1   1.5   −1.5   −1     −0.5   0    0.5   1     1.5




               14                                               3                                  2                                                5

               12                                              2.5
                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                 1.5
               10
                                                                2
                 8                                                                                                                                  3
                                                               1.5                                 1
                 6




     ρz=0.99
                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                1
                 4
                                                                                                 0.5




31
                                                                                                                                                    1
                 2                                             0.5

                  0                                             0                                  0                                                0
                 −0.1     −0.05       0      0.05      0.1      −1    −0.5   0     0.5       1     −1         −0.5      0          0.5       1     −0.5                 0                0.5




               20                                              2.5                                 5                                               10


                                                                2                                  4                                                8
               15

                                                               1.5                                 3                                                6
               10




     ρz=1.00
                                                                1                                  2                                                4

                 5
                                                               0.5                                 1                                                2


                0                                               0                                  0                                                0
               −0.05                  0                0.05     −1    −0.5   0     0.5       1     −1         −0.5      0          0.5       1            −0.2   −0.1   0    0.1   0.2   0.3

                                                                                         T=150   T=300         T=2000



                                                                                                         √
                                                              Figure 3: Kernel density of simulated          T (b
                                                                                                                ρz − ρz ).
                           QD                      HP                                             FD                          HD
               0.35                  0.05                                   0.05                                 0.07

                0.3                                                                                              0.06
                                     0.04                                   0.04
               0.25                                                                                              0.05

                0.2                  0.03                                   0.03                                 0.04

               0.15                                                                                              0.03




     ρz=0.95
                                     0.02                                   0.02
                0.1                                                                                              0.02
                                     0.01                                   0.01
               0.05                                                                                              0.01

                 0                     0                                      0                                    0
                      −5   0    5      −40   −20   0     20           40      −10           0          10   20     −10   −5   0    5   10




               0.35                  0.05                                   0.05                                 0.08

                0.3
                                     0.04                                   0.04
                                                                                                                 0.06
               0.25

                0.2                  0.03                                   0.03
                                                                                                                 0.04
               0.15




     ρz=0.99
                                     0.02                                   0.02
                0.1
                                                                                                                 0.02




32
                                     0.01                                   0.01
               0.05

                 0                     0                                      0                                    0
                      −5   0    5      −40   −20   0     20           40      −10           0          10   20     −10   −5   0    5   10




               0.35                  0.05                                   0.14                                 0.35

                0.3                                                         0.12                                  0.3
                                     0.04
               0.25                                                          0.1                                 0.25

                0.2                  0.03                                   0.08                                  0.2

               0.15                                                         0.06                                 0.15




     ρz=1.00
                                     0.02
                0.1                                                         0.04                                  0.1
                                     0.01
               0.05                                                         0.02                                 0.05

                 0                     0                                      0                                    0
                      −5   0    5      −40   −20   0     20           40      −10           0          10   20     −10   −5   0    5   10

                                                              T=150        T=300         T=2000



                                                                                    √
                                    Figure 4: Kernel density of simulated               T (b
                                                                                           σz − σz ).
                      Response of Output to Technology shock                   Response of Consumption to Technology shock                              Response of Investment to Technology shock
            1.8                                                       2                                                                        3

            1.6
                                                                                                                                              2.5
                                                                     1.5
            1.4
                                                                                                                                               2
            1.2
                                                                      1
             1                                                                                                                                1.5


            0.8                                                                                                                                1
                                                                     0.5
            0.6
                                                                                                                                              0.5
            0.4
                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                               0
            0.2

             0                                                      −0.5                                                                     −0.5
                  0       5            10            15        20          0          5            10           15           20                     0         5             10            15         20


                                                                       True        (LT,LT)       (FD1,FD1)        (HP,LT)         (HP,zt)


                      Response of Wages to Technology shock                    Response of Employment to Technology shock                                Response of Inflation to Technology shock
            1.4                                                      0.4                                                                     0.02




33
            1.2                                                                                                                                0
                                                                     0.2
             1
                                                                                                                                            −0.02
                                                                      0
            0.8
                                                                                                                                            −0.04
            0.6                                                     −0.2
                                                                                                                                            −0.06
            0.4                                                     −0.4
                                                                                                                                            −0.08
            0.2
                                                                    −0.6
                                                                                                                                             −0.1
             0
                                                                    −0.8                                                                    −0.12
           −0.2

           −0.4                                                      −1                                                                     −0.14
                  0       5            10            15        20          0          5            10           15           20                     0         5             10            15         20




     Figure 5: Impulse responses functions in the estimated Smets and Wouters (2007) model. Persistence of technology shock is
     ρz = 0.99.
                                   α
        0.5

        0.4


        0.3

        0.2


        0.1


         0
         −4    −3    −2     −1     0      1    2       3   4


                                  ρz
        0.8


        0.6


        0.4


        0.2


         0
         −4    −3    −2     −1     0      1    2       3   4


                                  σz
        0.5

        0.4


        0.3

        0.2


        0.1


         0
         −4    −3    −2     −1     0      1    2       3   4

                       MLE FD         MM QD    MM FD



Figure 6: Density of simulated t-statistic for MLE and MM estimators.




                                 34
