                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE UNDER-REPORTING OF TRANSFERS IN HOUSEHOLD SURVEYS:
                      ITS NATURE AND CONSEQUENCES

                                          Bruce D. Meyer
                                         Wallace K. C. Mok
                                         James X. Sullivan

                                        Working Paper 15181
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15181


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2009




This research was supported in part by the U.S. Social Security Administration through grant #10-M-98363
-1-01 to the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the SSA Retirement Research Consortium
and by the Economic Research Service of the USDA through Cooperative Research Agreement 58-5000-
6-0106. The findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not represent
the views of the SSA, the ERS or any agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER. We thank
participants at the Princeton Data Improvement Initiative Conference, the American Economic Association
Annual Meetings, the Washington Statistical Society, seminars at the Economic Research Service,
the Institute for Social Research and the University of Chicago for their comments, and Stephen Issacson,
Karen Peko and the staff at the Food and Nutrition Service, Kevin Stapleton at the Department of Labor,
and Steve Heeringa at the PSID Statistical Design Group for help with data. We also thank Richard
Bavier, Charles Pierret, Kalman Rupp, Robert Schoeni, and Frank Stafford for their helpful suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Bruce D. Meyer, Wallace K. C. Mok, and James X. Sullivan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Under-Reporting of Transfers in Household Surveys: Its Nature and Consequences
Bruce D. Meyer, Wallace K. C. Mok, and James X. Sullivan
NBER Working Paper No. 15181
July 2009
JEL No. C42,H53,H55

                                           ABSTRACT

High rates of understatement are found for many government transfer programs and in many datasets.
 This understatement has major implications for our understanding of economic well-being and the
effects of transfer programs. We provide estimates of the extent of under-reporting for ten transfer
programs in five major nationally representative surveys by comparing reported weighted totals for
these programs with totals obtained from government agencies. We also examine imputation procedures
and rates. We find increasing under-reporting and imputation over time and sharp differences across
programs and surveys. We explore reasons for under-reporting and how under-reporting biases existing
studies and suggest corrections.


Bruce D. Meyer                                   James X. Sullivan
Harris School of Public Policy                   Department of Economics
University of Chicago                            and Econometrics
1155 E. 60th Street                              447 Flanner Hall
Chicago, IL 60637                                University of Notre Dame
and NBER                                         Notre Dame, IN 46556
bdmeyer@uchicago.edu                             James.X.Sullivan.197@nd.edu

Wallace K. C. Mok
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
k-mok@northwestern.edu
1.       Introduction


        Under-reporting of benefit receipt (or misreporting in general) has important
consequences for many types of analyses.1 First, under-reporting of benefits leads analyses to
overstate the dispersion of the income distribution of the entire population or various
demographic groups, such as the aged. For example, the official income and poverty report for
the U.S. (U.S. Census Bureau 2008) provides such statistics. Second, under-reporting of benefits
leads to an understatement of the effect of income transfer programs or taxes on this
distribution.2 Third, estimates of program takeup—the fraction of those eligible for a program
who participate—are biased downward.3
        This paper provides information on the quality of individual reports of receipt of program
benefits for ten large transfer programs in five key household surveys. We calculate the
reporting rate—the ratio of weighted survey reports of benefits received to administrative totals
for benefits paid out—for a wide range of programs, datasets and years. These reporting rates
(when subtracted from one) generally provide a lower bound on the extent of under-reporting.
We relate the degree of under-reporting to survey and program characteristics, such as form of
interview, type of questionnaire, or potential for stigma. This information is informative for both
survey designers and data users. We consider ways our results can be used to correct different
types of data analyses. For example, the reporting rates we calculate, under certain
circumstances, can be used to make under-reporting adjustments to survey estimates of benefit
takeup rates.
        The reporting rates that we discuss in this paper count imputed values as reported
numbers. The reporting rates would be much lower in many cases if these imputed values were

1
  We refer to the subject of the paper as under-reporting rather than measurement error because the main pattern
appears to be under-statement of benefits, rather than unbiased but potentially erroneous reporting. We should
emphasize that we think of under-reporting as a synonym for under-statement or under-recording, since it is likely
due to errors by both interviewers and interviewees.
2
  For example, Jolliffe et al. (2005) examines the effects of the Food Stamp Program on poverty. Engelhardt and
Gruber (2006) analyze the effects of social security on poverty and the income distribution. Meyer (2007), U.S.
Census (2007) and Scholz, Moffitt and Cowan (2008) analyze the mechanical effects of a wide variety of programs
and taxes on features of the income distribution.
3
  For example, Blank and Ruggles (1996) examine the takeup of Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC)
and Food Stamps, while McGarry (2002) analyzes the takeup rate for Supplemental Security Income (SSI). A few
takeup studies have corrected for under-reporting, such as Bitler, Currie and Scholz (2003) who examine the
Women, Infants and Children (WIC) program. Some other studies use administrative data numerators that do not
suffer from under-reporting. For surveys of research on takeup, see Remler and Glied (2003) and Currie (2006).


                                                         2
ignored. As a consequence, we also examine imputation rates and procedures, as they are both
needed to interpret reporting rates and are an independent measure of data quality. Our results
provide an important measure of data quality, but are only part of the picture.4
         The programs we examine are Unemployment Insurance (UI), Workers’ Compensation
(WC), Social Security Retirement and Survivors Insurance (OASI) and Social Security Disability
Insurance (SSDI), Supplemental Security Income (SSI), the Food Stamp Program (FSP), the
Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), Aid to Families with Dependent Children/Temporary
Assistance for Needy Families (AFDC/TANF), the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for
Women, Infants and Children (WIC) program and the National School Lunch Program (NSLP).
We calculate reporting rates in five large household surveys that are approximately random
samples of the entire civilian non-institutionalized U.S. population.5 The surveys are the Current
Population Survey – Annual Demographic File/Annual Social and Economic Supplement (CPS),
the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), the Panel Study of Income Dynamics
(PSID), the American Community Survey (ACS), and the Consumer Expenditure Interview
Survey (CE Survey). We calculate reporting rates and imputation rates for as many years as is
feasible. We account for definition and universe differences as well as other data issues.
         The datasets that we analyze are among the most important for social science research
and government policy. Income numbers from the CPS are the source of the official U.S.
poverty rate and income distribution statistics. The SIPP was specifically designed to determine
eligibility and receipt of government transfers. The PSID is the main source for information on
changes in income and poverty over a lifetime and for changes in income and inequality across
generations.6 The ACS is the replacement for the Census Long Form data and is the household
survey with the largest sample. The CE Survey is the main source of consumption information
in the U.S. These datasets are among our most important for analyzing income and its
distribution as well as transfer receipt. Thus, the understatement of transfers in these data has
major implications for our understanding of the economic circumstances of the population and
the effects of government programs.

4
  Excellent summaries of data reporting issues in surveys include Moore, Stinson and Welniak (2000), Bound,
Brown and Mathiowetz (2001), and Hotz and Scholz (2002).
5
  We only consider surveys that cover the entire U.S. population to facilitate accurate comparisons since
administrative data are often not available for all age groups and other characteristics that define certain surveys.
6
  The PSID is also the only survey dataset that allows the longitudinal analysis of the income and consumption of a
random sample of the disabled (Stephens 2001; Charles 2003; and Meyer and Mok 2008).


                                                          3
        In the next section we begin by describing the various methods that can be used to
examine under-reporting. We then describe our methods in detail as well as the statistical
framework to interpret how the reported estimates related to underlying true mean values. In
Section 3 we describe our main results on dollar and month reporting and provide some
comparisons to earlier studies. Section 4 describes imputation methods and the rates at which
transfers are imputed. Section 5 discusses caveats to our main results and potential biases.
Section 6 discusses characteristics of programs and surveys that may lead to under-reporting and
possible lessons from our results. Section 7 describes adjustment methods and examples of how
the estimates in the paper may be used. Section 8 concludes. A detailed data appendix provides
sufficient information to reproduce our results.


2.      Research Design and Methods


        Past work on the extent of transfer under-reporting has used two approaches. The first
approach is the one taken here, the comparison of weighted microdata to administrative
aggregates. A second approach compares individual microdata to administrative microdata.7
Neither approach has been used on a broad scale. Comparisons to administrative aggregates
have been used more widely, but results are only available for a few years, for a few transfer
programs and for some of the key datasets. Important papers include Duncan and Hill (1989),
Coder and Scoon-Rogers (1996), and Roemer (2000). These papers tend to find substantial
under-reporting that varies across programs. Comparisons to administrative microdata are even
more limited in the literature. This approach has often been restricted to a single state, year,
program and dataset (Taeuber et al. 2004). Examples of studies that examine more than one
program (but still a single dataset) include Moore, Marquis and Bogen (1996), Sears and Rupp
(2003) and Huynh et al. (2002).8
        A third way to examine under-reporting is to compare the characteristics of program
recipients in administrative and survey data. This approach has been applied to under-reporting
in the Food Stamp Program (Meyer and Sullivan 2007a). Intuitively, the differences between the


7
  Bound et al. (2001, p. 3741) divide micro level comparisons into several types. We use a simpler categorization
here and focus on their “complete record check study” category.
8
  In related work, Card, Hildreth and Shore-Sheppard (2001) examine Medicaid reporting in the SIPP in California
for several years.


                                                        4
characteristics of recipients in the two data sources can be used to determine how those
characteristics affect reporting. This approach can be used for many datasets and programs and
many years, but relies on the survey data and the administrative data representing the same
population. Biases in the estimated determinants of reporting could come from imputations,
inaccurate weights and false positive reporting (i.e. non-recipients who report receipt) in the
survey data.
       Our analyses focus on how under-reporting has changed over time and how it differs
across programs and datasets. We compare weighted survey data to administrative aggregates
because this approach can be used for the widest range of transfer programs, the longest time
period and many datasets. We would also like to know how reporting varies with individual
characteristics, but matches to microdata have been quite limited in their scope. Furthermore,
the use of information from microdata matches is likely to be combined with the aggregate data
described here to adjust for changes over time or differences across datasets. This combination
of data could be used to extrapolate results from a one-year microdata match to other years.


2A.    Calculating Reporting Rates


       A dollar reporting rate (RRD) can be defined as the following ratio

RRD = dollars reported as received in a survey weighted to predict population totals
      dollars paid out as reported in an administrative data source

Similarly, one can define a month reporting rate (RRM) as


RRM = months reported as received in a survey weighted to predict population totals
      months paid out as reported in an administrative data source.

The weaknesses of this approach are that it relies on the accuracy of weights and the
comparability of sample universes. The approach may understate non-reporting by true
recipients because of false positive reporting by non-recipients. We provide some
estimates of false positive reporting rates in Section 5. We calculate dollar and month
reporting rates for our ten programs for as many individual years as are available for the




                                                 5
CPS, the SIPP, the ACS, the CE Survey and the PSID. 9                The benefit programs available
by year and respondent type are reported in Appendix Tables 1 and 2 in summary form
for the PSID and the CPS, respectively. The remaining datasets are less complicated, but
descriptions of the data sources can be found in the Data Appendix. We should note that
our approach of examining reporting rates by calendar year will at times mask differences
in reporting rates across SIPP survey panels and over time within panels, especially when
data from multiple panels are available for the same calendar year.


2B.     Making the Numerator and Denominator Comparable


        We make a number of adjustments in order to make the administrative and survey data
totals comparable.10 All of our household surveys include only individuals living in the 50
states and the District of Columbia. Consequently, to maintain comparability, for most programs
in most years, we are able to exclude from the administrative totals payments to those in U.S.
territories and those outside the U.S. In other cases, we subtract estimates of the share of such
payments obtained from years when this information is available. Specifically, we use the
dollars paid to those in the U.S. territories (and outside the U.S. in the case of OASI and SSDI)
for AFDC/TANF, FS, OASI, SSDI, SSI and UI reported in U.S. Social Security Administration
(various years), U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2008) and U.S Department of
Labor (various years).11 We also adjust the administrative monthly counts using these data
because we do not have other alternatives. For most programs these adjustments are typically
small, ranging from 0.02% (SSI) to about 3% (SSDI). The notable exception is the Food Stamps
Program, where dollars paid to U.S. territories constituted about 10% of the total prior to 1982.12
        For some programs (SSI, SSDI, OASI), the institutionalized can receive benefits but such
individuals are excluded from all of our survey datasets.13 To adjust for this, we rely on data


9
  We should emphasize that in some cases one can calculate dollar and month reporting rates for sub-groups using
administrative totals for geographic areas or demographic groups defined by characteristics such as age and gender.
10
   A full description of the data sources and methods can be found in the Data Appendix.
11
   Currently, we make no adjustments to the data for WIC, WC, and EITC payments to those in U.S. Territories and
outside the U.S.
12
   About 97% of the U.S. territory payments went to Puerto Rico. Payments to those in Puerto Rico under the Food
Stamp Program were replaced in 1982 by a block grant program called the Nutrition Assistance Program.
13
   The institutionalized are included in the 2006 ACS. However, we exclude these individuals from our survey
estimates to maintain consistency with the other estimates.


                                                         6
from the Decennial Censuses (which include the institutionalized) and the 2006 ACS to
determine the share of dollars that are likely missed in the five surveys. We simply reduce the
administrative data totals by the share of Census/ACS dollars that are received by the
institutionalized.14 Some programs, such as AFDC/TANF cannot be received while
institutionalized, but it is possible that some individuals are not institutionalized and receive
benefits during the survey’s reference period, but then become institutionalized during the
survey’s sampling period. Currently, we ignore this possibility because we expect it to be
infrequent.
        Another comparability issue is the possibility that recipients of transfers in the previous
year could subsequently die before being interviewed the next year. This is a potential concern
because all of the surveys (except for the SIPP) ask about income during the previous year.15
Previous studies have adjusted for decedents by applying age, gender and race specific death
rates to the data (Roemer 2000). However, if survey weights have previously been calculated to
match survey weighted population totals with universe population estimates by age, gender and
race then such an adjustment is unwarranted. A case could be made for adjusting the data if
these characteristics are nonstationary (but such an adjustment is likely to be small), or if the
adjustments were based on additional individual characteristics which are not used to determine
weights but are related to death, such as receipt of SSDI or SSI or other programs. Because we
do not have this information, we do not adjust for decedents. Consequently, SSDI and SSI
reporting ratios are likely to be biased downward somewhat, since recipients likely have a higher
mortality rate than the average person of their age, gender and race, and consequently are more
likely to miss the interview the following year.16
        A significant difficulty in several of the datasets is that there are at least some cases
where Social Security Disability benefits are combined with Social Security Retirement and
Survivors benefits. In these circumstances, we will use the data published in the various issues of
the Annual Statistical Supplement to the Social Security Bulletin (U.S. Social Security
Administration, various years) to calculate for each year, age, in school status, and gender cell,
the proportions of total social security dollars that are paid to OASI and SSDI recipients. We use

14
   In 2000, the share of dollars received by the institutionalized reaches 3.4 percent for OASI and 4.5 percent for
SSI.
15
   The CPS and PSID ask about the previous calendar year, while the ACS and CE Survey ask about the previous 12
months.
16
   It might be possible to correct for this potential source of bias with administrative data or data from the PSID.


                                                         7
these proportions to allocate combined SSDI and OASI benefits to the separate programs
whenever we have incomplete information about which program was received and whenever a
combined amount was reported for the programs. This allocation procedure is used for all
OASDI dollars and months in the CPS, ACS, and the CE Survey, and most years in the PSID.17
For the SIPP and the PSID (during 1983-1992 and 2003), it applies to a small share of dollars as
indicated in section 4 of the Data Appendix.
        The PSID sample weights are not appropriate for weighting to the universe in some
years. We adjust them in a manner suggested by the PSID staff (see the Data Appendix for more
details). Also in the PSID, benefit receipt by family members besides the head and spouse is not
recorded in some years. We account for these other family members using estimates of their
share from the years when their benefit receipt is available. Finally, we convert fiscal year
administrative data to a calendar basis by appropriately weighting the fiscal years.


2C.     Statistical Framework


        Program reporting can be separated out into a possibly mismeasured binary random
variable Ri for receipt and a nonnegative random variable for dollars Di, or the length of period
received, such as months, Mi conditional on recorded recipiency (these last two variables are
taken to be zero when receipt is not recorded). Denote the corresponding correctly measured,
but unobserved, random variables Ri*, Di* and Mi*. Recorded dollars and months are RiDi and
RiMi. The expected values of the dollar and month reporting rates can then be written as
E[RRD]=E[RD]/E[R*D*], while E[RRM]=E[RM]/E[R*M*]. In the case where a receipt
response is available for each month (as is typically true in the SIPP) E[RRM] has the simpler
form E[R]/E[R*].
        In general, we can write
                       E[ RD]
         E[ RRD ] =
                    E[ R * D*]
(1)
                    π (1 − π 01 ) E[ D | R = 1, R* = 1] + (1 − π )π 10 E[ D | R = 1, R* = 0]
                  =
                                                πE [D* | R* = 1]

17
 The procedure is also used in the SIPP when we cannot unequivocally differentiate between SSDI or OASI (e.g.
when an individual reports receipt of both).



                                                        8
and
                     E[ RM ]
        E[ RRM ] =
                   E[ R * M *]
(2)
                  π (1 − π 01 ) E[ M | R = 1, R* = 1] + (1 − π )π 10 E[ M | R = 1, R* = 0]
                =
                                              πE [M * | R* = 1]

where π=E[R*] is the probability of true receipt, π01=P[R=0|R*=1] is the probability of not
reporting given true receipt (the false negative rate), and π10=P[R=1|R*=0] is the probability of
reporting receipt given true non-receipt (the false positive rate).
       The reporting rates are informative about the false negative rate in several cases that are
worth considering. Let D11=[D|R=1, R*=1], D10=[D|R=1, R*=0], M11=[M|R=1, R*=1], and
M10=[M|R=1, R*=0]. Suppose there are no false positives (π10=0), and the observed value of D
conditional on recorded receipt is unbiased, i.e. the expected value of D given R=1 is the true
mean (given true receipt), i.e. D11=E[D|R=1, R*=1]=E[D*|R*=1]. Then, the dollar reporting
ratio is an unbiased estimate of 1-π01, i.e. E[RRD] = 1-π01=E[R|R*=1]. The analogous result for
months of receipt is that if π10=0 and the observed value of M conditional on recorded receipt is
unbiased, then E[RRM] = 1-π01=E[R|R*=1]. Thus, in this case either RRD or RRM can be used to
obtain an unbiased estimate of the probability of not reporting given true receipt. If π10 does not
equal zero (but the other conditions hold), then RRD and RRM provide upper bound estimates of
the probability of reporting receipt given true receipt, i.e. E[1-RRD ]>π01 and E[1-RRM ]>π01.
More generally, if E[D|R=1, R*=1]=E[D*|R*=1], we have


(3)    E[RRD]= 1-π01+π10(1-π) D10/E[D*|R*=1]π.


An analogous formula can be calculated for E[RRM] under similar assumptions. These
relationships indicate that we expect that 1-RRD will be an underestimate of the probability of
not reporting receipt π01, except if E[D|R=1, R*=1]<E[D*|R*=1] and the difference is sufficient
to outweigh the last term on the right hand side of (3). A analogous result applies to E[RRM].
       These equations are also informative regarding the interpretation of the relationship
between RRD and RRM. In many cases, we will find that the two reporting rates are not that
different, so it is useful to consider what might lead to this result. Suppose there are no false
positives (π10=0), D11=E[D*|R*=1], and M11=E[M*|R*=1], then the dollar and month reporting
rates will be the same in expectation. More generally, even if dollar and month reporting


                                                     9
conditional on reported receipt are biased, but biased by the same amount, then dollar and month
reporting rates will be equal in expectation. Another important case to consider is one where
month reporting is based on a yes or no question (as in the SIPP), so that trivially M11= M10=
[M*|R*=1]. If RRD and RRM are equal, and we are willing to assume D11=D10, then we know
D11= D10=E[D*|R*=1], i.e. dollar amounts are reported correctly on average. Finally, in the
case when months come from a question regarding the number of months received, if the two
reporting rates are equal and we are willing to assume D11=D10 and M11=M10, then either we are
estimating dollars and month on average right or we are understating both dollars and months by
the same ratio.


3.     Reporting Rate Results


       Table 1 indicates the years and programs available for each dataset when a
reporting rate can be calculated. Information on dollars received generally begins in the
1970s on programs in the PSID, CPS and CE Survey. SIPP program information begins
generally in 1983, while the ACS is more recent, beginning in 1999. We examine dollar
reporting rates for eight programs in the CPS, seven programs in the SIPP, PSID, and CE
Survey and five programs in the ACS. Information on monthly participation is more
limited. We can calculate reporting rates for seven programs in the PSID, the SIPP and
the CPS, and three in the ACS. We could calculate participation for several programs in
the CE Survey, but have not done so. In Tables 2 through 10, we report dollar reporting
rates for all of the programs except the NSLP. As noted above, it is often hard to separate
out OASI and SSDI reporting. We therefore include a table for the combination (Table
4) as well as tables for the separate programs. Each table reports the dollar reporting
rates by calendar year. At the bottom, a simple average over all years available is
reported for each dataset. Note that the years this average covers differs across surveys.


3A. Dollar Reporting Rates
       Table 2 illustrates the AFDC/TANF reporting rates. The results indicate that
since 2003, the PSID, CPS and CE Survey have all had years when less than half of




                                                10
TANF dollars were recorded.18 In the SIPP under sixty percent of dollars have been
recorded in several recent years, while over eighty percent of TANF dollars have been
captured by the ACS. Reporting rates have fallen over time. The CPS provides perhaps
the clearest case. The dollar reporting rate never falls below 0.69 between 1975 and
1990, but it has not exceeded 0.54 since 2000. It should be noted that in the ACS and the
CE Survey, the questionnaire asks for “Public Assistance” (or cash assistance) rather than
just AFDC/TANF. Respondents may therefore report other non-AFDC/TANF benefits.
Most of these other cash benefits are small except for General Assistance (GA).
Therefore in the last two columns of Table 2 we also provide ACS and CE Survey
reporting rates when we compare the survey reports with the sum of AFDC/TANF and
GA administrative totals. When GA is included, the CE Survey accounts for over half of
the dollars until 1996, after which the drop in reporting becomes considerably more
pronounced.19 By 2004, only about a quarter of the dollars are reported in the CE
Survey.
        Table 3 provides information on Food Stamp Program dollar reporting. In the
PSID and the SIPP, approximately eighty percent of Food Stamp dollars are reported,
while in the remaining surveys it is closer to 60 percent. There is a noticeable decline in
reporting rates in the CPS and the CE Survey. In the case of the PSID, there is a low rate
during much of the 1990s, but a recent improvement.
        Tables 4 through 6 provide information on OASDI reporting, with the latter two
tables dividing this total into disability and retirement benefits. We provide the combined
table first, since some imputation is often required to divide benefits into the two
programs. The combined numbers in Table 4 indicate that Social Security benefits are
recorded well in the surveys, with average reporting rates near ninety percent in all cases.
There is also no apparent decline over time in reporting. Retirement benefits in Table 5
are reported well in all datasets. Only about ten percent of benefit dollars seem to be
missed. Table 6 indicates that SSDI is particularly well reported in the PSID and the
CPS. There appears to be some over-reporting in the PSID, with reporting rates over one


18
   The surveys worked to lessen any confusion that occurred with welfare reform. For example, the CPS had
interviewers in a given state ask about TANF using the state specific name for the program.
19
   As explained in section 4B, one reason the reporting rates are lower in the CE Survey and the PSID in some years
is that these surveys do not impute income in some years.


                                                        11
for much of the 1970s through 1990s. This over-reporting does not seem to be due to the
allocation of OASDI between OASI and SSDI as the rates are similar during the period
when the type of benefits was directly recorded (1983-1992). For example, in the years
of allocation 1980-1982 the dollar reporting averaged 1.09, while it was 1.03 during the
direct report years 1983-1985 that followed. Similarly it was 1.13 in 1990-1992, the last
three direct report years, followed by 1.12 over 1993-1995, the first three years after the
return to allocation. In the ACS, reporting of SSDI is not quite as good as the other
sources, with almost thirty percent of benefits not recorded.
        Table 7 provides information on SSI dollar reporting. SSI is reported at a higher
rate than AFDC/TANF or FSP, but one-third of dollars are missing in the PSID and one-
quarter in the CPS. There is little pattern of decline in reporting over time, except in the
PSID.
        Unemployment insurance dollars, reported in Table 8, indicate somewhat better
reporting than for AFDC/TANF, and less evidence of a decline over time, though a fall is
still clear in the CPS and the CE Survey. Over seventy percent of dollars are on average
reported in the PSID, the SIPP and the CPS, while just over half are reported in the CE
Survey. The ACS does not have specific questions about unemployment insurance (it is
combined with Veterans’ payments, child support and alimony).20
        Under-reporting is particularly severe for Workers’ Compensation, as shown in
Table 9. Typically less than half of all WC dollars are recorded in the surveys (again the
ACS does not ask specifically about WC). A decline in reporting over time is less
evident, except for in the CE Survey and in the PSID after 2000. We should note that, we
have included lump sum payments in the administrative totals (see appendix). It has been
argued elsewhere that the CPS and the SIPP intend to exclude lump sum payments. It is
difficult to see what wording in the questionnaires would lead to this exclusion, and past
authors have suggested that lump sums may not be consistently excluded (see Coder and
Scoon-Rogers 1996, pp. 15-16, Roemer 2000, pp. 33-34).




20
  The PSID UI reporting rate in 2003 is very low, possibly due to the information being collected in the 2005
survey. Individuals may have more difficulty recalling receipt two years ago than one year ago.


                                                        12
        Table 10 reports Earned Income Tax Credit payments in the CPS.21 CPS
reporting rates for the EITC have a different interpretation than those for the other
programs. All EITC payments are imputed based on family status, earnings, and income.
Therefore under-reporting comes from errors in one of these variables, the imputation
process, or noncompliance as discussed in Section 6. The implicit assumption is that all
eligible individuals receive the credit, which should lead the approach to overstate
receipt. The numbers in Table 10 indicate a reporting rate of about seventy percent
overall, and eighty percent in recent years. This result suggests that the types of errors
suggested above are quite frequent.


3B. Month Reporting Rates


        Tables 11 through 17 report average monthly participation reporting rates for
seven programs (FSP, AFDC/TANF, SSI, OASI, SSDI, WIC, and NSLP). Tables 11 and
12, for AFDC/TANF and FSP, respectively, indicate monthly participation reporting
rates that are very similar to the corresponding dollar reporting rates in Tables 2 and 3,
respectively. In the case of AFDC/TANF the three datasets with both months and dollars
indicate reporting rates of 0.53 (months) and 0.44 (dollars) for the PSID, 0.77 (months)
and 0.71 (dollars) for the SIPP and 0.65 (months) and 0.62 (dollars) for the CPS. In the
case of FSP, the reporting rates are even more similar, with the two types of reporting
rates never differing by more than 0.028 for the three datasets. In the case of
AFDC/TANF and the FSP, month reporting comes from a mix of direction questions
about each month (the SIPP) and questions about the number of months received (the
CPS and the PSID). In the case of the SIPP, assuming that the reported monthly benefit
of those who are true recipients and those who are not is similar (D11 approximately
equals D10), this result suggests that individuals report about the right amount on average,
conditional on reporting. Or, put another way, most of under-reporting consists of not
reporting at all, rather than reporting too little conditional on reporting. The dollar
reporting rates are slightly lower than the month reporting rates, suggesting that there is a

21
  We considered including EITC reporting rates for the SIPP. However, most respondents to the topical module
that asks about EITC receipt and amounts refuse to answer the questions, don’t answer, or don’t know (see Lerman
and Mikelson 2004).


                                                       13
small amount of under-reporting dollars conditional on receipt, nevertheless. In the case
of the CPS and the PSID, the evidence suggests that total dollars and months are
understated by similar amounts, again suggesting that monthly benefits are reported about
right on average.
           For the programs in Tables 13 through 15 and 17 (OASI, SSDI, SSI and WIC)
reporting rates for monthly receipt are similar to dollar reporting rates, but the similarity
is not as close as it was for AFDC/TANF and FSP. In the case of these four programs,
the surveys besides the SIPP do not report monthly participation, only annual unique
participation. Since our administrative numbers are for monthly participation, we use the
relationship between average monthly and annual unique participation calculated in the
SIPP to adjust the estimates from the other sources. This adjustment step likely induces
some error that accounts for the weaker similarity between month and dollar rates. If we
just focus on the SIPP, where this adjustment step is not needed, the two rates are much
closer and the dollar rate is lower than the month rate, as we saw above.
           Table 16 reports average monthly participation reporting rates for the National
School Lunch Program (NSLP). In the PSID and CPS, free and reduced price lunches
are combined, while in the SIPP we have separate columns for the two types. Reporting
seems to be quite low for the PSID at 72 percent, and for the CPS at 55 percent, on
average. In the SIPP, on the other hand, more participants are reported than we see in the
administrative data. For reduced price lunches, almost fifty percent more participants are
reported than actually receive lunches. This result is likely due to our assumptions that
all eligible family members (ages 5-18) receive lunches and that they do so for all four
months of a given wave.


3C. Comparisons to Earlier Studies


           Estimates similar to those reported above are available in previous studies for some
surveys for a subset of years and programs. Our estimates are generally comparable to those in
these earlier studies, although discrepancies arise that are often due to methodological
differences.22

22
     See Section 5 for a comparison of our results to those from studies of microdata matches.


                                                           14
       Coder and Scoon-Rogers (1996) provide reporting rates for five of our programs for 1984
and 1990 for the CPS and the SIPP. Roemer (2000) reports reporting rates for the same five
programs for 1990-1996 for the CPS and the SIPP. Our reporting rates differ from Roemer’s in a
number ways. His reporting rates average about one percentage point higher than our OASDI
numbers, likely due to differences in accounting for decedents. His SSI and WC reporting rates
are each about five to ten percentage points higher. The SSI difference appears to be due to
Roemer’s adjustment for the decedents, while the WC difference seems to be due to his
exclusion of lump sum payments from the administrative data. Our UI and AFDC/TANF
numbers tend to be within a few percentage points, with his UI numbers lower and the
AFDC/TANF numbers generally higher than ours. Nevertheless, both our results and Roemer’s
do suggest a decline in survey quality over time as measured by benefit reporting.
       Duncan and Hill (1989) have also studied the extent of benefit under-reporting in the CPS
and PSID. They report that in 1979, the CPS accounts for about 69% of SSI, 77% of AFDC
income, and 91% of Social Security/Railroad Retirement income. They have also reported that
in 1980, the PSID accounts for about 77% of AFDC income, 84% of SSI income and about 85%
of Social Security Income. For Social Security and AFDC, their numbers are quite similar to
ours. For SSI, however, our PSID reporting rates are somewhat lower than theirs. This
difference might be due to the difference in the re-weighting algorithm employed, and that we do
not account for those who receive benefits but die during the survey year. To account for this
latter issue, Duncan and Hill adjust the reporting rate up 5 percent.


3D. Summary


       Reporting rates for all programs, measured as dollars reported in a household
survey divided by administrative reports of dollars of benefits paid out, are in almost all
cases considerably below one. Household surveys fail to capture a large share of
government transfers received by individuals.
       Reporting rates vary sharply across programs. Social Security Old Age and
Survivors Insurance (OASI) payments and Social Security Disability (SSDI) payments
are reported at a reasonably high rate. Over eighty percent of OASI benefits are reported
every year in the Current Population Survey (CPS) and the Survey of Income and



                                                 15
Program Participation (SIPP) and over seventy percent in the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics (PSID). The reporting rates for SSDI tend to be higher. Nevertheless,
typically more than ten percent and frequently a higher share of Social Security
retirement benefits are not reported.
       Reporting rates are especially low for certain programs. Only about fifty percent
of Workers’ Compensation benefits are reported in the CPS and an even smaller share is
reported in the SIPP and the PSID. Reporting rates for AFDC/TANF average below
seventy percent in all surveys except the SIPP and the ACS. Average reporting rates for
UI and the FSP range from 55 to 79 percent across surveys. The reporting rate for SSI
differs sharply across surveys with over 90 percent reported in the SIPP, but typically
under 70 percent in the PSID and the CE Survey.
       Surveys differ systematically in their ability to capture benefit receipt. The SIPP
typically has the highest reporting rate for government transfers, followed by the CPS and
the PSID. There are programs, however, that the other surveys do seem to capture
somewhat better. Unemployment Insurance and Workers’ Compensation are reported at
a slightly higher rate in the CPS than in the SIPP.


3E. Regression Estimates
       To summarize and quantify the differences between surveys and programs described
above, we estimate a series of regressions with the reporting rate as the dependent variable.
Specifically, we estimate equations of the form
                   P −1                   S −1                T −1
(4) R pst = α + ∑ α p1{ program= p} + ∑ β s1{survey = s} + ∑ γ t 1{ year =t } + ε pst ,
                   p =1                   s =1                t =1

where Rpst is the dollar or month reporting rate for program p in survey s in year t. We
exclude the EITC because it is qualitatively different from the other programs as it is
entirely imputed, and the NSLP because the data come in a different form and more
imputation is required. We include separate reporting rates for OASI and SSDI, but not
the combined reporting rate. We estimate separate equations for dollar and month
reporting rates, using the set of programs that is available in each case. The results are
reported in Table 18. For AFDC/TANF in the ACS and CE Survey, we include only the
reporting rates that account for GA.


                                                   16
           The estimates in columns 1 and 2 indicate that the programs can be ranked by the
dollar reporting rate, from best to worst in the following order: SSDI, OASI, SSI, FSP,
UI, AFDC/TANF, and WC. Column 3 examines this relationship for recent years,
specifically since the year 2000. The same pattern holds in recent years, OASI is
reported better than the base group (SSDI) now. The month reporting rate regressions in
columns 4 through 6 are very similar to the dollar reporting rate ones, though we do not
have rates for UI and WC.
           Estimates of equation 4 also provide a ranking of the different surveys in terms of
reporting. One should bear in mind that the dollar reporting rate is only one measure of
data quality, and one that can be inflated by false positive reporting or imputation (that
may lead to false positive reporting). The estimates suggest that overall dollar reporting
is highest in the SIPP and CPS, followed by the ACS, PSID, and CE Survey in that order.
This ordering also holds when we examine the patterns after 2000, either by interacting
survey with an indicator for the years starting with 2000 (column 2), or by estimating
using only data from 2000 forward (column 3). The ordering of the surveys is somewhat
different for month reporting rates. Overall, the PSID is slightly better than the CPS,
which in turn slightly better than the ACS. All three surveys though, have reporting rates
generally well below those of the SIPP. However, the SIPP in part does well because it
tends to have the highest imputation rate as we report below, while the CPS has a lower
rate, and the PSID an even lower rate yet. Prior to 2004, the CE Survey did not impute
income.
           We also examine trends in reporting by program and dataset by regressing the
dollar and month reporting rates on a constant and a time trend.23 The results (which are
not in the tables) indicate that most programs in the PSID, CPS and CE Survey show a
significant decline in dollar reporting over time, while there is a significant decline in
month reporting for most CPS programs. The time trends in reporting in the SIPP and
ACS are less pronounced. The exceptions to the general fall in reporting are SSI in the
case of the ACS and the SIPP and OASI in the CPS, which have rising reporting rates.


4.         Imputation Methods and Shares

23
     We estimate OLS, Cocharne-Orcutt, and Prais-Winsten versions of these regressions.


                                                         17
        Reporting rates are only one indicator of survey quality. Rates of survey and item
nonresponse are two others. All of the surveys we examine impute answers in some
cases of item nonresponse. We describe the methods used to impute these missing values
below. We should emphasize that all of the reporting rates we have presented include
imputed values in the survey totals. A survey’s reporting rate may be high, in part,
because a substantial amount of program dollars or months are imputed. In addition, as
emphasized in Section 2C, reporting rates are biased upward as a measure of reporting
conditional on true receipt if there are false positives. One of the most likely reasons for
false positives is recipiency imputation.24 Imputed dollars or months conditional on
receipt is also likely to induce error.25 Surveys may impute recipiency—whether or not a
person received a given type of benefit at all—or dollars or months of benefits received
conditional on reported or imputed receipt. In this section, we discuss the importance and
implications of such imputation in our surveys.


4A. Imputation Methods
        For the ACS and the CPS, the strategy employed to impute missing data is known as
“Hot-Deck” imputation or “Allocation”. Basically, a hot deck is a data table/matrix which stores
the values of donor values, stratified by characteristics. Missing data are assigned by using the
values from a donor in the hot deck who shares similar demographic and economic
background.26
        For the SIPP, a somewhat more complex algorithm is used to impute missing data. For
the 1984-1993 panels, hot-deck imputation is used to impute missing data in each wave of the


24
    Clearly an alternative would be to exclude all observations with imputed values and reweight by scaling
all weights upward by the inverse of the share of weights of non-imputed observations. However, if item
nonresponse is nonrandom, then such a strategy will lead to bias.
25
   Not all types of imputation are necessarily bad. If the appropriate benefit schedule can be determined for an
individual and one has the inputs to the formula well measured, the imputations may be more accurate than self
reports. However, that is not the way imputation is done for the programs and surveys we examine. Hot deck
imputation is the most common method, which likely leads to greater measurement error than self-reports.
26
   It is important to note that the imputation flags in the CPS-ASEC have to be used with caution. Since the CPS-
ADF/ASEC is a supplement to the basic monthly CPS, there are interviewees who responded to the basic CPS
survey, but not the ADF/ASEC. The imputation (allocation) flags for these individuals are set to zero (i.e. no
allocation) even though data for these individuals are imputed. The variable FL-665 (available in the 1991-2008
surveys) is used to distinguish individuals who participated in the basic survey but not to the ADF/ASEC.


                                                        18
panel.27 Beginning in the 1996 panel, however, the Census Bureau began to impute missing data
in a wave by using the respondent’s data in the previous wave (if available). In this study, we
regard such method as a form of imputation. Readers who are interested in how the SIPP
imputes missing data can refer to Chapter 4 of U.S. Census Bureau (2001) and Pennell (1993).28
        To reduce non-response to the income questions, the SIPP began the use of “Dependent
Interviewing” in wave 2 of the 2004 panel in which the interviewers use information from the
prior wave to tackle item non-response during the actual interview. For instance, in the event of
non-response, the interviewer asks “It says here that you received $X in the last interview, does
that still sound about right for the last 4 months?” Although this method is designed to reduce
non-response, Moore (2006) finds that there “is evidence of improper use of dependent follow-up
procedures by SIPP interviewers, resulting in very high rates of initial non-response to the wave
2 amount items in the 2004 panel.” Our SIPP imputation rates for 2004 are very high, a finding
in line with Moore’s conclusion.
        For the CE Survey, we only include “complete income reporters” and reweight the
estimates. Complete income reporters are those who do report at least one major sources of
income (such as wages and salaries, self-employment income, social security income). Thus,
complete income reporters may have missing income data. For the CE Survey, missing income
data are not imputed prior to the 2004 survey. Beginning with the 2004 survey, a regression-
based method is used to impute missing income data. If an individual indicates receipt of a
source of income, but does not provide an amount, then his amount is imputed. If a respondent
provides no information on income for any sources at the consumer unit level and no member of
the consumer unit provides income at the individual level, and no member is imputed to be a
worker, then the receipt of transfers (yes/no) is imputed, along with amounts. First, the BLS runs
a regression of a type of income on demographic characteristics and a variable that equals the
quarterly expenditures of a consumer unit; the data used in this regression come from the valid
non-zero reporters. After estimating the regression, the estimated coefficients are perturbed by
adding random noise; an estimate is then produced using the resulting coefficients. This process


27
   The Census Bureau also provides SIPP “full panel files” for the 1984-1993 panels that link all the waves in a
panel together. Additional imputations are implemented in these full panel files.
28
   For those who do not respond to the SIPP interview (person non-response), the imputation flags indicate whether
the hot-deck donor is imputed, not the non-responding individual. Thus one has to adjust the imputation flags for
these non-respondents (see section 4-13 of U.S. Census Bureau, 2001).


                                                        19
is performed five times in total, yielding five estimates. The imputed value is then the mean of
these five estimates. See Fisher (2006) and Paulin et al. (2006) for more details.
       Prior to the 1994 survey, the PSID imputed missing income data by using the hot-deck
imputation method with the hot deck built using data from previous and current interviews.
Beginning with the 1994 survey, however, the PSID ceased imputing missing data.


4B. Imputation Shares
       We report CPS, SIPP and ACS imputation shares as a consequence of item nonresponse
for various transfer programs. For the PSID and CE Survey we do not have information on
imputation shares. We also report total imputation rates for dollars or months that incorporate
yes/no and imputation conditional on that yes/no response.
       Table 19 reports the share of dollars recorded in the CPS for six of our programs
that are imputed. We report both the share of dollars accounted for by observations
where recipiency is imputed and the share accounted for by all types of imputation.
Typical recipiency imputation shares are on the order of 10 percent, but they are
frequently higher. There is substantial variation across program and over time. For most
of the years since 2000, recipiency imputation exceeds 20 percent for AFDC/TANF.
Imputations rates incorporating all types of imputation are necessarily larger. These rates
are typically around 25 percent, but exceed 30 percent for several years for
AFDC/TANF, OASDI and WC. In 2008, the imputation shares ranged from 25 percent
of UI dollars to 34 percent of social security dollars. Dollar imputation rates
incorporating all types of imputation have risen considerably over time, while the trend
for recipiency imputation alone is less pronounced.
       Table 20 reports the share of months that are imputed in the CPS for four of our
programs. The numbers are similar to those for dollars for both recipiency imputations
and all imputations. We should emphasize that the all imputation numbers for OASDI
and SSI are analogous to the recipiency imputations in Table 19, as months for these two
programs are not directly reported in the CPS and are calculated using averages based on
the SIPP. In recent years, at least ten percent of months are imputed in the CPS for all
four programs. Imputation rates were comparable across programs in the early 1990s,
but rates for AFDC/TANF and the FSP have risen more noticeably over time.



                                                20
        Table 21 reports the share of dollars imputed in the SIPP for six of our programs.
In recent years for all of the programs at least ten percent of dollars are attributed to those
for whom recipiency is imputed, with twenty percent typical for UI and approximately 40
percent typical for WC. The shares of dollars for all types of imputations are much
higher, at least twenty percent for all six programs in recent years. It is not uncommon
for these rates to exceed thirty percent in recent years. Imputation rates rise sharply over
time in the SIPP, as they are less than 10 percent for recipiency in five of the six
programs in 1990. Overall, the SIPP has higher imputation rates than the CPS. This
difference needs to be taken into account when comparing reporting rates and other
measures of data quality across surveys.
        Table 22 reports the share of months imputed in the SIPP for four of the
programs. Shares are sometimes below ten percent, but are more typically between ten
and twenty percent. OASDI tends to have the lowest imputation shares. The shares have
generally risen over time. Table 23 reports dollar imputation shares for the ACS. The
shares always exceed ten percent and are fairly similar across programs.
        As we did with reporting rates, we have also regressed imputation shares on a constant
and a time trend. Dollar imputation rates rise significantly for all programs in the CPS and SIPP
and month imputation rates rise significantly in most cases.


5.      Caveats and Biases


        Some caveats are in order. First, the reporting of benefit receipt certainly contains
some individuals who mistakenly report receipt despite not receiving benefits. As with
previous research, we include imputed values in our survey totals. Even if not for other
reasons, due to imputed observations benefit receipt will be recorded for some people
who do not truly receive transfers. As discussed in Section 2C, false positive reporting of
receipt (π10 >0) likely implies that the fraction of dollars received by true recipients is
strictly less than the calculated reporting rates, i.e. our reporting rates if applied to true
recipients are biased upward. Results from matches of survey microdata to
administrative microdata provide evidence on the extent of such false positives. In Table
24 we examine reporting rates analogous to ours from several studies that use matched



                                                   21
data. Column 1 reports the month reporting rate conditional on true receipt, while
column 2 reports the unconditional reporting rate that is analogous to our reporting rates.
The difference between these two columns is the false positive rate. Note that the
numbers in column 1 are lower than those in column 2. In most cases the difference is
not more than 0.1. In some cases, however, the rates are substantial, such as for UI, WC
and SSI.
        Second, in the situation where we have incomplete information about the type of
social security received, we apply the OASI and SSDI dollar proportions to determine
participation in these programs. A more desirable method would calculate these
proportions based on participation rather than dollars. Applying these proportions
essentially assumes that an individual can only receive benefits from either SSDI or
OASI, but not both, in a particular year. Strictly speaking, individuals can receive
benefits from both programs in a year, most commonly those whose SSDI benefit
switches automatically to OASI when they reach retirement age. This issue leads to a
bias downward in our social security retirement and disability participation estimates.
        Third, in certain years of the PSID we do not have information about benefit receipt of
non-head and non-spouse family members. Although we have attempted to alleviate this issue
by using the share of total benefits received by these non-head, non-spouse family members in
other years and scaling up the aggregates accordingly, such methods assume that these shares are
relatively stable over time. Fourth, adults may receive social security and SSI benefits on behalf
of their children. Since administrative data are based on awardees, calculating weighted total
benefits based on payees rather than awardees may introduce biases. Unfortunately, most of the
household surveys provide little information about exactly who is the true awardee of the
benefit.29 Fifth, it is important to emphasize that our survey totals do not include the
institutionalized or decedents, although as explained in Section 2.B, we adjust these totals for the
former for SSI, SSDI, and OASI.
        We should also note that the validity of these comparisons depends on unbiased survey
weights.30 The weights are based on the Census of Population, so an argument about
underweighting is essentially an argument about individuals being missed in the Census count.

29
  The SIPP, however, does provide some information about who is the true awardee of Social Security benefits.
30
  As a check, for each survey and year, we have confirmed that our weighted population totals are close to Census
population estimates.


                                                        22
Unfortunately, we have no estimates of the undercount for the populations receiving transfer
income. In 1990 for example, estimates are only available for broader groups such as non-blacks
and blacks, women and men, renters and owners, those in large urbanized areas and those in
other areas, and by age (and some cross-classifications of these groups).31 Overall estimates of
the 1990 undercount are fairly low, in the range of two percent. Estimates are higher for blacks
and renters, but lower for women, especially women of childbearing age.
         We are also encouraged that errors in the weights are not a substantial source of bias
because the reporting rates are fairly similar to rates based on comparisons to administrative
microdata, in the few cases where such comparisons are available. Column 2 of Table 24 reports
reporting rates based on microdata comparisons, while column 3 reports numbers from our tables
that are based on comparisons of aggregates usually for the same year (but not the same months
or states).32 The 1984 SIPP estimates from Marquis and Moore (1990) indicate that microdata
based reporting rates are similar to ours based on aggregates.33 The same is true for the other
studies, except for SSI for two years in one of the studies.34 The estimates from the microdata
match studies are often quite close to our numbers, and do not show a pronounced tendency to be
lower. Our reporting rates based on aggregates are particularly close (or higher) for FSP and
TANF, the programs most targeted to the poor, the group that might be most plausibly under-
weighted or under-represented. That these reporting ratios in matched administrative and survey
data are comparable to our main estimates suggests that weighting is not a substantial source of
bias.




31
   See Hogan (1993) and Robinson et al. (1993) for 1990 Census undercount estimates.
32
   In some cases we must substitute dollar for month reporting rates.
33
   There is a large difference for WC, but this may be due, in part, to the fact that for WC and UI, our estimates are
based on dollars reported because months are not available, while the microdata estimates are based on months
reported.
34
   In the case of Huynh et al. (2002) and Sears and Rupp (2003) another source of noncomparability between
columns 2 and 3 is that the administrative microdata behind column 2 exclude those under 18 (who may be
especially likely to not report receipt), while the survey data behind column 3 include those under 18.


                                                          23
6.      Reasons for Under-reporting


        The reasons for benefit receipt under-reporting in household surveys have been
catalogued by several authors.35 Interviewees may forget receipt or confuse the names of
programs. They may misremember the timing of receipt or who are the true recipients of a
program within a family. Errors may be due to a desire to reduce interview burden, the stigma of
program participation, or the sensitivity of income information. Survey and interviewer
characteristics such as the interview mode (in person or by phone), respondent type (self or
proxy) may matter for the degree of under-reporting. Information on the extent of under-
reporting, how it varies across programs, surveys and time should be informative about the
plausibility of different explanations for under-reporting. For example, comparisons of programs
with different degrees of stigma, and surveys with different question timing and wording, should
shed some light on the reasons for mis-reporting.
        The different explanations for under-reporting suggest different approaches to improve
reporting. If the pattern of mis-reporting seems most consistent with recall biases, then changing
the timing of the questions relative to the period of receipt may be warranted. If interviewee
time burden seems to be the explanation, then the length of the interview may need to be altered.
If the stigma of program participation is a major issue, then a focus on question wording and the
way interviewers ask the questions may be warranted. The results could also suggest that some
dollar items should be calculated based on reported receipt and demographic characteristics, or
that respondents should be encouraged to obtain check stubs. Some items could also be obtained
through matching to administrative data.


6A. Differences Across Programs
        A standard explanation of under-reporting is the stigma of reporting receipt of “welfare”
programs, and the inclination to give “socially desirable” answers (Sudman and Bradburn 1974).
This explanation is consistent with the low reporting rates of four of the programs most
associated with “welfare” or idleness, AFDC/TANF, the FSP, UI and WIC. There has been a
noticeable decline over time in AFDC/TANF and food stamp reporting, which is broadly


35
  Marquis and Moore (1990) provide nice examples for the SIPP, while Bound, Brown and Mathiowetz (2001) and
Groves (2004) provide more general discussions.


                                                    24
consistent with the stigma explanation as the stigma associated with these programs has arguably
risen over time.36 However, some of the patterns of reporting by program do not fit with a
stigma explanation for under-reporting. Workers’ Compensation has the lowest reporting rate
but is presumably not a program that greatly stigmatizes its recipients, given that the program is
for those injured while working.
        A second common explanation for under-reporting is that respondents forget that they
receive transfers. Benefits that an individual regularly receives or that account for a substantial
fraction of total resources are arguably easier to recall. An example of such a program is OASI,
which is often continuously received for many years and may be the only major source of
income for many recipients. OASI is reported at a high rate, generally above eighty percent and
often higher. By contrast, TANF benefit receipt is much more likely to be sporadic and
potentially harder to recall. With the reform of welfare in the mid-1990s the typical time on
welfare fell and the likelihood of return to the rolls decreased (U.S. House of Representatives
2004). Reporting rates seem to have fallen at roughly the same time, though the PSID drop
seems to precede welfare reform. Receipt of FSP also tends to be more sporadic than OASI, but
the pattern of receipt has not changed as much as that of TANF. FSP reporting has dropped in
recent years in the PSID and the CPS, and the decline has been less pronounced than for TANF,
providing additional evidence that the regularity of receipt affects reporting.
        How familiar an interviewer is with a particular program and how common it is to
receive it might also affect reporting because the ability of the interviewer to infer receipt might
affect the extent to which they probe respondents about particular programs. Workers’
Compensation is received by a small fraction of the population and has the lowest reporting rate.
Workers’ Compensation may also be the program of which the general public has the least
knowledge. It may also be hard for an interviewer to guess that a given person is a recipient and
probe further when asking the questions about receipt of Workers’ Compensation. By contrast,
an interviewer will know that anyone 65 or older is likely to be an OASI recipient.
        Another explanation for under-reporting for a given program is that its name may be
confused with that of another program for which the benefits are reported instead. TANF
benefits might be reported as general assistance payments, OASI, SSDI, and SSI might be

36
  Opinion surveys provide some evidence of increased stigma. Data from the General Social Survey show that
more than 40 percent of respondents report that spending on welfare is too high in the U.S., and this fraction
increased sharply starting in 1993 (Scholz and Levine 2001).


                                                        25
confused, or SSDI and Workers’ Compensation might be confused. The surveys employ various
techniques to avoid this problem, such as asking specifically about the color of checks received
in the case of the PSID. We should also note that the reporting rate for SSDI in the PSID is not
noticeably different whether we impute the division of OASDI into OASI and SSDI or whether
we use self reports.37 It is plausible that the recent changes in the names of state and federal
welfare programs might have confused respondents into saying that they were not receiving
TANF, but other welfare instead. However, the reporting rate for a broader welfare measure that
combines TANF and general assistance tends to be lower than that for TANF alone in most
survey years, suggesting that such confusion is not responsible for the low reporting rates.
        We also find the puzzling result that the EITC is sharply under-imputed in the CPS. This
result suggests a problem with survey misreporting of earnings or children, or tax
noncompliance.


6B. Differences Across Surveys
        The finding that the SIPP has higher program reporting rates than the other surveys is
consistent with the focus of the survey on program participation. Conversely, it is not surprising
that the CE Survey has low program reporting rates given the focus of the survey on collecting
detailed consumption data. Nevertheless, the survey characteristics and methods that lead to
high or low reporting merit exploration. The SIPP has the most detailed questions about
program receipt.38 The surveys differ across many dimensions as is indicated in Appendix Table
3 which summarizes the survey characteristics including frequency, target population, and recall
period. Given the many differences, it may be difficult to isolate the effect of a given
characteristic. The recall period is the previous four months for the SIPP, the calendar year for
the PSID and CPS, and the previous twelve months for the ACS and CE Survey. The only
survey for which interviewees are legally required to respond is the ACS, possibly accounting
for its high reporting rate for TANF and some other programs. The PSID is the only survey
which provides monetary compensation to respondents. Most surveys use a combination of
phone and in-person interviewing, while the ACS also relies on mail back responses and the CE
Survey uses only in-person interviewing.

37
  We impute based on the interaction of demographics and year as described in the Appendix.
38
  Though Czajka and Denmead (2008) observe that a small number of questions sometimes seem to do a good job
of measuring mean income.


                                                     26
         Changes in survey procedures over time potentially provide evidence on reasons for
under-reporting. Evidence on respondent recall biases comes from the PSID, which moved to
asking about FSP and SSI benefits received two years earlier rather than one year earlier for odd
numbered years starting in 1997 (2003 for TANF, UI and WC; see Appendix Table 1). The
longer recall period seems to have resulted in a decrease in reporting, as the dollar reporting rate
is lower in each odd numbered year than the following even numbered year (except 2003-2004
for FSP and 1997-1998 and 1999-2000 for SSI).
         Reduction or elimination of in-person interviewing seems to have little effect on
reporting rates. For example, reporting rates do not change much after the 1996 reduction of in-
person interviewing in the SIPP. This result is consistent with the Groves (2004) observation
that there is no robust evidence of a difference in errors between in-person and phone
interviewing. An exception may be the sharp fall in AFDC reporting in the PSID after the move
to telephone interviewing in 1973 (1972 income). There is some evidence from the PSID and
the CPS that a change to CATI/CAPI decreases reporting. In the case of the SIPP, however,
there does not appear to be a fall in reporting that coincides with the introduction of CATI/CAPI.
These analyses are complicated by simultaneous changes in the questionnaire in the cases of both
the PSID and the CPS.
         We examine the effects of survey changes on reporting rates more directly with a number
of different regression specifications (the results of these analyses are not reported but are
available upon request), focusing on survey years without multiple contemporaneous changes.
For example, we study the effect of explicitly mentioning the name of a program on the reporting
accuracy for that program. Beginning in the 1978 PSID survey, for some programs the
interviewer mentions the name of the program when asking about the amount of dollars received
by the non-head non-spouse family members.39 Using a regression discontinuity framework, our
estimates of the effect of this change on reporting are small and not statistically significant.40




39
   In the other years, the interviewer asks the interviewee to recall what types of income were received. OASDI is
explicitly asked starting in 1978 and AFDC starting in 1984. Starting in 1985 WC is explicitly asked, but we do not
focus on this change because there were other survey changes implemented in 1985.
40
    Specifically, we regress the reporting rate of a program on a constant, a time trend, time trend interacted with the
post-change period, and a post-change period indicator variable. The coefficient of interest is that of the post-
change indicator variable. We use only the 10 years of data surrounding the change. We correct for autocorrelation
using the Prais-Winsten method.


                                                          27
The estimated effects are also jointly statistically insignificant.41 These results suggest that
imperfect recipiency recall may not be a strong reason for under-reporting. Another survey
change we examine is the addition of bracketed responses. Starting in 2001, when a specific
amount is not provided, the CE Survey asks interviewees whether the amount falls within certain
ranges. There is some evidence that this change increased the reporting rates of TANF and SSI
(by 5 and 23 percentage points respectively), while it decreased the reporting rate of OASI (by 9
percentage points). These estimated changes are jointly significant at the 1 percent level.

7.       Some Adjustment Methods


         Reporting rates calculated as above can be used to adjust existing data analyses. In
particular, the reporting rates we provide can be used to adjust estimated program effects on the
income distribution as well as estimates of program takeup. A takeup rate is typically measured
as the fraction of eligible individuals or families that receive a given transfer. A conservative
adjustment to the typical takeup rate can be obtained by multiplying the takeup rate by the
inverse of the reporting probability. For example, Blank and Ruggles (1996) examine the Food
Stamp takeup rate in SIPP during 1986-1987. Their reported takeup rate is 0.52. Since our
average monthly participation reporting rate for these years averages 0.876, an adjusted takeup
rate for this period is 0.52/0.876 = 0.59. This adjustment is likely conservative because our
reporting rate is likely to be too high because some true non-recipients report receipt. While
false positives could bias the takeup rate upward, we are implicitly assuming that the eligibility
calculations and the likely exclusion of imputed observations imply that there are few false
positives in the original analysis.
         Other adjustments are possible in more complicated situations. When estimating the
effect of a program on the income of a group, one can consider scaling up benefit receipt by one
over the dollar reporting rate. As long as non-reporting recipients have the same distribution of
characteristics as reporting recipients (where the set of characteristics is those that are used as
conditioning variables), the approach is unbiased. One application is to scale up benefits for the
group of potential recipients. If there are no false positives from outside the group of potential
recipients, then scaling by the inverse of the dollar reporting rate provides the amount of program

41
  We replace the after variable by after*program interactions in the regression and perform an F-test of whether all
the after*program interaction coefficients are zero. The test statistic has a p-value of 0.25.


                                                         28
benefits received by potential recipients. If there are false positives from outside the group, then
the rescaling is a downward biased estimate of benefits received by the group. An example of
such an adjustment in the case of UI, FSP, WC, AFDC/TANF, SSI, SSDI and OASI is Meyer
and Mok (2008). Other studies have assumed that under-reporting is constant in proportional
terms across deciles or quintiles of the income distribution. Examples of adjustments based on
this assumption can be found for the FSP and AFDC/TANF in Primus et al. (1999) and for
unemployment insurance in Anderson and Meyer (2006).
         However, in many analyses of income distributions or the distributional effects of
transfers, it will be difficult to adjust the analyses for under-reporting using aggregate reporting
rates. One often needs to know exactly who under-reported, and by how much. An example of
the difficulties of trying to make such an adjustment can be found in Meyer and Sullivan (2006)
for the case of Food Stamps and AFDC/TANF in the CE Survey.
         A type of analysis that might be particularly sensitive to under-reporting is analyses of
the probability that a member of a disadvantage population neither works nor receives welfare.
Blank and Kovak (2008) recently found a rise in the share of single mothers who are neither
working nor receiving welfare; these women are referred to as “disconnected single mothers.”
Blank and Kovak estimate that the among low-income single mothers (defined as those with
family income below 200% of the poverty line), the fraction who are disconnected single
mothers has risen from 18.8% in 1990 to 24.9% in 2003 using the SIPP, and from 9.9% in 1990
to 20.0% in 2005 using the CPS.42
         We use our reporting rates to reexamine the estimates reported in Blank and Kovak
(2008). Given that they rely on the reported fraction of poor single mothers who are not working
and not receiving welfare, their rate may be overstated as some of those who receive welfare do
not report it. Under fairly reasonable assumptions,43 the Blank and Kovak estimate is overstated
by k(1-y)/y, where k is the observed probability of not working and receiving welfare (among


42
   Blank and Kovak (2008) define disconnected single mothers in the CPS as those who did not receive welfare and
did not have earnings in the calendar year, while in the SIPP they consider welfare recipiency and earnings in a
month. Thus the CPS rates are considerably lower than those obtained in the SIPP.
43
   We assume 1) there is no failure to report work, and 2) true welfare recipients who work are as likely to fail to
report receipt as those who do not work. The first assumption biases us towards a higher rate of disconnected single
mothers. We motivate the second assumption by considering that welfare recipients who work may be more willing
to report due to lower stigma, but yet the amount of AFDC/TANF they receive may be too small for them to bother
reporting. Also, interviewers may be less likely to probe for welfare information if the individual is working. These
opposing forces may imply similar average reporting rates between those who work and those who do not.


                                                         29
poor single mothers) and y is the AFDC/TANF month reporting rate of the corresponding year.44
Using this adjustment factor, we adjust the Blank and Kovak estimates.
        Table 25 reports our results. Panels A and B report the results for the SIPP and the CPS
respectively. In column 1 of each panel, the estimates from Blank and Kovak (2008) are shown.
Column 2 reports the adjustment factor and column 3 reports the adjusted fraction of
disconnected single mothers. Accounting for under-reporting, we see that the fraction of
disconnected single mothers is somewhat lower than that reported by Blank and Kovak (2008).
In 1990, Blank and Kovak (2008) suggest that disconnected single mothers constitute 19% and
10% of the poor single mothers population in the SIPP and the CPS respectively. After
correcting for under-reporting, these fractions drop to 10% and 2% for the SIPP and the CPS
respectively. Nevertheless, Blank and Kovak’s finding that the fraction of single mothers who
are disconnected has risen is still evident in our adjusted numbers. In fact, after correcting for
under-reporting, the rise in the disconnected single mothers population is more serious than what
Blank and Kovak suggest—between 1990-2005 the adjusted numbers suggest that the fraction of
disconnected single mothers has doubled in the SIPP and risen by a factor of eight in the CPS.


8.      Conclusions and Extensions


        We provide estimates of the extent of under-reporting of dollars and months of
participation for ten large transfer programs in five major household surveys. We find that
under-reporting is common and has increased over time. Less than half of Workers’
Compensation benefits are typically reported, and only about two-thirds of Food Stamp Program,
TANF, WIC and Unemployment Insurance benefits are commonly reported. Three-quarters of
SSI benefits and a much larger share of SSDI and OASI benefits tend to be recorded. There is
substantial variation across surveys, with the CE Survey typically having the lowest reporting
rate and the SIPP having the highest rate for most programs.



44
   Formally, consider a single mother who is either working (W) or not working (NW), and who either receives or
does not receive welfare (B and NB), and who either reports or does not report welfare recipiency (R and NR). This
situation yields eight possibilities. Blank and Kovak (2008) estimate the observed fraction of poor single mothers
who are not working and not receiving welfare, which is equivalent to the sum of Prob(NW ∩ NB ∩ NR) and
Prob(NW ∩ B ∩ NR). Assuming no false positives, the true fraction of disconnected single mothers should only be
Prob(NW ∩ NB ∩ NR), thus the Blank and Kovak’s estimate is overstated by Prob (NW ∩ B ∩ NR).


                                                       30
       Over time, the reporting of many programs in the surveys has sharply deteriorated. We
have also seen a noticeable rise in the share of responses that are imputed. This rise in
imputation and under-reporting is part of an overall pattern of decline in the quality of data from
U.S. household surveys. Other papers have shown a rise in survey nonresponse and item
nonresponse and a drop relative to alternative sources (Atrostic et al. 2001, Meyer and Sullivan
2007b, 2009).
       The patterns of under-reporting that we find do not seem to be consistent with a simple
story of stigma or the sensitivity of income reporting. While these reasons are plausible
explanations for the low FSP and TANF reporting rates, they cannot explain the very low WC
reporting rate. We suspect that other factors, including continuity of receipt, the ease of
reporting, the survey structure, and a desire to reduce the length of interviews play a large part in
determining the degree of under-reporting.
       We have also shown how our estimates can be used to correct the findings of recent
studies. We can extend these results by calculating aggregate based reporting rates for
demographic groups, regions or states to make more refined adjustments. Ideally one would also
use microdata to match these surveys to program data. It would be useful to analyze such
matches to understand how mis-reporting varies with respondent and interviewer characteristics,
and to assess the extent of false positive reporting by nonrecipients to better adjust studies of the
effects of transfer programs.




                                                 31
                                         References

Anderson, Patricia M. and Bruce D. Meyer. 2006. “Unemployment Insurance Tax Burdens and
        Benefits: Funding Family Leave and Reforming the Payroll Tax,” National Tax Journal,
        77-95.
Atrostic, B. K, Nancy Bates, Geraldine Burt, and Adrian Silberstein. 2001. “Nonresponse in
        U.S. Government Household Surveys: Consistent Measures, Recent Trends, and New
        Insights,” Journal of Official Statistics, 17:209-226.
Bitler, M., J. Currie and J. K. Scholz. 2003. "WIC Eligibility and Participation," Journal of
        Human Resources, 38:S, 1139-1179.
Blank, Rebecca M. and Brian Kovak. 2008. “The Growing Problem of Disconnected Single
        Mothers,” National Poverty Center Working Paper #07-28.
Blank, Rebecca M. and Patricia Ruggles (1996): "When Do Women Use AFDC & Food
        Stamps? The Dynamics of Eligibility vs. Participation," Journal of Human Resources 31,
        57-89.
Bollinger, Christopher and Martin David (1997). “Modeling Discrete Choice with Response
        Error: Food Stamp Participation.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 92
        (439) pp. 827-835.
Bollinger, Christopher and Martin David (2001), Estimation with Response Error and
        Nonresponse: Food-Stamp Participation in the SIPP, Journal of Business and Economic
        Statistics, 19:2, 129-141.
Bound, John, Charles Brown, and Nancy Mathiowetz (2001), “Measurement Error in Survey
        Data,” in Handbook of Econometrics. Volume 5, ed. by J.J Heckman and E. Leamer.
        Elsevier: Amsterdam.
Card, David, Andrew K.G. Hildreth and Lara D. Shore-Sheppard (2001), “The Measurement of
        Medicaid Coverage in the SIPP: Evidence from California 1990-1996” NBER Working
        Paper 8514.
Charles, Kerwin K. 2003. “The Longitudinal Structure of Earnings Losses among Work-Limited
        Disabled Workers.” Journal of Human Resources 38(3): 619-46
Coder, John and Lydia Scoon-Rogers. 1996. AEvaluating the Quality of Income Data Collected
        in the Annual Supplement to the March Current Population Survey and the Survey of
        Income and Program Participation,@ Housing and Household Economic Statistics
        Division, Bureau of the Census.
Currie, Janet. 2006. “The Take-up of Social Benefits,” in Alan J. Auterbach, David Card, and
        john M. Quigley, eds. Public Policy and the Income Distribution, Russell Sage
        Foundation: New York.
Czajka, John L. and Gabrielle Denmead. 2008. AIncome Data for Policy Analysis: A
        Comparative Assessment of Eight Surveys,@ Mathematica Policy Research.
Doyle, Pat, Betsy Martin and Jeff Moore. 2000. AThe Survey of Income and Program
        Participation (SIPP) Methods Panel Improving Income Measurement.@ The Survey of
        Income and Program Participation Working Paper No. 234.
Duncan, Greg J. and Daniel H. Hill. 1989. “Assessing the Quality of Household Panel Data: The
        Case of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics.” Journal of Business and Economic
        Statistics, 441-52.




                                             32
Engelhardt, Gary and Jon Gruber. 2006. “Social Security and the Evolution of Elderly
         Poverty,” in Alan J. Auterbach, David Card, and john M. Quigley, eds. Public Policy and
         the Income Distribution, Russell Sage Foundation: New York.
Fisher, Jonathan D. 2006. “Income Imputation and the Analysis of Consumer Expenditure
         Data.” Monthly Labor Review, November 2006: 11-17.
Groves, Robert M. 2004. Survey Errors and Survey Costs. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Hogan, Howard. 1993. “The 1990 Post-Enumeration Survey: Operations and Results.” Journal
         of the American Statistical Association 88(3): 1047-1060.
Hotz, V. Joseph and John Karl Scholz. 2002. “Measuring Employment and Income for Low-
         Income Populations With Administrative and Survey Data.” In Studies of Welfare
         Populations: Data Collection and Research Issues, eds. Michele Ver Ploeg, Robert A.
         Moffitt, and Constance F. Citro, 275-313. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Huynh, Minh, Kalman Rupp, and James Sears. 2002. “The Assessment of Survey of Income
         and Program Participation (SIPP) Benefit Data using Longitudinal Administrative
         Records.” Social Security Administration.
Joint Economic Committee Democrats. 2004. “Reduction in Poverty Significantly Greater in
         the 1990s than Official Estimates Suggest,” Policy Brief, August.
Jolliffe, Dean, Craig Gundersen, Laura Tiehen, and Joshua Winicki (2005). “Food Stamp
         Benefits and Child Poverty,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, August, 569-
         581.
Lerman, Robert I. and Kelly S. Mikelson, 2004. “Examining the Relationship between the EITC
         and Food Stamp Program Participation Among Households with Children,” Working
         Paper, American University.
Marquis, Kent H. and Jeffrey C. Moore. 1990. “Measurement Errors in SIPP Program Reports.”
         In Proceedings of the 1990 Annual Research Conference, 721-745. Washington, DC.:
         U.S. Bureau of the Census.
McGarry, Kathleen. 2002. “Guaranteed Income: SSI and the Well Being of the Elderly Poor,”
         in The Distributional Aspects of Social Security and Social Security Reform, ed. by
         Martin Feldstein and Jeffrey B. Liebman, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002.
Meyer, Bruce D. 2007. “The U.S. Earned Income Tax Credit, its Effects, and Possible
         Reforms,” Swedish Economic Policy Review 14: 55-80.
Meyer, Bruce D. and Wallace K.C. Mok. 2008. “Disability, Earnings, Income and
         Consumption.” Manuscript, University of Chicago.
Meyer, Bruce D. and James X. Sullivan. 2003. “Measuring the Well-Being of the Poor Using
         Income and Consumption.” Journal of Human Resources, 38(Supplement): 1180-1220.
Meyer, Bruce D. and James X. Sullivan. 2006. “Consumption, Income and Material Well-Being
         After Welfare Reform.” NBER Working Paper 11976.
Meyer, Bruce D. and James X. Sullivan. 2007a. “Reporting Bias in Studies of the Food Stamp
         Program.” Unpublished manuscript.
Meyer, Bruce D. and James X. Sullivan. 2007b. “Further Results on Measuring the Well-Being
         of the Poor Using Income and Consumption,” NBER Working Paper 13413.
Meyer, Bruce D. and James X. Sullivan. 2009. “Five Decades of Consumption and Income
         Poverty,” NBER Working Paper 14827, March.
Moore, Jeffrey C., Kent H. Marquis, and Karen Bogen. 1996. “The SIPP Cognitive Research
         Evaluation Experiment: Basic Results and Documentation.” The Survey of Income and
         Program Participation, Working Paper No. 212. Washington D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau.



                                              33
Moore, Jeffrey C. 2006. “The Effects of Questionnaire Design Changes on General Income
        Amount Nonresponse in Waves 1 and 2 of the 2004 SIPP Panel.” Research Report Series
        (Survey Methodology #2006-4). Statistical Research Division, U.S. Census Bureau,
        Washington, DC.
Moore, Jeffrey C., Nancy Bates, Joanne Pascale, Julia Klein Griffiths and Aniekan Okon.
        2006a. “Use of Dependent Interviewing Procedures to Improve Data Quality in the
        Measurement of Change.” Research Report Series (Survey Methodology #2006-2).
        Statistical Research Division, U.S. Census Bureau, Washington, DC.
Moore, J. C., Stinson, L.L. and Welniak, E. J. Jr. 2000. “Income Measurement Error in
        Surveys: A Review.” Journal of Official Statistics, 14:4, 331-361.
Paulin, Geoffrey, Jonathan D. Fisher and Sally Reys-Morales. 2006. “User's Guide to Income
        Imputation in the CE.” Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Pennell S. G. 1993. “Cross-Sectional Imputation and Longitudinal Editing Procedures in the
        Survey of Income and Program Participation” U. S. Department of Commerce, Census
        Bureau.
Primus, Wendell, Lynette Rawlings, Kathy Larin, and Kathryn Porter. 1999. “The Initial
        Impacts of Welfare Reform on the Incomes of Single-Mother Families.” Washington,
        DC: Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.
Remler, Dahlia K and Sherry A. Glied. 2003. “What Other Programs Can Teach Us: Increasing
        Participation in Health Insurance Programs.” American Journal of Public Health 93(1):
        67-74.
Robinson, J. Gregory, Bashir Ahmed, Prithwis Das Gupta and Karen A. Woodrow. 1993.
        “Estimation of Population Coverage in the 1990 United States Census Based on
        Demographic Analysis.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 88(3): 1061-
        1071.
Roemer, Marc I. 2000. “Assessing the Quality of the March Current Population Survey and the
        Survey of Income and Program Participation Income Estimates, 1990-1996.” Staff Papers
        on Income, Housing and Household Economic Statistics Division. Washington D.C.:
        U.S. Census Bureau.
Scholz, John Karl, and Kara Levine. 2001. “The Evolution of Income Support Policy in Recent
        Decades.” In Sheldon Danziger and Robert Haveman, eds., Understanding Poverty,
        Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 193–228.
Scholz, John Karl, Robert Moffitt, and Benjamin Cowan. 2008. “Trends in Income Support.”
        Working Paper, University of Wisconsin, Madison.
Sears, James and Kalman Rupp. 2003. “Exploring Social Security Payment History matched
        with the Survey of Income and Program Participation. Social Security Administration.
Stephens, Mel. 2001. “The Long-Run Consumption Effects of Earnings Shocks.” Review and
        Economics and Statistics 83(1):28-36.
Sudman, Seymour and Norman M. Bradburn. 1974. Response Effects in Surveys. Chicago:
        NORC/Aldine Publishing Company.
Taeuber, Cynthia, Dean M. Resnick, Susan P. Love, Jane Stavely, Parke Wilde, and Richard
        Larson. 2004. “Differences in Estimates of Food Stamp Program Participation Between
        Surveys and Administrative Records” working paper, U.S. Census Bureau.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2001. “Survey of Income Program Participation Users’ Guide” Third
        Edition. Washington D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau.




                                             34
U.S. Census Bureau. 2008. “Income, Poverty, and Health Coverage in the United States: 2007”
       August.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2007. “The Effects of Taxes and Transfers on Income and Poverty in the
       United States: 2005,” March.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2008. “Indicators of Welfare Dependence:
       Annual Report to Congress 2007.” U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
       Washington, D.C.
U.S. Department of Labor. Various Years. “Unemployment Insurance Financial Data
       Handbook.” Employment and Training Administration. ET Handbook No. 394.
U.S. House of Representatives (2004). 2004 Green Book. Committee on Ways and Means.
       Washington DC: USGPO.
U.S. Social Security Administration. Various Years. “Annual Statistical Supplement to the
       Social Security Bulletin.” U.S. Social Security Administration, Office of Research,
       Evaluation and Statistics.




                                             35
                                         Data Appendix


1.       The Household Surveys
A. Surveys and Samples

     •    Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) – We use the 1968-1997, 1999, 2001, 2003,
          and first release 2005 waves. The initial sample of the PSID consisted of two
          independent samples: 1) A National Sample (2,930 families) of the civilian non-
          institutionalized population of the 48 conterminous states and 2) The SEO (Survey of
          Economic Opportunity) sample, which consisted of 1,972 low income families residing
          in Standard Metropolitan Statistical Areas (SMSAs) and non-SMSAs in the southern
          regions. In the 1990 wave, a sample of 2,043 Latino households was added, but we do
          not include them in this study. However, we do include the 1997 immigrant sample,
          which consists of 441 families.

     •    Survey of Income Program Participation (SIPP) – We use the 1984-1993, 1996, 2001
          and 2004 panels. The periods covered by each panel can be seen in the table below.

                                  SIPP Survey Period, by Panel

     SIPP Panel            Begin (reference month)    End (reference month)   Number of Waves
     1984                  June 1983                  July 1986               9
     1985                  October 1984               July 1987               8
     1986                  October 1985               March 1988              7
     1987                  October 1986               April 1989              7
     1988                  October 1987               December 1989           6
     1989                  October 1988               December 1989           3
     1990                  October 1989               August 1992             8
     1991                  October 1990               August 1993             8
     1992                  October 1991               December 1994           9
     1993                  October 1992               December 1995           9
     1996                  December 1995              February 2000           13
     2001                  October 2000               December 2003           9
     2004                  October 2003               Still Ongoing           4 (as of Sept. 2008)

The SIPP sample consists of individuals residing in the United States, excluding people who are:

     a)   Living in a household on a temporary basis and have a residence elsewhere.
     b)   Armed forces members who are in the household on a temporary basis.
     c)   Students whose living quarters are located elsewhere.
     d)   Inmates in an institution.
     e)   Nursing home residents.
     f)   Citizens of foreign countries.




                                                     36
   •   Current Population Survey – Annual Demographic File/Annual Social and
       Economic Supplement (CPS-ADF/ASEC) – We use the 1976-2008 surveys. The CPS-
       ADF/ASEC sample universe is the civilian non-institutional population living in the US
       and members of the Armed Forces living in civilian housing units on a military base or in
       a household not on a military base.

   •   American Community Survey (ACS) – We use the 2000-2006 surveys. The coverage
       of this survey is the non-institutionalized households and also excludes those in college
       dormitories and other group quarters.

   •   Consumer Expenditure Survey (CE Survey) – We use the 1980-2006 surveys. The
       eligible population is US civilian non-institutionalized persons. The survey excludes
       people such as patients, inmates, and those who live in camps, communes, convents,
       monasteries, flophouses, halfway houses, non-staff units in homes for the aged, infirm, or
       needy, transient quarters in hotels or motels and missions. For our analyses, we only
       include “complete income reporters” and reweight the estimates accordingly.

B. Weighting

Weights are needed to compute a population estimate.

   •   PSID: Email correspondence with the staff at the PSID Statistical Design Group
       indicated that although PSID weights in the publicly available datasets are suitable to
       compute scaling invariant statistics like the weighted mean, they are nevertheless
       unsuitable for the computation of weighted population totals. This situation occurs
       because PSID weights are not exactly calibrated to external population totals for families
       and individuals. The recommended approach is to scale the PSID weights linearly using
       an external dataset, based on characteristics such as age and gender. Doing so makes the
       sum of the revised PSID weights equal to the total population of the United States in any
       given year.

       We use the CPS-ADF/ASEC as the basis for revising the PSID weights for two reasons.
       First, our calculations show that the sum of the weights in the CPS-ADF/ASEC matches
       the U.S. population very well in any given year. Second, the sample frame of the CPS-
       ADF/ASEC is very similar to that of the PSID. Third, CPS-ADF/ASEC data are
       available for every year since 1968, the year that the PSID survey began.

       An important decision to make in this scaling strategy is the choice of individual
       characteristics to use for stratification when determining the revised PSID weights. If
       one chooses too few characteristics, it is sub-optimal if there is considerable
       heterogeneity across the population. If one chooses too many characteristics because the
       PSID is a small dataset, one may have few or no PSID observations in a particular
       stratum (combination of characteristics), making scaling sensitive or impossible. In
       addition, the PSID has already emphasized that the original PSID weights are designed to
       provide the correct proportionate representation of individual characteristics and family



                                               37
         types in the US household population. Thus, the marginal bias reduction gain involved in
         introducing an extra characteristic may well be small.

         We chose age and gender as the basis for scaling, simply because they are the two most
         clearly defined characteristics in both the PSID and the CPS-ADF/ASEC datasets.45 We
         defined 19 age groups (0-4, 5-9, 10-14, 15-19, 20-24, 25-29,…, 80-84, 85-89 and 90 and
         above) and two gender groups. Together, these constitute 38 strata, upon which our
         scaling will be based. To scale the PSID individual weights, we first compute the
         original weighted PSID population (using original PSID individual weights) and
         weighted CPS-ADF/ASEC population in a particular stratum k, denoted as Np,k and Nc,k
         respectively. Then we compute the ratio of these populations in this stratum Rk, i.e. Rk =
         Nc,k/Np,k. Finally, for each person, i, in this stratum, we multiply his original PSID
         individual weight Wi,k,p by this ratio, yielding his revised PSID individual weight Wˆi ,k , p ,
         i.e. Wˆ    = W R . We use the revised PSID weights to compute the PSID weighted
               i ,k , p   i ,k , p   k

         totals in this paper.

     •   CPS-ADF/ASEC: Individual weights are used. The only exception is the calculation of
         Food Stamp totals (1988 survey onwards), where we use household weights because
         Food Stamp receipts are reported at the household level.

     •   SIPP: Calculating weights for the SIPP is non-trivial because of the overlapping panels.
         We follow an approach similar to that in the SIPP Users’ Guide 2001 (pp. 8-19 to 8-23).
         Essentially, for each program, we compute the total weighted receipts (individual
         monthly weights are applied) in each month. Then, for the overlapping months, we
         weight each of the monthly estimates in proportion to the number of individuals included
         in that estimate. For example, there are three monthly estimates for January 1986, one
         each from the 1984, 1985 and 1986 panels. The number of individuals who were
         interviewed in the waves covering these months is 32,008, 33,043, and 30,566,
         respectively. Thus, the weights are 0.335, 0.346 and 0.32 when combining the three
         January 1986 estimates into one.46

     •    ACS: Individual weights are used throughout, except for Food Stamps (benefit dollars
         and participation aggregates), where household weights are used.

     •   CE Survey: Consumer Unit weights are used. For individual reported benefits such as
         social security and SSI (these benefits come from the Member Files), we first obtain the
         consumer unit total (sum across family members) then apply the consumer unit weights.

45
   Race is not as clearly defined. First, the PSID only has the race of the head of household and the spouse
(beginning in 1985). Second, both the CPS and the PSID are unclear about the treatment of people with multiple
racial backgrounds.
46
   Prior to applying these weights to the estimates, we have adjusted each of the estimates according to the number
of rotation groups it represents to obtain a population estimate for that panel. For example, a monthly estimate
which is based on 3 rotation groups will be multiplied by 4/3 so it becomes a population estimate for that panel
(since each rotation group represents ¼ of the population). See pages 8-14 in the SIPP User Manual for a detailed
explanation.


                                                        38
C. Technical Details/Assumptions

SIPP – Calendar Years 1983 and 2000

       There are two calendar years in which the SIPP did not conduct interviews for all the
months. In 1983, there are no interviews for January to May. In 2000, there are no interviews
for March to September. For these years, we annualize the aggregate dollar estimates by taking
the average across the months available and multiply the result by 12.

Fiscal Year to Calendar Year Conversion

        Administrative aggregates for some programs (see sections 2 and 3 in this appendix) are
originally reported on a fiscal year basis. The adjustment from fiscal to calendar year is done as
follows: For the calendar year 1977 onwards, we take one quarter of the amount in the next
fiscal year and three quarters of the amount in the current fiscal year. For the calendar years
before 1977, we take one half from each of the current and the next fiscal year.

Missing data/Non-response

        Those who answered “don’t know” or “refused” are treated as missing data, and hence,
they are treated as non-recipients.

Other Income in the CPS-ADF/ASEC

        Note that in the CPS-ADF/ASEC, beginning with the 1988 surveys, there is also a
question asked at the end of the income section regarding “other income” received and the type
of this other income. The possible types of “other income” include AFDC, Social Security,
Worker’s Compensation and Unemployment Compensation, amongst many other private income
types. We therefore use these responses and add them to the amount they reported in the
sections preceding the other income question. We do not include Unemployment Compensation
because there is no indication as to whether it is state unemployment insurance. These factors
are generally small; for Unemployment Compensation, it is usually less than 1% in a typical
year.

PSID - Adjusting aggregate benefits to account for non-head, non-spouse members of the family

        In certain years of the PSID, certain benefits are only reported for the head of household
and the spouse. To account for this survey issue, we calculate the share of benefits received by
non-head, non-spouse family members (in the years when they are available). We apply this
share to scale up the benefit estimates in the appropriate years.

CE Survey - Computing Calendar Year Aggregates




                                                39
        The reference period in the CE Survey is the previous 12 months. We therefore allocate
the individual’s reported benefit receipt based on the fraction of the last 12 months that falls in
the previous calendar year and the fraction that falls in the current calendar year. For example,
for an individual who is interviewed in January, we would allocate his entire benefit receipt to
the previous calendar year. Similarly, for an individual who is interviewed in April, we would
say that three quarters of his reported benefit receipt belong to the previous calendar year and
one quarter belongs to the current year.

CE Survey – Complete Income Reporters

We count only the complete income reporters and reweight the results by the inverse of the
fraction of complete income reporters in the sample.

D. Identifying recipients in the PSID

        One of the major shortcomings of the PSID is the lack of individual data in certain waves
of the survey. In this section, we explain how we obtain aggregates when there is incomplete
information regarding individual recipiency. Readers may find it helpful to read this section in
conjunction with Appendix Table 1, which tabulates, by survey and benefit year, the availability
of benefit data.

   •   Survey years 1968-1970: Benefits such as OASDI, UI and WC are only reported for the
       family head. Thus, the aggregates calculated will understate the actual amounts received
       by all PSID families. We thus do not report estimates for these programs in these years.

   •   Survey years 1971-1974: During these survey years, AFDC and Social Security are
       reported as the combined amounts received by the head of household and the spouse. We
       use the response to the type of income question in the PSID individual file to decide who
       the recipient is. The main possible responses are: Labor Income Only, Transfer Income
       Only, Asset Income Only, Combination Including Labor Income, and Combination
       Excluding Labor Income. An individual is assumed to receive AFDC and Social Security
       if the answer to the above question suggests that transfer income is received. After we
       determine whether the head and/or the spouse received transfer income, we divide the
       reported amount of benefit equally. If only the head of the family is reported to receive
       transfer income, all AFDC and Social Security income received by this family will be
       allocated to the head. If both the head and the spouse are reported to receive transfer
       income, the head and the spouse will each get half of the reported AFDC and Social
       Security Income.

   •   Survey Years 1975-1993: In these survey years, there are two issues to confront. First,
       we again see that AFDC, SSI and Social Security benefits are reported as the combined
       amount received by the head and the spouse in 1975-1985. Second, all benefits (except
       Social Security in 1984-1992 waves) received by other family unit members (OFUMs)
       are also reported as combined amounts. Both issues can be tackled by using the type of
       transfer received question in the PSID individual file. The question asks what type of
       transfer was received, and the main possible responses are: 1) AFDC only; 2) Other


                                                 40
         welfare only; 3) Social Security only; 4) Other retirement pay, pensions, annuities only;
         5) Unemployment, Worker Compensation only; 6) Alimony, child support only; 7) Help
         from relatives only; 8) Supplemental Security Income Only; and 9) Any combination.
         Thus, we assess what types of benefits each person in the family received using the
         response to the above question. In the event that the individual answered “Any
         Combination,” we assume that he received several kinds of transfers. Again, we divide
         the reported benefit amount equally between all recipients if more than one individual
         reports recipiency of the benefit.47

     •   Survey years 1994-2003: Most benefits (except Food Stamps, Social Security and SSI
         (for 2 years)) are reported separately for the head and the spouse only. See the Social
         Security and SSI sections for more detail on how aggregates are obtained. In addition,
         the data format changed beginning in the 1994 wave, with most benefits now reported in
         the following format: First, how much benefit was received (the amount question)?
         Second, the frequency (per year, per month, per week, per two weeks etc) of the said
         amount (the frequency question). Third, during which months was the benefit received?
         Two sets of these responses are available, one for the head and one for the spouse. To
         determine the annual amount received based on these questions, we first determine the
         monthly amount received using the amount and the frequency questions. We then
         multiply the result by the number of months this benefit was received. However, if the
         individual answered “per year” in the frequency question, we assume that the reported
         dollars in the amount question is the annual amount he received. The reason for doing so
         is that the individual may have received the entire reported amount in one month, and
         obtaining the annual amount by the preceding method will understate the actual amount
         received.

     •   Survey year 2005: The public release of this wave contains the benefit amount received
         by the head and the spouse separately for 2004, reported just like the 1994-2003 waves.48
         In addition, the amount received by the entire family for 2003 is also available for all
         benefits. The individual file also includes indicator variables regarding individual
         recipiency of a particular type of benefit in 2003. Thus, for 2003, we divide the reported
         family amount equally between all persons in the family who reported receiving a
         particular type of benefit.

       Based on these rules, we determine the amount of each type of benefit each member of
the family received. The annual aggregate is obtained simply by multiplying the individual
amount by the individual revised weight and then summing the result across all individuals in the
year. In the case of Food Stamps and SSI (in 1997 and 1999), the annual aggregate is obtained


47
   If the benefit is reported as the combined amount received by the head and the spouse (denoted as (H+W)), then
we divide this amount only between the head and the spouse. If more than one OFUM received a particular type of
benefit, we divide the total amount received by the OFUMs by the number of OFUMs who received the benefit. In
other words, the reported amount received by the head and the spouse is always distributed between the head and the
spouse only. Similarly, the amount received by the OFUMs is always distributed between the OFUMs.
48
   The first public release of this wave also includes variables representing the benefit amounts received by the
OFUMs in 2004, but all values are zero. It is likely that these variables will be made available in future public
releases.


                                                        41
by multiplying the family amount by the revised family weight (average revised weight of the
head and the spouse) and then summing across all families.

2.       Administrative Data Sources and Details of the Calculations by
         Program – Benefit Dollars

A. Aid to Families with Dependent Children and Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
(AFDC/TANF)

Administrative Data Sources

(1970-2004)
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2008. “Indicators of Welfare Dependence:
Annual Report to Congress 2007.” U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
Washington, D.C.

(1970-2004 data on the territories)
U.S. Social Security Administration. Various Years. “Annual Statistical Supplement to the
Social Security Bulletin.” U.S. Social Security Administration, Office of Research, Evaluation
and Statistics.

Note: The administrative estimates have been adjusted to exclude amounts paid to Guam, Puerto
Rico and Virgin Islands using various years of Annual Statistical Supplement of the Social
Security Administration.

(1970-2004 data on General Assistance)
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2009. U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Bureau of
Economic Analysis. Table 3.12. http://www.bea.gov/national/nipaweb/SelectTable.asp (accessed
June, 2009).

Adjustments to the Administrative Aggregates due to Institutionalized Individuals

No adjustment is made to account for institutionalized individuals.49

Technical Notes

     •   PSID: For the 1968 survey, the amount of AFDC is the family total. For the 1969-1970
         surveys, we know only the amount of AFDC received by the head of the family. For the
         1971-1974 surveys, AFDC is the combined amount received by the head and the spouse.
         For 1975-1985 surveys, the head and spouse combined amount and the other family
         members’ combined amount are each available. For the 1986-1993, the dataset has the
         amount of AFDC received by the head and the spouse separately, but for other family
         members, only the combined amount is available. Beginning in the 1994 survey, only the
49
  Using the 2000 Census, we find that about 9.4% of total reported welfare income (AFDC/TANF and General
Assistance) was received by the institutional population. This suggests a high level of misreporting among the
institutional population since we expect that they are not eligible for AFDC/TANF.


                                                        42
       amount received by the head and the amount received by the spouse are recorded, except
       in the 2005 survey, when the amount received by the family is recorded for 2003. We
       therefore scale up the benefits to account for the non-head, non spouse family members
       in 1970-1973, 1993-2002, and 2004.

   •   SIPP:   Reported consistently.

   •   CPS-ADF/ASEC: For the 1968-1975 surveys, AFDC is combined with old age
       assistance, aid to the blind and to the disabled. There are no variables that indicate which
       benefit the person received. From the 1976 survey, AFDC/TANF is combined with
       Other Welfare, but there are variables indicating whether the person received each of
       these benefits. We use these variables to count only those who receive only
       AFDC/TANF.

   •   ACS: The ACS reports the amount of Public Assistance received, which includes TANF
       and General Assistance.

   •   CE Survey: The CE Survey reports the amount of public assistance, welfare, and other
       cash assistance.


B. Food Stamps

Administrative Data Sources

(1973-2002)
Administrative totals for 1967-2002 were kindly provided to us (via email) by the Food and
Nutrition Service.

(2003-2004)
Food and Nutrition Service. 2006. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service.
http://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/fspmain.htm (accessed April, 2006).

(2005-2007)
Food and Nutrition Service. 2008. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service.
http://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/fspmain.htm (accessed September 10, 2006).

Notes: The administrative aggregates have been adjusted to remove payments received by
people in Puerto Rico, Guam and Virgin Islands. Note that Puerto Rico implemented Food
Stamps beginning in fiscal Year 1975 until June of Fiscal Year 1982. Using U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services (2008), the share of Food Stamps payments for Puerto Rico during
FY1975-FY1982 is 9.87%. The share of Food Stamps payments for Guam and Virgin Islands is
estimated to be 0.3%.

Adjustments to the Administrative Aggregates due to Institutionalized Individuals



                                                43
No adjustment is made to account for institutionalized individuals.

Technical Notes

   •   PSID: There are Food Stamps questions in all the surveys except the 1973 survey. Note
       that the Food Stamps estimates prior to 1973 are implausibly large and hence are
       excluded in the table. Because free food was initially included (in the 1968 survey, the
       survey question was: Did you (family) get any free food, clothing, or food stamps worth
       more than $50 in 1967? If yes, how much did that save you last year?), the longitudinal
       nature of the survey may have caused respondents in the subsequent waves to include
       free food when asked about Food Stamps. Since Food Stamps are reported on a family
       basis, we apply the revised family weights in obtaining the aggregate.

   •   SIPP: Asked consistently.

   •   CPS-ADF/ASEC: Food Stamp questions are asked beginning with the 1980 survey.
       These questions are asked at the household level and so are weighted using the household
       weight. Food Stamps data from the 2008 survey are withheld.

   •   CE Survey: The CE Survey reports the value of Food Stamps received. Food Stamps
       data for the 1982-1985 surveys are obtained from the Income File rather than from the
       Consumer Unit (Family) files. Food Stamps values beginning in the 2001 survey include
       electronic benefits.

C. Social Security

Administrative Data Sources

(1967-2007)
U.S. Social Security Administration. 2008. U.S. Social Security Administration.
http://www.socialsecurity.gov/OACT/STATS/table4a4.html (accessed September 10, 2008).

(1967-2007 data on the territories)
U.S. Social Security Administration. Various Years. “Annual Statistical Supplement to the
Social Security Bulletin.” U.S. Social Security Administration, Office of Research, Evaluation
and Statistics.

Notes: The administrative estimates have been adjusted to exclude amounts paid to American
Samoa, Guam, Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands and those living outside the U.S.

Adjustments to the Administrative Aggregates due to Institutionalized Individuals

         We use the 1970, 1980, 1990 and 2000 census data to estimate the fraction of total Social
Security received by the institutional population (individuals in correctional facilities, mental
institutions, and institutions for the elderly, the handicapped and the poor, and those in military
facilities). We adjust the administrative aggregates downward by applying the 1970 fraction


                                                44
(2.93%) to the 1967-1974 aggregates, the 1980 fraction (1.43%) to the 1975-1984 aggregates,
the 1990 fraction (2.75%) to the 1985-1994 aggregates, and the 2000 fraction (3.39%) to the
1995-2004 aggregates. We also use the 2006 ACS to estimate the fraction of total Social
Security received by the institutional population (3.2%), and apply these fractions to the 2005-
2007 administrative aggregates.



Inclusion of Railroad Retirement Benefits

        In the CE Survey and the CPS-ADF/ASEC (1968-1975 surveys), Railroad Retirement
benefits and Social Security benefits are combined. Hence, we adjust the administrative
aggregates for these surveys by including Railroad Retirement benefits. We also assume that
SSDI recipients cannot get Railroad Retirement benefits – hence, we adjust only the OASI
aggregates for the aforementioned surveys to include Railroad Retirement benefits.

Dividing Social Security Income

        Social security income in the surveys we examine is sometimes reported without
specifying the type of social security, and deducing whether it is SSDI or OASI becomes
virtually impossible. In these circumstances, we use the data published in the various issues of
Annual Statistical Supplements to calculate, for each year, age, gender, and schooling status, the
proportion of social security dollars that is paid to OASI and SSDI recipients.50 We use these
proportions to determine the amount of SSDI and OASI the individual received whenever we
have incomplete information about why he received social security or whenever he received
money from both the SSDI and OASI programs without specifying the amount received from
each type separately.51

Technical Notes

     •   PSID: For the 1968-1969 waves, benefit amounts are reported for the head only and are
         coded in bracketed form. We take the midpoint of each bracket as the amount the
         individual receives. For 1984-1993 waves, the type of social security is reported. If the
         individual reported receiving both SSDI and OASI, then his amount of social security
         income will be divided between the two programs using the Annual Statistical
         Supplements. For the 1994-2003 waves, in general we have only the total amount of
         social security income received by the family. To decide which member in the family
         received social security should the family social security receipt be positive in a
         particular year, we adopt two approaches: First, we use the panel structure of the PSID,
         and if the individual received social security in the 1993 wave (1992 for OFUMs), we
50
   To reduce computational burden, these proportions are calculated for the following age groups only: 0-17, 18, 19,
20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 41-44, 45-49, 50-54, 55-59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65+. One set of these
proportions are calculated for men and women separately. A separate set of proportions is also calculated for those
students who were 18-24.
51
   Note that the demographic data published in the Annual Statistical Supplements represents what happened in
December of each year. Thus, in constructing the official proportions for each calendar year, we take the average of
these proportions in the two adjacent years.


                                                        45
       assume that this individual always received social security in the 1994-2003 waves.
       Second, if the individual is reported as being permanently disabled or retired, we assume
       he received social security. The amount of social security received by the family will be
       divided equally between family members who we determine to be social security
       recipients, and the amount of OASI and SSDI each member received is then determined
       using the proportions obtained from the Annual Statistical Supplements. For the 2005
       wave, we only have the amount of social security the family received in 2003, but we
       also know which member of the family received social security in 2003. Therefore, we
       divide the amount equally between recipients in the family and again determine OASI
       and SSDI amounts based on the proportions obtained in the Annual Statistical
       Supplements. We also scale up the benefits to account for the non-head, non spouse
       family members in 1970-1973.

   •   SIPP: Two variables that indicate the first two reasons for receiving social security
       income are available but are only asked once (the first time the individual indicated
       receipt of social security) in the 1984-1993 panels. Hence, we assume that the reasons
       for receiving social security are the same for all the waves in these panels. For the 1996
       panel, the reasons for receiving social security are not asked in waves 2-8; thus, we take
       the nearest answer available. As such, reasons for receiving social security from wave 2
       to wave 5 (second month) are the same as those in wave 1. When the reasons for
       receiving social security imply that the individual may have received from both the SSDI
       and OASI programs, we use the Annual Statistical Supplements to obtain the amounts of
       SSDI and OASI for this individual as described above.

   •   CPS-ADF/ASEC: The data include the total social security income received by the
       individual, with no information about the type of social security received until 2001. For
       the 1968-1987 surveys, social security income is combined with railroad retirement. For
       the 1976-1987 surveys, two variables indicating whether the person received social
       security and railroad retirement benefits are available. However, we cannot precisely
       distinguish the two benefits when both benefits are received. If the person indicated he
       received both railroad retirement benefits and social security, we treat the entire sum as
       social security for these years. Since no information on type of social security received is
       available until 2001, we determine the amount of SSDI and OASI the individual received
       using the Annual Statistical Supplements as described above.

   •   ACS: The data include the total social security income received by the individual, with
       no information about the type of social security received. We use the Annual Statistical
       Supplements to determine the amounts of SSDI and OASI.

   •   CE Survey: The Member files of the CE Survey report, for each member in the
       Consumer Unit, the total amount of Social Security and Railroad Retirement income
       received. We use the Annual Statistical Supplements to determine the amounts of SSDI
       and OASI as described above.

D. Supplemental Security Income



                                                46
Administrative Data Sources

(1974-2005)
U.S. Social Security Administration. 2005. “2005 SSI Annual Report.” U.S. Social Security
Administration, Office of the Chief Actuary. Tables IV C1, C4, C5.

(2006-2007)
U.S. Social Security Administration. 2008. “2008 SSI Annual Report.” U.S. Social Security
Administration, Office of the Chief Actuary. Tables IV C1, C4.

(1978-2006 data on the territories)
U.S. Social Security Administration. Various Years. “Annual Statistical Supplement to the
Social Security Bulletin.” U.S. Social Security Administration, Office of Research, Evaluation
and Statistics.

       The administrative aggregates have been adjusted to exclude SSI dollars received by
people living in Mariana Islands. Only people living in the states of the U.S., the District of
Columbia and those in Mariana Islands are eligible for SSI.

Adjustments to the Administrative Aggregates due to Institutionalized Individuals

         We use the 2000 census data to estimate the fraction of total SSI dollars received by the
institutional population (individuals in correctional facilities, mental institutions, and institutions
for the elderly, the handicapped and the poor, and those in military facilities). The result
suggests that the fraction is about 4.50%, and we adjust the 1974-2004 administrative aggregates
downwards using this number throughout.52 We also use the 2006 ACS to estimate the fraction
of total SSI received by the institutional population (3.2%), and apply these fractions to the
2005-2007 administrative aggregates.


Technical Notes

     •   PSID: Beginning in the 1994 survey, SSI is only reported for the head and the spouse.
         However, in the 1999 and 2001 surveys, SSI for the family is also reported for the prior
         survey year (1997 and 1999 respectively). To calculate the weighted total SSI benefits in
         these two years, we apply the revised family weights since there is virtually no
         information regarding individual recipiency. We also scale up the benefits to account for
         the non-head, non spouse family members in 1993-2002 and 2004.



52
  We use only the 2000 Census because it is the only census data that reports SSI as a separate category. In the
1970-1990 census data, SSI, AFDC, General Assistance and other welfare are lumped together as “Welfare
Income”. Roemer (2000) uses the 1990 census and assumes that all welfare income received by institutionalized
individuals is SSI and estimated that 7.4% of total SSI is paid to these individuals. Using the 2000 census, we find
that only 4.5% of total SSI is paid to the institutionalized individuals and that the amount of AFDC/TANF received
by institutionalized individuals is about 3.7% of the total SSI. These results suggest that the 7.4% adjustment
Roemer (2000) uses may be overstated.


                                                         47
   •   SIPP: The SSI question only asks about federal SSI. We assume that reported amounts
       include state supplementation because there is not a separate question about state funded
       SSI, and we believe it is unlikely respondents understand the financing of the program.

   •   CPS-ADF/ASEC: Questions about SSI are asked consistently beginning with the 1976
       survey.

   •   ACS: Amount of SSI received by the individual is available.

   •   CE Survey: The Member Files of the CE Survey report the amount of SSI received.

E. Unemployment Insurance

Administrative Data Sources

(1976-2004)
U.S. Department of Labor. Various Years. “Unemployment Insurance Financial Data
Handbook.” ET Handbook No. 394. U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training
Administration.

(2005-2007)
U.S. Department of Labor. 2008. U.S. Department of Labor – Employment and Training
Administration. http://workforcesecurity.doleta.gov/unemploy/content/data.asp (accessed
September 12, 2008).

Note: The administrative aggregates have been adjusted to exclude payments to Puerto Rico and
Virgin Islands.

Adjustments to the Administrative Aggregates due to Institutionalized Individuals

No adjustment is made to account for institutionalized individuals.

Technical Notes

   •   PSID: Unemployment Insurance and Workers’ Compensation are combined in the 1968-
       1976 surveys. In addition, they are not reported for every family member. See Appendix
       Table 1 for more information. In calculating the average reporting rate, we only include
       the 1976-2004 years (i.e. 1977-2005 surveys). We also scale up the benefits to account
       for the non-head, non spouse family members in 1993-2002, and 2004.

   •   SIPP: Reported Consistently as “Amount of State Unemployment Compensation”. SIPP
       also has “Supplemental Unemployment Compensation” and “Other Unemployment
       Compensation”. The combined sum of these two non-state unemployment benefits never
       exceeds 5% of the total administrative state UI benefits payouts. In a typical year, total
       Supplemental Unemployment Compensation in the SIPP constitutes only about 2% of the
       administrative UI total. For Other Unemployment Compensation, that percentage is


                                               48
       around 1%. Thus, we only count State Unemployment Compensation when computing
       UI weighted totals.

   •   CPS-ADF/ASEC: For the 1968-1987 surveys, Unemployment Insurance and Workers’
       Compensation are combined into one category. In some of the years, the category also
       includes veterans’ benefits. See Appendix Table 2 for more detail. In calculating the
       average reporting rate, we only include the years 1987-2007.

   •   CE Survey: The CE Survey reports the amount of unemployment compensation
       received.

F. Workers’ Compensation

Administrative Data Sources

(1976-1986)
Nelson Jr., William J. 1992. “Workers’ Compensation: 1984–88 Benchmark Revisions.”
Social Security Bulletin 55(3):41–58.

(1987-2006)
Sengupta, I., V. Reno, and J.F. Burton, Jr. 2003. “Workers’ Compensation: Benefits, Coverage,
and Costs.” National Academy of Social Insurance, Washington D.C.

Note: We consider only cash payments, obtained by removing the medical portion of the total
program cost.

Adjustments to the Administrative Aggregates due to Institutionalized Individuals

No adjustment is made to account for institutionalized individuals.

Technical Notes

   •   PSID: Unemployment Insurance and Workers’ Compensation are combined in the 1968-
       1974 waves. In addition, they are not reported for every family member. See Appendix
       Table 1 for more information. In calculating the average reporting rate, we only include
       the years 1976-2004. We also scale up the benefits to account for the non-head, non
       spouse family members in 1993-2002 and 2004.

   •   SIPP: Reported consistently as “Amount of Workers’ Compensation”

   •   CPS-ADF/ASEC: For the 1968-1987 surveys, Unemployment Insurance and Workers’
       Compensation are combined as one category. In some of the years, the category also
       includes veterans’ benefits. See Appendix Table 2 for more details. In calculating the
       average reporting rate, we include only the years 1987-2006.




                                               49
     •   CE Survey: The CE Survey reports the amount of Worker’s Compensation and
         Veterans’ Benefits (include education benefits, but excluding military retirement
         benefits) combined.

G. Earned Income Tax Credit

Administrative Data Sources

(1991-2003)
U.S. Government Printing Office. 2004. 2004 Green Book. US House of Representatives
Committee on Ways and Means, Washington D.C. Table 13-14.

(2004-2006)
U.S. Office of the President of the United States. 2008. “Historical Tables for the Budget of the
United States Government – Fiscal Year 2009.” The White House, Office of Management and
Budget, Washington D.C.

Adjustments to the Administrative Aggregates due to Institutionalized Individuals

No adjustment is made to account for institutionalized individuals.

Technical Notes

     •   PSID: The PSID does not have information on EITC

     •   CPS-ADF/ASEC: Reported consistently from the 1992 survey onwards.


3.       Administrative Data Sources and Details of the Calculations by
         Program – Benefit Participation
A. Aid to Families with Dependent Children and Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
(AFDC/TANF)

Administrative Data Sources

(1980-2007)
Administration for Children and Families. 2008. U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, Administration for Children and Families. http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ofa/data-
reports/caseload/caseload_archive.html (accessed September 10, 2008).

Note: We use the fraction of dollars received by those living in the territories to adjust the
administrative aggregates downward to account for those living outside the 50 states and
DC. This adjustment is small, typically below 0.7%.

Adjustments to the Administrative Aggregates due to Institutionalized Individuals


                                                 50
No adjustment is made to account for institutionalized individuals.

Technical Notes

       We compute average monthly participation at a family level. All numbers are
weighted using family weights.

     •   PSID: For the 1994 and later waves, it asks, for each month, whether
         AFDC/TANF were received separately for the head and the spouse. We assume,
         therefore, that either participation of the head or the spouse constitutes family
         participation.

     •   SIPP: Information on monthly recipiency is available. Note again that we do not
         have complete calendar year coverage for 1983 and 2000. Specifically, the SIPP
         does not cover January 1983-May 1983 and March 2000-September 2000. Thus,
         we adjust the administrative monthly average participation so it covers the same
         months for these two years as the SIPP.

     •   CPS-ADF/ASEC: The survey asks the number of months Public Assistance was received
         (1988-2008 surveys).53 Note that since public assistance included General Assistance,
         we have made adjustment so those who received only General Assistance are not
         counted.

B. Food Stamp Program

Administrative Data Sources

(1973-2002)
Administrative totals for 1967-2002 are kindly provided to us (via email) by the Food and
Nutrition Service.

(2003-2004)
Food and Nutrition Service. 2006. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service.
http://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/fspmain.htm (accessed April, 2006).

(2005-2007)
Food and Nutrition Service. 2008. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service.
http://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/fspmain.htm (accessed September 10, 2006).

Adjustments to the Administrative Aggregates due to Institutionalized Individuals


53
   In the codebooks, this question was phrased in many years as: “In how many months of 19.. did …
receive social security payments?” This question was asked under the public assistance section and was
asked immediately after the question of whether AFDC was received. Thus, we conjecture that the term
“social security” in the above months question is a typographical error.


                                                     51
No adjustment is made to account for institutionalized individuals.

Technical Notes

        We look at participation at a household level; this is primarily due to the limitations of
the surveys. In the SIPP, the coverage indicator (i.e. whether a person is covered by food
stamps) is not asked if the person is under 15 years of age. This issue becomes complicated
when there are multiple families living in a household, and they can be related or not related.
Note that Food Stamps distributions are officially determined on a household basis. The CPS-
ADF/ASEC mainly asks only the number of children covered by food stamps. It is then not clear
whether the spouse is also covered by food stamps.

   •   PSID: For the 1994 and later waves, it asks, for each month, whether food stamps were
       received. Prior to the 1994 surveys, it asked instead how many months in the previous
       calendar year did the individual use food stamps (monthly recipiency also available for
       1984-1993 waves). Basically, we have information about how many months did the
       individual use/receive food stamps for the calendar years 1975-2002. The PSID also
       asked the number of persons in the family covered by food stamps, but we will not use
       this data as we are comparing household participation.

   •   SIPP: Information on monthly recipiency is available. Note again that we do not have
       complete calendar year coverage for 1983 and 2000. Specifically, SIPP does not cover
       January 1983-May 1983 and March 2000-September 2000. Thus, we adjust the
       administrative monthly average participation so they cover the same months for these two
       years as the SIPP.

   •   CPS-ADF/ASEC: The CPS-ADF/ASEC asked the number of persons covered and the
       number of months covered by food stamps. These questions are asked in the 1980-2008
       surveys.

C. National School Lunch Program (NSLP)

Administrative Data Sources

(1979-1988, 2002-2006)
Food and Nutrition Service. 2008. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition
Service. http://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/slsummar.htm (accessed September 25, 2008).

Note: These data show the average monthly participation (excluding June-August) of Free,
Reduced Price and Full Price lunches for the fiscal years 1969-2007. We convert fiscal years to
calendar years, taking into account that the summer months are excluded. Specifically, for the
fiscal years 1979 and onwards, we calculate average monthly participation of calendar year t by
taking 2/3 of the average monthly participation in fiscal year t and 1/3 of the average monthly
participation in the fiscal year t+1.

(1989-2001)


                                               52
Administrative totals for 1980-2002 were kindly provided to us (via email) by Food and
Nutrition Service. These data include monthly participation numbers for the Free, Reduced Price
and Full Price lunches under the NSLP. Participation during the summer season (June-August)
is excluded in computing the average monthly participation for the year.

Technical Notes

In the CPS-ADF/ASEC and PSID, the data yield only unique participation of free or reduced
price lunch estimates. We use the SIPP to approximate average monthly participation of free or
reduced price lunches using these unique participation estimates.

   •   SIPP: We use the response to the household-level question: “In the past 4 months, were
       the lunches free, reduced-price, or were they full-price?” to calculate participation. Note
       that this question is asked only once per wave and the answer to the question covered the
       4 reference months (the 4 months before the survey month). Since the answer to this
       question covers all the children in the household, we assume that every eligible child (5-
       18 years of age) in a participating family receive the reported type of lunch from the
       NSLP.

   •   PSID: We use the family-level question “During the (previous year), did any child in
       your family between 5 and 18 years old receive free or reduced-cost lunches at school?”
       The response to this question yields a unique annual participation count, and we therefore
       convert these estimates to average monthly participation using the SIPP. Note that a
       person may have had both reduced price and free lunches in a year so that these unique
       participation count numbers may understate their true values. Also, we assume that every
       eligible child (5-18 years of age) in a participating family received lunches from the
       NSLP.

   •   CPS-ASEC: The survey asks about the number of children in the household receiving
       free or reduced price lunch. Thus, we cannot estimate numbers of free lunch and reduced
       price lunch recipients separately. We also do not know exactly which child in the
       household is a recipient. To calculate participation, we first calculate the average weight
       of those in the household who are between ages 5 and 18, multiply this average weight by
       the number of children who receive free or reduced price lunches, and sum the result
       across households. This method yields unique participation, and we convert it to average
       monthly participation as described above.

D. Social Security

Administrative Data Sources

(1974-2007)
U.S. Social Security Administration. 2008. U.S. Social Security Administration.
http://www.ssa.gov/OACT/STATS/OASDIbenies.html (accessed September 15, 2008).




                                               53
Note: Official Data give current participation as of December of each year. We compute
average monthly participation of year t by taking the average of participation numbers in
December of year t and year t-1.

We use the fraction of dollars received by those living in the territories or outside the U.S. to
adjust the administrative aggregates downwards to account for those living outside the 50 states
and DC. These data are obtained from U.S. Social Security Administration (various years).
Typically, payments to those living in the territories/outside the U.S. constitute about 3% of the
total.

Adjustments to the Administrative Aggregates due to Institutionalized Individuals

        We use the 1970, 1980, 1990 and 2000 census data to estimate the fraction of Social
Security benefit recipients who are institutionalized. We adjust the administrative aggregates
downward by applying the 1970 fraction (3.49%) to the 1967-1974 aggregates, the 1980 fraction
(2.48%) to the 1975-1984 aggregates, the 1990 fraction (3.43%) to the 1985-1994 aggregates,
and the 2000 fraction (3.59%) to the 1995-2004 aggregates. We also use the 2006 ACS to
estimate the fraction of total Social Security recipients who are institutionalized (3.52%), and
apply these fractions to the 2005-2007 administrative aggregates.


Technical Notes

        In the PSID, CPS-ADF/ASEC, ACS (and sometimes SIPP), we do not know the type of
social security the individual received (OASI or SSDI). Using data from the Annual Statistical
Supplements, we look at the fraction of dollars spent on SSDI/OASI for someone in the same
age and gender group, and we determine OASI/SSDI participations by splitting the individual’s
weight according to these fractions.54,55

        Since we can obtain only unique participation in the PSID, CPS-ADF/ASEC and the
ACS, we use the SIPP and obtain the ratio of unique participation to average monthly
participation estimates, then we convert unique participation in the PSID, CPS-ADF/ASEC and
the ACS using these ratios.

     •   PSID: These data give unique participation in a calendar year, and we convert to average
         monthly participation using the SIPP as described above. Note that in the 1975-1983
         surveys, the type of social security (SSDI or OASI) is unknown. We therefore split the
         weight of the individual according to the fraction of social security dollars spent on
         SSDI/OASI as described above.



54
   Alternatively, we could calculate these fractions by looking at the share of people (rather than dollars) who
receive SSDI/SSDI for a given age and gender group.
55
   A major limitation of this method of determining OASI/SSDI participation is that certain individuals may receive
both types of social security benefits in a given year. One possible improvement would be to adjust our method by
looking at the percentage of people who receive SSDI or OASI or both using the SIPP.


                                                        54
     •   CPS-ADF/ASEC: These data indicate unique participation in a calendar year, and we
         convert to average monthly participation using the SIPP as described above. Since the
         type of social security is unknown, we split the weight of the individual according to the
         fraction of social security dollars spent on SSDI/OASI as described above.

     •   ACS: These data indicate unique participation in a calendar year, and we convert to
         average monthly participation using the SIPP as described above. Since the type of
         social security is unknown, we split the weight of the individual according to the fraction
         of social security dollars spent on SSDI/OASI as described above.

     •   SIPP: SIPP data can indicate both unique and average monthly participation. In the
         event that we do not know the type of social security received, we split the weight of the
         individual according to the fraction of social security dollars spent on SSDI/OASI as
         described above.

E. Supplementary Security Income

Administrative Data Sources

(1974-2007)
U.S. Social Security Administration. Various Years. “Annual Statistical Supplement to the
Social Security Bulletin.” U.S. Social Security Administration, Office of Research, Evaluation
and Statistics.

Note: Official Data give current participation as of December of each year. We compute
average monthly participation of year t by taking the average of participation numbers in
December of year t and year t-1.

Adjustments to the Administrative Aggregates due to Institutionalized Individuals

         We use the 2000 Census data to estimate the fraction of SSI recipients who are
institutionalized (individuals in correctional facilities, mental institutions, and institutions for the
elderly, the handicapped and the poor, and those in military facilities).56 The fraction is
estimated to be about 4.50%. We adjust the 1974-2004 average monthly participation numbers
using this fraction because SSI participation is not available in earlier Censuses. We also use the
2006 ACS to estimate the fraction of total SSI recipients who are institutionalized (3.66%), and
apply this fraction to the 2005-2007 administrative aggregates.

Technical Notes

        We compute SSI participation at the individual level. Since we can obtain only unique
participation in the PSID, CPS-ADF/ASEC and the ACS, we use the SIPP and obtain the ratio of

56
  In the 1970, 1980 and 1990 census, SSI is combined with general assistance and AFDC, while the 2000 census
reports SSI as a separate category. This makes identifying the number of SSI recipients difficult in the 1970, 1980
and 1990 census data. Thus, we use only the 2000 census data to estimate the number of SSI recipients that are
institutionalized.


                                                         55
unique participation to average monthly participation estimates, then we convert unique
participation in the PSID, CPS-ADF/ASEC and the ACS using these ratios.

   •   PSID: These data give unique participation in a calendar year, and we convert to average
       monthly participation using the SIPP as described above. We also scale up the
       participation aggregates to account for the non-head, non-spouse family members in
       1993-2004.

   •   CPS-ADF/ASEC: These data give unique participation in a calendar year, and we
       convert to average monthly participation using the SIPP as described above.

   •   ACS: These data give unique participation in a calendar year, and we convert to average
       monthly participation using the SIPP as described above.

   •   SIPP: SIPP data can give both unique and average monthly participation.


F. Women, Infants and Children (WIC)

Administrative Data Sources

(1973-2002)
Administrative totals for 1980-2002 were kindly provided to us (via email) by Food and
Nutrition Service.

(2003-September 2004)
Food and Nutrition Service. 2006. U.S. Department of Agriculture¸ Food and Nutrition
Service. http://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/WIC_Monthly.htm (accessed April, 2006).

(October 2004-December 2007)
Food and Nutrition Service. 2008. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition
Service. http://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/wicmain.htm (accessed August 28, 2008).

Adjustments to the Administrative Aggregates due to Institutionalized Individuals

No adjustment is made to account for institutionalized individuals.

Technical Notes

   •   SIPP: Participation in WIC is determined by the survey response to the question:
       “Was the person covered by WIC for this month?”

   •   PSID: Family participation in the WIC program is determined by the survey
       question “During the (previous year), did anyone in the family get food through the
       WIC program?” Note that this is a family question, so we cannot identify who in
       the family received WIC. The following assumption is made: If the family


                                               56
    reported participating, then we assume that those in this family who were: 1)
    Females who were 15-45 years of age in the survey year or 2) Children between 0-5
    years of age (in the survey year) participated the WIC program. The question
    response yields a unique participation count, which we convert to average monthly
    participation.

•   CPS-ADF/ASEC: The question structure is very similar to the PSID. Thus, we
    proceed in the same fashion as we have done for the PSID. Though CPS-
    ADF/ASEC also asked the number of people in the household receiving WIC, we
    do not use this variable because it is not so clear whether this implies participation
    (an adult might receive WIC only because of his/her children).




                                             57
4. Social Security Imputation Algorithm
        In section 2B, we describe our methodology for splitting social security dollars into SSDI
and OASI when no information regarding the type of social security received is available. The
fractions of total social security dollars in the surveys that are subjected to our strategy in order
to estimate OASI and SSDI are tabulated in the table below.57

                                Share of Social Security Dollars for which
                               Retirement/Disability/Survivors is uncertain
                      Calendar Year                         PSID                            SIPP
                          1983                              0.016                           0.127
                          1984                              0.011                           0.170
                          1985                              0.011                           0.167
                          1986                              0.012                           0.165
                          1987                              0.015                           0.147
                          1988                              0.026                           0.114
                          1989                              0.016                           0.099
                          1990                              0.028                           0.080
                          1991                              0.032                           0.106
                          1992                              0.047                           0.110
                          1993                                                              0.107
                          1994                                                              0.131
                          1995                                                              0.140
                          1996                                                              0.075
                          1997                                                              0.103
                          1998                                                              0.066
                          1999                                                              0.049
                          2000                                                              0.050
                          2001                                                              0.045
                          2002                                                              0.044
                          2003                                                              0.046
                          2004                                                              0.048
                          2005                                                              0.039
             Note: This table shows, for each calendar year and each survey, the percentage of total Social
             Security Benefits that must be subjected to the imputation algorithm to separately obtain SSDI and
             OASI.


        Note that the SIPP has higher imputation rates than those of the PSID because of: 1) Lack
of program information about Children’s Social Security benefits, which is about 4% in each
year in the SIPP; and 2) When the individual is asked to report up to two reasons for receiving
social security, one possible response is “Spouse or Dependent Child” and such social security
income will be subjected to imputation.58 The SIPP imputation rates in 1998-2003 are lower
than those in the earlier years because the reason for social security receipt is available in every
wave (and it is subjected to changes between waves). In 1983-1995, however, these responses

57
  For CPS-ADF/ASEC and the CE Survey, the type of social security received is never asked.
58
  In the PSID (1984-1993 surveys), the type of social security received by the individual is categorized into one of
the following: Disability, Retirement, Survivor benefits, Combination of the OASI and SSDI, Dependent of
Disabled recipient, Dependent of Deceased recipient.


                                                            58
are typically available only once per panel (thus, whether imputation is needed depends only on
this response).




                                               59
               Table 1: Benefit Programs and Periods Examined, by Survey

                                  A. Aggregate Dollars
                                         Survey and Calendar Years
                                                   CPS-
  Benefit Program          PSID       SIPP                       ACS     CE Survey
                                                ADF/ASEC
 AFDC/TANF              1970-2004  1983-2004     1975-2004    2000-2004  1979-2004
 FSP                    1973-2004  1983-2005     1979-2006    2004-2005  1979-2006
 OASI                   1970-2003  1983-2005     1967-2006    2000-2006  1979-2006
 SSDI                   1970-2003  1983-2005     1967-2006    2000-2006  1979-2006
 SSI                    1974-2004  1983-2005     1975-2007    2000-2006  1979-2006
 UI                     1976-2004  1983-2005     1987-2007               1979-2006
 WC                     1976-2004  1983-2005     1987-2006               1979-2006
 EITC                                            1991-2006
Note: For the NSLP and WIC program, how to measure dollar information is conceptually
unclear and also not available.

                                 B. Average Monthly Participation
                                            Survey and Calendar Years
     Benefit                                            CPS-
                          PSID            SIPP                          ACS       CE Survey
    Program                                          ADF/ASEC
 AFDC/TANF            1993-2004        1983-2005     1987-2007
                   Retrospective #      Monthly     Retrospective
                       of months                     # of months
 FSP                  1980-2004        1983-2005     1980-2006
                   Retrospective #      Monthly     Retrospective
                       of months                     # of months
 OASI                 1974-2003        1983-2005     1974-2007       2000-2006
                    At all last year    Monthly       At all last     At all last
                                                         year         12 months
 SSDI                 1974-2003        1983-2005     1974-2007       2000-2006
                    At all last year    Monthly       At all last     At all last
                                                         year         12 months
 SSI                1974-1991 At       1983-2005     1975-2007
                      all last year     Monthly       At all last
                      1992-2004                          year
                   Retrospective #
                       of months
 WIC                  1998-2004        1983-2005     2000-2007
                    At all last year    Monthly       At all last
                                                         year
 NSLP                 1998-2004        1983-2005     1979-2006
                    At all last year At all last 4    At all last
                                         months          year
Note: Several of the surveys report combined receipt and dollars for OASI and SSDI. See the
Data Appendix for more details. UI, WC and the EITC are not paid on a monthly basis.


                                             60
                                                          Table 2
            Aid to Families with Dependent Children/Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Dollar Reporting Rates

             Administrative
                   Total                                                                                                              Reporting Rate
                                  Survey - Weighted Total (in millions of dollars)                    Reporting Rate
              (in millions of                                                                                                           (with GA)
                  dollars)
                        AFDC/                         CPS-                                                CPS-
            AFDC/                                                            CE                                               CE                CE
     Year               TANF     PSID       SIPP      ADF/        ACS                 PSID    SIPP        ADF/         ACS            ACS
            TANF                                                            Survey                                           Survey            Survey
                         + GA                         ASEC                                                ASEC
     1970   4,750        7,770   4,379                                                0.922
     1971   5,984        9,842   4,703                                                0.786
     1972   6,747       10,018    4,413                                               0.654
     1973   7,155       10,234    4,306                                               0.602
     1974   7,861       11,030    5,716                                               0.727
     1975   9,016       13,009    6,035               6,630                           0.669               0.735
     1976   10,004      14,123    6,644               7,051                           0.664               0.705
61




     1977   10,417      14,284    6,522               7,665                           0.626               0.736
     1978   10,631      14,225    6,938               7,436                           0.653               0.699
     1979   11,003      14,231    7,116               7,798                  9,266    0.647               0.709              0.842              0.651
     1980   12,114      15,432    8,516               9,021                  8,316    0.703               0.745              0.687              0.539
     1981   12,770      16,208    9,196               9,164                  8,210    0.720               0.718              0.643              0.507
     1982   12,973      16,414    8,907               9,554                  8,705    0.687               0.736              0.671              0.530
     1983   13,727      17,453    9,803    10,830     10,262                  9,287   0.714   0.789       0.748              0.677              0.532
     1984   14,352      18,111    9,449    11,676     10,711                  9,456   0.658   0.814       0.746              0.659              0.522
     1985   14,676      18,669    8,768    11,452     11,052                  8,952   0.597   0.780       0.753              0.610              0.480
     1986   15,437      19,535    8,940    11,477     12,096                 12,165   0.579   0.743       0.784              0.788              0.623
     1987   16,336      20,634    9,179    11,926     11,722                 12,804   0.562   0.730       0.718              0.784              0.621
     1988   16,734      21,026   10,097    11,519     11,980                 12,123   0.603   0.688       0.716              0.724              0.577
     1989   17,486      22,054   10,098    12,359     12,167                 11,965   0.577   0.707       0.696              0.684              0.543
     1990   18,911      23,244   10,795    14,441     13,463                 13,972   0.571   0.764       0.712              0.739              0.601
     1991   20,743      25,332   12,937    15,405     14,813                 16,241   0.624   0.743       0.714              0.783              0.641
                                                                                                                                            (continued)
                                                            Table 2 (continued)
                  Aid to Families with Dependent Children/Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Dollar Reporting Rates
                    Administrative
                         Total                                                                                                                           Reporting Rate
                                          Survey - Weighted Total (in millions of dollars)                          Reporting Rate
                    (in millions of                                                                                                                        (with GA)
                        dollars)
                              AFDC/                             CPS-                                                    CPS-
                  AFDC/                                                               CE                                                      CE                   CE
        Year                  TANF       PSID        SIPP      ADF/        ACS                   PSID        SIPP       ADF/         ACS                 ACS
                  TANF                                                               Survey                                                  Survey               Survey
                               + GA                            ASEC                                                     ASEC
       1992       22,169      27,041    12,486      15,931     15,033                18,603      0.563      0.719       0.678                 0.839               0.688
       1993       22,318      27,184    11,614      18,191     16,712                19,103      0.520      0.815       0.749                 0.856               0.703
       1994       22,509      27,121    10,255      17,853     16,165                17,358      0.456      0.793       0.718                 0.771               0.640
       1995       21,534      26,147    10,349      18,359     14,940                15,309      0.481      0.853       0.694                 0.711               0.585
       1996       19,611      23,843    10,109      15,104     13,107                11,851      0.515      0.770       0.668                 0.604               0.497
       1997       16,742      20,758                12,675     9,888                 9,840                  0.757       0.591                 0.588               0.474
       1998       14,282      18,476     5,555       9,692     7,797                 8,017       0.389      0.679       0.546                 0.561               0.434
62




       1999       12,849      17,069                 7,635     6,015                 6,217                  0.594       0.468                 0.484               0.364
       2000       10,867      14,950     4,181       6,760     5,741       8,232     5,161       0.385      0.622       0.528        0.694    0.475     0.514     0.345
       2001        9,923      13,231                5,812      4,892       7,983     4,905                  0.586       0.493        0.768    0.494     0.567     0.371
       2002        9,576      13,701     3,051      5,384      4,920       8,092     4,473       0.319      0.562       0.514        0.830    0.467     0.601     0.326
       2003       10,211      16,686     4,164       5,514     5,493       8,763     4,779       0.408      0.540       0.538        0.886    0.468     0.577     0.286
       2004       10,421      17,968     5,333       6,486     5,075       8,559     4,569       0.512      0.622       0.487        0.830    0.438     0.494     0.254
       2005                                         6,407      5,213       8,789     5,106
       2006                                                    4,343       8,914     4,957
       2007                                                    3,932
      Average                                                                                    0.597      0.712       0.668        0.801    0.656     0.550     0.513


     Note: For the ACS, the reporting rate is computed by comparing the survey year total with the average of the current and previous years’ administrative totals.
                                                           Table 3
                                           Food Stamp Program Dollar Reporting Rates

              Admin.
                              Surveys - Weighted Total (in millions of dollars)                      Reporting Rate
               Total
             (millions                             CPS-                      CE                           CPS-                 CE
     Year                 PSID         SIPP                      ACS                 PSID    SIPP                     ACS
            of dollars)                          ADF/ASEC                   Survey                      ADF/ASEC              Survey
     1973      2,202      3,047                                                      1.384
     1974      3,313      3,297                                                      0.995
     1975      4,558      3,586                                                      0.787
     1976      4,729      3,505                                                      0.741
     1977      4,507      3,436                                                      0.762
     1978      4,706      3,671                                                      0.780
     1979      6,392      5,055                      4,828                  4,503    0.791                 0.755               0.705
     1980      8,116      6,246                      6,064                  4,799    0.770                 0.747               0.591
     1981      9,852      7,586                      6,343                  4,689    0.770                 0.644               0.476
     1982      9,832      8,239                      7,141                  5,322    0.838                 0.726               0.541
63




     1983     11,083      9,011       9,003          7,477                  6,192    0.813   0.812         0.675               0.559
     1984     10,638      8,920       9,009          7,573                  6,436    0.838   0.847         0.712               0.605
     1985     10,672      8,776       8,760          7,369                  6,658    0.822   0.821         0.690               0.624
     1986     10,558      8,687       9,032          7,542                  8,077    0.823   0.856         0.714               0.765
     1987     10,603      9,433       9,106          7,863                  8,430    0.890   0.859         0.742               0.795
     1988     11,230      9,814       9,317          8,095                  8,094    0.874   0.830         0.721               0.721
     1989     11,635      11,609      9,927          8,582                  8,883    0.998   0.853         0.738               0.763
     1990     14,100      12,287      11,769        10,301                  11,100   0.871   0.835         0.731               0.787
     1991     17,264      13,053      14,044        12,370                  13,661   0.756   0.814         0.717               0.791
     1992     20,843      14,455      15,866        13,340                  14,749   0.694   0.761         0.640               0.708
     1993     21,940      13,719      17,909        14,921                  15,043   0.625   0.816         0.680               0.686
     1994     22,680      14,897      17,581        15,261                  14,775   0.657   0.775         0.673               0.651
     1995     22,696      14,680      17,822        14,487                  14,496   0.647   0.785         0.638               0.639
     1996     22,373      13,759      17,664        14,108                  13,097   0.615   0.790         0.631               0.585
     1997     19,490      9,967       15,260        12,219                  10,905   0.511   0.783         0.627               0.559
                                                                                                                            (continued)
                                                            Table 3 (continued)
                                                 Food Stamp Program Dollar Reporting Rates

                  Admin.
                                   Surveys - Weighted Total (in millions of dollars)                        Reporting Rate
                   Total
                 (millions                             CPS-                        CE                            CPS-                  CE
       Year                   PSID        SIPP                        ACS                 PSID       SIPP                    ACS
                of dollars)                          ADF/ASEC                    Survey                        ADF/ASEC              Survey
       1998       16,840       9,866     13,249       10,756                      8,895   0.586     0.787        0.639                0.528
       1999       15,722      10,446     12,167        9,449                      8,537   0.664     0.774        0.601                0.543
       2000       14,938      10,848     12,078        8,711                      8,252   0.726     0.809        0.583                0.552
       2001       15,501       8,651     13,712        9,655                      6,922   0.558     0.885        0.623                0.447
       2002       14,938      10,659     15,846       11,158                      7,765   0.714     1.061        0.747                0.520
       2003       22,205      20,199     17,771       12,823                     10,003   0.910     0.800        0.577                0.450
       2004       25,788      21,963     20,714       14,622                      9,682   0.852     0.803        0.567                0.375
       2005       29,540                 22,572       16,132         15,472      10,998             0.764        0.546       0.559    0.372
       2006       29,440                              15,878         16,000      11,243                          0.539       0.543    0.382
64




       2007       30,988

      Average                                                                             0.783     0.823         0.665      0.551   0.597

     Note: For the ACS, the reporting rate is computed by comparing the survey year total with the average of the current and previous years’
     administrative totals.
                                                           Table 4
                 Social Security Old Age, Survivors and Disability Insurance (OASDI) Dollar Reporting Rates

                        Admin.
            Admin.     Total (with
                                        Surveys - Weighted Total (in millions of dollars)                      Reporting Rate
             Total      Railroad
                       Retirement)
                                                             CPS-                                                   CPS-                  CE
     Year   (millions of dollars)     PSID       SIPP                      ACS     CE Survey   PSID    SIPP                     ACS
                                                           ADF/ASEC                                               ADF/ASEC               Survey
     1967    20,506       21,591                            19,270                                                  0.893
     1968    23,880       25,196                            21,538                                                  0.855
     1969    25,611      27,158
     1970   30,498        32,045      24,223                  26,593                           0.794                 0.830
     1971   35,548        37,095      29,277                  31,382                           0.824                 0.846
     1972   39,752        42,011      37,569                  36,988                           0.945                 0.880
     1973   49,185        52,156      38,323                  44,511                           0.779                 0.853
     1974   55,925        58,896      47,884                  51,299                           0.856                 0.871
65




     1975   64,953        67,924      54,770                  57,049                           0.843                 0.878
     1976   73,436        76,453      63,846                  62,774                           0.869                 0.855
     1977   82,049        85,478      70,157                  70,004                           0.855                 0.853
     1978   90,073        94,735      77,771                  78,118                           0.863                 0.867
     1979   101,114      105,777     87,688                   87,375                  92,946   0.867                 0.864                0.879
     1980   116,863      121,663     104,290                 103,255                  94,073   0.892                 0.884                0.773
     1981   136,739      142,058     122,729                 119,447                  95,666   0.898                 0.874                0.673
     1982   151,482      157,204     135,318                 132,178                 111,969   0.893                 0.873                0.712
     1983   162,075      168,044     142,173    143,821      139,037                 132,241   0.877   0.887         0.858                0.787
     1984   170,554      176,604     153,390    159,679      148,419                 152,911   0.899   0.936         0.870                0.866
     1985   178,237      184,418     165,506    169,838      157,284                 147,737   0.929   0.953         0.882                0.801
     1986   188,306      194,508     175,747    178,348      164,882                 172,284   0.933   0.947         0.876                0.886
     1987   195,468      201,846     181,834    185,756      173,887                 186,857   0.930   0.950         0.890                0.926
     1988   207,982      214,560     194,194    197,863      184,189                 196,106   0.934   0.951         0.886                0.914
                                                                                                                                      (continued)
                                                            Table 4 (continued)
                        Social Security Old Age, Survivors and Disability Insurance (OASDI) Dollar Reporting Rates

                               Admin.
                   Admin.     Total (with
                                                 Surveys - Weighted Total (in millions of dollars)                             Reporting Rate
                    Total      Railroad
                              Retirement)
                                                                      CPS-                                                         CPS-                     CE
        Year       (millions of dollars)      PSID        SIPP                      ACS     CE Survey      PSID         SIPP                    ACS
                                                                    ADF/ASEC                                                     ADF/ASEC                 Survey
        1989       221,038     227,936      221,691     210,534      197,162                   208,473      1.003       0.952      0.892                   0.915
        1990       237,310     244,468      233,242     228,329      209,783                   221,739      0.983       0.962      0.884                   0.907
        1991       256,789     264,200      243,246     243,941      221,757                   243,525      0.947       0.950      0.864                   0.922
        1992       273,976     281,575      254,224     251,658      235,734                   261,749      0.928       0.919      0.860                   0.930
        1993       289,634     297,382      261,601     262,309      248,143                   268,894      0.903       0.906      0.857                   0.904
        1994       303,389     311,231      273,655     270,954      274,696                   275,323      0.902       0.893      0.905                   0.885
        1995       316,355     324,267      294,829     285,338      287,378                   289,999      0.932       0.902      0.908                   0.894
        1996       330,139     338,064      308,459     292,735      298,819                   314,163      0.934       0.887      0.905                   0.929
66




        1997       344,298     352,303                  303,966      315,494                   320,145                  0.883      0.916                   0.909
        1998       356,673     364,700      325,602     313,496      320,133                   328,639      0.913       0.879      0.898                   0.901
        1999       366,883     374,932                  323,984      333,311                   339,417                  0.883      0.908                   0.905
        2000       387,687     395,809      368,864     345,768      352,480       310,442 297,242          0.951       0.892      0.909        0.806      0.751
        2001       410,715     418,990                  366,612      375,663       336,735 357,090                      0.893      0.915        0.827      0.852
        2002       431,448     439,945      388,333     382,062      386,170       353,229 378,217          0.900       0.886      0.895        0.822      0.860
        2003       447,562     456,248      329,149     405,925      405,366       368,006 395,177          0.735       0.907      0.906        0.821      0.866
        2004       468,926     477,748                  456,915      425,986       382,034 389,007                      0.974      0.908        0.818      0.814
        2005       496,041     505,044                  482,380      444,002       396,749 449,621                      0.972      0.895        0.807      0.890
        2006       526,541     535,818                               470,328       421,573 423,956                                 0.893        0.810      0.791
        2007                                                         492,700
      Average                                                                                               0.894       0.920        0.881      0.816      0.859
     Note: The administrative totals include retirement benefits, survivors benefits and benefits paid to special age-72 beneficiaries, lump sum death payments and
     payments received by disabled workers, their spouse and their children. Survivor’s benefits include payments to surviving children, widowed mothers and fathers,
     widows and widowers and parents. For the CE Survey and the CPS (1968-1975) the reporting rate is calculated using the administrative total that includes
     Railroad Retirement. For the ACS, the reporting rate is computed by comparing the survey year total with the average of the current and previous years’
     administrative totals.
                                                              Table 5
                          Social Security Old Aged and Survivors Insurance (OASI) Dollar Reporting Rates

                        Admin.
            Admin.     Total (with
                                         Surveys - Weighted Total (in millions of dollars)                        Reporting Rate
             Total      Railroad
                       Retirement)
                                                               CPS-                      CE                           CPS-                  CE
     Year    (millions of dollars)    PSID        SIPP                        ACS                 PSID    SIPP                     ACS
                                                             ADF/ASEC                   Survey                      ADF/ASEC               Survey
     1967   18,646        19,731                              17,085                                                  0.866
     1968   21,683        22,999                              19,238                                                  0.836
     1969    23,180      24,727
     1970   27,569        29,116      20,431                    23,671                            0.741                0.813
     1971   31,962        33,509      24,415                    27,833                            0.764                0.831
     1972   35,488        37,747      31,715                    32,531                            0.894                0.862
     1973   43,740        46,711      32,525                    38,719                            0.744                0.829
     1974   49,355        52,326      40,650                    44,482                            0.824                0.850
67




     1975   56,838        59,855      45,650                    48,960                            0.803                0.861
     1976   63,833        66,849      53,660                    53,830                            0.841                0.843
     1977   71,023        74,452      59,192                    59,760                            0.833                0.841
     1978   78,056        82,719      64,769                    66,870                            0.830                0.857
     1979   87,959        92,622      73,850                    74,776                   79,891   0.840                0.850                0.863
     1980   102,071      106,871     89,359                     89,122                   80,702   0.875                0.873                0.755
     1981   120,258      125,578     103,931                   103,781                   83,295   0.864                0.863                0.663
     1982   134,876      140,598     116,768                   116,472                   98,615   0.866                0.864                0.701
     1983   145,297      151,266     124,441    129,502        123,350                  117,602   0.856   0.891        0.849                0.777
     1984   153,432      159,482     136,037    143,352        131,994                  138,546   0.887   0.934        0.860                0.869
     1985   160,471      166,569     147,166    152,394        140,472                  133,008   0.917   0.950        0.875                0.799
     1986   169,583      175,784     158,495    159,944        147,319                  155,644   0.935   0.943        0.869                0.885
     1987   176,093      182,471     163,622    167,268        154,490                  168,666   0.929   0.950        0.877                0.924
     1988   187,486      194,064     177,372    178,025        164,376                  177,220   0.946   0.950        0.877                0.913
                                                                                                                                         (continued)
                                                              Table 5 (continued)
                                Social Security Old Aged and Survivors Insurance (OASI) Dollar Reporting Rates

                              Admin.
                 Admin.      Total (with
                                                  Surveys - Weighted Total (in millions of dollars)                            Reporting Rate
                  Total       Railroad
                             Retirement)
                                                                         CPS-                       CE                              CPS-                    CE
        Year       (millions of dollars)       PSID          SIPP                       ACS                  PSID       SIPP                     ACS
                                                                       ADF/ASEC                   Survey                          ADF/ASEC                Survey
        1989     199,408       206,306          200,506       190,082   175,522                   188,324       1.006     0.953     0.880                  0.913
        1990     213,825       220,982          207,648       206,833   187,052                   200,766       0.971     0.967     0.875                  0.909
        1991     230,571       237,983          213,370       219,058   197,351                   218,592       0.925     0.950     0.856                  0.919
        1992     244,487       252,087          222,736       225,840   207,877                   234,914       0.911     0.924     0.850                  0.932
        1993     256,799       264,548          222,887       233,770   217,526                   240,952       0.868     0.910     0.847                  0.911
        1994     267,650       275,492          233,663       239,679   241,010                   246,682       0.873     0.895     0.900                  0.895
        1995     277,857       285,716          250,496       251,111   250,835                   256,632       0.902     0.904     0.903                  0.898
        1996     288,557       296,483          263,592       259,750   260,612                   274,170       0.913     0.900     0.903                  0.925
68




        1997     301,319       309,323                        261,631   273,736                   278,780                 0.868     0.908                  0.901
        1998     311,327       319,354          281,268       261,522   278,750                   286,308       0.903     0.840     0.895                  0.897
        1999     318,469       326,518                        272,399   288,344                   291,118                 0.855     0.905                  0.892
        2000     335,879       344,001          322,318       302,932   308,420           273,532 254,479       0.960     0.902     0.918         0.816    0.740
        2001     354,518       362,793                        324,550   327,070           296,445 302,642                 0.915     0.923         0.839    0.834
        2002     369,504       378,002          332,445       337,427   335,870           310,013 325,241       0.900     0.913     0.909         0.837    0.860
        2003     380,612       389,298          289,711       355,405   352,088           320,748 343,873       0.761     0.934     0.925         0.836    0.883
        2004     395,005       403,828                        394,457   365,943           332,643 333,397                 0.999     0.926         0.839    0.826
        2005     415,093       424,096                        413,833   377,881           343,495 382,863                 0.997     0.910         0.830    0.903
        2006     438,915       448,193                                  398,559           362,620 364,938                           0.908         0.831    0.814
        2007                                                            415,921
      Average                                                                                                   0.874     0.924         0.874     0.833    0.857
     Note: The administrative totals include retirement benefits, survivors benefits and benefits paid to special age-72 beneficiaries and lump sum death payments.
     Survivor’s benefits include payments to surviving children, widowed mothers and fathers, widows and widowers and parents. For the CE Survey and the CPS
     (1968-1975) the reporting rate is calculated using the administrative total that includes Railroad Retirement. For the ACS, the reporting rate is computed by
     comparing the survey year total with the average of the current and previous years’ administrative totals.
                                                             Table 6
                              Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) Dollar Reporting Rates

              Admin.
                              Surveys - Weighted Total (in millions of dollars)                       Reporting Rate
               Total
             (millions                              CPS-                      CE                           CPS-                 CE
     Year                 PSID         SIPP                       ACS                 PSID    SIPP                     ACS
            of dollars)                           ADF/ASEC                   Survey                      ADF/ASEC              Survey
     1967      1,860                                2,185                                                  1.175
     1968      2,197                                2,300                                                  1.047
     1969      2,431
     1970      2,929       3,793                    2,922                             1.295                 0.998
     1971      3,587       4,862                    3,549                             1.356                 0.990
     1972      4,264       5,854                    4,457                             1.373                 1.045
     1973      5,445       5,798                    5,791                             1.065                 1.064
     1974      6,570       7,235                    6,817                             1.101                 1.038
     1975      8,115       9,120                    8,090                             1.124                 0.997
     1976      9,603      10,186                    8,944                             1.061                 0.931
69




     1977     11,026      10,965                    10,244                            0.994                 0.929
     1978     12,016      13,002                    11,249                            1.082                 0.936
     1979     13,156      13,838                    12,599                   13,055   1.052                 0.958               0.992
     1980     14,791      14,931                    14,133                   13,371   1.009                 0.955               0.904
     1981     16,481      18,798                    15,666                   12,371   1.141                 0.951               0.751
     1982     16,606      18,550                    15,706                   13,353   1.117                 0.946               0.804
     1983     16,778      17,732      14,319        15,687                   14,639   1.057   0.853         0.935               0.873
     1984     17,122      17,353      16,328        16,424                   14,364   1.014   0.954         0.959               0.839
     1985     17,766      18,340      17,444        16,812                   14,729   1.032   0.982         0.946               0.829
     1986     18,724      17,252      18,404        17,564                   16,640   0.921   0.983         0.938               0.889
     1987     19,375      18,212      18,489        19,398                   18,192   0.940   0.954         1.001               0.939
                                                                                                                             (continued)
                                                             Table 6 (continued)
                                    Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) Dollar Reporting Rates

                   Admin.
                                       Surveys - Weighted Total (in millions of dollars)                               Reporting Rate
                    Total
                 (millions of                                CPS-                       CE                                  CPS-                     CE
       Year                        PSID         SIPP                        ACS                     PSID        SIPP                      ACS
                   dollars)                                ADF/ASEC                    Survey                             ADF/ASEC                 Survey
       1988        20,495         16,822       19,838       19,813                     18,886      0.821       0.968        0.967                   0.921
       1989        21,629         21,185       20,452       21,640                     20,150      0.979       0.946        1.000                   0.932
       1990        23,486         25,594       21,495       22,732                     20,973      1.090       0.915        0.968                   0.893
       1991        26,218         29,876       24,883       24,406                     24,933      1.140       0.949        0.931                   0.951
       1992        29,488         31,488       25,818       27,857                     26,835      1.068       0.876        0.945                   0.910
       1993        32,835         38,714       28,539       30,617                     27,942      1.179       0.869        0.932                   0.851
       1994        35,739         39,993       31,275       33,686                     28,641      1.119       0.875        0.943                   0.801
       1995        38,498         44,333       34,226       36,543                     33,366      1.152       0.889        0.949                   0.867
       1996        41,582         44,867       32,986       38,206                     39,993      1.079       0.793        0.919                   0.962
       1997        42,980                      42,334       41,759                     41,365                  0.985        0.972                   0.962
70




       1998        45,346         44,334       51,974       41,383                     42,331      0.978       1.146        0.913                   0.933
       1999        48,414                      51,585       44,967                     48,299                  1.065        0.929                   0.998
       2000        51,808         46,547       42,836       44,059        36,911       42,763      0.898       0.827        0.850        0.737      0.825
       2001        56,197                      42,062       48,590        40,290       54,448                  0.748        0.865        0.746      0.969
       2002        61,943         55,887       44,636       50,297        43,215       52,976      0.902       0.721        0.812        0.732      0.855
       2003        66,951         39,438       50,521       53,262        47,258       51,304      0.589       0.755        0.796        0.733      0.766
       2004        73,920                      62,458       59,962        49,391       55,610                  0.845        0.811        0.701      0.752
       2005        80,948                      68,547       66,087        53,254       66,758                  0.847        0.816        0.688      0.825
       2006        87,625                                   71,757        58,953       59,017                               0.819        0.699      0.674
       2007                                                 76,767
      Average                                                                                      1.056       0.902         0.945       0.719     0.874
     Note: The administrative totals include payments received by the disabled workers, their spouse and their children. For the ACS, the reporting rate is
     computed by comparing the survey year total with the average of the current and previous years’ administrative totals.
                                                              Table 7
                                        Supplemental Security Income Dollar Reporting Rates

            Admin. Total           Surveys - Weighted Total (in millions of dollars)                   Reporting Rate
            (in millions of                             CPS-                       CE                         CPS-               CE
     Year                      PSID         SIPP                      ACS                 PSID    SIPP                  ACS
                dollars)                             ADF/ASEC                    Survey                   ADF/ASEC              Survey
     1974        5,010        3,518                                                       0.702
     1975        5,614        3,625                     3,609                             0.646              0.643
     1976        5,793        3,497                     4,057                             0.604              0.700
     1977        6,022        4,406                     4,344                             0.732              0.721
     1978        6,653        4,216                     4,573                             0.634              0.687
     1979        6,782        5,776                     4,967                     6,925   0.852              0.732               1.021
     1980        7,636        5,733                     6,055                     6,471   0.751              0.793               0.848
     1981        8,236        7,205                     6,505                     4,329   0.875              0.790               0.526
     1982        8,598        6,928                     6,597                     4,410   0.806              0.767               0.513
71




     1983        9,081        7,942        7,880        7,629                     6,314   0.875   0.868      0.840               0.695
     1984        9,939        7,818        9,211        8,445                     6,305   0.787   0.927      0.850               0.634
     1985       10,592         7,990        9,638       8,876                     5,381   0.754   0.910      0.838               0.508
     1986       11,558         9,046       10,325       9,005                     6,484   0.783   0.893      0.779               0.561
     1987       12,405         7,907       11,120       9,517                     6,734   0.637   0.896      0.767               0.543
     1988       13,173         9,347       12,076      10,244                     8,611   0.710   0.917      0.778               0.654
     1989       14,343        10,194       12,515      11,225                     8,885   0.711   0.873      0.783               0.619
     1990       15,897        10,020       12,853      12,050                     9,927   0.630   0.809      0.758               0.624
     1991       18,303        10,603       14,726      14,397                    11,707   0.579   0.805      0.787               0.640
     1992       21,974        11,938       16,904      15,351                    13,796   0.543   0.769      0.699               0.628
     1993       24,363        15,374       18,918      18,532                    13,644   0.631   0.776      0.761               0.560
     1994       25,557        13,908       20,323      18,174                    15,944   0.544   0.795      0.711               0.624
     1995       27,323        13,843       22,276      19,550                    17,562   0.507   0.815      0.715               0.643
     1996       28,674        15,116       26,772      22,261                    19,001   0.527   0.934      0.776               0.663
     1997       28,904        16,295       28,679      22,717                    17,395   0.564   0.992      0.786               0.602
                                                                                                                              (continued)
                                                              Table 7 (continued)
                                              Supplemental Security Income Dollar Reporting Rates
                 Admin. Total          Surveys - Weighted Total (in millions of dollars)                               Reporting Rate
                 (in millions of                            CPS-                       CE                                     CPS-                   CE
        Year                        PSID        SIPP                      ACS                      PSID        SIPP                       ACS
                     dollars)                            ADF/ASEC                    Survey                               ADF/ASEC                 Survey
        1998         30,085        15,984      29,138      22,309                    18,971        0.531       0.969          0.742                 0.631
        1999         30,907        20,719      29,805      22,583                    18,995        0.670       0.964          0.731                 0.615
        2000         31,562        17,252      31,501      22,468        25,099      21,209        0.547       0.998          0.712       0.804     0.672
        2001         33,314                    33,188      25,652        25,847      28,881                    0.996          0.770       0.797     0.867
        2002         34,708        17,037      35,161      25,924        26,920      25,957        0.491       1.013          0.747       0.791     0.748
        2003         36,151        18,445      37,231      28,022        28,901      22,533        0.510       1.030          0.775       0.816     0.623
        2004         37,504        23,857      39,901      30,634        29,537      21,749        0.636       1.064          0.817       0.802     0.580
        2005         39,755                    43,139      31,150        32,350      26,095                    1.085          0.784       0.837     0.656
        2006         41,576                                31,977        36,599      21,808                                   0.769       0.900     0.525
        2007         43,466                                33,008                                                             0.759
72




      Average                                                                                     0.659        0.917         0.760        0.821     0.644

     Note: For the ACS, the reporting rate is computed by comparing the survey year total with the average of the current and previous years’ administrative
     totals.
                                          Table 8
                        Unemployment Insurance Dollar Reporting Rates

                               Survey - Weighted Total
            Admin.                                                        Reporting Rate
                                (in millions of dollars)
             Total
           (millions                           CPS-                                CPS-
                                                           CE                               CE
Year      of dollars)    PSID       SIPP       ADF/               PSID    SIPP     ADF/
                                                         Survey                            Survey
                                              ASEC                                 ASEC
1976       11,141        8,772                                    0.787
1977        9,989        6,046                                    0.605
1978        8,318        5,631                                    0.677
1979        8,703        5,213                            8,022   0.599                    0.922
1980       15,364       10,527                           10,191   0.685                    0.663
1981       14,392       10,388                            9,216   0.722                    0.640
1982       24,146       20,321                           11,124   0.842                    0.461
1983       24,726       15,495     15,065                14,787   0.627   0.609            0.598
1984       14,760        8,660     11,447                11,100   0.587   0.776            0.752
1985       14,763       10,998     11,990                 8,581   0.745   0.812            0.581
1986       15,425       11,546     12,584                 9,553   0.749   0.816            0.619
1987       13,584        9,839     11,151     10,417      8,401   0.724   0.821    0.767   0.618
1988       12,490       10,197      9,801      9,476      8,108   0.816   0.785    0.759   0.649
1989       13,529       10,263     10,170     10,310      7,624   0.759   0.752    0.762   0.564
1990       17,195       13,502     14,237     14,172     10,087   0.785   0.828    0.824   0.587
1991       25,435       18,768     22,064     21,652     16,392   0.738   0.867    0.851   0.644
1992       37,239       25,352     30,858     27,786     20,021   0.681   0.829    0.746   0.538
1993       32,357       23,275     28,343     25,811     18,167   0.719   0.876    0.798   0.561
1994       21,761       18,983     18,192     20,497     15,219   0.872   0.836    0.942   0.699
1995       19,909       13,804     16,080     18,808     11,773   0.693   0.808    0.945   0.591
1996       20,418       16,454     14,222     17,591      8,921   0.806   0.697    0.862   0.437
1997       18,375                  11,687     15,856      9,092           0.636    0.863   0.495
1998       18,187       19,805     10,417     15,728      8,787   1.089   0.573    0.865   0.483
1999       19,027                  12,007     14,606      8,168           0.631    0.768   0.429
2000       19,218       15,384     14,713     14,469      7,937   0.801   0.766    0.753   0.413
2001       30,143                  19,365     24,291     11,718           0.642    0.806   0.389
2002       51,086       36,234     28,903     37,912     19,394   0.709   0.566    0.742   0.380
2003       50,163       21,822     31,047     36,932     21,881   0.435   0.619    0.736   0.436
2004       33,512       30,978     25,405     25,058     15,907   0.924   0.758    0.748   0.475
2005       31,104                  27,073     22,290     13,728           0.870    0.717   0.441
2006       29,885                             20,650     12,425                    0.691   0.416
2007       32,213                             21,876                               0.679

Average                                                           0.738   0.747    0.792   0.553




                                                    73
                                        Table 9
                       Workers’ Compensation Dollar Reporting Rates

                              Survey - Weighted Total
           Admin.                                                           Reporting Rate
                               (in millions of dollars)
            Total
          (millions                           CPS-                                  CPS-
                                                          CE                                    CE
 Year    of dollars)    PSID       SIPP       ADF/               PSID      SIPP     ADF/
                                                        Survey                                 Survey
                                             ASEC                                   ASEC
 1976        5,204     1,788                                     0.344
 1977        5,950     2,343                                     0.394
 1978        6,816     2,854                                     0.419
 1979        8,507     2,573                             9,076   0.302                         1.067
 1980        9,671     3,420                             9,770   0.354                         1.010
 1981       10,623      4,081                            8,239   0.384                         0.776
 1982       11,349      3,728                            6,902   0.328                         0.608
 1983       11,894      4,777      5,536                10,011   0.402     0.465               0.842
 1984       13,261      4,139      5,484                10,348   0.312     0.414               0.780
 1985       14,719      5,210      5,822                 8,024   0.354     0.396               0.545
 1986       15,971      7,521      5,728                 9,631   0.471     0.359               0.603
 1987       17,405      7,155      7,313      8,375     12,927   0.411     0.420     0.481     0.743
 1988       19,196      7,214      7,054     10,726     13,611   0.376     0.367     0.559     0.709
 1989       20,892      8,893      8,582     12,822     12,103   0.426     0.411     0.614     0.579
 1990       23,050      7,510      9,684     13,005     11,885   0.326     0.420     0.564     0.516
 1991       25,355      9,512      9,958     14,412     11,839   0.375     0.393     0.568     0.467
 1992       25,996     11,141      9,989     13,660     12,168   0.429     0.384     0.525     0.468
 1993       24,422      7,352      9,687     13,434     14,855   0.301     0.397     0.550     0.608
 1994       26,288      9,987      9,773     13,554     15,104   0.380     0.372     0.516     0.575
 1995       25,389     8,447       8,465     11,752     13,235   0.333     0.333     0.463     0.521
 1996       25,221     6,843      11,946     10,263     12,742   0.271     0.474     0.407     0.505
 1997       24,574                10,949     12,417     12,675             0.446     0.505     0.516
 1998       25,365      9,589     10,659     11,089     10,947   0.378     0.420     0.437     0.432
 1999       26,258                11,678     11,799     12,105             0.445     0.449     0.461
 2000       26,766     10,597      9,807     12,944     11,750   0.396     0.366     0.484     0.439
 2001       27,690                 9,930     12,246      9,515             0.359     0.442     0.344
 2002       28,094      5,935     10,905     12,943      8,999   0.211     0.388     0.461     0.320
 2003       29,147      5,491     11,223     13,926      9,577   0.188     0.385     0.478     0.329
 2004       29,719     10,202      9,859     13,658      9,683   0.343     0.332     0.460     0.326
 2005       29,228                11,541     15,323     11,051             0.395     0.524     0.378
 2006       28,207                           14,870     11,787                       0.527     0.418
 2007                                        12,820

  Average                                                        0.354     0.397     0.501     0.567

Note: The administrative totals refer to only cash payments, obtained by removing the medical portion of
the total program cost.




                                                   74
                                    Table 10
                  Earned Income Tax Credit Dollar Reporting Rates

              Admin.           Survey - Weighted Total
                                                            Reporting Rate
               Total                 (in dollars)
          (in millions of
Year                              CPS-ADF/ASEC              CPS-ADF/ASEC
              dollars)

1991         11,105                 7,114,273,167               0.641
1992         13,028                 8,557,786,177               0.657
1993         15,537                 9,838,109,512               0.633
1994         21,105                15,657,377,258               0.742
1995         25,956                18,745,177,769               0.722
1996         28,825                21,759,768,835               0.755
1997         30,389                21,853,593,976               0.719
1998         32,340                22,746,758,857               0.703
1999         31,901                22,925,582,818               0.719
2000         32,296                22,114,667,940               0.685
2001         33,376                23,249,556,083               0.697
2002         35,784                25,758,259,544               0.720
2003         34,412                25,280,285,195               0.735
2004         33,490                26,180,929,642               0.782
2005         34,961                28,419,265,886               0.813
2006         36,693                30,332,485,115               0.827

Average                                                         0.722




                                           75
                                      Table 11
                         AFDC/TANF Average Monthly Participation

        Administrative
           Average       Surveys – Average Monthly Participation
                                                                            Reporting Rate
           Monthly                   (family level)
         Participation
                                                          CPS-                           CPS-
Year      (Families)        PSID         SIPP                       PSID      SIPP
                                                        ADF/ASEC                       ADF/ASEC
1980      3,692,608
1981      3,812,123
1982      3,522,001
1983      3,667,080                    2,851,592                              0.778
1984      3,695,574                    3,040,356                              0.823
1985      3,683,941                    2,900,857                              0.787
1986      3,746,240                    2,801,266                              0.748
1987      3,759,011                    2,871,043        3,025,954             0.764          0.805
1988      3,732,307                    2,795,287        2,968,807             0.749          0.795
1989      3,781,426                    2,902,077        2,816,732             0.767          0.745
1990      4,039,016                    3,209,590        3,120,412             0.795          0.773
1991      4,478,428                    3,436,155        3,419,110             0.767          0.763
1992      4,809,566                    3,579,069        3,468,416             0.744          0.721
1993      4,990,435       3,099,655    4,020,104        3,713,955   0.621     0.806          0.744
1994      5,011,151       2,840,407    3,966,091        3,451,463   0.567     0.791          0.689
1995      4,770,300       2,603,520    3,942,927        3,124,368   0.546     0.827          0.655
1996      4,415,233       2,347,537    3,510,786        2,957,559   0.532     0.795          0.670
1997      3,724,214                    3,001,523        2,275,387             0.806          0.611
1998      3,041,589       1,217,162    2,376,098        1,824,069   0.400     0.781          0.600
1999      2,547,606                    1,866,543        1,401,124             0.733          0.550
2000      2,203,417       1,117,209    1,656,865        1,283,230   0.507     0.752          0.582
2001      2,093,124                    1,519,928        1,173,244             0.726          0.561
2002      2,040,879        708,284     1,337,550        1,089,399   0.347     0.655          0.534
2003      2,014,886       1,369,355    1,397,108        1,290,115   0.680     0.693          0.640
2004      1,971,090       1,130,092    1,632,136        1,117,250   0.573     0.828          0.567
2005      1,887,309                    1,527,558        1,189,858             0.809          0.630
2006      1,774,635                                      935,072                             0.527
2007      1,662,727                                      875,565                             0.527

Average                                                             0.530     0.771          0.652
Average Dollars Reporting Rate for Comparable Years                 0.443     0.712          0.624




                                                   76
                                   Table 12
                Food Stamp Program Average Monthly Participation

        Administrative        Surveys – Average Monthly
            Average                                                       Reporting rate
                                     Participation
            Monthly
         Participation                                CPS-                               CPS-
Year                       PSID         SIPP                      PSID       SIPP
        (Households)                                ADF/ASEC                           ADF/ASEC
1980       7,763,714     5,659,991                    5,130,682   0.729                    0.661
1981       8,231,565     5,986,317                    5,273,484   0.727                    0.641
1982       7,817,518     6,341,138                    5,351,906   0.811                    0.685
1983       7,839,288     6,414,963    6,561,402       5,560,356   0.818     0.837          0.709
1984       7,515,342     5,921,546    6,656,248       5,533,007   0.788     0.886          0.736
1985       7,291,303     5,742,227    6,228,872       5,314,065   0.788     0.854          0.729
1986       7,202,921     6,063,710    6,272,349       5,239,128   0.842     0.871          0.727
1987       7,084,390     6,082,936    6,242,591       5,183,350   0.859     0.881          0.732
1988       7,092,014     6,039,197    6,133,158       5,249,217   0.852     0.865          0.740
1989       7,337,547     6,261,035    6,164,276       5,159,889   0.853     0.840          0.703
1990       7,999,990     6,200,845    6,582,906       5,697,878   0.775     0.823          0.712
1991       9,208,275     6,238,023    7,263,082       6,294,527   0.677     0.789          0.684
1992      10,282,358     6,982,771    7,891,822       6,816,542   0.679     0.768          0.663
1993      10,902,288     7,598,139    8,733,851       7,329,268   0.697     0.801          0.672
1994      11,093,566     7,796,566    8,561,080       7,420,375   0.703     0.772          0.669
1995      10,791,655     7,273,270    8,474,133       7,071,615   0.674     0.785          0.655
1996      10,395,150     6,912,900    8,751,572       6,896,048   0.665     0.842          0.663
1997       9,087,686     5,179,876    8,001,126       6,111,001   0.570     0.880          0.672
1998       8,068,051     4,884,314    7,075,561       5,374,420   0.605     0.877          0.666
1999       7,568,908     4,504,903    6,564,475       4,780,595   0.595     0.867          0.632
2000       7,326,583     4,441,331    6,304,656       4,606,152   0.606     0.861          0.629
2001       7,595,058     4,622,812    6,827,110       4,823,717   0.609     0.899          0.635
2002       8,402,369     5,017,984    7,393,731       5,149,868   0.597     0.880          0.613
2003       9,447,575     7,502,129    8,007,800       5,704,880   0.794     0.848          0.604
2004      10,566,039     8,464,400    8,914,594       6,002,098   0.801     0.844          0.568
2005      11,485,609                  9,525,628       6,484,700             0.829          0.565
2006      11,592,557                                  6,147,814                            0.530
2007      11,927,826

Average                                                           0.725     0.843          0.663
Average Dollars Reporting Rate for Comparable Years               0.753     0.823          0.662




                                               77
                                          Table 13
                              OASI Average Monthly Participation

             Admin             Survey Aggregates (thousands)                     Reporting Rate
            Average
                                                 CPS-                                       CPS-
            Monthly
  Year                     PSID       SIPP       ADF/       ACS        PSID       SIPP      ADF/      ACS
          Participation
                                                 ASEC                                       ASEC
          (thousands)
 1974        25,007        18,360               19,874                 0.734                0.795
 1975        26,033        18,739               20,286                 0.720                0.779
 1976        26,781        19,562               20,716                 0.730                0.774
 1977        27,525        20,380               21,638                 0.740                0.786
 1978        28,185        21,136               22,780                 0.750                0.808
 1979        28,743        21,607               23,787                 0.752                0.828
 1980        29,351        23,050               24,929                 0.785                0.849
 1981        29,946        23,914               25,722                 0.799                0.859
 1982        30,417        24,315               25,912                 0.799                0.852
 1983        30,781        26,007    27,254     26,354                 0.845     0.885      0.856
 1984        31,174        26,967    29,024     26,732                 0.865     0.931      0.858
 1985        31,295        27,803    29,360     27,265                 0.888     0.938      0.871
 1986        31,809        28,910    29,853     27,353                 0.909     0.939      0.860
 1987        32,287        28,969    30,522     28,403                 0.897     0.945      0.880
 1988        32,691        29,861    30,946     28,878                 0.913     0.947      0.883
 1989        33,110        32,925    31,436     29,264                 0.994     0.949      0.884
 1990        33,598        31,735    32,234     29,622                 0.945     0.959      0.882
 1991        34,107        31,133    32,682     29,711                 0.913     0.958      0.871
 1992        34,610        30,259    32,540     30,544                 0.874     0.940      0.883
 1993        35,043                  32,740     29,834                           0.934      0.851
 1994        35,369                  32,523     30,433                           0.920      0.860
 1995        35,566                  32,871     30,829                           0.924      0.867
 1996        35,740                  33,668     30,121                           0.942      0.843
 1997        35,878                  32,889     29,645                           0.917      0.826
 1998        35,995                  32,038     30,028                           0.890      0.834
 1999        36,103                  32,559     30,088                           0.902      0.833
 2000        36,499                  34,651     30,708     29,091                0.949      0.841     0.801
 2001        36,914                  36,390     31,535     30,299                0.986      0.854     0.825
 2002        37,137                  36,485     31,229     30,352                0.982      0.841     0.820
 2003        37,359        31,747    36,785     31,871     30,886      0.850     0.985      0.853     0.829
 2004        37,598                  36,763     31,689     30,943                0.978      0.843     0.826
 2005        37,943                  36,823     31,423     30,958                0.970      0.828     0.820
 2006        38,299                             31,259     31,531                           0.816     0.827
 2007        39,291                             31,566                                      0.803

 Average                                                              0.835       0.942       0.843    0.821
 Average Dollars Reporting Rate for Comparable Years                  0.881       0.926       0.880    0.833
Note: For the ACS, the reporting rate is computed by comparing the survey year total with the average of the
current and previous years’ administrative totals.



                                                   78
                                         Table 14
                             SSDI Average Monthly Participation

             Admin             Survey Aggregates (thousands)                     Reporting rates
            Average
                                                 CPS-                                       CPS-
            Monthly
  Year                     PSID       SIPP       ADF/       ACS        PSID       SIPP      ADF/      ACS
          Participation
                                                 ASEC                                       ASEC
          (thousands)
 1974        3,535         2,814                 3,066                 0.796                0.867
 1975        3,943         3,010                 3,389                 0.764                0.860
 1976        4,279         3,170                 3,453                 0.741                0.807
 1977        4,510         3,332                 3,645                 0.739                0.808
 1978        4,619         3,481                 3,782                 0.754                0.819
 1979        4,579         3,626                 4,076                 0.792                0.890
 1980        4,484         3,419                 3,974                 0.763                0.886
 1981        4,332         3,716                 3,924                 0.858                0.906
 1982        3,994         3,430                 3,721                 0.859                0.932
 1983        3,686         3,787      3,342      3,599                 1.027     0.907      0.976
 1984        3,612         3,684      3,664      3,648                 1.020     1.014      1.010
 1985        3,619         3,613      3,725      3,511                 0.998     1.029      0.970
 1986        3,701         3,215      3,800      3,557                 0.869     1.027      0.961
 1987        3,770         3,623      3,820      3,831                 0.961     1.013      1.016
 1988        3,809         3,668      3,905      3,758                 0.963     1.025      0.987
 1989        3,851         4,109      3,978      3,882                 1.067     1.033      1.008
 1990        3,947         4,228      4,121      3,954                 1.071     1.044      1.002
 1991        4,131         4,907      4,804      3,935                 1.188     1.163      0.953
 1992        4,428         4,329      4,923      4,383                 0.978     1.112      0.990
 1993        4,779                    4,988      4,484                           1.044      0.938
 1994        5,098                    4,837      4,688                           0.949      0.919
 1995        5,374                    5,035      4,970                           0.937      0.925
 1996        5,603                    5,075      5,024                           0.906      0.897
 1997        5,742                    6,138      5,006                           1.069      0.872
 1998        5,865                    7,379      4,921                           1.258      0.839
 1999        6,051                    7,146      5,114                           1.181      0.845
 2000        6,210                    5,868      4,866      4,530                0.945      0.784     0.739
 2001        6,395                    5,581      5,207      4,697                0.873      0.814     0.745
 2002        6,655                    5,696      5,260      4,769                0.856      0.790     0.731
 2003        6,981         6,662      6,159      5,491      5,067      0.954     0.882      0.787     0.743
 2004        7,332                    6,863      5,812      5,137                0.936      0.793     0.718
 2005        7,683                    7,199      6,049      5,425                0.937      0.787     0.723
 2006        8,004                               6,050      5,784                           0.756     0.737
 2007        8,461                               6,387                                      0.755

 Average                                                              0.908       1.006       0.887    0.734
 Average Dollars Reporting Rate for Comparable Years                  1.017       0.907       0.926    0.719
Note: For the ACS, the reporting rate is computed by comparing the survey year total with the average of the
current and previous years’ administrative totals.



                                                   79
                                           Table 15
                              SSI Average Monthly Participation

             Admin            Survey Aggregates (thousands)                     Reporting rates
            Average
                                                CPS-                                       CPS-
            Monthly
  Year                     PSID       SIPP      ADF/       ACS        PSID       SIPP      ADF/      ACS
          Participation
                                                ASEC                                       ASEC
          (thousands)

 1974        3,475        3,103                                       0.893
 1975        4,005        2,718                 2,888                 0.679                0.721
 1976        4,128        2,388                 2,911                 0.578                0.705
 1977        4,093        2,648                 2,908                 0.647                0.710
 1978        4,084        2,556                 2,898                 0.626                0.710
 1979        4,044        2,777                 2,868                 0.687                0.709
 1980        4,010        2,579                 3,082                 0.643                0.769
 1981        3,945        2,935                 2,986                 0.744                0.757
 1982        3,808        2,736                 2,760                 0.718                0.725
 1983        3,755        2,837      3,061      2,972                 0.755     0.815      0.791
 1984        3,844        2,457      3,498      3,081                 0.639     0.910      0.802
 1985        3,960        2,484      3,582      3,074                 0.627     0.904      0.776
 1986        4,081        2,644      3,684      3,078                 0.648     0.903      0.754
 1987        4,204        2,471      3,797      3,057                 0.588     0.903      0.727
 1988        4,297        2,857      3,985      3,271                 0.665     0.927      0.761
 1989        4,400        3,071      4,075      3,434                 0.698     0.926      0.781
 1990        4,565        2,759      3,912      3,438                 0.604     0.857      0.753
 1991        4,817        2,703      4,199      3,695                 0.561     0.872      0.767
 1992        5,179        2,883      4,573      3,870                 0.557     0.883      0.747
 1993        5,592        3,540      4,874      4,117                 0.633     0.872      0.736
 1994        5,941        3,282      5,124      3,979                 0.553     0.862      0.670
 1995        6,185        3,360      5,271      4,073                 0.543     0.852      0.659
 1996        6,328        3,003      5,971      4,164                 0.475     0.944      0.658
 1997        6,323                   6,429      3,851                           1.017      0.609
 1998        6,310        3,154      6,451      3,966                 0.500     1.022      0.628
 1999        6,346                   6,406      3,970                           1.009      0.626
 2000        6,363        3,012      6,346      3,682      3,516      0.473     0.997      0.579     0.553
 2001        6,427                   6,330      3,931      3,491                0.985      0.612     0.546
 2002        6,477        2,838      6,669      3,724      3,462      0.438     1.030      0.575     0.537
 2003        6,537                   6,804      4,049      3,740                1.041      0.619     0.575
 2004        6,633        3,511      6,569      4,090      3,631      0.529     0.990      0.617     0.551
 2005        6,793                   6,917      3,904      3,773                1.018      0.575     0.562
 2006        6,912                              3,737      4,152                           0.541     0.606
 2007        7,030                              3,773                                      0.537

 Average                                                             0.619      0.937       0.688    0.561
 Average Dollars Reporting Rate for Comparable Years                 0.659      0.917       0.760    0.821
Note: For the ACS, the reporting rate is computed by comparing the survey year total with the average of the
current and previous years’ administrative totals.


                                                   80
                                                         Table 16
                      National School Lunch Program (NSLP) - Average Monthly Participation (in thousands)

                   Administrative
                                                     Survey- Average Monthly Participation                            Reporting Rates
            Average Monthly Participation
                                                                               SIPP                                                  SIPP
                                Free or                            SIPP                      CPS-                        SIPP                      CPS-
                                                        SIPP                  (Free or                        SIPP                  (Free or
     Year    Free    Reduced    Reduced     PSID                 (Reduced                    ADF/    PSID              (Reduced                    ADF/
                                                       (Free)                 Reduced                        (Free)                 Reduced
                                 Price                             Price)                    ASEC                        Price)                    ASEC
                                                                               Price)                                                Price)
     1979   10,000     1,767     11,767                                                      5,704                                                  0.485
     1980   10,200     1,900     12,100                                                      6,212                                                  0.513
     1981   10,333     1,800     12,133                                                      5,963                                                  0.491
     1982    9,967     1,567     11,533                                                      6,241                                                  0.541
     1983   10,300     1,500     11,800               10,444       2,353       12,796        6,186           1.014       1.569          1.084       0.524
     1984   10,167     1,533     11,700                9,648       2,343       11,991        6,163           0.949       1.528          1.025       0.527
     1985    9,933     1,600     11,533                9,560       2,576       12,136        6,340           0.962       1.610          1.052       0.550
     1986   10,000     1,600     11,600               10,103       2,791       12,894        6,382           1.010       1.744          1.112       0.550
81




     1987    9,933     1,600     11,533               10,479       2,633       13,112        6,273           1.055       1.645          1.137       0.544
     1988    9,767     1,600     11,367               10,496       2,574       13,070        5,869           1.075       1.609          1.150       0.516
     1989    9,704     1,609     11,313               10,019       2,446       12,465        6,253           1.032       1.520          1.102       0.553
     1990    9,980     1,696     11,675               10,292       2,278       12,570        6,419           1.031       1.343          1.077       0.550
     1991   10,590     1,742     12,331               11,196       2,544       13,741        7,186           1.057       1.461          1.114       0.583
     1992   11,400     1,734     13,133               12,164       2,665       14,829        7,505           1.067       1.537          1.129       0.571
     1993   11,874     1,762     13,637               13,158       2,713       15,871        8,515           1.108       1.539          1.164       0.624
     1994   12,272     1,836     14,108               13,791       2,860       16,651        9,033           1.124       1.558          1.180       0.640
     1995   12,469     1,910     14,379               14,677       2,939       17,616        9,374           1.177       1.539          1.225       0.652
     1996   12,774     2,025     14,799               13,793       2,724       16,517        9,497           1.080       1.345          1.116       0.642
     1997   12,969     2,126     15,095               13,592       2,905       16,497        8,508           1.048       1.366          1.093       0.564
     1998   13,031     2,255     15,286     11,333    13,623       3,048       16,671        9,292   0.741   1.045       1.352          1.091       0.608
     1999   12,956     2,391     15,347               13,586       3,248       16,834        8,129           1.049       1.358          1.097       0.530
     2000   12,951     2,497     15,448     10,736    14,587       3,016       17,603        7,934   0.695   1.126       1.208          1.139       0.514
     2001   13,047     2,591     15,638               14,607       3,282       17,889        8,076           1.120       1.266          1.144       0.516
                                                                                                                                                (continued)
                                                        Table 16 (continued)
                         National School Lunch Program (NSLP) - Average Monthly Participation (in thousands)

                      Administrative
                                                        Survey- Average Monthly Participation                            Reporting Rates
               Average Monthly Participation
                                                                                   SIPP                                                 SIPP
                                   Free or                            SIPP                      CPS-                        SIPP                   CPS-
                                                           SIPP                  (Free or                        SIPP                  (Free or
      Year      Free    Reduced    Reduced     PSID                 (Reduced                    ADF/    PSID              (Reduced                 ADF/
                                                          (Free)                 Reduced                        (Free)                 Reduced
                                    Price                             Price)                    ASEC                        Price)                 ASEC
                                                                                  Price)                                                Price)
      2002     13,433     2,633     16,067     11,645    15,026       3,294       18,320        8,901   0.725   1.119       1.251       1.140      0.554
      2003     13,833     2,733     16,567               14,781       3,421       18,202        8,858           1.069       1.252       1.099      0.535
      2004     14,267     2,833     17,100     12,155    15,707       3,923       19,630        8,628   0.711   1.101       1.385       1.148      0.505
      2005     14,667     2,900     17,567               15,879       3,884       19,763        8,503           1.083       1.339       1.125      0.484
      2006     14,833     2,933     17,767                                                      8,288                                              0.466
      2007                                                                                      8,380

     Average                                                                                            0.718   1.065       1.449          1.119   0.548
82
                                                           Table 17
                               Women, Infants and Children (WIC) - Average Monthly Participation

                          Average Monthly Participation                        Surveys                         Reporting Rates
                                                                                             CPS-                             CPS-
      Year        Women        Infants    Children         Total     PSID        SIPP                  PSID       SIPP
                                                                                           ADF/ASEC                         ADF/ASEC
      1983        578,010     762,100     1,341,762   2,681,873                2,548,915                          0.950
      1984        656,534     834,477     1,575,325   3,066,336                2,857,268                          0.932
      1985        678,098     891,376     1,625,838   3,195,311                2,741,860                          0.858
      1986        717,986     963,642     1,653,688   3,335,315                2,438,474                          0.731
      1987        758,672    1,030,236    1,651,786   3,440,693                2,269,432                          0.660
      1988        845,065    1,131,385    1,717,037   3,693,487                2,165,192                          0.586
      1989        986,097    1,299,690    1,985,077   4,270,865                2,371,682                          0.555
      1990       1,040,887   1,444,443    2,065,124   4,550,454                2,694,798                          0.592
      1991       1,154,320   1,602,121    2,295,770   5,052,210                3,176,805                          0.629
      1992       1,252,709   1,696,693    2,555,337   5,504,738                3,469,799                          0.630
      1993       1,404,240   1,757,864    2,909,770   6,071,873                3,924,523                          0.646
83




      1994       1,524,576   1,796,083    3,298,240   6,618,898                3,997,409                          0.604
      1995       1,589,327   1,816,872    3,541,696   6,947,895                4,073,833                          0.586
      1996       1,675,121   1,834,936    3,769,028   7,279,085                4,087,180                          0.561
      1997       1,708,688   1,868,648    3,807,929   7,385,265                3,892,830                          0.527
      1998       1,744,294   1,893,036    3,741,169   7,378,499    6,911,033   3,794,967               0.937      0.514
      1999       1,737,284   1,891,698    3,629,042   7,258,024                3,727,767                          0.514
      2000       1,760,347   1,899,835    3,551,309   7,211,492    6,384,731   3,649,744   4,595,053   0.885      0.506          0.637
      2001       1,788,958   1,925,665    3,648,665   7,363,287                4,132,639   4,806,973              0.561          0.653
      2002       1,818,691   1,931,632    3,763,862   7,514,184    6,453,758   4,274,605   4,861,428   0.859      0.569          0.647
      2003       1,874,606   1,959,486    3,850,275   7,684,367                4,132,526   5,075,717              0.538          0.661
      2004       1,944,911   2,028,188    3,991,965   7,965,064    8,150,696   4,470,050   5,105,831   1.023      0.561          0.641
      2005       1,975,405   2,053,280    4,001,781   8,030,466                4,671,507   4,825,039              0.582          0.601
      2006       2,043,836   2,093,967    3,987,749   8,125,552                            4,951,229                             0.609
      2007       2,110,410   2,185,447    4,080,116   8,375,973                            4,843,223                             0.578

     Average                                                                                           0.926      0.626          0.628
     Average Dollars Reporting Rate for Comparable Years                                                          0.717
                         Table 18 - Reporting Rates Regression Estimates

Indicator Variables                        Dollars                                       Months
for:                            (1)          (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)            (6)
Program

       AFDC/TANF             -0.318        -0.318         -0.313           -0.254        -0.255         -0.221
                             (0.038)       (0.039)        (0.047)          (0.022)       (0.024)        (0.031)
       FSP                   -0.223        -0.223         -0.148           -0.191        -0.192         -0.139
                             (0.045)       (0.045)        (0.065)          (0.025)       (0.026)        (0.039)
       OASI                  -0.059        -0.059          0.093           -0.045        -0.045          0.061
                             (0.037)       (0.037)        (0.044)          (0.014)       (0.014)        (0.020)
       SSI                   -0.186        -0.186         -0.008           -0.187        -0.187         -0.138
                             (0.048)       (0.048)        (0.060)          (0.037)       (0.037)        (0.066)
       UI                    -0.227        -0.228         -0.153
                             (0.048)       (0.048)        (0.062)
       WC                    -0.470        -0.470         -0.402
                             (0.074)       (0.074)        (0.062)
       WIC                                                                 -0.300        -0.297         -0.186
                                                                           (0.082)       (0.084)        (0.101)

Survey

       PSID                  -0.071        -0.066         -0.122           -0.131         0.007         -0.120
                             (0.042)       (0.055)        (0.061)          (0.044)       (0.074)        (0.092)
       CPS                   -0.043        -0.022         -0.058           -0.118        -0.069         -0.168
                             (0.035)       (0.051)        (0.044)          (0.029)       (0.049)        (0.057)
       ACS                   -0.065                       -0.107           -0.196                       -0.211
                             (0.067)                      (0.049)          (0.056)                      (0.061)
       CE Survey             -0.120        -0.102         -0.196
                             (0.043)       (0.058)        (0.052)

Specification

       Year Dummies            Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes

       Coefficients
       above for
                                             Yes                                          Yes
       Survey*Post
       2000

       Only 2000-2007
                                                             Yes                                         Yes
        Data
Notes: This table reports the estimated coefficients in a regression of reporting rates on indicator variables for
programs, surveys and years. In column 2, we further add a set of surveys and post year 2000 interactions, and
the coefficients for these interactions are reported instead. In column 3, the regression is based on 2000-2007
data only. Standard errors, clustered by survey and program combinations, are in parentheses. The omitted
program indicator is SSDI and the omitted survey indicator is for the SIPP. In these regressions we exclude the
NSLP. For AFDC/TANF in the ACS and CE Survey we use the reporting rates that incorporate General
Assistance.



                                                       84
                                                             Table 19
                                                 CPS-ADF/ASEC Share of Dollars Imputed


                                   A. Recipiency Imputed                                             B. All Imputations

      Survey    AFDC/                                                            AFDC/
       Year     TANF        FSP      OASDI       SSI        UI       WC          TANF        FSP     OASDI       SSI       UI       WC
       1991     0.113      0.106      0.106     0.103      0.108    0.078        0.155      0.142     0.210     0.163     0.179    0.228
       1992     0.094      0.086      0.099     0.103      0.084    0.099        0.135      0.135     0.206     0.173     0.168    0.193
       1993     0.131      0.111      0.110     0.111      0.096    0.062        0.177      0.150     0.223     0.175     0.181    0.167
       1994     0.110      0.094      0.110     0.120      0.110    0.084        0.179      0.162     0.241     0.229     0.211    0.219
       1995     0.165      0.129      0.144     0.162      0.136    0.159        0.237      0.194     0.273     0.222     0.209    0.255
       1996     0.165      0.127      0.139     0.127      0.151    0.133        0.234      0.204     0.294     0.199     0.237    0.276
       1997     0.140      0.118      0.120     0.128      0.115    0.143        0.206      0.180     0.275     0.206     0.199    0.255
       1998     0.106      0.109      0.108     0.118      0.093    0.112        0.173      0.192     0.278     0.198     0.196    0.252
       1999     0.171      0.127      0.120     0.154      0.158    0.137        0.270      0.211     0.306     0.240     0.259    0.283
85




       2000     0.118      0.099      0.111     0.114      0.099    0.129        0.243      0.187     0.298     0.216     0.215    0.278
       2001     0.184      0.125      0.117     0.134      0.118    0.148        0.286      0.224     0.333     0.257     0.270    0.301
       2002     0.284      0.133      0.123     0.152      0.106    0.115        0.381      0.235     0.332     0.278     0.229    0.287
       2003     0.262      0.138      0.129     0.140      0.127    0.131        0.353      0.233     0.356     0.279     0.253    0.302
       2004     0.265      0.141      0.128     0.143      0.133    0.171        0.348      0.232     0.351     0.298     0.265    0.307
       2005     0.258      0.142      0.121     0.146      0.117    0.128        0.346      0.238     0.344     0.287     0.251    0.279
       2006     0.220      0.121      0.115     0.139      0.120    0.135        0.291      0.215     0.327     0.269     0.238    0.271
       2007     0.143      0.120      0.120     0.125      0.120    0.100        0.240      0.222     0.341     0.259     0.254    0.215
       2008     0.171                 0.109     0.123      0.118    0.116        0.262                0.335     0.268     0.254    0.286

     Notes: Panel A shows the share of total dollars reported attributable to those whose recipiency is imputed. Panel B shows the share of
     total dollars reported that are imputed. Food Stamps data for 2008 are currently unavailable.
                                 Table 20
                    CPS-ADF/ASEC Share of Months Imputed

            A. Recipiency Imputed                     B. All Imputations
 Survey     AFDC/                         AFDC/
  Year       TANF           FSP           TANF         FSP       OASDI        SSI
  1991       0.115         0.115          0.134       0.126       0.107      0.104
  1992       0.104         0.092          0.117       0.113       0.099      0.102
  1993       0.123         0.118          0.144       0.146       0.109      0.115
  1994       0.108         0.101          0.115       0.108       0.108      0.115
  1995       0.151         0.140          0.218       0.194       0.146      0.156
  1996       0.154         0.139          0.214       0.203       0.141      0.127
  1997       0.139         0.124          0.209       0.178       0.124      0.135
  1998       0.117         0.112          0.173       0.184       0.108      0.120
  1999       0.174         0.139          0.285       0.210       0.118      0.150
  2000       0.120         0.107          0.238       0.185       0.111      0.119
  2001       0.206         0.128          0.301       0.207       0.116      0.128
  2002       0.282         0.142          0.379       0.227       0.121      0.147
  2003       0.263         0.136          0.356       0.228       0.130      0.143
  2004       0.266         0.140          0.362       0.229       0.127      0.143
  2005       0.281         0.142          0.398       0.229       0.125      0.144
  2006       0.238         0.123          0.329       0.211       0.116      0.133
  2007       0.166         0.123          0.257       0.210       0.120      0.120
  2008       0.174         0.118          0.270       0.201       0.109      0.122

Notes: Panel A shows the share of months for those who recipiency is imputed. Panel B
shows the overall average monthly participation imputation rates.




                                         86
                                                                     Table 21
                                                           SIPP Share of Dollars Imputed



                                   A. Recipiency Imputed                                             B. All Imputation

      Survey    AFDC/                                                            AFDC/
       Year     TANF        FSP      OASDI       SSI          UI       WC        TANF        FSP     OASDI       SSI      UI        WC
       1990     0.092      0.080      0.044     0.081        0.136    0.083      0.153      0.127     0.255     0.161    0.208     0.207
       1991     0.097      0.095      0.056     0.088        0.177    0.097      0.140      0.145     0.291     0.158    0.255     0.212
       1992     0.098      0.088      0.054     0.089        0.166    0.087      0.154      0.145     0.301     0.163    0.258     0.203
       1993     0.101      0.091      0.058     0.092        0.187    0.095      0.175      0.156     0.327     0.170    0.276     0.229
       1994     0.108      0.099      0.070     0.102        0.220    0.128      0.191      0.175     0.364     0.193    0.326     0.280
       1995     0.109      0.095      0.067     0.106        0.203    0.136      0.187      0.168     0.354     0.194    0.310     0.292
       1996     0.146      0.128      0.080     0.103        0.183    0.368      0.269      0.192     0.291     0.194    0.268     0.407
87




       1997     0.253      0.195      0.127     0.142        0.261    0.466      0.341      0.262     0.357     0.237    0.348     0.544
       1998     0.234      0.197      0.138     0.156        0.244    0.583      0.325      0.267     0.363     0.248    0.325     0.632
       1999     0.216      0.206      0.130     0.158        0.242    0.494      0.312      0.277     0.360     0.251    0.374     0.571
       2000     0.181      0.132      0.075     0.103        0.206    0.361      0.273      0.188     0.319     0.197    0.301     0.428
       2001     0.148      0.146      0.097     0.126        0.227    0.385      0.264      0.214     0.376     0.254    0.341     0.494
       2002     0.179      0.176      0.131     0.161        0.213    0.412      0.260      0.257     0.428     0.284    0.338     0.518
       2003     0.186      0.181      0.146     0.172        0.209    0.364      0.284      0.264     0.436     0.287    0.358     0.480
       2004     0.126      0.104      0.116     0.209        0.274    0.133      0.403      0.358     0.807     0.492    0.441     0.462



     Notes: Panel A shows the share of total dollars reported attributable to those whose recipiency is imputed. Panel B shows the share of
     total dollars reported that are imputed.
                           Table 22
                 SIPP Share of Months Imputed

Calendar Year   AFDC/TANF       FSP        OASDI     SSI
    1990           0.096       0.088        0.029   0.074
    1991           0.101       0.095        0.036   0.083
    1992           0.105       0.091        0.036   0.080
    1993           0.107       0.095        0.039   0.082
    1994           0.114       0.098        0.049   0.095
    1995           0.115       0.098        0.046   0.099
    1996           0.152       0.136        0.058   0.095
    1997           0.262       0.188        0.098   0.137
    1998           0.240       0.180        0.109   0.142
    1999           0.210       0.192        0.106   0.151
    2000           0.158       0.124        0.060   0.101
    2001           0.170       0.141        0.075   0.124
    2002           0.195       0.178        0.101   0.155
    2003           0.210       0.176        0.109   0.169
    2004           0.145       0.102        0.079   0.210




                             88
                              Table 23
            ACS Dollars Imputation Rates, by Year and Program

  Survey Year            TANF                 FSP            OASDI              SSI
     2000                0.166                                0.215            0.217
     2001                0.171                                0.208            0.169
     2002                0.179                                0.185            0.167
     2003                0.173                                0.185            0.166
     2004                0.145                                0.156            0.145
     2005                0.139               0.172            0.145            0.141
     2006                0.217               0.164            0.173            0.175

Note: The table above shows the dollars imputation rates in the ACS, obtained by dividing
the weighted total imputed benefit amounts in each year by the unconditional weighted total
in that year.




                                            89
                                           Table 24
                        Reporting Rates from Microdata and Aggregates,
                          and Reporting Conditional on True Receipt

                                             Microdata
                                Reporting Rate      Unconditional                   Aggregate Data
                                Conditional on     Reporting Rate                   Reporting Rate
                                 True Receipt
     Study/Program                    (1)               (2)                                 (3)
 Marquis and Moore (1990) - 1984 SIPP
      AFDC                    0.51                             0.61                        0.82
      FSP                     0.77                             0.87                        0.89
      OASDI                   0.95                             1.01                        0.94
      SSI                     0.77                             0.88                        0.91
      UI                      0.61                             0.80                        0.78
      WC                      0.45                             0.82                        0.41
 Huynh, Rupp and Sears (2002) – SIPP
  OASDI
      Jan 1993                0.96                             1.02                        0.95
     Aug 1995                 0.95                             1.02                        0.93
     Mar 1996                 0.94                             0.99                        0.94
      Oct 1998                0.95                             1.00                        0.94
    SSI
        Jan 1993                      0.83                     1.04                        0.87
        Aug 1995                      0.86                     1.12                        0.85
        Mar 1996                      0.83                     0.96                        0.94
        Oct 1998                      0.83                     0.98                        1.02
 Sears and Rupp (2003) - SIPP
   OASDI
       Mar 1996               0.96                             1.00                        0.94
       Jan 2001               0.95                             0.99                        0.97
     SSI
       Mar 1996                       0.86                     1.00                        0.94
        Jan 2001                      0.81                     0.99                        0.99
 Taeuber et al. (2004) - ACS
   FSP
      2001                            0.53                     0.58                        0.57
     2001 2nd method                  0.62
Note: The time periods and geography do not match exactly. For UI and WC, the rates in column 3 come
from the dollars reporting rates reported in this paper. We also assume OASDI participation is the sum of
OASI and SSDI participation.




                                                      90
                                           Table 25

       Adjusted Trends in the Number of Single Mothers with Neither Work or Welfare,
                                   CPS and SIPP Data

                                             A. SIPP

                      Observed Fraction of                         Adjusted Fraction of
                                                   Adjustment
Calendar Year     Disconnected Single Mothers                      Disconnected Single
                                                     Factor
                   in Blank and Kovak (2008)                             Mothers
                               (1)                     (2)            (3) = (1) – (2)
1990                         0.188                    0.091               0.097
1996                         0.170                    0.071               0.099
2001                         0.232                    0.035               0.197
2003                         0.249                    0.042               0.207

                                             B. CPS

                      Observed Fraction of                         Adjusted Fraction of
                                                   Adjustment
Calendar Year     Disconnected Single Mothers                      Disconnected Single
                                                     Factor
                   in Blank and Kovak (2008)                             Mothers
                               (1)                     (2)            (3) = (1) – (2)
1990                         0.099                    0.079               0.020
1995                         0.117                    0.111               0.006
2000                         0.146                    0.052               0.094
2005                         0.200                    0.040               0.160

Notes: The sample is based on families headed by a single mother ages 18-54, with at least one
child ages 0-18, and with family income equal or less than 200% of the poverty level (for the
SIPP, we annualize the monthly income reported prior to comparing to the poverty level). For
the CPS, disconnected single mothers are those with: 1) zero earnings in the past calendar year,
2) zero AFDC/TANF receipts in the past calendar year, and 3) those who reported not working
in the past calendar year for reasons other than going to school. For the SIPP, disconnected
single mothers are those with: 1) zero earnings in the month, 2) zero AFDC/TANF receipts in the
month, and 3) those who are not in school in the month. Column 1 numbers are obtained from
Table 2 of Blank and Kovak (2008). The adjustment factors in columns 2 are equal to k(1-y)/y
where k is the observed probability of not working and receiving welfare (among low-income
single mothers) and y is the AFDC/TANF month reporting rate of the corresponding year.




                                              91
                                              Appendix Table 1
                                 Summary of PSID Benefit Variable Information

 Benefit      Survey
                               SSI              OASI                SSDI                UI             WC            FSP       AFDC/TANF
  Year         Year
  1967         1968                               H only (a)                           H only (a)                     All           All
  1968         1969                               H only (a)                           H only (a)                     All           H
  1969         1970                                 H only                              H only                        All           H
  1970         1971                              (H+W) only                             H only                        All         (H+W)
  1971         1972                              (H+W) only                             H only                        All         (H+W)
  1972         1973                              (H+W) only                             H only                                    (H+W)
  1973         1974                              (H+W) only                             H only                        All         (H+W)
  1974         1975        (H+W)+O                (H+W)+O                              H+(W+O)                        All        (H+W)+O
  1975         1976        (H+W)+O                (H+W)+O                              H+(W+O)                        All        (H+W)+O
  1976         1977        (H+W)+O                (H+W)+O                          H+(W+O) H+(W+O)                    All        (H+W)+O
  1977         1978        (H+W)+O                (H+W)+O                          H+(W+O) H+(W+O)                    All        (H+W)+O
  1978         1979        (H+W)+O                (H+W)+O                          H+(W+O) H+(W+O)                    All        (H+W)+O
  1979         1980        (H+W)+O                (H+W)+O                          H+(W+O) H+(W+O)                    All        (H+W)+O
  1980         1981        (H+W)+O                (H+W)+O                          H+(W+O) H+(W+O)                    All        (H+W)+O
  1981         1982        (H+W)+O                (H+W)+O                          H+(W+O) H+(W+O)                    All        (H+W)+O
  1982         1983        (H+W)+O                (H+W)+O                          H+(W+O) H+(W+O)                    All        (H+W)+O
  1983         1984        (H+W)+O          H+W+O (b) H+W+O (b)                    H+(W+O) H+(W+O)                    All        (H+W)+O
  1984         1985        (H+W)+O          H+W+O (b) H+W+O (b)                    H+(W+O) H+(W+O)                    All        (H+W)+O
  1985         1986         H+W+O           H+W+O (b) H+W+O (b)                    H+W+O      H+W+O                   All         H+W+O
  1986         1987         H+W+O           H+W+O (b) H+W+O (b)                    H+W+O      H+W+O                   All         H+W+O
  1987         1988         H+W+O           H+W+O (b) H+W+O (b)                    H+W+O      H+W+O                   All         H+W+O
  1988         1989         H+W+O           H+W+O (b) H+W+O (b)                    H+W+O      H+W+O                   All         H+W+O
  1989         1990         H+W+O           H+W+O (b) H+W+O (b)                    H+W+O      H+W+O                   All         H+W+O
  1990         1991         H+W+O           H+W+O (b) H+W+O (b)                    H+W+O      H+W+O                   All         H+W+O
  1991         1992         H+W+O           H+W+O (b) H+W+O (b)                    H+W+O      H+W+O                   All         H+W+O
  1992         1993         H+W+O           H+W+O (d) H+W+O (d)                    H+W+O      H+W+O                   All         H+W+O
  1993         1994          H+W                     All                            H+W         H+W                   All          H+W
  1994         1995          H+W                     All                            H+W         H+W                   All          H+W
  1995         1996          H+W                     All                            H+W         H+W                   All          H+W
  1996         1997          H+W                     All                            H+W         H+W                   All          H+W
  1997         1999           All                                                                                     All
  1998         1999         H+W (e)                         All                       H+W             H+W             All           H+W
  1999         2001           All                                                                                     All
  2000         2001         H+W (e)                         All                       H+W             H+W             All           H+W
  2001         2003                                                                                                   All
  2002         2003           H+W                        All                          H+W             H+W             All           H+W
  2003         2005            All                    H+W+O (g)                        All             All            All            All
  2004        2005(g)         H+W                                                     H+W             H+W             All           H+W
Note: H - head, W - spouse, O - other family members, All - family, H+W - head and spouse reported separately, (H+W) - head and spouse
amounts combined, (W+O) – spouse amount and other family members amount combined, H + W + O - head, spouse and all other family
members reported separately (other family members amount combined as one). (a) These variables are reported in bracketed form; we take
the midpoint of the interval in each case. (b) Amount of Social security income is recorded for each individual in the family. The type of
social security (Disability, Retirement, Survivors, More than one of the above) is also recorded. (d) Amount of Social security income is
recorded separately for the Head and Spouse. But for other family members, only the combined amount is available. The type of social
security (Disability, Retirement, Survivors, More than one of the above) is also recorded only for the Head and the spouse. (e) SSI is reported
also for the second year before the survey year and is for the whole family. (f) Based on the preliminary data release, the table here reflects
only what is currently made available to the public, extra variables may be available in future data releases. (g) Each family is asked to
nominate two types of social security received and each family member is asked about whether he received social security.



                                                                       92
                                Appendix Table 2
    Summary of CPS Annual Demographic File/Annual Social and Economic Supplement
                            Benefit Variable Information
 Survey Year           SSI         OASI           SSDI          UI            WC          FSP        AFDC/TANF              EITC
    1968                                  Y (b)                       Y (a)                N            Y (d)
    1969                                  Y (b)                       Y (a)                N            Y (d)
    1970
    1971                                  Y (b)                       Y (a)               N               Y (d)
    1972                                  Y (b)                       Y (a)               N               Y (d)
    1973                                  Y (b)                       Y (a)               N               Y (d)
    1974                                  Y (b)                       Y (a)               N               Y (d)
    1975                                  Y (b)                       Y (a)               N               Y (d)
    1976              Y (e)               Y(h,i)                      Y(g)                N               Y(f)
    1977              Y (e)               Y(h,i)                      Y(g)                N               Y(f)
    1978              Y (e)               Y(h,i)                      Y(g)                N               Y(f)
    1979              Y (e)               Y(h,i)                      Y(g)                N               Y(f)
    1980              Y (e)               Y(h,i)                      Y(g)               Y (k)            Y(f)
    1981              Y (e)               Y(h,i)                      Y(g)               Y (k)            Y(f)
    1982              Y (e)               Y(h,i)                      Y(g)               Y (k)            Y(f)
    1983              Y (e)               Y(h)                        Y(g)               Y (k)            Y(f)
    1984              Y (e)               Y(h)                        Y(g)               Y (k)            Y(f)
    1985              Y (e)               Y(h)                        Y(g)               Y (k)            Y(f)
    1986              Y (e)               Y(h)                        Y(g)               Y (k)            Y(f)
    1987              Y (e)               Y(h)                        Y(g)               Y (k)            Y(f)
    1988              Y (e)                Y                  Y (n)           Y          Y (k)            Y(f)
    1989              Y (e)                Y                  Y (n)           Y          Y (k)            Y(f)
    1990              Y (e)                Y                  Y (n)           Y          Y (k)            Y(f)
    1991              Y (e)                Y                  Y (n)           Y          Y (k)            Y(f)
    1992              Y (e)                Y                  Y (n)           Y          Y (k)            Y(f)                Y
    1993              Y (e)                Y                  Y (n)           Y          Y (k)            Y(f)                Y
    1994              Y (e)                Y                  Y (n)           Y          Y (k)            Y(f)                Y
    1995              Y (e)                Y                  Y (n)           Y          Y (k)            Y(f)                Y
    1996              Y (e)                Y                  Y (n)           Y          Y (k)            Y(f)                Y
    1997              Y (e)                Y                  Y (n)           Y          Y (k)            Y(f)                Y
    1998              Y (e)                Y                  Y (n)           Y          Y (k)            Y(f)                Y
    1999              Y (e)                Y                  Y (n)           Y          Y (k)            Y(f)                Y
    2000              Y (e)                Y                  Y (n)           Y          Y (k)            Y(f)                Y
    2001              Y (e)                Y                  Y (n)           Y          Y (k)            Y(f)                Y
    2002              Y (e)                Y                  Y (n)           Y          Y (k)            Y(f)                Y
    2003              Y (e)                Y                  Y (n)           Y          Y (k)            Y(f)                Y
    2004              Y (e)                Y                  Y (n)           Y          Y (k)            Y(f)                Y
    2005              Y (e)                Y                  Y (n)           Y          Y (k)            Y(f)                Y
    2006              Y (e)                Y                  Y (n)           Y          Y (k)            Y(f)                Y
    2007              Y (e)                Y                  Y (n)           Y          Y (k)            Y(f)                Y
    2008              Y (e)                Y                  Y (n)           Y          N (m)            Y(f)               N (m)
Notes:
(a) Also includes Veterans benefits, government employee pensions.
(b) Also includes railroad retirement benefits.
(d) Old age assistance, AFDC and aid to the blind or disabled are combined; no variable for type of benefit.
(e) Federal and state payments are included
(f) AFDC and general assistance are combined; they can be partially separated (except when both benefit type variables =1).
(g) Includes Veterans benefits.
(h) Also includes railroad retirement benefits; they can be partially separated (except when both benefit type variables=1)
(i) The variable is called "income from US government", the position of this variable though is the same as other years' social security.
(k) Available at the household level only.
(m) Data withheld by the Census Bureau.
(n) May include union or strike benefit payments. The amount of unemployment compensation was asked after asking whether the individual
received unemployment benefits, supplemental benefits or union and strike benefit payments.



                                                                     93
                                          Appendix Table 3: Comparison of Household Survey Characteristics

                                            ACS                 CE Survey (Interview)         CPS-ADF/ASEC                  PSID                       SIPP
     Years of Operation           1999–Present                  1980-present                1947-present           1968-present              1983-present
     Interview Mandatory?         Yes                           No                          No                     No                        No
     Type of Survey and           Cross-Sectional, Annual       Quarterly interviews for    2 year panel, Annual   Panel, annual until       2-5 year panels,
     Frequency                                                  12 months                                          1997, bi-annual after     interviews every 4
                                                                                                                                             months
     Recall Period                Last 12 months                Last 12 months              Last calendar year     Last calendar year or     Last 4 months
                                                                                                                   last two calendar years
     Target Population            1999-2005: Civilian non-      Civilian non-               Civilian non-          Civilian non-             Civilian non-
                                  institutionalized             institutionalized           institutionalized*     institutionalized         institutionalized
                                  2006–present: Group
                                  quarters are included.
     Months in which              Throughout the year           Throughout the year         March                  March – August            Throughout the year
     Interviews are                                                                         (February-April
     Conducted                                                                              beginning in 2002)
     Interview Mode               Mailed Questionnaire,         Personal Visits             Personal visits,       Personal visits until     Mostly personal visits in
                                  Telephone and Personal                                    Telephone              1972, Telephone           the 1984-1993 panels.
94




                                  Visits                                                                                                     Personal visits and phone
                                                                                                                                             in 1996-2004 panels.
     Computer Aided               Yes                           Yes (beginning in           Yes (beginning in      Yes (beginning in 1993)   Yes (beginning in the
     Interviewing                                               2003)                       1994)                                            1996 panel)
     Sample Size                  Over 3 million addresses      About 7,800 consumer        Over 97,000            Over 67,000 individuals   20,897 households (1984
                                  surveyed when fully           units are interviewed       households in the      interviewed at least      Panel) – 40,188
                                  implemented in 2005           each quarter                2008 survey            once                      households (1996 Panel)
     Average Time per                                           About 65 minutes                                   About 30 minutes          About 20 minutes
     Interview                                                                                                                               (median)
     Imputation of Income        Yes                             Yes (beginning in          Yes                    Some                      Yes
     Data                                                        2004)
     Household Head or           Yes                             Yes                        Yes                    Yes (except in the 1976   Interviewers attempt
     Householder Provides                                                                                          and 1985 surveys when     interviews with each
     Information for All                                                                                           wives were also           family member 15 years
     Family Members?                                                                                               interviewed)              of age and above
     Monetary Compensation No                                    No                         No                     Yes                       No
     for Participation
     *Military personnel living with at least one other civilian adult are also included.
